Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/HeartSutra/BP2 M4 L06 (final-new).doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:52:27.887171
================================================================================


Transcript of teachings by Khen Rinpoche Geshe Chonyi  on  the  Heart  Sutra
and Stages of the Path (the Six Perfections)

Root text: The Heart of  Wisdom  Sutra  by  Shakyamuni  Buddha,  translation
Gelong  Thubten  Tsultrim  (George  Churinoff).  Extracted  from   Essential
Buddhist Prayers: An FPMT Prayer  Book,  Volume  1.  Copyright:  FPMT,  Inc.
2008.

Lesson                                                                     6
                                                     11 July 2013


Review of the prologue. The cause of Shariputra’s question & the question
itself. The transition. The actual explanation. The assertions of the CMWS.
Phenomena are merely imputed by & are mere appearances to the mind. Object
of negation. Apprehension of true existence. Dependent origination.


Question: Why one must take the engaged bodhisattva  vows  in  order  to  be
enlightened? Why can’t the bodhisattva just train  in  the  six  perfections
alone?

Answer: If one is able to practise the six perfections,  then  personally  I
do not think that it has to be preceded by making a  pledge  or  vow.  After
all, the bodhisattva vow is a pledge to practise the six perfections, is  it
not? Before one engages in the six perfections, one must really want  to  do
so. That is akin to making a pledge.

Imagine that you are heading to an important  destination.  Before  you  set
foot for that important destination, first you must have the  idea  and  the
wish to go there. It is a commitment, “I will go there”. Based on that,  you
then actually set out.  There  are  people  who  just  go  anywhere  without
thinking.

Khen Rinpoche: These people do not reach that special place.  They  reach  a
different place.

I think if it is an important task, that task probably has  to  be  preceded
by a commitment to accomplish the task.

Khen Rinpoche: Maybe it is like that.

In  Lama  Tsongkhapa’s  Dependent  Arising:  A  Praise  of  the  Buddha,  he
mentioned that he was indeed fortunate to have  found  even  just  a  little
faith in the Buddha before his life came to an end.  Likewise  we  have  the
opportunity to study the teachings of the  Buddha  now.  It  is  challenging
when you study these philosophical teachings. Even if you do not  manage  to
achieve any realisations or experiences, if you are  able  to  develop  some
faith in the Buddha through  learning and reflecting on the teachings,  that
makes you a very fortunate person indeed.

This is something that you should remember, keep  in  mind  and  feel  happy
about all the time. In particular you need to  realise  that  you  are  very
fortunate to have  an  opportunity  to  study  and  to  learn  the  Buddha’s
teachings on emptiness.
 Now you have the opportunity to learn  together  with  many  other  people.
Generally it is difficult to study or to listen to  the  teachings  on  your
own. That is much more challenging than if you were to do the  same  with  a
group of like-minded people. The presence of other  people  in  class  is  a
helpful condition  for  your  own  studies.  As  such  you  should  consider
everyone in this class to be precious and helpful. Therefore it is  good  to
have mutual consideration and respect for one another. Thinking  in  such  a
way is helpful.

A monastery is a great seat of learning. In the monastery, students  of  the
same class and who share the same teacher are generally very close-knit  and
very harmonious. They have a  strong  feeling  of  togetherness.  Of  course
there will be disagreements at times but, in general,  the  overall  feeling
is, “We are together in the same class,” or  “We  have  the  same  teacher”.
The feeling of unity is very strong. This is the culture of learning in  the
monastery.

Likewise we can adopt the same kind of thinking here. You are  all  together
in the same class. You should cultivate this  feeling  of  unity.  Therefore
practise pure perception in relation to one  another.  When  there  is  this
feeling of unity or oneness in the class, then when it comes  to  activities
such as discussions, there should not be any problems  conducting  them  and
so forth. Without such unity, even holding discussions is difficult.  It  is
possible that there will  be  disagreements  from  time  to  time.  This  is
normal. But you should always keep in mind the idea of  coming  together  in
unity and harmony.

All of you are studying the same material at the same thing. When  it  comes
to learning, you should not have the thought, “This is terrible.  It  is  so
difficult!”  Rather you should learn willingly, voluntarily and happily.  It
is the same with regard to  coming  to  class.  You  should  come  to  class
willingly, voluntarily and  happily.  Whether  it  is  coming  to  class  or
engaging in your studies, in order for you to do so  willingly,  voluntarily
and happily, that comes from knowing what  is  in  it  for  you,  e.g.,  the
benefits of studying emptiness. We have talked  a  little  bit  about  those
benefits and the merit it generates.

Willingness is a happy feeling of  doing  something  voluntarily.  It  comes
about  based  on  knowing  the  benefits  without  which   generating   such
willingness may be really difficult.  You come to class after a  hard  day’s
work and you feel tired. When you do not understand what is in it  for  you,
when you do not see the benefits, then of course it will be  difficult.  You
have to understand that you are very fortunate to be able to  learn  even  a
little bit  despite  living  in  such  a  busy  country  with  such  a  busy
lifestyle. Please keep this in mind at all times.

                                 ~~~~~~~~~~

The prologue

The sutra starts with:

      Thus did I hear at one time. The Bhagavan  was  dwelling  on  Mass  of
      Vultures Mountain in Rajagriha together  with  a  great  community  of
      monks and a  great  community  of  bodhisattvas.  At  that  time,  the
      Bhagavan was absorbed  in  the  concentration  on  the  categories  of
      phenomena called “Profound Perception.”

The section up to this point in the sutra constitutes the prologue.

The Perfection of Wisdom  Sutras  are  mostly  classified  under  the  Sutra
Pitaka. This makes The Heart of the Perfection of Wisdom Sutra part  of  the
Sutra Pitaka as well.

The sutra starts with, “Thus did I hear at one time.” The ‘I’ indicates  the
compiler who compiled this particular sutra. If The Heart of the  Perfection
of Wisdom Sutra falls into the Sutra Pitaka, that makes Ananda the  compiler
of this sutra.

In the last lesson we looked at the compilation  of  the  teachings  of  the
Buddha.  From a common  perspective,  the  teachings  were  compiled  during
three councils. The teachings that were compiled are now commonly  known  as
the Pali Canon which consists of the Hinayana teachings.

If you were to look at the compilation of the Buddhist  teachings  from  the
Mahayana perspective, then Vajrapani would be the compiler of this sutra.

“Thus did I hear at one time. The Bhagavan was dwelling on Mass of  Vultures
Mountain in Rajagriha together with a great community of monks and  a  great
community of bodhisattvas.” By reading this section of the sutra,  you  will
get the idea that the Buddha gave this  very  special  teaching  called  The
Heart of the Perfection of Wisdom Sutra at this very special place, Mass  of
Vultures Mountain.

Who were the Buddha speaking to? The  teachings  were  heard  by,  “a  great
community of monks and a great community of bodhisattvas.” This  means  that
the listeners consisted of the  persons  of  the  three  lineages  or  three
vehicles.

Shariputra’s question

“At that time, the  Bhagavan  was  absorbed  in  the  concentration  on  the
categories of phenomena called ‘Profound Perception.’” This  indicates  that
the  Buddha,   while   remaining   in   meditative   equipoise   with   that
concentration, blessed Shariputra so that he  would  initiate  the  question
that will be followed by the answer from Avalokiteshvara.

Next is the condition for the question to be asked:

      Also, at that time, the bodhisattva  mahasattva  arya  Avalokiteshvara
      looked upon the very practice of the profound perfection of wisdom and
      beheld those five aggregates also as empty of inherent nature.


Following this is the question from Shariputra:

      Then, through the power of Buddha, the venerable Shariputra said  this
      to the bodhisattva mahasattva arya Avalokiteshvara:  “How  should  any
      son of the lineage train who wishes to practice the  activity  of  the
      profound perfection of wisdom?”


The Tibetan translation of the  sutra,  which  is  a  translation  from  the
Sanskrit version, says, “How should any son of the lineage train  ...?”  The
Chinese translation  that  also  purports  to  be  the  translation  of  the
Sanskrit version includes “the daughter of the lineage.”

In the Tibetan translation, only “the son of the lineage” is mentioned.
When only “the son of the lineage”  is  mentioned,  then  “the  son  of  the
lineage” refers to Avalokiteshvara to whom the question is posed.

“How should any son of the lineage train who  wishes  …”:  The  “who”  would
cover those who are not Avalokiteshevara, i.e., both the sons and  daughters
of the lineage. When you read it in such  a  way,  then  it  is  all  right,
because the person who is going to practise the perfection of wisdom is  not
just Avalokiteshvara but also the sons or daughters of the lineage.

When you do not know how to explain this, there  will  be  problems  because
people will ask, “How about the daughters of the  lineage?  Does  this  mean
only the sons of lineage can practise?” One has to be careful in  explaining
such things.


The transition

      He said that and the bodhisattva mahasattva arya Avalokiteshvara  said
      this to the venerable Sharadvatiputra. “Shariputra,  any  son  of  the
      lineage or daughter of the lineage who wishes to practice the activity
      of the profound perfection of wisdom should look upon  it  like  this,
      correctly and repeatedly beholding those five aggregates also as empty
      of inherent nature.”

“He said that and the bodhisattva mahasattva arya Avalokiteshvara said  this
to the venerable Sharadvatiputra. ‘Shariputra, any son  of  the  lineage  or
daughter of the lineage who wishes to practice the activity of the  profound
perfection of wisdom should look upon it like this’  …”  This  is  when  the
transition is made to the actual explanation that is to follow.

The actual explanation: brief & detailed explanations

“… correctly and repeatedly beholding those five aggregates  also  as  empty
of inherent nature.”: This is where the actual explanation  begins.  Of  the
actual  explanation,  between  the  brief  explanation  and   the   detailed
explanation, “… correctly and repeatedly  beholding  those  five  aggregates
also as empty of inherent nature” constitutes  the  brief  explanation.  The
detailed explanation starts from, “Form is empty. Emptiness  is  form.”  and
so forth.

The brief explanation indicates the general procedure  of  the  practice  of
the path of accumulation, the path of preparation, the path  of  seeing  and
the path of meditation. “… correctly and  repeatedly  beholding  those  five
aggregates also as empty of inherent nature.” is to be applied  to  all  the
four paths.
      Form is empty. Emptiness is form. Emptiness is not  other  than  form.
      Form is also not other than  emptiness.  In  the  same  way,  feeling,
      discrimination, compositional factors and consciousness are empty.


This section shows the way to meditate on emptiness  while  one  is  on  the
path of accumulation and the path of preparation.

You will remember from our discussion of the paths and grounds that:
• On the path of accumulation and the path of preparation, the meditation
  on emptiness is done via a meaning generality or mental image of
  emptiness.
• On the path of seeing, emptiness is perceived directly.
• On the path of meditation, one meditates on the emptiness that one has
  seen directly, i.e., familiarising oneself with what one has seen directly
  on the path of seeing.

“… correctly and repeatedly beholding those five aggregates  also  as  empty
of inherent nature.” The ‘also’ indicates that  not  only  is  form  and  so
forth empty of inherent existence, even  the  collections  of  form  and  so
forth are also empty of inherent existence.

The assertions of the CMWS

According  to  the  Consequence  Middle  Way  School  (CMWS),  emptiness  of
inherent existence is synonymous with empty of existing from its  own  side.
This means that there are no phenomena that can exist from their own side.

The CMWS asserts that all phenomena are posited as mere appearances  to  the
mind like the appearance of a dream elephant to the dream consciousness.  In
the dream, there is an appearance of a dream elephant, but  that  appearance
of the elephant is not coming from the side of the object  as  there  is  no
such object. Yet  there  is  still  the  appearance  of  an  elephant.  That
appearance is an appearance to the perceiving consciousness; in  this  case,
the dream consciousness. Likewise all phenomena do not exist from their  own
side. They exist as mere appearances to the mind.

You can think of the emptiness of inherent existence by  using  the  analogy
of a dream elephant. In  a  dream,  you  have  the  appearance  of  a  dream
elephant. The dream elephant does not exist from its own side,  i.e.,  there
is nothing coming from the side of the object. It is a  mere  projection  of
the mind, a mere appearance to and a creation of  the  dream  consciousness.
There is no real elephant functioning out there.

Likewise all phenomena that exist exist as creations of the mind, as  merely
imputed by thought. Phenomena do not exist from their own  side.  We  should
use this analogy to understand how all phenomena do  not  exist  from  their
own side. Rather all phenomena are posited as mere appearances to the  mind.


Of course phenomena exist  but  how  do  they  exist?  They  exist  as  mere
appearances to a conventional mind or  a  conventional  consciousness.  When
you are not satisfied with that level of appearance  and  you  look  deeper,
you will not be able to point to or find the object. It is not findable.
When you try to look for the imputed object, you  cannot  find  it;  yet  it
exists. How does it exist? It exists as a mere appearance. You  have  to  be
satisfied with that. This is how things exist.  Anything  beyond  that,  you
will run into problems.

Phenomena are merely imputed by the mind

Before you can have any understanding of the meaning  of  the  emptiness  of
inherent existence, the very first thing that you  must  understand  is  how
all phenomena are merely imputed by the mind (or imputed by  thought).  This
is the first step. The word merely eliminates inherent existence.

Let us go back to the example of mistaking a coil of rope to be a  snake.[1]
This  happens when conditions are gathered,  such  as  the  weather  and  so
forth. First the coil of rope appears to be a snake. On top of it  appearing
as a snake, we believe there is a snake. So there  is  an  appearance  of  a
snake from the side of the rope.  The mind assents to  that  appearance  and
believes a snake is there.

Believing that there is a snake, fear arises and we start to worry.  Without
such a belief, there will be no fear. But  when  the  mind  assents  to  the
appearance and believes that there is a snake, fear arises. The  reality  is
that it is only a coil of rope. There is no snake there.  When  we  look  at
the coil of rope, from one end to the other, we will not be able to  find  a
snake on the rope. This  is  very  clear.  Still  there  is  the  mind  that
believes it to be a snake.

Is this belief that there is a snake imputed and made up by the mind? Is  it
not   imputed by the mind? From this, we can see that the appearance of  the
coil of rope as a snake is a fabrication of the mind. It is not coming  from
the side of the rope. The mind imputes that it is a snake. This  shows  that
the snake is imputed by the  mind.  The  coil  of  rope  being  a  snake  is
completely imputed by the mind. It has nothing to do with the coil of  rope.


Think about this:  The  coil  of  rope  appearing  as  a  snake  is  a  mere
appearance to the mind.

Then you apply your understanding of that analogy to an actual  object,  for
example, the sense of the ‘I’. What is the sense of the ‘I’ or  the  thought
apprehending ‘I’? This ‘I’ is the same as the  appearance  of  the  coil  of
rope to be a snake in that it is a mere appearance to the mind.[2]

According to  the  CMWS,  the  ‘I’  is  that  which  is  merely  imputed  in
dependence upon the bases of designation, the aggregates.

The aggregates are the body  and  mind.  When  elaborated,  there  are  five
aggregates:
1. form
2. feeling
3. discrimination
4. compositional factors
5. consciousness
These five aggregates are the bases of designation of the person,  the  ‘I’.
The ‘I’ is merely imputed in dependence upon the aggregates.

When you look  for  the  ‘I’  among  the  five  aggregates  one  by  one—the
aggregate of form, the aggregates of feeling, discrimination,  compositional
factors and consciousness—you will not be able to find the ‘I’. The  ‘I’  is
not the aggregate of form, it is not the aggregate of feeling and so  forth.


This is the same as the analogy of mistaking a coil of  the  rope  to  be  a
snake. When you look for the snake in that coil of rope,  from  one  end  of
the rope to the other, you will not be able  to  find  anything  that  is  a
snake. Likewise when you look for the ‘I’ among the aggregates that  is  the
basis of designation for the  ‘I’,   you  will  not  be  able  to  point  to
anything that is the ‘I’.

When you think about it, what exactly is the ‘I’? The ‘I’ is that  which  is
merely labelled  or  merely  imputed  by  thought  in  dependence  upon  the
aggregates that are their bases of designation, just as the snake is  merely
imputed upon the coil of rope. Just as there is no  snake  on  the  coil  of
rope, likewise there is no ‘I’  on  the  aggregates.  The  ‘I’  is  not  the
aggregates. It cannot be found on the aggregates.

Phenomena are merely imputed because they cannot be found among their  bases
of designation. The basis of  designation  is  not  the  phenomenon  itself.
Therefore phenomena are merely  imputed  by  thought.  We  can  use  various
analogies to help us understand this. The analogy of  mistaking  a  coil  of
rope as a snake is one. There is also the analogy of a dream  elephant,  the
analogy of a mirage, the analogy of an echo and so  forth.  There  are  many
such examples.

When you look for the ‘I’ among the basess of designation,  the  ‘I’  cannot
be found among its bases of designation and the bases of designation is  not
the ‘I’.

If the ‘I’ cannot be found there, is the ‘I’ of a different entity from  the
aggregates?  When you look for an ‘I’ that is of  a  different  entity  from
the aggregates, you will not be able to find the ‘I’ either.
• The ‘I’ is not the aggregates.
• The ‘I’ is also not of a different entity from the aggregates.

Are we saying then that the ‘I’ does not exist? No, the ‘I’ exists. The  ‘I’
has to exist because we experience it. It is nonsense to say  that  the  ‘I’
does not exist. The ‘I’ definitely exists.

How then does it exist if it is not inherently one with the  aggregates  and
it is not inherently different from the aggregates?

According to the CMWS, the highest view, the ultimate reality  is  that  the
‘I’ does not exist from the side of the aggregates:
• Phenomena do not exist from the side of their bases of designation.
• Phenomena are not their bases of designation.
• Yet phenomena exist.
How do phenomena exist? They  exist  as  merely  posited  by  the  mind  and
specifically posited by the conventional consciousness.

Both of these are the same in that they are merely imputed by the mind:
• The coil of rope appearing as a snake is a fabrication of and is imputed
  by the mind.
• The ‘I’ or the self is none other than that which is merely imputed in
  dependence upon the aggregates.

But one does not exist and the other exists.  There  is  a  huge  difference
between the two:
• In the case of mistaking the coil of rope to be a snake, although the
  idea of the snake is imputed by the mind, in reality, the snake does not
  exist.
• However, in the case of the ‘I’, although it is also merely imputed by
  the mind, the ‘I’ does exist.

The mind apprehending a coil of rope to be a snake is a wrong  consciousness
because the coil of a rope is not a snake. There was never  a  snake  there.
Although the snake is merely imputed by the mind, in this  case,  the  snake
does not exist. Therefore this mind is a wrong consciousness.

In the case of the mind conceiving of and apprehending the ‘I’,  this  is  a
factually concordant mind because the ‘I’ does exist.

This is complicated because we are comparing two things:
1. the appearance of a coil of rope as a snake
2. the appearance of the ‘I,’ the self or person

Both of these appearances are merely imputed by the mind  yet,  in  reality,
one does not exist and the other does exist. This is the problem.  Both  are
imputed by the mind but how do you account for the fact that  one  does  not
exist while the other does exist?

The essential point about settling the view of emptiness is that  while  you
see that phenomena do not exist inherently, yet, at the same time,  you  are
able to explain how they function. All phenomena  are  merely  imputed,  yet
they perform functions. They actually work.

The first thing to figure out and to really  understand  is  what  it  means
when the CMWS says that all phenomena are merely imputed  by  the  mind.  We
have to use the various analogies—the analogy of  the  dream  elephant,  the
analogy of mistaking a coil of rope  to  be  a  snake,  the  analogy  of  an
illusion, the analogy of a mirage, the analogy of an echo and so forth.  The
essential thing to understand first is this: Are things  merely  imputed  by
the mind? If so, how are phenomena merely imputed by the mind? This  is  the
first thing to settle.



Object of negation

According to the CMWS,  all  phenomena  are  merely  imputed  by  the  mind.
Anything that is not merely imputed by the mind  but  exists  from  its  own
side, i.e., inherently existent, is the object of negation  (or  the  object
of refutation). This is what we need to refute and negate on  the  basis  of
knowing how all phenomena are merely imputed by the mind.

Apprehension of true existence

The mind that conceives things and events to  be  inherently  existent  from
their own side and to be not  merely  imputed  by  the  mind  is  called  an
apprehension of true existence. An apprehension of  true  existence  is  the
mind that conceives any phenomena to exist inherently.

If things existed exactly according to how the mind views  the  world,  then
this shows that there is  indeed  inherent  existence,  true  existence  and
existence from its own side.

The CMWS asserts that all phenomena do not exist  inherently.  They  do  not
exist from their own side. There is not a single atom of inherent  existence
from its own side. Everything is merely imputed by  thought.  This  includes
the ‘I’, the self or  person.

Nagarjuna said in his Precious Garland, “A being is not  earth,  not  water/
Not fire, not wind, not space,/ Not consciousness,  and  not  all  of  them.
What person is there other than these?” The different elements constitute  a
person but a person is not  each  of  the  elements  nor  is  a  person  the
collection of all of them. Then what is the person? Does the  person  exist?
It has to exist.

So what is the answer? The  person  is  that  which  is  merely  imputed  in
dependence upon the collection  of  the  elements.  You  can  think  of  the
aggregates. When we look for the phenomenon among its basis of  designation,
e.g., the ‘I’ or person, we cannot talk about the ‘I’ or the person  without
talking about the body and the mind.

If  the  ‘I’  exists  inherently,  it  should  exist  among  its  basis   of
designation, but the ‘I’ is not the aggregates. When we  look  for  the  ‘I’
among the aggregates, we will not be able to find the  ‘I’.  This  does  not
mean that we have found the non-existence of the ‘I’. The  correct  analysis
should lead us in the direction whereby we begin to feel  that  we  are  not
finding the inherently existent ‘I’. This is the correct  direction.  It  is
not about finding the non-existence of the  ‘I’.  The  wrong  conclusion  is
that the ‘I’ does not exist. This is completely wrong. Instead the  analysis
should  conclude  with  the  understanding  that  indeed  the  ‘I’  is   not
inherently existent, that there is no inherently existent ‘I’.

The inherently existent ‘I’ does not exist. We have to  look  for  it  among
the aggregates in order to convince ourselves of this  fact.  When  we  look
for it, what should we find in the end? We should find the non-existence  of
the inherently existent ‘I’, i.e.,  you  should  find  that  the  inherently
existent ‘I’ does not exist.

Finding that the inherently existent ‘I’ does not exist is not the  same  as
finding that the ‘I’ does not exist. According to the CMWS, just because  we
have discovered  that  a  particular  object  in  question  does  not  exist
inherently, it does not mean that we  have  found  its  non-existence.  When
things do not exist inherently, it does not mean  that  they  cannot  exist.
All phenomena do not exist inherently but they exist as  merely  imputed  by
thought.

Dependent origination

Phenomena that are existents obviously exist.  But  existence  and  inherent
existence are not the same thing. Things that exist do not mean that  things
exist inherently. A phenomenon comes into being in dependence on causes  and
conditions. This  makes that particular  phenomenon  dependently  originated
(or dependently arisen). This is  dependent  origination  at  the  level  of
causality. A dependently originated  phenomenon is not inherently  existent.
This is the essence.

Dependent origination and inherent existence are  mutually  exclusive.  They
contradict one another. If something exists by depending on something  else,
it cannot be inherently existent.

To gain an understanding of inherent existence, one of  the  best  lines  of
reasoning is to use the logic of dependent origination. By using  the  logic
of dependent origination, one comes to understand how things  are  empty  of
existing inherently and how things exist as merely imputed by the mind.

We return to the analogy of mistaking a coil of rope to be  a  snake.  There
is the appearance of a snake from the side of the coil of the rope.  Now  we
have concluded that that appearance is a fabrication  and  creation  of  the
mind and does not come from the side of the rope. The snake is just  a  mere
imputation by thought. This is the reality but this is not how it appears.

The snake is merely imputed by the mind on the coil of  rope.  At  the  time
when the mind does not realise that the snake is imputed by the mind,  there
is an appearance of a snake being projected from the side  of  the  coil  of
the rope. Although this is not the reality, this  is  how  it  appears.  The
reality is that the snake is merely imputed by the  mind.  Nevertheless  the
appearance of a snake comes from the side of the coil of the rope.

Likewise although, in reality, the ‘I’ is none  other  than  that  which  is
merely imputed in dependence upon the  aggregates  that  are  its  bases  of
designation, our experience of the ‘I’ is that it  does  not  appear  to  be
merely imputed in this way. The  ‘I’  never  appears  to  us  to  be  merely
imputed. The ‘I’ seems to exist among the body and mind. We think  that  the
‘I’ is coming completely from the side of the body and mind, that it  exists
from the side of the basis of designation. This is not the real problem  yet
.

The real problem is  that  we  completely  assent  to  that  appearance.  We
believe completely in that appearance. This is how it is—it  exists  in  the
way it appears. This is the ultimate root of our circling in samsara.

Returning to the analogy of mistaking the coil of the rope to  be  a  snake,
although there is no snake from the side of the rope  and  the  snake  is  a
mere imputation by the mind, there is the appearance of the snake  from  the
side of the rope. Not only is there this appearance but we  assent  to  that
appearance.  We believe that  there  is  a  snake  there.  Because  of  this
belief, there is fear and other problems follow.

Likewise all our problems and suffering  come  from  our  assenting  to  the
appearance of the inherently existent  ‘I’,  our  belief  that  the  ‘I’  is
inherently existent.

                                 ~~~~~~~~~~

So, “… correctly and repeatedly beholding  those  five  aggregates  also  as
empty of inherent nature.” This is the brief explanation  of  the  emptiness
of inherent existence.

The extensive explanation follows with the  presentation  of  the  four-fold
emptiness.



Interpreted by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme; transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek,  Vivien  Ng
and Aki Yeo; edited by Cecilia Tsong.




-----------------------
[1] This was discussed in Pages 8 – 10 of Lesson 25 of Module 3 on Tenets.
The transcripts can be downloaded from this link:
http://www.fpmtabc.org/teachings_files/bp2ndM3.php.
[2] Ven Gyurme: I am not saying that it is the same. You have to be  careful
with the English.

