Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/HeartSutra/BP2 M4 L01 (final-new).doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:52:27.865199
================================================================================


Transcript of teachings by Khen Rinpoche Geshe Chonyi  on  the  Heart  Sutra
and the Six Perfections

Lesson                                                                     1
      No: 1                             Date:             25th June 2013



Presentation of the Mahayana paths and grounds according to the Consequence
Middle Way School. Paths of the ordinary bodhisattva: path of accumulation
and path of preparation.


Khen Rinpoche: You have completed the exams. There were  many  questions  so
if you really want to know the answers, then discuss them with  each  other.
Find out why you were wrong, why you were right. Find out from  each  other.
If you still cannot understand why you were wrong, then you can ask me,  all
right?

This time round, nobody got 100 marks (laughter). Many people  said  it  was
difficult. As I  mentioned  to  everyone  before,  the  exam  was  just  for
exercising your brain. When you exercise  your  brain,  your  brain  becomes
younger and healthier! That was the idea. So you can take as that.

Don’t be too stressed over about the exam. You got the  right  answer?  That
is alright. You got the wrong answer? That is also alright.  It  is  not  so
much about the marks. Maybe some  people  are  worried.  They  expected  100
marks and they didn’t get it so they are upset. It is not like that.

Take it as an exercise and is part of learning. Whether you get  good  marks
or , you get bad marks, it doesn’t  matter.  Sometimes  there  may  be  some
mistakes in  giving out the  marks. There may be a  difference  of  oOne  or
two marks.  will be different. There should be is no  argument  about  that.
e. The marks doesn’ not t  go  anywhere  so  .  So  just  accept  the  marks
giventhat. Sometimes could be mistake. That’s not so much problem.

So Aafter the class today, I will give  back  (the  exam  paper).  I’m  just
wondering, anybody think these questions are so  difficult,  just  ask  one.
From here, If someone body felt elthere was  such a difficult  question—“Why
is Khen Rinpoche asking me this?”—and you , want to ask me,  ask  now.  Just
one . Only onequestion. Then after finish this class,  then  you  take  your
exam papers.

                        (No response from students).

                                 ~~~~~~~~~~~

Before we start on Tthe Heart of the Perfection  of  Wisdom  Sutra,  I  will
talk a little bit about the paths and grounds.  Ideally, in order  to  learn
and to really understand Tthe Heart of the Perfection of Wisdom  Sutra,  one
must have a prior knowledge and understanding of the mode  of  progressionng
along the paths according to the Consequence Middle  Way  School  (CMWS).  I
think I have talked a little bit about that in the previous classes when  we
were looking at Tenets. In order to learn and to  understand  the  Heart  of
the Perfection of Wisdom Sutra, Wwe must have a clear understanding  of  the
presentation of the coarse and subtle selflessnesses according to the  CMWS.
In order to learn and to understand the Heart of the  Perfection  of  Wisdom
Sutra, Yyou should re-visit what we had covered  recently  in  the  previous
module;, in in particular, you should re-visit the  section  on  the  CMWS’s
presentation of:
• - what are the main objects of abandonment
• -  what  is  meant  by  the  afflictive  obscurations  and  the  knowledge
  obscurations
• - the illustrations that are posited for these two obscurations


If you remember from our previous discussion on the CMWS,  with  regards  to
the hearers, solitary realiszers  and the bodhisattvas, with respect to  the
main object of meditation, there is no difference with respect to  their  in
the main objects of meditation. ; whether it is a hearer, solitary  realizer
or bodhisattva. However there are  is  a  main  differences  in  their  main
objects of abandonment.

You must have some understanding ofn these things  in  order  to  appreciate
the explanation of Tthe Heart of the Perfection  of  Wisdom  Sutra.  If  you
remember that Aat the very end of the root text on  tenets,   root  text  in
the section on the f CMWS, there wasis  a brief  mention  of  discussion  on
how:
• - the abandonment of the afflictive obscurations is simultaneous with the
  attainment of the eighth 8th bodhisattva ground (or eighth 8th bhumi) and,


• - the abandonment of the knowledge obscurations is simultaneous with the
  actualiszation of the four bodies of a bBuddha (page 27[1] of the root
  text).
So that was what being mentioned towards the very end of that text. That  is
just a brief mention of how the abandonment of the  afflictive  obscurations
is simultaneous with the achievement of the  8th  eight  bodhisattva  ground
and the abandonment of the knowledge obscurations is simultaneous  with  the
actualization of the four bodies. In order to have  some  understanding   of
whatthe meaning of  is meant by theose statements, now we are going to  look
now at the presentation of the paths and grounds according to the CMWS.

Many of you may know that in Tthe Heart of the Perfection of  Wisdom  Sutra,
there is this mantra:
Tadyatha gate gate paragate parasamgate bodhi svaha.
Essentially, Tthiast mantra shows how the bodhisattvas  progress  along  the
different Mahayana paths. The and the main subject matter of Tthe  Heart  of
the Perfection of Wisdom Sutra is showing  how  the  bodhisattvas,   on  the
basis of realiszing emptiness,  progress on the various  Mahayana  paths  in
order to achieve full enlightenment.

Khen Rinpoche (in English): Okay, Tthat  is  completes  the  Hheart  Ssutra.
Express version in one.t Ten minutes!.

                                 ~~~~~~~~~~~

There is a chart (see below) that shows the  five  Mahayana  paths.  I  will
attempt to give a brief explanation of the paths and  grounds  according  to
this chart on the five Mahayana paths.[2] .


All the four Buddhist tenets assert the  three  vehicles:  the  Hhearers’  V
vehicle,  the  Ssolitary  Rrealiszers’  V  vehicle,  and  the   Bbodhisattva
Vvehicle (or the Ggreat Vvehicle, the Mahayana).
All three vehicles talk talked about the five paths. So tThere are the  five
paths of the hearers, the five paths of the  solitary  realiszers   and  the
five paths of the bodhisattvas. The five paths for all three  vehicles  have
the same name.
So what are the five paths? The five paths are:
1. The path of accumulation
2. The path of preparation
3. The path of seeing
4. The path of meditation
5. The path of no more learning.

For those of you who are seriously really interested  to  learn,  gain  gain
knowledge  and understanding over time, and for those of you who are  really
interested to learn, then it is your personal  responsibility  to  memorisze
some of these things. , such that Yyou should be able, at least,  to say  at
least what the five paths  are  are:  path  of  accumulation,  the  path  of
preparation, the path of seeing, the path of meditation and the path  of  no
more learning. This is like your the working capital. When  So  if  you  are
unable not able even even to express verbally what  these  five  paths  are,
then tthere is really no way to progress and or to learn.  .  That  is  your
personal responsibility.
Mahayana & Hinayana tenets & the three vehicles

From the perspective of sutra
If you remember our discussion ofn the four Buddhist tenets, the  first  two
Buddhist tenets are Hinayana tenets.[3]. They assert that when  the  hearers
and  solitary  realiszers,  and  even  the  bodhisattvas,   complete   their
respective  five  paths,  they  become  hearers  arhats   (or   hearer   foe
destroyers)  and  solitary  realiszer  arhats  (or  solitary  realiser   foe
destroyers).
They first achieved the  nirvana with remainder. When they pass  away,  they
achieve the nirvana without  remainder.  According  to  these  two  Hinayana
tenets, when these arhats achieved  the  nirvana  without  remainder,  their
mental continuaums are severed.

What about those who become buddhas?
According to the two Hinayana tenets, when the a bBuddha  passes  away,  and
achieves the  nirvana  without  remainder,  his  mental  continuum  is  also
severed. So Tthat is the view or the beliefs of the two Hinayana tenets.

When If you look at the Hinayana tenets, they do  not  assert  that  a  bthe
Buddha continues on in some form  after passing away  in  order  to  benefit
sentient beings. According to these Hinayana  tenets,  once  a  bthe  Buddha
passes  into  the  sorrowless  state  and  achieves  the   nirvana   without
remainder, his mental continuum is severed  and  there  is  nothing  remains
left of him that to hang around to works for the welfare do  things  for  of
us sentient beings. A So according  to  the  Hinayana  tenets,  the  bBuddha
literally disappears into nothingness so t. His mental continuum is  severed
after he passes away into the sorrowless state. The Hinayana tenets  do  not
n’t have a presentation  or  an  explanation  of  athe  bBuddha  benefitting
sentient beings in myriad ways. When If you think about it,  this  is  quite
mind boggling and is something that is quite difficult to accept.

Khen Rinpoche (in English): I am  juJust  repeating  the  tenets  here.  You
should This one you already know  this.  You  already  know  what  I  am  ’m
ttalking about, don’t you now, isn’t it? Anyway, Iif you  do  not  n’t  know
what I am talking about, , then we are just leaving   some  imprints  there.
Okay. I won’t talk too long.

Of the four Buddhist tenets, two are Hinayana tenets and  two  are  Mahayana
tenets. The two Mahayana tenets are the Mind  Only  School  (MOS)   and  the
Middle Way School (MWS).

There are different divisions  wWithin  the  Mind  Only  School,  there  are
different divisions:
• T- there are some Pproponents of Mind Oonly who assert that there are
  three final vehicles.
• - Tthere are some Pproponents of Mind Oonly who assert that there is just
  one final vehicle.
In general, there are three vehicles. However, some of  the  Pproponents  of
Mind  Oonly  assert  that,   although  there  are  three  vehicles,  but  in
actuality, there is only one final vehicle.  There  are  also  some  of  the
Pproponents of Mind Oonly who assert that just as there are three  vehicles,
there are three final vehicles.

As for the MWSMiddle Way School,  although  they  do  do  assert  the  three
vehicles— -the hearers, the solitary realiszers   and  the  bodhisattvas—for
this school, - but there is just one final vehicle.



The Mahayana tenets do not accept  that,   upon  achieving  nirvana  without
remainder, the mental continuaum  are is severed whether it is  with  regard
to the arhat. They do not accept  that  at  all;  whether  is  for  the  foe
destroyers or the buddhas. All  the   Mahayana  tenets  assert  that,   upon
achieving full enlightenment, the mental continuum is not severed.

Rather, upon achieving enlightenment, which is simultaneous with the
actualization of the four khayas or the four bodies, then the buddhas work
for the welfare of all the numberless sentient beings equaling to the
limitless extent of space forever until the entire samsara is emptied.
• All the Mahayana tenets assert that,  upon achieving the  full
  enlightenment that is simultaneous with the actualisation of the four
  kayas (or the four bodies),, i.e., bbecoming a bBuddha, athe bBuddha will
  continue to work for all sentient beings equalling to the limitless extent
  of space for as long as samsara exists.  The Mahayana tenets do not accept
  that the mental continuum of arhat or Buddha will just be severed upon
  achieving nirvana. This is the Mahayana position of the Mahayana, and it
  tenets is the opposite of what the Hinayana tenets assert.
• The Hinayana tenets assert that,  whether they be it is arhats or the
  buddhas, after they having achieved the nirvana without remainder, their
  mental continuaum are is severed.

So So you have these two very different positions. Which one do you  choose?
The valid position is the The one that makes more sense  and  the  one  that
does not contradict logic. should be the valid position.

According to the Mahayana, the job is not done for those who have  completed
the hearers’ path and the solitary realiszers’ path to  become  hearers  foe
destroyers ( arhats) or solitary realiszers  foe  destroyers  (arhats).  But
according to the Mahayana, the job  is  not  done  after  having  become  an
arhat. They don’t just hang around and stay on do not remain  as  an  arhats
forever and ever.  According  to  the  Mahayana,  these  hearer  arhats  and
solitary realiszer arhats will have to enter and travel along  the  Mahayana
paths, travel on the various Mahayana paths  aand  eventually  achieve  full
enlightenment.

This is like a brief introduction of what happens to and what  the  hearers,
solitary realiszers and bodhisattvas do  after  they  complete  their  paths
and what they do. You have to understand This what we have  just  discussion
ed iis from the perspective of sutra.

From the perspective of Mahayana tantra
From  the  perspective  of  Mahayana  tantra,  one   cannot   achieve   full
enlightenment, i.e., enlightenment is not possible,   by  depending  on  the
ssutrutra a path alone. Enlightenment is not possible just by  depending  on
the sutra path alone. Even for a bodhisattva n individual who has  travelled
the various bodhisattva grounds up to the  tenth  bodhisattva  ground,  that
bodhisattva cannot achieve enlightenment without depending  on  the  tantric
path. That individual will still have to enter the tantric path in order  to
achieve enlightenment. Therefore oOn top of the sutra path,  there  is  also
the  presentation  of  the  paths  and  grounds  according  to  tantra.   So
enlightenment is very far away and achieving it  demands  a  great  deal  of
effort.

From the perspective of Mahayana tantra, even  for  an  individual  who  has
travelled all the way up to the  tenth  bodhisattva  ground  cannot  achieve
enlightenment without depending on tantra. That individual will  still  have
to  enter  the  tantric  path  in  order  to   achieve   enlightenment.   So
enlightenment is very far away. Achieving enlightenment is not a  stroll  in
the park which you can just relax.
Khen Rinpoche (In English): So now we are going to see how far away  it  is.
We are jJust looking down the road, not looking at  the map, to  see  .  Not
think like how far away is enlightenment is.

Now is not the time to dwell on into the reasons why one  needs  tantra  and
why one cannot achieve enlightenment by depending on the sutra  path  alone.
This is not the time. This will come towards the end of the  Basic  Program.
I think Tthere is one module  dedicated  to  a  brief  introduction  on  the
tantric paths and grounds. At that time, we  will  talk  about  the  special
features of tantra. It Oonly by understanding s these  special  features  of
tantra thatwill  you appreciate and understand  why  you  need  the  tantric
path in addition on top ofto the sutra path.

Three great countless eons

According to the  Mahayana,  in  order  to  achieve  full  enlightenment  or
buddhahood, one needs to accumulate the collections over a period  of  three
great countless eons.
It is the general view of the Mahayana that  one  needs  to  accumulate  the
collections over the period of  three  great  countless  eons.  But  do  not
despair, for according to tantra, it is possible  to  achieve  enlightenment
in one brief lifetime in one body.
Now weWe are going to look at the presentation of the paths and grounds,  in
particular the Mahayana paths and grounds. We  are  going  to  look  at  the
presentation of the Mahayana paths and  grounds  according  to  the  highest
philosophical school, the  CMWSonsequence  Middle  Way  School.  It  is  the
general view of the Mahayana and also from the
From the perspective of the CMWS that   of the Mahayana sutra, according  to
the Consequence Middle Way School, one needs to accumulate  the  collections
over a period of three great  countlessgreat  countless  eons.  But  do  not
despair for, according to tantra, it is possible  to  achieve  enlightenment
in one brief lifetime in one body!

Let us look at the accumulation of the collections during  the  first  great
countless eon.
During  the  first  great  countless  eon,  Wwhere  does  this  first  great
countless eon occur it happen in relation to the five paths?

The five paths can be condensed into two:
• The paths of an ordinary being: the accumulation of the collections in
  the first great countless eon happens when one is still an ordinary being.
•
• The paths of a superior (or superior being): t
The accumulation of the collections in the first great countless eon
happens when one is still an ordinary being.
• The accumulation of the collections in the second and third great
  countless eons is done as a superior, i.e., . So the person who is
  accumulating the collections at these times in the second and the third
  great countless eons is not an ordinary being but is already , the person
  is already a superior. Arya
• The word “arya” in Sanskrit means superior. The accumulation of the
  collections in the second and third great countless eon is done as a
  superior.
•

Impure and pure grounds
Let us look at the accumulation of  the  collections  in  the  second  great
countless eon specifically.
The accumulation of the collections in the second great countless eon  takes
place happens from the first to the seventh ground (or bhumi  in  Sanskrit).
The first seven grounds are also called the seven impure grounds.

The accumulation of the collections in the third great countless  eon  takes
place happens from the eighth to the tenth ground. The  eighth,  ninth   and
tenth grounds are known as the three pure grounds.

More details on these grounds will come later on. For the  time  being,  now
you must know that:
• The first seven bodhisattva grounds are impure grounds.
• The last three—the  (eighth, ninth  and tenth) bodhisattva grounds— are
  pure grounds.

Why are tthey termed  impure or pure in this way?
Why are the first seven bodhisattva grounds impure?
Why are the last three bodhisattva grounds pure?
• The first seven bodhisattva grounds are called impure grounds because the
  bodhisattvas on these grounds have not yet abandoned the afflictive
  obscurations,  i.e.,  they have not been purified of the afflictive
  obscurations.
• The bodhisattvas on the eighth, ninth  and tenth grounds have already
  abandoned the afflictive obscurations and . tTherefore they are purified
  of the afflictive obscurations. Therefore, the eighth, ninth  and tenth
  grounds are called pure grounds.

As I mentioned earlier and also during the tenets,  the  attainment  of  the
eighth ground  is  simultaneous  with  the  abandonment  of  the  afflictive
obscurations. When the bodhisattva abandons the afflictive obscurations,  he
achieves the eighth ground simultaneously.

When the bodhisattva completes  the  accumulation  of  the  two  collections
during the third great countless eon, he achieves full enlightenment.
When the bodhisattva completes the accumulation of the  two  collections  in
the third great countless eon,  then  he  achieve  full  enlightenment,  Hhe
becomes  a  bBuddha  and  he  achieves  the  Mahayana  pPath  of  nNo-  more
lLearning.

Path of learning and the path of no more learning
All the paths prior to that, starting from the  paths  of  accumulation  and
preparation that are the paths of an ordinary bodhisattva and the  paths  of
the  arya  bodhisattvas  From  the  beginning  of  the  Mahayana   path   of
accumulation anto d all the way up to the end of the tenth  ground,  one  is
still a sentient being. All these paths are called the pPaths  of  lLearning
(or learning paths) because one is  training  and  is  still  learning.  The
paths of learning occur during the time when one is a sentient being.

The point behind tThe terms  the pPath of lLearning  and the pPath  of  nNo-
more lLearning  is to indicates the fact that as a bBuddha,  he  has  learnt
completed everything that is  to be learneded. A  The  bBuddha  has  nothing
more to know or and to learn, whereas,  as a sentient being,  one  is  still
learning and one is still progressing along  the  paths.  Therefore,  during
the time when one is travelling the paths  as  a  sentient  beings,  one  is
still on the pPath of lLearning.

It is up to us as an individual to decide whether we want  to  learn  or  we
don’t want to learn. In a way, it is ’s up to everyonebody as an  individual
to choose individually whether you want to learn or not,, but  of course  in
order to make thate decision,  you really have to know where  you  are  now.
So Iti is  t’s  every  clear  that,   unless  you  are  already  a  bBuddha,
obviously  then anyone body else who is not a bBuddha  obviously  still  has
things to learn. Please decide where you are.

Khen Rinpoche (in English): If you are enlightened then there is no need  to
come to class.

Even for those bodhisattvas who have achieved reached the unbelievably  high
attainment of the tenth 10th ground, that is unbelievably  high  attainment,
still still have not completed their training. They still have  obscurations
to be abandoned. They still have to continuously e  and  joyously  persevere
in their  training  in  order  to  become  a  bBuddha.  From  this   we  can
understand that, until we are a bBuddhas, there are always things  to  learn
and there is always room for improvement.

It is obvious that,  as a sentient being, there will is always be athe  time
when that we do notnot understand certain things.  But Ssome people  do  get
discouraged just because they do not n’t understand some things.  When  they
get discouraged, they lose heart. Rather than losing heart, we  should  just
continue to learn by remembering that we are still  a  sentient  beings.  We
need to remember this.

Bodhisattvas who are travelling on these  five  Mahayana  paths  are  either
ordinary bodhisattvas or superior (or / arya)  bodhisattvas.

Paths of the Ordinary Bodhisattva: the path of accumulation &  the  path  of
preparation

What are the paths of the ordinary bodhisattvas?
There are two Mahayana paths of the ordinary bodhisattvas:
1. the Mahayana pPath of aAccumulation
2. the Mahayana pPath of pPreparation.

When does one become a bodhisattva?
One  becomes  a  bodhisattva  when  one  enters  the   Mahayana   pPath   of
aAccumulation. W
When  one  enters  the  Mahayana  Path  of  Accumulation   one   becomes   a
bodhisattva. So when one has achieved the Mahayana pPath  of  aAccumulation,
it is said that one has entered the Mahayana path, and one is on the way  to
buddhahood.



When do you become a bodhisattva?
A bodhisattva is someone who  has  generated  bodhicitta  (or  the  mind  or
spirit of enlightenment or the spirit of enlightenment).  So  a  bodhisattva
is someone who has generated bodhicitta/ the mind of enlightenment.
Bodhicitta can be divided into:
1. cContrived bodhicitta
2. uUncontrived  bodhicitta

Contrived and uncontrived bodhicitta
Contrived bodhicitta is the bodhicitta that  arises  when  one  puts  effort
into thinking  about bodhicittait.  and  put  effort.  Then  the  The  fully
qualified bodhicitta arises, but it that requires effort.

But havingHaving  contrived bodhicitta does not make one a bodhisattva  yet.
Only when one generatesd uncontrived bodhicitta, the  bodhicitta  that,  due
to  familiarity,  arises  spontaneously  without  effort,   then  does  oone
becomes a bodhisattva. Due to  familiarity,  uncontrived  bodhicitta  arises
spontaneously without effort at all.  This is  indicated  as  ““B””  in  the
chart.
When a person generates effortless  bodhicitta  or  uncontrived  bodhicitta,
that is when thate person becomes a bodhisattva, is suitable to be called  a
bodhisattva and enters the Mahayana path as an . That is when he  becomes  a
Bodhisattva. Here he is an ordinary bBodhisattva.

Bodhisattvas  of  dull  and  sharp  facultiesSo   whoever   generates   this
uncontrived bodhicitta in their mind, then that person enters  the  Mahayana
path and is suitable to be called a bodhisattva.

There are two types of individuals who generate  bodhicitta  and  enter  the
path:
1. tThose of dull faculties who are followers of faith
2. tThose of sharp faculties who are followers of Dharma

Those who are of sharp faculties are said to be followers of Dharma,   i.e.,
 they are followers of reasoning, will generate bodhicitta and  then  become
a bodhisattva. But.  Bbefore they  generate  bodhicitta,  they  investigate,
analysze and think about emptiness.  So Tthose of sharp faculties  are  said
to realisze emptiness first. On theat basis of having  developed  a  correct
understanding of emptiness, only then do they   then  they  only  go  on  to
generate the uncontrived bodhicitta and  become  a  bodhisattvas.  So  those
persons of sharp faculties will first develop  a  correct  understanding  of
emptiness and then move on to  generating  bodhicitta.  When  they  generate
bodhicitta they then become bodhisattvas.

WEssentially what is bodhicitta?
Simply speaking,  Iit  is  the  thought  thinking,   “I  must  achieve  full
enlightenment for the benefit of sentient beings.”
So for those who are of sharp faculties, before  they  generate  bodhicitta,
i.e.,  the thought that make the pledging e to achieve  full  enlightenment,
they do analysze to see why there is a need to achieve  full  enlightenment,
. They analyze whether enlightenment does exists or not, and whether  it  is
attainable possible or not, whether is there such a  thing  or  not.  It  is
only  until  when  they  see  that  enlightenment  actually  exists  and  is
something that is aattainable that , they then make the  pledge  to  achieve
full enlightenment.

In order for those who are of sharp  faculties,  ,  in  fact  for  anyone,in
fact, for anyone,  to  be absolutely certain have certainty in their   heart
to see that enlightenment is a possibility, that  it  is  definitely  exists
and is definitely can be aachievableed, these  that individuals  must  first
have an understanding of emptiness,   -  the  ultimate  nature  of  reality.
Without this understanding, it is not possible to see that there  is  the  a
state whereby all the obscurations can be  removed. Therefore, Wwithout  the
uunderstanding  of  emptiness,  it  is  not  possible  to  have  such   that
certainty.

So Therefore for those who are of sharp faculties, until they have  achieved
such an understanding of emptiness, they will not make the pledge,  “I  want
to achieve full enlightenment for the benefit of sentient beings.” Those  of
sharp faculties will only make the pledge to achieve full enlightenment  for
all sentient beings  after  they  are  fully  convinced  that  enlightenment
exists and is actually possible to be achieved attainable.

• In order for any individual to see that enlightenment exists and is
  attainablepossible to be achieved, that individual must first be convinced
  and realiszed that the obscurations, no matter how strong and powerful
  they may be,  can be eliminated and removed from the mind.
• , no matter how terrible or how powerful they are. In order In order to
  realisze this, first at, one must realisze that the antidotes to the
  obscurations exist, because. W hen if one does not realise see that e
  antidotes exist, one will not see how the obscurations can be removed.
So before one can see the obscurations can be removed, one must first
realized that antidotes exist.
• And wWhen we talk about the antidotes, the final conclusion is that there
  is nothing else beyond the wisdom or the mind  that directly perceives
  emptiness,  or the mind that directly perceives the ultimate nature of
  reality.

When we say that those of sharp faculties realisze  that  the  enlightenment
is possible because the obscurations can be removed from  the  mind  due  to
the existence of , the antidotes do exist and so forth, we are  not  talking
about some kind of general understanding that exist  in  general.  Those  at
individuals must have a  very  personal  conviction,  in  their  own  hearts
believing that,  realize  that  in  his  own  heart  “Enlightenment  can  be
achieved because I am fully convinced that the obscurations  I  have  inside
me are temporary and can be removed   because  it  is  possible  for  me  to
generate the antidotes to them.”. This is a very  personal  conviction.   So
This that is the brief explanation of ““A”” in the chart.

“A”: inferential realisation of emptiness
In lLo-rig, when we talked  about  the  realiszation  of  emptiness,  it  is
either:
- (1) aan inferential realiszation of emptiness  or (2)
- a direct realiszation of emptiness. B
If you do remember the presentation of the mind  and  awareness,  between  a
non-conceptual consciousness and a conceptual consciousness, the  mind  that
realiszes emptiness at “point “A”” is a conceptual consciousness. one.
For this conceptual consciousness realiszing  emptiness,  between  a  direct
valid  cogniszer  and  an  inferential  valid  cogniszer,  the   mind   that
realiszing emptiness at  ““A”  ”  is  an  inferential  cogniszer  realiszing
emptiness.


The direct realiszation of emptiness does not happen until  the  path  of  a
superior bodhisattva (or arya bodhisattva)  is  manifested.  ,  and  Tthisat
happens on the Mahayana pPath of sSeeing.

According to the Prasangika, the Middle WayCMWS,   Consequence  School,  all
the realiszations of emptiness prior to “point “G”” are  either  inferential
cognisers or subsequent cognisers. This refers to:
• , i.e. prior to entering the Mahayana path (““A””)
• , after entering the Mahayana path (from “B” up to but not including
  “G”)while, i.e.,  on the paths of the ordinary bodhisattva,  (from “B” up
  to but does not includes “G”), that means on the Mahayana pPath of
  aAccumulation and pPath of pPreparation, are either inferential cognizers
  or subsequent cognizers.

As opposed to those who are sharp faculties, the persons of  dull  faculties
are mainly followers of faith. Based on some belief or faith, they make  the
pledge to achieve  enlightenment  to  accomplish  the  welfare  of  sentient
beings. So iIt is still possible to  generate  bodhicitta  without  a  prior
understanding of emptiness, and there are individuals  who  do  do  generate
this a bbodhicitta. When they generate bodhicitta, they enter  the  Mahayana
path,  become  a  bodhisattva   and  actualisze  the   Mahayana   pPath   of
aAccumulation. So Ffrom this, you can see that there  are  bodhisattvas  who
do not have any understanding or realiszation of emptiness.
|Sharp faculties bodhisattva      |Dull faculties bodhisattva       |
|Followers of Dharma (followers of|Followers of faith.              |
|reasoning)                       |Based on some belief or faith (  |
|Analyze and think about emptiness|generate bodhicitta ( become     |
|( realize emptiness ( generate   |bodhisattva                      |
|bodhicitta   ( become bodhisattva|                                 |

The path of accumulation
The Mahayana pPath of aAccumulation has three divisions:
1. sSmall pPath of aAccumulation
2. mMedium pPath of aAccumulation
3. gGreat pPath of aAccumulation
As one progresses along these paths, the quality and  the  strength  of  the
antidotes becomes increase  ingly  over  time,   i.e.,  they   becomes  more
powerful overtime.
But Wwith respect to the objects of abandonment, they become weaker  smaller
over time. One starts off with many huge  mass  of  objects  of  abandonment
that diminish and then become smaller and smaller over time.

In  the  case  of  generating  the  antidotes  on  the  Mahayana  pPath   of
aAccumulation, one starts with the small  pPath  of  aAccumulation.  As  the
antidotes grow stronger, strengthen, one  moves  from  the  small  pPath  of
aAccumulation to the medium pPath of aAccumulation.   and  Tthen  one  moves
from the medium pPath of aAccumulation to the great pPath of  aAccumulation.


When one enters the Mahayana pPath of aAccumulation,  one  enters  from  the
Mahayana small pPath of aAccumulation. Such an entry is  contingent  on  one
having generateding the uncontrived bodhicitta. So when  one  generates  the
actual full realization of bodhicitta, one enters the  Mahayana  small  Path
of Accumulation.

When we talk about  mind  generation,  there  are  many  divisions  of  mind
generation. The mind generation at the point when one  enters  the  Mahayana
small pPath of aAccumulation is called the eEarth-liked mind  generation  or
the - mind generation that is like the earth.
For Tthe bodhisattva who is on the Mahayana small  pPath  of  aAccumulation,
that Bodhisattva  has  uncontrived  bodhicitta,   i.e.,   he  has  the  full
realiszation of bodhicitta, but .  But thate bodhicitta in the continuum  of
the bodhisattva on f the Mahayana small pPath of  aAccumulation  is  subject
to degeneration, i.e., . That means it is unnot stable and can  deteriorate.


It is said that there are some bBodhisattvas at  this  juncture  who  become
get discouraged  and  disheartened,   thinking,   “Sentient  beings  are  so
difficult,” ” or they may meet a Hinayana  guru.  ,  or  for  Wwhatever  the
reason may be, , they lose their bodhicitta,  decide to give up the idea  of
achieving enlightenment,  and fall into the Hinayana path and  become  .  So
it is possible that there are bodhisattvas on the  Mahayana  small  Path  of
Accumulation lose their bodhicitta and  fall  into  the  Hinayana  path  and
become arhats,  to achievinge liberation from samsara. It is m
It is said that it is possible for bodhisattva on the  Mahayana  small  Path
of Accumulation to be  disheartened  and  give  up  the  idea  of  achieving
enlightenment and fall into  the  Hinayana  path.  Most  likely  that   such
bodhisattvas are bodhisattvas who are of dull faculties.

It is quite unlikely that e bodhisattvas of sharp faculties  would  give  up
their bodhicitta because they have already concluded   in  their  own  mind,
“E; “Enlightenment is something that is needed.  It  is  very  good  and  is
necessary.  and Iit is possible for me and I  want  to  attain  and  I  want
it.”. So Therefore it is  unlikely  that  bodhisattvas  of  sharp  faculties
would ever give up their bodhicitta.

The bodhisattva who is on the  Mahayana  small  Path  of  Accumulation  will
progress to the Mahayana medium Path of Accumulation. When the  bBodhisattva
reaches the Mahayana medium of pPath of  aAccumulation,  the  bodhicitta  in
his continuum has become very stable.   This  So  the  bBodhisattva  on  the
Mahayana medium Path of Accumulation will will never ever give  up  his  the
bodhicitta,  .  He  will  never  ever  give  up  the  thought   to   achieve
enlightenment for  the  benefit  of  all  sentient  beings.  His  bodhicitta
becomes very stable.  The bodhicitta/  the  mind  of  enlightenment  of  the
bodhisattva at  this  juncture  is  like  gold  and  is  called  gGold-liked
bodhicitta; the mind of enlightenment is like gold. Just aslike  the  actual
gold which will  never  deteriorate  and  change  into  something  else  and
deteriorates, the bodhicitta mind of  enlightenment  of  bodhicitta  in  the
continuum of the bodhisattva on the Mahayana medium pPath  of  aAccumulation
will never change and never deteriorate and change.

At ““C”” in the chart, once the bodhisattva achieves  the   Mahayana  medium
pPath  of  aAccumulation  is  achieved,  it  is  not  possible   for   thate
bodhisattva to fall  down  into  the  Hinayana  because  because  if  hishis
bodhicitta will never degenerate. , then it is not possible for him to  fall
into the Hinayana.

Khen Rinpoche: (in English): So Tthat is ’s why it  is  important  that  you
all to come to ABC  to  know  the  “A,”,  “B,”,  “C.”  (referring  to  these
milestones in the chart).  You know what “is  A”,  is.  Yyou  know  what  is
“B”,  is. Yyou know what “is C” is. This is why ABC exists. I am joking.
Khen Rinpoche: (in English): Of course that’s why ABC exists. Joking.  There
is another handout[4] that , you can read that. In the nNext class  we  will
go through the chart and the handout is these two together. Hopefully I  can
finish this topic in one more class. So you can read the chart  also.  Maybe
one class I will finish this chapter.
It will be is good if you can get a clear general idea of how an  individual
progresses along these paths by . So we should referring  to  the  chart  to
get a clearer idea.








Interpreted Translated by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme; t

Transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek, Julia Koh, and Aki Yeo; e

Edited by Cecilia Tsong.
-----------------------
[1] Presentation of Tenets by  Jetsün  Chökyi  Gyaltsen  can  be  downloaded
from: http://www.fpmtabc.org/teachings_files/bp2ndM3.php.
[2] Refer to chart on The Five Mahayana Paths that can  be  downloaded  from
http://www.fpmtabc.org/download/teaching/geshe-
chonyi/bp/heartsutra/Handout/.
[3] The Hinayana tenets are the Great Exposition School (or the  Vaibhasika)
and the Sutra School (or the Sautrantika).
[4] Refer to Mahayana Paths and Grounds according to the Consequence  Middle
Way School that can be downloaded from the link in footnote (2).

