Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/HeartSutra/BP2 M4 L04 (final-new).doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:52:27.512240
================================================================================


Transcript of teachings by Khen Rinpoche Geshe Chonyi on  the   Heart  Sutra
and Stages of the Path (the Six Perfections)

Root text: The Heart of  Wisdom  Sutra  by  Shakyamuni  Buddha,  translation
Gelong  Thubten  Tsultrim  (George  Churinoff).  Extracted  from   Essential
Buddhist Prayers: An FPMT Prayer  Book,  Volume  1.  Copyright:  FPMT,  Inc.
2008.

Lesson                                                                     4
                                4 July 2013


How the five Mahayana paths are condensed in The Heart of Perfection of
Wisdom mantra. Importance of realising emptiness. Developing heartfelt
faith in the Buddha. The four seals and the four tenet systems. Benefits of
receiving teachings and reflecting on emptiness.


Transcript of teachings by Khen Rinpoche Geshe Chonyi  on  the  Heart  Sutra
and the Six Perfections

Lesson No: 4                               Date: 4th July 2013

Question: Student: How do the  bodhisattva superiors on  the  Mahayana  path
of seeing and the Mahayana pPath of mMeditation accumulate merits when  they
are in post-meditative equipoise?

Answer:  There  are  many  ways  in  which  these  bodhisattvas   go   about
accumulating the collections of merit. Recall our If you remember  from  the
previous discussion on  about  the  qualities  these  bodhisattva  superiors
possess. , Llet us take the example of  the  bodhisattva  superiors  on  the
first 1st ground called “, Very Joyful..” These  bodhisattvas  are  able  to
travel,  in an instant,  to a hundred bBuddha pure lands,  and  also  in  an
instant, temit hey can send out a hundred emanations instantly.

The purpose of travelling to the pure lands is to listen  to  the  teachings
from the buddhas there.
These bodhisattvas on the  1st  ground  are  able  to  send  out  a  hundred
emanations. With these emanations, Tthey work for the  welfare  of  sentient
beings with their hundred emanations. .

These are the various ways in  whichthat   they  accumulate  the  merit.  Of
course, these bodhisattvas also engage in the practices of the  perfections,
 such as the  perfection  of  generosity,  the  perfection  of  ethics,  the
perfection of patience, the perfection of joyous perseverance and so  forth.


It is said that the bodhisattva superiors  on  the  first  1st  ground  make
numberless very strong and powerful numberless prayers, numberless  tens  of
hundreds of thousands of aspirational prayers, which  are  very  strong  and
powerful.   It  is  said  that  all  these  numberless  prayers   that   the
bodhisattvas made are can be ccondensed into the  Prayer  of  Samantabhadra,
which is commonly known as tThe King of Prayers. So it is said that when  we
recite and  make  aspirations  using  tThe  King  of  Prayers,  it  is  very
powerful, precisely because this prayer contains  the  essence  of  all  the
numberless  prayers  made  by  the  bodhisattvas.  That  is  the  Prayer  of
Samantabhadra, or commonly known as The King of Prayers.

If you were to condense  tThe King of Prayers further, then  you  will  have
those two verses that we are commonly  recited  when  we  make  dedications,
i.e., for example,  the  verse  that  starts,   with  “Jjust  as  the  brave
Manjushri and Samantabhadra too,/Realise things as they are …”

                      ~~~~~~~~~~and Manjushri know ….”


I have given you a rough explanation of the Mahayana paths and grounds  over
the last three lessons.
I think Mmost of you are aware that in The the Heart of  the  Perfection  of
Wisdom Sutra, there is the is mantra, :
 “The mantra of the Perfection  of  Wisdom:  ‘Tadyatha  Gate  Gate  Paragate
Parasamgate Bodhi Svaha’.”
Because now you have some idea of the Mahayana paths  and  grounds,  now  we
can look at how the five Mahayana paths arecan be explained or explained  in
and  condensed in this mantra.

Path of accumulation and path of preparation

In the mantra,  ‘Tadyatha Gate Gate Paragate  Parasamgate  Bodhi  Svaha,  ’,
there are ‘gate gate” -two gates. Gate means “go‘gate’.
When translated into Tibetan, ‘” so the two gates mean “go and go”:
Tgate’ means go.
Here there are two ‘gate’, so that means ‘go, and go’.
• In essence, the first  ‘gate’  means  to  go  to  go  into  the  pPath  of
  aAccumulation.
• The second ‘gate’  means  to  go  go  toto   the  pPath  of  pPreparation.


SBasically, o tthe first two ‘gates’ collectively  means  that  one  has  to
enter  and  trains  in  the  pPath  of  aAccumulation  and  the   pPath   of
pPreparation.

So, the first two  ‘gate’  collectively  means  to  train  in  the  Path  of
Accumulation and the Path of Preparation.When
If you already  have  some  idea  of  what  is  entailed  in  the  pPath  of
aAccumulation and the pPath of pPreparation, does it not  are, then it  does
make more sense when I say that theseis two ‘gates’ mean to trains in n  the
pPath  of aAccumulation and the pPath of pPreparation, isn’t  it?  In  order
to fully really appreciate theseis first two ‘gates’,  you  really  have  to
have some  idea  of  exactly  what  happens  on  exactly  is  the  pPath  of
aAccumulation, what happens on  the  Path  of  Accumulation,  what  kind  of
qualities are acacquired and so forth.  Similarly,  when  you  we  are  told
that you we should go to the Ppath of pPreparation,  it  will  is  not  make
going to make any sense unless you  have  some  idea  of  what  a  pPath  of
pPreparation is, what does it involves, what kind of training  is  required,
and what qualities that arare attained and so forth, isn’t it?.

In one of the previous lessons, I hadve explained briefly hon how  and  when
the transition is made from the pPath  of  aAccumulation  to  the  pPath  of
pPreparation is made. ; when the transition is made, when  the  bodhisattvas
move from the Path of Accumulation to the Path of Preparation.
What  is  the  boundary  between  these  two  paths?   Generally   speaking,
Essentially, one has to attain gain theis special concentration  that  which
is a union of calm abiding and special insight . In general,  we  say  this,
but this at is not enough. Just achieving such  a  special  a  concentration
which  is  a  union  of  calm  abiding  and   special   insight   does   not
necessarnecessarilyy mean that one is you are on the pPath of  pPreparation.
However, when  if one generates a special  concentration  that  which  is  a
union of calm abiding and special  insight  focussing  on  emptiness,   (the
ultimate nature of reality), then that is when the   bodhisattva  makes  the
transition from the pPath of aAccumulation into the pPath  of  pPreparation.
It is That is very specific.

If Yyou may  remember that that  the  Mahayana  pPath  of  aAccumulation  is
divided into three:
1. tThe Mahayana small pPath of aAccumulation
2. tThe Mahayana medium piddling Path of aAccumulation
3. tThe Mahayana greatbig pPath of aAccumulation

The bodhisattvas obviously engage in learning, hearing and  reflection,  and
work very hard atin their practice.
What is their main goal at this point in time when  they  are   bodhisattvas
on the Mahayana small and medium pPaths of aAccumulation  and  the  Mahayana
middling Path of Accumulation? At this time, t
On the Mahayana small Path of Accumulation and the  Mahayana  middling  Path
of Accumulation, the bodhisattvas are trying to  using  every  e  all  their
available means in order to generate the wisdom of realiszing emptiness.
When the bodhisattvas are on the Mahayana greatbig pPath  of  aAccumulation,
they have already realiszed emptiness and .  tThey  have  generateachieve  d
the meditative serenity or calm abiding focussing on emptiness.
So, on the Mahayana great Path of  Accumulation,  the  bodhisattvas  achieve
the meditative serenity or calm abiding focusing on emptiness.
When they at bodhisattva achieves the special concentration that is a  union
of calm abiding  and  special  insight  focussing  on  emptiness,  these  at
bodhisattvas  makes  the  transition  from  the  Mahayana  great  pPath   of
aAccumulation to the Mahayana pPath of pPrreparation.


What is it that enables the bodhisattvas on the Mahayana great  pPath  of  a
Accumulation to make the transition and to  cross  over  into  the  Mahayana
pPath of pPreparation?
It is not bodhicitta but their . It is basically the  wisdom  of  realiszing
emptiness.
It is the gradual strengthening of their wisdom of realiszing emptiness,  in
terms  of  its  depth,  profundity  and  ,  clarity,  i.e.,   basically  the
improvement in the quality of the mind. As the quality of their   wisdom  of
realiszing emptiness increases, this is how they move from one milestone  to
the nextanother.

In essence, this is what the  bodhisattvas  do  on  the  Mahayana  pPath  of
aAccumulation and the Mahayana pPath of pPreparation. Of  course  Tthere  is
the practice of the six perfections but  essentially,  they  are  developing
their  understanding  and  their  realiszation  of  emptiness.   It  is  the
strengthening of that wisdom of realiszing emptiness that  enables  them  to
move higher and higher higher up on the path.

As I mentioned before, when  the  bodhisattvas  on  the  Mahayana  pPath  of
pPreparation  are  able  to  start  doing  something   about   with   ttheir
apprehension of true  existence,  they  are  able  to  start  harming  their
ignorance. The bodhisattvas on the Mahayana pPath  of  pPreparation  acquire
theat ability to harm their manifest conception of true existence.

The great Lama Tsongkhapa said in his Three Principles Aspects of  the  Path
that, “ Wwithout the wisdom of realising ultimate reality,/Even  though  you
have generated renunciation and the mind of enlightenment/  You  cannot  cut
the root cause of circling.”zing emptiness, even though you  have  generated
the determination to be free (renunciation) and the  mind  of  enlightenment
(bodhicitta), you cannot cut the root of samsara.
Lama Tsongkhapa said that even if you have bodhicitta, but  if  you  do  not
possess the wisdom of realiszing emptiness, you cannot do anything,  nothing
at all. You cannot even start start to damage your ignorance,   -  the  root
cause of samsara.  Therefore, the  wisdom  of  realiszing  emptiness  is  of
utmost importance as . It is this wisdom  of  realizing  emptiness  that  is
the only antidote to the afflictions/ destructive emotions.

There are five different Mahayana paths.
Why are there these different paths?
In a way these different paths highlights the positive development of  theat
wisdom of realiszing emptiness, .
It is highlighting the progress of that particular mind  as  it  improvesing
in quality and strength and so forth. Therefore, there are  you  have  these
different paths. It is the development of the wisdom of realizing  emptiness
that becoming better and better.


The purpose whole point of doing any  practice,  in  this  case,  the  whole
point of trying to actualisze and travel to  the  end  of  these  paths  and
travel to the end of the paths is to destroy the afflictions in  our  minds.
and to destroy the destructive emotions.
In order to do that,  destroy  the  afflictions,  weyou  must  have  an  the
antidote . You must have the solution. The solution or the antidote  has  to
bethat is  powerful enough to overcome and  to  destroy  these  afflictions.
The only antidote that can cut  and  destroy  ignorance  is  the  wisdom  of
realiszing emptiness.

Path of seeing

Going bBack to the mantra, after ‘gate gate’ is ‘paragate’.
‘Para’ means the other side and refers here to the path of seeing. So .
So ‘paragate’ means to go cross over to the , literally means  to  ‘go  over
that side’.
In the case of ‘paragate’, in general ‘para’ means over there.
Here, ‘para’ means pPath of sSeeing.
So ‘paragate’ means ‘to go’.
Therefore ‘go, go and then go over’.  Literally, ‘go over  to  the  Path  of
Seeing.’

The bodhisattvas on the Mahayana pPath of  aAccumulation  and  the  Mahayana
pPath of pPreparation  are  bodhisatbodhisatttvas,  but  they  are  ordinary
bodhisattvas. They are still ordinary beings. Once the  bodhisattvas  enters
into the pPath of sSeeing, henceforth they are he is a superiors. s
So o  ‘paragate’  is  the  demarcation  between  an  ordinary  being  and  a
superior.
There is a huge difference between being an ordinary being and a superior.
Here, an ordinary being is crossing over,  going  beyond  the  realm  of  an
ordinary being and becoming superiors. .
When the bodhisattvas cross over, he becomes a  superior.  So  that  is  the
demarcation between an ordinary being and a superior. You could  say  it  is
the demarcation between the transcendental and the worldly.
On the four stages of the  Mahayana  pPath  of  pPreparation,  the  ordinary
bodhisattvass meditate on emptiness, .
The Mahayana Path of Preparation is divided into four stages.
On those four stages of  Mahayana  Path  of  Preparation,  the  bodhisattvas
meditate on emptiness -the  ultimate  nature  of  reality,  -  in  order  to
overcome suppress the  manifest conception of true existence. They  overcome

He suppresses the manifest conception  of  true  existence  with  their  his
wisdom of realiszing emptiness but their his wisdoms of realizing  emptiness
areis still a conceptual consciousnesses, i.e., ; in that they he  realiszes
emptiness only via the meaning generality of emptiness.

The perception of emptiness is still based  on  the  meaning  generality  of
emptiness.  AAs  the  bodhisattvas  progresses  on  the  Mahayana  pPath  of
pPreparation, the object of emptiness becomes  clearer  and  clearer.   Come
the time Wwhen athe bodhisattva gainss  a  clear  appearance  of  emptiness,
i.e. when he he perceivess  the  object,   ‘emptiness’,   directly  for  the
first time without the need for any meaning generality ora  mental image  of
emptiness, that bodhisattva enters the Mahayana pPath of sSeeing.

This That is how  the  the  bodhisattvas  makes  the  transitions  from  the
Mahayana pPath of pPreparation  to  the  Mahayana  pPath  of  sSeeing.  This
transition is again made based on the development of their  wisdomthat  mind
realiszing emptiness. The transition is not made based on  the  strength  of
their bodhicitta. In this case, the  mind  realiszing  emptiness  transforms
from a conceptual realiszation of emptiness  into  a  direct  perception  of
emptiness.
It is only at this point in time that the  bodhisattvas,  in  fact,  can  be
anyone,   acquire,  s  for  the  very  first  time  in  their  entire  whole
existence,  an actual antidote that is strong enough to directly  counteract
the afflictions.
In this  case,  the  bodhisattva  very  first  time  gaining  this  powerful
antidote that is really able to counteract and destroy the afflictions.

What are the abandonments othe things that are and will be  abandoned  f  by
this wisdom directly perceiving emptiness?
In the last lesson, you will remember that we talked a little bit about  the
Mahayana  pPath  of  sSeeing  abandonments  and  the   Mahayana   pPath   of
mMeditation abandonments. Of the two, it is the Mahayana  pPath  of  sSeeing
abandonments that are is destroyed first.
When the bodhisattvas realisze emptiness directly for the first time,  their
at wisdom directly perceiving emptiness act as the actual  antidote  to  the
Mahayana pPath of sSeeing abandonments.

What exactly areis the Mahayana pPath of sSeeing abandonments?
They are It is the intellectually  acquired  afflictions,  perhaps  together
with their seeds. These are destroyed  or  abandoned  by  the  uninterrupted
path of the Mahayana pPath of sSeeing.
Although at this time, the intellectually  acquired  afflictions,   together
with their seeds,  are destroyed by the uninterrupted path of  the  Mahayana
pPath of sSeeing, but these intellectually acquired afflictions are not  the
root of samsara.

The root of samsara is the innate afflictions.
So the innate afflictions are the final roots of samsara.
From our previous studies, we know that the  root  of  samsara  consists  of
both the an apprehension of the self of persons and the an  apprehension  of
the a self of phenomena.
Whether it is an apprehension of a self of persons  or  an  apprehension  of
the a self of phenomena, it is the innate forms of these  two  apprehensions
that constitute the root of samsara.

The  uninterrupted  path  of  Mahayana  pPath  of   sSeeing   destroys   the
intellectually acquired afflictions.  Only  after  that  does  the  work  of
destroying the innate afflictions starts.
It is the wisdom directly perceiving emptiness that is the  direct  antidote
to both the intellectually acquired afflictions and the innate  afflictions.
It is the same wisdom.
In terms of the object that is realiszed by this  wisdom,  it  is  the  same
object. It is not asthat if  tthe wisdom realiszing emptiness that  acts  as
an antidote to the innate afflictions will entail have a a  slightly  higher
realiszation of emptiness. It is not like that.  The  object,   ‘emptiness’,
that is realiszed by this e wisdom is the same.

But there is a  difference  in  terms  of  the  collections  of  merit  that
accompanies this wisdom.
Depending  on  the  collections  of  merit  that  accompanies  this  wisdom,
Ccommensurate  with  the  strength  of  thee  accumulation  of  merit   that
accompanies this wisdom, then this wisdom wcould be stronger.  It  realiszes
the same object,   ‘emptiness’,   but  in  terms  of  its  strength,  it  is
stronger.

After abandoning the intellectually acquired  afflictions,  the  bodhisattva
accumulatess merit again.
Come the time Wwhen the bodhisattva’s  accumulation  of  merit  is  powerful
enough to enable his wisdom of directly perceiving emptiness  to  act  as  a
direct antidote to the innate afflictions,  that  is  when  the  bodhisattva
achieves the first ground uninterrupted path of  the  pPath  of  mMeditation
that is the .
Technically, he achieves the 1st ground uninterrupted path of  the  Path  of
Meditation. That 1st ground uninterrupted path of the Path of Meditation  is
the direct antidote to the first level of the innate afflictions.

How is the transition made from  the  pPath  of  sSeeing  to  the  pPath  of
mMeditation?
In this case,  Tthe  transition  is  made  when  the  bodhisattva’s   wisdom
directly perceiving emptiness becomes  powerful  enough  to  act  as  the  a
direct antidote to the innate afflictions.

Path of meditationWhen his  wisdom  directly  perceiving  emptiness  becomes
powerful enough to act as an antidote to  the  innate  afflictions  that  is
when the bodhisattva makes a transition from the Path of Seeing to the  Path
of Meditation. It is in the chart.


Next is ‘parasamgate. ’.
‘Sam’  means  perfectly  or  thoroughly,  i.e.,  .   parasamgate  means   to
tThoroughly or perfectly go beyond.  or perfectly go beyond.
‘Parasamgate’ shows the pPath of mMeditation.
It is saying, : “‘From the pPath of sSeeing,  to go over or  cross  over  to
the pPath of mMeditation.”’.

From ‘paragate’, one makes the transitions to ‘parasamgate’, i.e., it  means
crossing over from the pPath of sSeeing intto the pPath of mMeditation.
What does this show?
This shows that  the  bodhisattvas  have  to  move  on.  They  have  already
realiszed  emptiness,  i.e.  the  truth,  ,  i.e.  they  have  already  seen
emptiness, the truth, directly.  One  You  could  say  that  there  that  is
nothing else much to  realise  see  again  as  they  already  have  realised
emptiness directly already, seen it, but the bodhisattvas do not  just  stop
sit there.  The bodhisattvas  are  asked  to  move  on  into  the  pPath  of
mMeditation.

What the bodhisattvas  do  on  the  Path  of  Meditation,  as  if  they  are
realizing emptiness again in which they have already realized it?
What happens on the path of meditation?
As the name path of word ‘meditation’ suggests, they are meditating  on  the
emptiness  that  which  they  have  already  ascertained.   “So   they   are
familiarizing. To meditate” in Tibetan
Meditate, in Tibetan, has the connotation of  ‘to familiarising  zethe  mind
with an object. ’. So the bodhisattvas  on  the  pPath  of  mMeditation  are
familiariszing their minds with what they have already ascertained  already.
from before.

Based  on  the  chart  of  the  paths  and  grounds,  chart[1],   how   many
uninterrupted paths are there?
On the  Mahayana  pPath  of  mMeditation,  there  are  ten10   uninterrupted
paths, and each of these ten  uninterrupted  paths  areis   meditationss  on
emptiness.

After abandoning the intellectually acquired afflictions,  the  bodhisattvas
again meditate on emptiness. They familiarisze  themselves  with  what  they
have already realiszed already  in  order  to  counteract  and  destroy  the
innate afflictions.
They destroy the innate afflictions with  their   meditation  on  emptiness,
i.e., their . Of course, for them it is the direct perception of  emptiness.

As shown  in  the  chart,  there  are  many  uninterrupted  paths.  All  the
uninterrupted paths up to the end of the seventh  7th  ground  and  entering
the 8th ground are uninterrupted  paths  of  the  pPath  of  mMeditation  on
emptiness. Theose meditations of emptiness are done in order to destroy  the
innate afflictions.

When the innate afflictions together with their  seeds  are  destroyed,  the
bodhisattvas simultaneously  achieved  the  eighth  8th  ground.  Once  they
entered into the eighth 8th ground,  the  bodhisattvas  have  no  more  more
afflictions  as  the  seeds  of  the  afflictions  have  also  are  alsobeen
destroyed. But there are still  some obscurations left over that must  needs
to be removed. Theose are the knowledge obscurations that prevent them  from
being omniscient.

On the eighth, 8th, ninth 9th and tenth 10th grounds,  they  continue  their
meditation and familiariszation with  emptiness  in  order  to  destroy  the
knowledge obscurations.

SoSo , you  can  see  that  there  is  much  to  do   on  in  the  pPath  of
mMeditation, i whereas the Mahayana path of seeing is  relatively  short.  t
has quite a lot of things to do.
Relative to  the  Path  of  Meditation,  the  Mahayana  Path  of  Seeing  is
relatively very short.

Khen Rinpoche (in English): Look at the chart. You can see that the path  of
seeing , it is very short. The Mahayana pPath of mMeditation has is so  many
(uninterrupted paths).

The chart is athe representation of what happens on the path. Based  on  the
chart, can don’t you see that it is implying  that  the  innate  afflictions
are much  more  difficult  to  overcome  than  the  intellectually  acquired
afflictions?
The  intellectually  acquired  afflictions  are  abandoned   by   just   one
uninterrupted path on  the  Mahayana  pPath  of  sSeeing.   One  and  it  is
abandoned by just one uninterrupted path. One uninterrupted  path  does  all
the  jobs  in  one  go;  t.  The  entire  collection  of  whole   works   of
intellectually acquired afflictions and together  with  all  its  seeds  are
destroyed in one go. accessions of the 18  generations  and  so  forth,  the
whole works, everything is destroyed in one go. There is also only one  just
one pPath of rRelease.

As discussed  before,  Based  on  our  previous  discussion  on  the  innate
afflictions, the innate afflictions  are  divided  into  nine  levels.  Then
there are the knowledge obscurations  that  which  are  divided  into  three
levels. All of them make up  the  innate  afflictions..  In  order  to  just
overcome or destroy the afflictive obscurations and  their  seeds,  so  many
uninterrupted paths are needed,  all the way up to the end  of  the  seventh
7th ground. So many uninterrupted paths are needed even to just  to  destroy
just the innate afflictions together with the  seeds.  After  that,  another
three uninterrupted paths are needed in order to overcome  the  imprints  of
these afflictions.

Path of no more learning

‘Bodhi’ means enlightenment.
‘Svaha’ in general means to establish or literally, to plant the base.
Here it means to achieve enlightenment.
So, B‘Bodhi’ here shows means enlightenment. What it  shows  isthe  Mahayana
pPath of nNo- more -learning.

This mantra “Tadyatha Gate Gate Paragate Parasamgate Bodhi Svaha’”  is  like
a very short or condensed version of The The  Heart  of  the  Perfection  of
Wisdom Sutra. If you want to condense The Heart of the Perfection of  Wisdom
Sutra, you can condense into this mantra.

|Tadyatha Gate Gate Paragate Parasamgate Bodhi Svaha’                 |
|Gate gate  |Gate means gogo, and go      |1st ‘gate’:  - To go on on |
|           |.                            |the Mahayana pPath of      |
|           |                             |Aaccumulation.             |
|           |                             |2nd ‘gate’:  - To go on the|
|           |                             |Mahayana pPath of          |
|           |                             |pPreparation.              |
|Paragate   |‘Para’ means  - to the other |To go on the Mahayana Ppath|
|           |side. cross over.            |of sSeeing.                |
|           |Literally means to ‘go over  |                           |
|           |that side’.                  |                           |
|           |Bodhisattvas become Superior |                           |
|           |Paragate means to go to the  |                           |
|           |other side.                  |                           |
|Parasamgate|‘Sam’  means perfectly or    |Go perfectly to on the     |
|           |thoroughly so parasamgate    |other shore, the Mahayana  |
|           |means to go perfectly        |pPath of mMeditation.      |
|           |beyond.  Literally,          |                           |
|           |thoroughly or perfectly go   |                           |
|           |beyond                       |                           |
|Bodhi      |Enlightenment.               |Go perfectly to the        |
|           |                             |Mahayana pPath of no more  |
|           |                             |No-more-learning, i.e., be |
|           |                             |firmly established in full |
|           |                             |enlightenment. and be      |
|           |                             |firmly established         |
|Svaha      |To estEstablish              |                           |
|           |or lLiterally, to  plant the |                           |
|           |base.                        |                           |

Sometimes when we perform do certain rituals and at those times  when  there
is the are needs to recite Tthis particular The Heart of the  Perfection  of
Wisdom Sutra, whenfor whatever reason if  there is a lack  of  time,  it  is
said that just reciting the mantra is said to be sufficient.  When   If  you
think about the meaning of the mantra, and when if you have an idea  of  the
paths and grounds, although the mantra itself is  very  short,  the  meaning
that is eencompassed by this mantra is great.  huge.  There  areis  so  many
things that one can think about when reciting the mantra.

Importance of realising emptiness

For whom is this This presentation of the mode  of  progress  through  these
various paths and grounds intended? are spoken for whom?
It is spoken  or  intended  for  those  who  are  desiring  or  looking  for
liberation.

Khen Rinpoche (in English): This at means it  is  not  for  us.  I  am  Just
joking.

The presentation of the paths and grounds are meant for  those  who  have  a
heartfelt desire or heartfelt looking for liberation and real  happiness.  .
So, it is Ffor such  individuals,  an  who  from  the  heart,  seeking  real
happiness and liberation. Then the understanding of the  paths  and  grounds
is essential . In fact, it isand  indispensable.

We mentioned before that did talk about the Buddhadharma or Buddha  teaching
is of twofold:
1. sScriptural Ddharma
2. rRealiszational D dharma

Realizsational  D  dharma  is  the  key  because,  main  one.  wWithin   the
realiszational D dhharma, there are  so  many  practices  and  realiszations
that one can perform and do and aachieve. One  of  Tthe  most  important  of
these is understanding the  view  of  reality,  i.e.,  having  the  view  of
understanding the realiszation of emptiness, especially for someone, who  is
wholeheartedly seeking  in the heart, really  looking  for  permanent  peace
and happiness, i.e., . We say liberation.
What is permanent peace and happiness?
Understanding  the  realization  of  ultimate   nature   of   reality,   the
realisation of / emptiness,  is indispensable and is none negotiable. It  is
indispensable for such a person. When If you think about  it,  actually  the
teachings  on  emptiness,   and  especially  the  view  of  emptiness,  /the
realization of emptiness are that is like the heart essence  of  the  entire
Buddha teachings of the Buddha.
The view of emptiness/the ultimate view of reality is like the essence  (the
pinnacle, the crest, the heart)heart  of the entire Buddhadharma.

In order to truly really understand this and fully  really  appreciate  this
from the heart, you have to know how important the view of emptiness is.  We
have been talking about the paths and grounds and how  an  individual  moves
and make transitions from one milestone to the next other milestone  on  the
way to enlightenment. The whole purpose whole point of  practiscing  and  or
traversing the paths is to counteract and destroy the  cause  of  suffering,
- the afflictions or / destructive emotions.

When If you  look  at  all  the  different  milestones,  when  do  how  tthe
transitions occuris made? The transitions happen  is made  when  their  view
or  the  realiszation  of  the  ultimate  nature  of  reality  develops  and
progresses and develop. That is how  the  transition  realization  is  made.
From this, you can see the how importantce of  the view  of  emptiness/  the
ultimate nature of reality is. So, Iit is indispensable. for,  wWithout  it,
which, there is  nothing  we  can  do  to  counteract  to  our  afflictions.
Therefore it is said
As said in many of the  ggreat ttreatises, for  the  reasons  that  I  hadve
stated, the correct view of the ultimate  nature  of  reality,  /eemptiness,
is the very heart or the essence of the entire Buddhadharma.

From your own side, it is important that you gain an understanding  and  the
conviction in your heart of how important it is to have the correct view  of
ultimate nature of reality/ emptiness and how . It is important  to  gain  a
conviction and an appreciation in your own heart of how  holy  and  precious
such a view is. It is also important that for you to gain the  a  conviction
and a desire in your heart to want to understand and actualisze  this  view.


In order to actualisze this realiszational D dharma,  the  correct  view  of
reality that which is the heart essence  of  or  the  pinnacle  of  all  the
entire Buddhadharma, you have to depend on the Ggreat  Ttreatises,  ;  those
valid texts that show you how to develop the view. So you have to depend  on
the scriptural Ddharma. In order to realisze the  realiszational  D  dharma,
you have to depend on the scriptural Ddharma.  Among  Of  all  the  so  many
categories of scriptural Ddharma, those ggreat  ttreatises  and  texts  that
show the unmistaken meaning of emptiness/ the  ultimate  nature  of  reality
are like the best of all the scriptural Ddharma.

Based on your personal learning and reflection, when you come to  understand
for yourself of how your afflictions  areis  the  main  cause  of  all  your
miseryies, among  and of all the afflictions,  you will see that how  it  is
the ego-grasping— – the incorrect sense of the  “I”— - that  is  the  source
of all yourthe afflictions. , therefore, Aall yourthe sufferings and all  of
the problems that comes from thatit.

Developing heartfelt faith in the Buddha

When we Sseeing  how that is the case, then  and if you will  see how it  is
the understanding view of the dependent origination  arising  (or  dependent
arising) -the understanding of dependent arising- that will  enable  you  to
destroy the root of all your past, present and future misery. Wies hen .  If
you connect these  two  points,   then  definitely  you  will  gain  a  very
different kind of appreciation for  the  Tteacher,  the  Ffounder.  In  this
case, it was  is Buddha  Shakyamuni  who  taught  theis  view  of  dependent
origination arising. , then Yyou will be able to see  for  yourself  of  how
your own object of refuge, in this case,  is the  founder,  the  Buddha,  is
just so different and , in athe class of his  own.  You  can  see  this  for
yourself. From that Then you  develop  already  a  heartfelt  faith  in  and
appreciation for the Buddha.

From the discussion so far,  you can see that how it is not easy  really  to
develop the gain  a personal conviction in your own  object  of  refuge.  We
are Buddhists, and we consider the Buddha, the founder, to be our object  of
refuge. But In order to really to be able to generate this gain  a  personal
conviction that the Buddha your founder is really of no competition,  he  is
in the completely different a class of his own. In fact  one  and  the  only
class, others are not classes at all. In order to gain that  understanding,,
 you really have  to  develop  the  gain  a  conviction  in  his  teachings,
especially in all the topics things that we  have  talked  about—;  how  the
afflictions and  especially  our   ego-grasping  is  the  root  of  all  our
problems and how it is only  his  teachings  on  the  dependent  origination
origination and dependent arising that can  destroy  the  root  of  all  our
sufferings. Only w When you see that only thenwill  you will start  to  have
gain an appreciation of on  how  great  the  Buddha  is.  Otherwise,  it  is
difficult.

For many people, when they think of the Buddha, they probably think that  he
does not have much has no enough power. I mean not as powerful as,  Iin  the
traditional Indian context, people think that he is not as powerful  as   of
Brahma and Shiva. Perhaps Iin our own  context,  we  like  to  pray  to  the
worldly gods, thinking they think are more powerful. of  Jade  Emperor  (and
other local deities). We always think that Buddha doesn’t have  much  power.
We like to pray to all these different (worldly gods).

This is a the sign of our lack of understanding. You have to  think  clearly
wthat we don’t really understand. When you compare the Buddha to  and  other
objects of refuge to whom you turn to solve , you  have  to  think  clearly.
Of course, you turn to a refuge in order to solve your problems. TBut  there
are two ways of solving a problem:
1. gGetting to the at the root of the problem and and eliminating it e the
   problem once and for all.
2. sThe usual way of solving is imply just addressing the symptoms without
   , but not really addressing es the root cause of the problem..

By relying on these worldly gods, they may  do  help  you  temporarily,  but
they cannot it doesn’t solve the problem. Therefore,  we  have  to  discover
for ourselves how it is our ignorance which is the root of all our  problems
and how it is only the teachings of the Buddha’s presentation on the on  the
ultimate nature  of  reality,  /eemptiness—  and,  especially,  through  his
teachings on dependent origination arising—that are  is the  only  antidotes
to destroy the root of our sufferings.  When we see this and , we put  these
two together, then we will begin to realisze that the  Buddha  is  extremely
how precious and special and that Buddha is, how different he is and  he  is
completely in athe class of his own. Only then will we really  have  a  deep
appreciation and a have very different  kind  of  faith  and  trust  in  the
Buddha.

Therefore iIn order to develop this  such  kind  of  conviction  and  faith,
therefore it is very important to educate ourselves,  to learn. This  at  is
one of the reasons why I always encourage and try to persuade all of you  to
study and learn and study. This at is the point. You really have to learn.

We need faith before we can aspire to something. We must  have  faith  in  a
particular object or goal before we can aspire to achieve  it.  It  is  only
with a strong aspiration to  reach  for  that  goal,  only  then  will  that
translate into effort. When we put in the effort,  we will achieve  our  the
goal. So, in order to have the goal, we need to have joyous perseverance.  A
real Ssustained effort can  only  come  from  a  stable  aspiration.  Stable
aspiration cannot arise without a stable faith.

There are many different levels of qualities and  many  different  kinds  of
faith. The faith that we are talking about here is  the  faith  that  arises
from understanding. Now do you You see the point?  In  order  to  have  this
kind of faith, we have to investigate, study and learn and  study.  Whatever
you are doing here now  is the a supporting condition in order  for  you  to
move towards generating having the real faith that , which  will  then  help
you to stabilisze your aspiration. This in turn will , which then  translate
into stable effort,  and its the result.

We are actually very fortunate indeed to even to have  this  opportunity  to
hear and to reflect on the teachings of the Buddha. Even if we  do  not  n’t
achieve any realisations, just thing spectacular out of this endeavor or  we
don’t achieve any realization, just having an opportunity to  learn  and  to
have some understanding of these teachings is our great good fortune.  makes
us really very fortunate.


There will c
Comes a  the day when we will be are able to develop  this  real  faith  and
trust in  the  Buddha,  a  the  trust  that  comes  from  understanding  his
teachings. , then we could say that Tthis is one of the ways  that  we  have
actually make our current human  life,  this  human  existence,  meaningful.
Therefore we should try to make sure that whatever we  do  here—,  educating
ourselves through learning and through reflection—, becomes  the  supporting
cause for us to move closer and closer towards   generating  e  this  stable
and unshakeable faith and convictionn and faith.

Many past great masters of the past hadve said that,   of  all  the  Ddharma
understandings  that  an  individual  can   achieve,   have,   the   highest
understanding is the understanding of  dependent  origination  arising.  The
heart of all the realiszational Ddharma is the  mind  realiszing  emptiness.
The best of  the  scriptural  Ddharma  is  the  ggreat  ttreatises  and  the
teachings that show the meaning of dependent origination arising that  which
points to emptiness. Based on  theose  scriptural  Ddharma,   come  the  day
wwhen we gain an the actual correct understanding  of  emptiness,  our  that
understanding that we will come to possess in the  future  will  be  is  the
highest of all the Ddharma knowledge that we can achievehave.

If you remember from our past  discussions  on  the  four  Buddhist  tenets,
isn’t it the case that all four Buddhist  tenets  are  equivocal  in  saying
that real permanent peace and happiness, i.e., liberation from samsara,  can
only be  attained  when  an  individual  realiszes  selflessness.  The  four
Buddhist tenets differ as to  what constitutes the  view  of  emptiness  but
they  all  agree  are  the  same  in  saying   that,    without   realiszing
selflessness, it is not possible  there is no way tto progress on  the  path
to liberation. In fact, the modes of progress on the path to liberation  are
explained primarily express  on the realiszation of selflessness.

The four seals

All four Buddhist tenets accept the four seals that attest to  a  particular
doctrine being is the teachings of the Buddha.
The four seals are:
1. All compounded phenomena are impermanent.
2. All contaminated phenomena are miserable (or in the nature of
   suffering)y.
3. All phenomena are empty and selfless.
4.    Nirvana is peace.


When If you look at the four seals, the third seal, “A  ‘All  phenomena  are
empty and selfless,” ’ is extremely important because  it  is  only  on  the
basis of the third seal thatthen you can have the fourth  seal,  “  ‘Nirvana
is peace.”’

How is peace is achieved? How Iis peace  possiblepossible?  How  is  nirvana
achieved? possible? How Iis nirvana  possibleachieved?
Theat whole explanation of all  of  this   is  has  to  come  based  on  the
understanding of the  third  seal,  h:  How  all  phenomena  are  empty  and
selfless.


We can relate the four seals to the four noble truths in this way:

|Four seals                    |Four noble truths      |
|All compounded phenomena are  |True origins.          |
|impermanent.                  |                       |
|All contaminated phenomena are|True suffering.        |
|miserable. y                  |                       |
|All phenomena are empty and   |True paths.            |
|selfless.                     |                       |
|Nirvana is peace.             |True cessations.       |

Without the understanding  of  how  all  phenomena  are  selfless,  how  all
phenomena lack a self,i.e., lacking a self,   we are not going to  have  the
nirvana that is  peace.  Therefore,  the  realiszation  of  selflessness  is
indispensable  in  achieving   nirvana,   /liberation   and   enlightenment.
Therefore, all the four Buddhist tenets assert these four seals.

The four tenet systems

This means that aAll four Buddhist tenets assert the four seals.  That  mean
they all assert that all phenomena  are  empty  and  selfless.  Having  said
that,  all four Buddhist tenets have different  opinions  as  to  what  that
means. , tThey all have different explanation of what  exactly  selflessness
is, , as you  saw  in  the  previous  module  on  tTenets.  The  meaning  of
selflessness is just different as everybody has their own take.


In short, Tthe explanation of emptiness by the CMWS  is  the  most  correct,
and most to the point. It is the most profound  and  the  one  that  accords
with reality.  and most correct. According to them,  all  phenomena,  person
and  otherwise,  are  empty  of  existing  inherently.  The  explanation  of
selflessness by the CMWS is really the correct one  and  which  accord  with
reality.

 Having said that, it is quite natural that some for people may  to  ask,  ;
“Why do I have to study all thisese? Just tell me the essence  of  the  view
of the CMWS. Prasangika. Why give me  so  much  information?”  tell  me  all
these long grandmother stories?” Naturally you will think: “Why tell  me  so
much? Just tell me the essence, the executive summary.”

Why are there these different  presentations  on  f  selflessness?  This  is
because there are differing  views  as  to  what  constitutes  the  root  of
samsara. All the tenets Everybody agrees that the grasping of  the  self  is
the root of samsara but there are people  have  ddifferent  opinions  as  to
what grasping at the self means. In short, there are  four  different  views
as to what constitutes really the root of samsara is.  So,  when  they  four
tenets  propose a solution for this, there it  will  not  be  not  just  one
solution but there will be going to have four different  solutionsproposals.
This at is the reason why there are four  different  presentations  of  what
selflessness means.is.

It is The explanation of the CMWS’  of  explanation  of  what  the  root  of
samsara is the subtlest, clearest and , most profound. but yet very  subtle.
Since their presentation of what exactly the root of all our problems is  so
precise, so profound but yyet so subtle, they offer the best is  make  their
presentation onf selflessness.  the best. Since  they  have  identified  the
problem correctly,  then obviously the solution they proposed  on  the  view
of selflessness is also the subtlest,  most profound,  most  correct  and  ,
most refined. , and most subtle.

Benefit of receiving teachings and reflecting on emptiness

The teachings mentions the extensive great benefit of hearing the  teachings
on emptiness and reflecting on emptiness. According to tThe  Three  Hundreds
Verses of the Perfection of Wisdom, gives  it gives an  example  of  someone
who makes offerings of the seven kinds of  precious  jewels.  How  extensive
are these offerings? many of such seven kinds of precious jewel?  The  seven
precious jewels that are enough to fill not only the entire  existence;  not
just this universe, not just this  galaxy  but  all  of  whatever  there  is
space. There is no need to talk about the  amount  of  merit  that  one  can
accumulate If you think about the meritsfrom   of  filling  the  entire  the
whole of existence  with  the  seven  kinds  of  precious  jewels  and  then
offering  that to all the bBuddhas. , there is no need  to  talk  about  the
amount of merits that one can accumulate. But wWhen this ese merits is   are
compared to the merits of someone who just having takesn a four-lines  verse
from the sutra teachings on emptiness and teaches it ing  to  others,  these
merit of doing this is s are  far  much  greater  compared  to  the  earlier
example.

In general, it is good and useful  to  remember  the  benefits  of  doing  a
particular thing. I, it motivates you. Just Bbased on  this  quotation,  you
can have some understandings of the merits that you accumulate  simply  just
by learning about emptiness and , thinking about emptiness.  I,  it  is  far
greater much more than filling up  the  entire  whole  world  system   (with
precious jewels).

You have to remember this. The point is that you have  to  remember  because
Tthere will be students  who,  are  people,  who  in  the  course  of  their
studiesy, become get bored and they think, “What is the  point  of  learning
all this?  intellectual garbage? Why am I am  doing  thisall  these?   Won’t
uld it be better if I do thea  hundred thousand prostrations or  I  do  thea
hundred thousand mandala offerings to so that I can accumulate merits?”

However when , if you think about this particular  quotation,  there  is  no
comparison with regard  to  the  amount  of  merit  you  can  accumulate.  ,
assuming that the The Buddha does not n’t lie. If you think  about  it,  the
Buddha probably doesn’t lie.  This  That  is  why  when  you  ascertain  for
yourself think about the  benefits  and  the  merits  that  comes  from   of
learning and reflecting on selflessness then. If you ascertain for  yourself
that indeed there are these benefits and indeed there are  such  merits,  of
course you will find your efforts at learning about  and  reflecting  ng  on
emptiness to be worthwhile.  Then   You  you  will  realisze  that  you  are
extremely damn llucky and fortunate. Then you will be are able to rejoice.

When If you  have  an  overview  of  the  importance  of  understanding  and
realiszing or understanding emptiness based  on  our  earlier  discussions—,
how the root of all our problems is the ignorance and how the only  antidote
that can destroy ignorance is the mind realiszing emptiness that  which  has
to come from understanding  dependent  originationorigination  or  dependent
arising—, then you will be able to appreciate the benefit that is  mentioned
in this sutra. , for example, the benefits that you can get.




Interpreted



Translated by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme; t

Transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek, Vivien Ng and Aki Yeo;

eEdited by Cecilia Tsong

.

-----------------------
[1] Refer to chart on The Five Mahayana Paths that can  be  downloaded  from
http://www.fpmtabc.org/download/teaching/geshe-
chonyi/bp/heartsutra/Handout/.


