Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/HeartSutra/BP2 M4 L10 (final).doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:52:27.696532
================================================================================


Transcript of teachings by Khen Rinpoche Geshe Chonyi on  the   Heart  Sutra
and Stages of the Path (the Six Perfections)

Root text: The Heart of  Wisdom  Sutra  by  Shakyamuni  Buddha,  translation
Gelong  Thubten  Tsultrim  (George  Churinoff).  Extracted  from   Essential
Buddhist Prayers: An FPMT Prayer  Book,  Volume  1.  Copyright:  FPMT,  Inc.
2008.

Lesson                                                                    10
                           25 July 2013


Benefits of studying  emptiness.  How  to  meditate  on  The  Heart  of  the
Perfection of Wisdom Sutra.  Training  on  the  paths  of  accumulation  and
preparation. Training on the  path  of  seeing.  Training  on  the  path  of
meditation.


Question: How does an uninterrupted path  remove  the  obscurations  of  its
particular ground?

Answer:  The uninterrupted path of the Mahayana path of seeing  is  said  to
be the direct antidote against the intellectually acquired  afflictions  and
its seeds. When we  talk  about  the  intellectually  acquired  afflictions,
there are different varieties of them. So how does  one  uninterrupted  path
in one meditative equipoise  act  as  an  antidote  to  these  varieties  of
afflictions?

The answer could be this: Think about the practice  of  patience.  When  one
has a stable or good practice of patience, one will be patient to  not  just
one person and not another, especially when the  practice  of  patience  has
culminated in the perfection of patience. The person who  has  achieved  the
perfection of patience is someone who has conquered  anger  in  relation  to
every single person. It is not as if he has  to  practise  with  one  enemy,
then move on to the next enemy and so forth. It is not like that.

In Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds,  Shantideva,  the  great  bodhisattva,
mentioned that the whole world can be  covered  with  thorns  but  when  one
wears a pair of shoes, one can walk anywhere.[1]

The power behind the first  uninterrupted  path  of  the  Mahayana  path  of
seeing that acts as the antidote to the intellectually acquired  afflictions
does not happen suddenly. That power has been built up,  starting  from  the
beginning of the path of preparation. There are four stages on the  path  of
preparation: heat, peak, forbearance and supreme mundane  qualities.  During
those stages, the bodhisattva is working hard to gain the mental  power  and
strength to overcome the  manifest  conception  of  true  existence.  As  he
progresses along  the  path  of  preparation,  power  of  his  mind  becomes
stronger. The manifest conception of true existence that is overcome  during
these four stages becomes increasingly more and more subtle.

When the bodhisattva achieves the direct perception of emptiness,  he  gains
a very clear appearance of emptiness and  sees  emptiness  directly  without
any intervening mental image.  This  is  the  time  when  the  mind  becomes
powerful enough to  destroy  the  intellectually  acquired  afflictions  and
their seeds.

When this bodhisattva  realises  emptiness  directly,  this  realisation  is
completely free of all  dualistic  appearances.  All  dualistic  appearances
subside in the perspective of  this  wisdom.  When  this  bodhisattva  newly
attains the path of seeing, i.e., when he achieves the path  of  release  of
the  first  ground,  at  that  time,  he  has   completely   abandoned   the
intellectually acquired afflictions and its seeds with a mind that  has  the
power to destroy these afflictions, i.e., the uninterrupted path.

This question is about the uninterrupted path of the path  of  seeing.  This
particular uninterrupted path is a  wisdom  directly  perceiving  emptiness.
This  wisdom  realising  emptiness  realises  one  emptiness  related  to  a
specific basis or realises the emptiness that pervades all phenomena?

Khen Rinpoche: What do you think?

We can only say that this is what happens on the path of  release.  In  this
case, the intellectually acquired afflictions are abandoned.

What else can we say about the uninterrupted path  other  than  it  being  a
mind powerful enough to destroy the intellectually acquired afflictions?  It
is not possible to explain exactly what  it  is  because  it  is  completely
beyond the scope of the ordinary mind.

It is like the question raised in the  previous  class  regarding  the  sign
when one achieves the path of release. It is not  possible  to  really  talk
about that. I would think that you will not be able to tell from looking  at
the external demeanour of that person who is in meditative equipoise.

The teachings give an analogy to describe the  uninterrupted  path  and  the
path of release:
• The uninterrupted path is like throwing a thief out from the house.
• The path of release is like closing the door after him.

                                 ~~~~~~~~~~~

BENEFITS OF STUDYING EMPTINESS

I guess all of us consider the teachings of the Buddha  to  be  very  sacred
and precious. The Buddha’s teachings consist of the  scriptural  Dharma  and
the realisational Dharma. Of the  two,  the  realisational  Dharma  is  more
important.  But to have the   realisational Dharma, first  you  must  depend
on the scriptural Dharma. We have discussed this before.

The supreme realisational Dharma is said to  be  the  correct  view  of  the
ultimate  nature  of  reality,  emptiness,  i.e.,   the   wisdom   realising
emptiness. Having said this, you have to figure out for yourself the  reason
why this is so. You need to  ascertain for yourself that the mind  realising
emptiness is the supreme or the highest  of  all  realisational  Dharma.  In
order to gain this ascertainment, you have to  analyse  over  and  over  and
over again.

We talked about the different scriptural Dharma. Remember that there was  an
explanation  of  the  benefits  of  studying,   learning,   reflecting   and
meditating on the perfection of wisdom? It is stated in one sutra  that  the
merit of learning, reflecting, meditating and practising the  perfection  of
wisdom far surpasses the merit of someone who fills  the  billionfold  world
system with the seven kinds of jewels and offers them to  the  buddhas.   We
have to think about this benefit over and over again.

Of course, in order to understand the benefit, first we have  to  understand
why hearing, reflecting and meditating on the perfection  of  wisdom  is  so
beneficial. Ultimately, when we hear, study and reflect on the teachings  on
the perfection of wisdom, we are also learning about dependent  origination.
By understanding  that  there  are  these  benefits,  by  understanding  the
importance of learning, hearing and reflecting on the perfection  of  wisdom
and then practising it later, effort will follow. The aspiration  will  come
to want to study, learn, analyse and meditate on the perfection of wisdom.

The motivation
Whenever we have the  opportunity  to  read  or  recite  The  Heart  of  the
Perfection of Wisdom Sutra, we have to think, reflect and  meditate  on  it.
We should remember why we are doing  this.  Our  motivation  has  to  be  to
destroy our ignorance and our  apprehension of a self, remembering that  the
Buddha gave this teaching in order to enable  sentient  beings  like  us  to
destroy our ignorance and the apprehension of a self.

With that in mind, when we recite, reflect, learn or meditate on  The  Heart
of the Perfection of Wisdom Sutra conjoined with the thought,  “I  am  doing
this in order to achieve full enlightenment for  all  living  beings,”  then
the  benefit  will  be  very  extensive.  So  always  generate  a   virtuous
motivation.

Whenever we recite or think about The Heart  of  the  Perfection  of  Wisdom
Sutra, we can also think, “I am doing this to plant  imprints  of  emptiness
in my mind.”

How the merit increases
The Buddha spoke about the  amazing  benefits  of  hearing,  reflecting  and
meditating on emptiness. We  accumulate  so  much  merit  just  by  hearing,
learning and studying the teachings  on  emptiness,  the  teachings  on  the
perfection of wisdom. On top of simply accumulating that information, if  we
process what we have learnt by critically analysing and thinking  about  it,
of course that merit will supersede the merit we get from just  hearing  the
teachings on emptiness.

Based on our critical analysis and  thinking,  the  merit  we  gain  through
whatever knowledge  or  the  meaning  of  emptiness  that  we  ascertain  by
depending on mindfulness and introspection, that merit would  supersede  the
merit that comes from just analysing or  reflecting  on  the  perfection  of
wisdom.

Quality of imprints
We know the threefold activities  of  hearing,  reflection  and  meditation.
Let’s say we are engaging in all three activities  and  the  object  is  the
perfection of wisdom. These three activities do plant imprints on  the  mind
but there is a  difference  in  the  quality  and  the  stability  of  those
imprints.

• The imprints that are planted on the mind through hearing  alone  are  not
  long-lasting and are not stable.
• The imprints that are planted on the mind  through  reflection  produce  a
  certain level of knowledge. Comparatively  speaking,  these  imprints  are
  more stable and last longer.
• But the most important imprints that are planted on the  mind  is  through
  repeatedly  familiarising  our  minds  with  whatever   ascertainment   or
  conviction we have gained.  Of  the  imprints  that  are  planted  by  the
  threefold activities, it is the imprints that  are  planted  on  the  mind
  through familiarisation, i.e., meditation, that move from  life  to  life,
  that give hope for our future lives.

Studying, learning and hearing the teachings are  important,  without  which
there is nothing to think about. If there is  nothing  to  think  about  and
analyse, then there is nothing to familiarise  ourselves  with  or  meditate
on. On the basis of the knowledge that is accumulated from hearing, we  have
to work on analysing and familiarising the mind repeatedly again  and  again
with whatever understanding or conviction  that  one  has  gained.  This  is
where we need to put in effort.  Please think about  the  benefits  and  the
merit that you can accumulate from learning,  reflecting,  familiarising  or
meditating on the perfection of wisdom.

HOW TO MEDITATE ON THE SUTRA

The prologue
The sutra starts with the prologue:

      Thus did I hear at one time. The Bhagavan  was  dwelling  on  Mass  of
      Vultures Mountain in Rajagriha together  with  a  great  community  of
      monks and a  great  community  of  bodhisattvas.  At  that  time,  the
      Bhagavan was absorbed  in  the  concentration  on  the  categories  of
      phenomena called “Profound Perception.”

When you recite this section of the sutra, you can bring to  mind  that  the
Buddha is a special being. You can think about the qualities of his  exalted
body, exalted speech and exalted mind. It is this  special  being  who  gave
this very special teaching on the perfection of wisdom  at  this  particular
time to this particular perfect congregation at this  perfect  place.   This
is the idea that should come to your mind when you recite this prologue.  At
this time, you bring to mind the Buddha and generate devotion.

Shariputra’s question
Next, Shariputra poses his question to Avalokiteshvara:
      Also, at that time, the bodhisattva  mahasattva  arya  Avalokiteshvara
      looked upon the very practice of the profound perfection of wisdom and
      beheld those five aggregates also as empty of inherent  nature.  Then,
      through the power of Buddha, the venerable Shariputra said this to the
      bodhisattva mahasattva arya Avalokiteshvara: “How should  any  son  of
      the lineage train who wishes to practice the activity of the  profound
      perfection of wisdom?”

At this  point  in  the  sutra,  it  is  not  so  much  about  focussing  on
Shariputra. Instead you can imagine that you are the one who is  asking  the
question. You are the one who is wondering  how  the  perfection  of  wisdom
should be practised.  You should have some queries in your mind.

Khen Rinpoche: So here, you can  be  Shariputra.  Not  Shariputra,  perhaps.
Maybe another putra I think.

So when you recite this, you should  attempt  to  bring  to  your  mind  the
meaning   of   emptiness.   Before   Shariputra    asked    his    question,
Avalokiteshvara,  like  the  Buddha,  was  also  in   meditative   equipoise
reflecting  on  the  perfection  of  wisdom.  That  was  the  condition  for
Shariputra to ask his question.

TRAINING ON THE PATH OF ACCUMULATION AND THE PATH OF PREPARATION

The brief explanation
Then Avalokiteshvara replied:

      He said that and the bodhisattva mahasattva arya Avalokiteshvara  said
      this to the venerable Sharadvatiputra. “Shariputra,  any  son  of  the
      lineage or daughter of the lineage who wishes to practice the activity
      of the profound perfection of wisdom should look upon  it  like  this,
      correctly and repeatedly beholding those five aggregates also as empty
      of inherent nature.

“… correctly  and  repeatedly  beholding  those  five  aggregates  also  …”:
Beholding is ta war in Tibetan. That literally means to view (but  not  with
your eyes) “those five aggregates also as empty of inherent nature.”

Here the five aggregates are qualified by “also ….”   This  means  that  not
only is the ‘I’ that is imputed in dependence on the bases  of  designation,
the aggregates, empty of existing inherently, but the aggregates  themselves
are also empty of existing inherently.

Having said that, what does it  mean  when  we  say  the  ‘I’  is  empty  of
existing inherently?  What does it mean  when  we  say  the  aggregates  are
empty of existing inherently? We have to reflect on this. The ‘I’ is  empty.
The aggregates are empty.  They  are  empty  of  what?  They  are  empty  of
inherent existence.

“… correctly and repeatedly beholding those five aggregates  also  as  empty
of inherent nature” is the brief explanation.
The detailed explanation
The next section is the expanded explanation that starts with:

      Form is empty. Emptiness is form. Emptiness is not  other  than  form;
      form is also not other than  emptiness.  In  the  same  way,  feeling,
      discrimination, compositional factors, and consciousness are empty.

In the commentary, this is said to be the  training  of  the  perfection  of
wisdom in the path of accumulation and the path of preparation.

~ Meditating on the ‘I’
It starts with the form aggregates, “Form is empty. Emptiness is form.”  But
it would be easier if we use  the  ‘I’,  the  person  or  the  self  as  the
subject. Rather than starting with form, we can reflect on this: The ‘I’  is
empty. Emptiness is the ‘I’. Emptiness is not other than ‘I’;  ‘I’  is  also
not other than emptiness. This is the reflection on  the  four  features  of
emptiness on the basis of the ‘I’. This is said to  be  easier  than  if  we
were to start with a phenomenon other than the ‘I’.

After you have done that, perhaps you could then move on to  the  aggregates
and start with the aggregate of form. Form is empty. Emptiness is  form  and
so forth. After you have finished with form, you can move  on  to  the  next
aggregate. This is why it says, “In the  same  way,  feeling  ….”  You  then
reflect   on   feeling,   discrimination,    compositional    factors    and
consciousness.

We start with the self, the person or the ‘I’. The ‘I’ is  empty.  Emptiness
is the ‘I’.  We recollect our past experiences of our sense of the  ‘I’.  We
can bring to mind  an  experience  when  we  were  feeling  very  depressed,
useless or hopeless. That is when we  feel  that  the  ‘I’  is  so  low,  so
depressed. There are also times where  we  feel  this  ‘I’  is  so  elevated
especially when pride is  manifesting.  At that time, the sense  of  ‘I’  is
so overwhelming.

Try to recollect those experiences of the sense of  the  ‘I’.  Then  analyse
the ‘I’ that we are grasping at during those times. Use the ‘I’  to  reflect
on how the ‘I’ is empty and how emptiness is the ‘I’.  If  we  can  do  this
meditation, it helps us to pacify the very disturbed mind.

“The ‘I’ is empty.” At this time, what we have to reflect on or  realise  is
that the strong sense  of  ‘I’  that  we  recollected—whether  the  ‘I’  was
feeling high or low—the ‘I’ we were grasping at  does  not  exist  from  the
side of the body and mind. There is nothing in the body and mind or  in  the
collection of the body and mind that we can point to to  be  the  ‘I’.   The
‘I’ does not exist from the side of the aggregates.

How do we think of ourselves when  we  have  this  sense  of  the  ‘I’,  the
person? How does the ‘I’ appear? The  ‘I’ obviously appears and  we  believe
that it exists in a certain way. The way it appears for all of  us  is  that
the ‘I’ appears to exist from the  side  of  the  body  and  mind.  The  ‘I’
appears to be the body and mind. The ‘I’ is somewhere there  from  the  side
of the body and mind. Not only is there such an appearance. We believe  that
is how the ‘I’ exists. We assent completely to that appearance. We grasp  at
and apprehend the ‘I’ to be like  that.  What  we  have  to  understand  and
realise for ourselves is that the ‘I’ does not exist from the  side  of  the
aggregates.

By depending on analogies, we can come to understand that there  is  no  ‘I’
from the side of the aggregates.  There  are  different  analogies.  Do  you
remember the analogy of mistakenly seeing a coil of rope to be a snake?  Due
to certain weather conditions, there is the appearance of a snake  from  the
side of the coil of rope.  But the reality is that, when you  look  for  the
snake on the coil of rope, you will not be able to find a snake on the  rope
nor will you be able to find a snake among the parts that make up the  rope.
The individual parts of the rope are not the snake  and  the  collection  of
the whole coil of rope is not the snake.

In exactly the same way, the ‘I’ cannot be found on the aggregates. The  ‘I’
cannot be found among the aggregates. The ‘I’ does not exist from  the  side
of the aggregates. This is an analogy to help us understand that the ‘I’  or
self does not exist from the side of the aggregates that are  its  bases  of
designation.

We are trying to discover how the ‘I’ does  not  exist  inherently.  We  are
trying to understand and see for ourselves how  there  is  no  ‘I’  existing
from the side of the aggregates. Although there is such  an  appearance  and
we believe in that appearance, in reality, there is no ‘I’ from the side  of
the aggregates. This is what we are trying to establish. Using  the  analogy
is one way to help us understand that.

Another way to understand this is seeing how  things  that  are  dependently
originated, based  on  causes  and  conditions,  are  dependent,  i.e.,  not
independent and not inherently existent. The Buddha said this in the  sutras
and  Nagarjuna  says  likewise  in  his  texts.  Therefore  there  is   this
statement, “Those that are produced  from  causes  and  conditions  are  not
produced.”  What it means is that phenomena that are  produced  from  causes
and conditions are not inherently produced.

The realisation of emptiness on the path of  preparation  is  not  a  direct
realisation in that the mind realising  emptiness  does  not  see  emptiness
directly. Rather it still realises emptiness through an  intervening  image,
technically called the meaning generality of emptiness.

TRAINING ON THE PATH OF SEEING

It is only on the path of seeing that the individual can  realise  emptiness
directly without any intervening meaning generality.  The  training  on  the
perfection of wisdom on the path of seeing is  indicated  by  the  following
sentence:

      Shariputra,   likewise,   all   phenomena   are   emptiness;   without
      characteristic; unproduced, unceased; stainless,  not  without  stain;
      not deficient, not fulfilled.


This is talking about the eight characteristics or features of emptiness.

“… all phenomena are emptiness”: This is talking about the nature or  entity
of all phenomena. The ultimate nature of all phenomena is  emptiness,  i.e.,
they are empty of inherent existence. In addition to  that,  the  causes  of
phenomena themselves do not  exist  inherently  and  the  effects  that  are
produced are also not  inherently  produced,  i.e.,  there  is  no  inherent
production.  In  short,  not  only  is  the  ultimate  nature  of  phenomena
emptiness but their causes and effects also  do  not  exist  inherently.  So
here it is talking about the  emptiness  of  inherently  existent  entities,
causes and results.

TRAINING IN THE PATH OF MEDITATION

      Shariputra, therefore, in emptiness there is no form, no  feeling,  no
      discrimination, no compositional factors, no consciousness;

This indicates the emptiness of inherent existence of the  five  aggregates.
The five aggregates do not exist inherently.

      … no eye, no ear, no nose, no tongue, no  body,  no  mind;  no  visual
      form, no sound, no  odor,  no  taste,  no  object  of  touch,  and  no
      phenomenon.

This explains the emptiness of the twelve sources.

      There is no eye element and so on up to and including no mind  element
      and no mental consciousness element.

This shows the emptiness of the eighteen elements. The six sense powers  and
the six consciousnesses are explicitly mentioned. What  is  implied  in  the
meaning? The six objects are also implied in the meaning. So they  form  the
eighteen elements in total.

|               |EIGHTEEN elements    |TWELVE Sources  |
|Objects        |1. Form element      |1. Form source  |
|               |2. Sound element     |2. Sound source |
|               |3. Odour element     |3. Odour source |
|               |4. Taste element     |4. Taste source |
|               |5. Tangible object   |5. Tangible     |
|               |element              |source          |
|               |6. Phenomenon element|6. Phenomenon   |
|               |                     |source          |
|Sense powers   |1. Eye element       |1. Eye source   |
|               |2. Ear element       |2. Ear source   |
|               |3. Nose element      |3. Nose source  |
|               |4. Tongue element    |4. Tongue source|
|               |5. Body element      |5. Body source  |
|               |6. Mental element    |6. Mental source|
|Consciousnesses|1. Eye consciousness |                |
|               |2. Ear consciousness |                |
|               |3. Nose consciousness|                |
|               |4. Tongue            |                |
|               |consciousness        |                |
|               |5. Body consciousness|                |
|               |6. Mental            |                |
|               |consciousness        |                |

      There is no ignorance, no extinction of ignorance and so on up to  and
      including no aging and death and no extinction of aging and death.
This shows the emptiness of the twelve links  of  dependent  origination  in
its forward process and its reverse process. It is also  talking  about  the
emptiness of  the  twelve  links  from  the  perspective  of  the  class  of
thoroughly afflicted phenomena and the  class  of  the  thoroughly  purified
phenomena.

      Similarly, there is no suffering, origination, cessation, and path;

This indicates the emptiness of the four noble truths.

      … there is no exalted wisdom, …


This indicates that the wisdom perceiving emptiness is in itself also  empty
of existing inherently.

      … no attainment, …


The attainments themselves do not exist inherently.

      … and also no non- attainment.

The attainments  that  are  to  be  achieved  are  also  empty  of  inherent
existence.

This entire paragraph is talking about the training  of  the  perfection  of
wisdom on the path of meditation.  In this paragraph, quite a long  list  of
phenomena is given. It is stating  that  all  these  phenomena,  the  twelve
sources, the further expanded eighteen elements and so forth  are  empty  of
existing inherently. What it is also trying to  tell  us  is  that  none  of
these  phenomena  exist  in  the  perspective  of  a  superior’s  meditative
equipoise directly perceiving emptiness. In the perspective of that  wisdom,
only emptiness appears. Only emptiness exists,  nothing  else.  It  is  said
that there is no dualistic appearance in the perspective of  the  superior’s
meditative  equipoise   directly   perceiving   emptiness.   All   dualistic
appearances have subsided.

The next paragraph shows how one achieves enlightenment by depending on  the
training in the perfection of wisdom on the path of accumulation,  the  path
of preparation, the path of seeing and the path of meditation.  This is  how
one has train to achieve enlightenment and this is how the  buddhas  in  the
past have achieved enlightenment.

      Shariputra, therefore, because there is  no  attainment,  bodhisattvas
      rely on and dwell in  the  perfection  of  wisdom,  the  mind  without
      obscuration and without fear. Having completely passed  beyond  error,
      they reach the end-point of nirvana. All the buddhas who dwell in  the
      three times  also  manifestly,  completely  awaken  to  unsurpassable,
      perfect, complete enlightenment  in  reliance  on  the  perfection  of
      wisdom.


The next paragraph expresses the greatness of the perfection of  wisdom.  In
this context, the perfection of  wisdom  here  is  the  path  perfection  of
wisdom, the wisdom
realising emptiness.

      Therefore, the mantra of the perfection of wisdom, the mantra of great
      knowledge, the unsurpassed mantra, the mantra equal to the  unequaled,
      the mantra that thoroughly pacifies all suffering, should be known  as
      truth since it is not false.


The mantra of definitive meaning, the actual mantra is the wisdom  realising
emptiness. ‘Mantra’ is made up of two syllables,  man  and  tra  that  means
mind protection, i.e., protecting the mind  from  fear  and  protecting  the
mind from suffering. What is it that protects? It is  the  wisdom  realising
emptiness that protects.

This paragraph then goes on to talk about the features of the mantra,  i.e.,
how special and great the perfection of wisdom is.

Next is the declaration of  the  mantra  that  is  the  brief  or  condensed
presentation of the five paths.

      The mantra of the perfection of wisdom is declared: Tadyatha [Om] Gate
      Gate Paragate Parasamgate Bodhi Svaha.


      “Shariputra, the bodhisattva mahasattva should train in  the  profound
      perfection of wisdom like that.”

This is like a summary and again emphasises in brief that this  is  how  one
must train in the perfection of wisdom.

      Then the Bhagavan arose from  that  concentration  and  commended  the
      bodhisattva mahasattva arya Avalokiteshvara saying: “Well  said,  well
      said, son of the lineage, it is like that. It is like that; one should
      practice the profound perfection of wisdom just as you have indicated;
      even the tathagatas rejoice.”

Next is the conclusion and rejoicing:

      The Bhagavan having thus spoken, the  venerable  Sharadvatiputra,  the
      bodhisattva mahasattva  arya  Avalokiteshvara,  those  surrounding  in
      their entirety along with the  world  of  gods,  humans,  asuras,  and
      gandharvas were overjoyed  and  highly  praised  that  spoken  by  the
      Bhagavan.

When we manage to gain some insight and some understanding of  the  ultimate
nature of reality, the emptiness of inherent existence, this is a cause  for
us to rejoice.  The benefit is similar to  learning  all  the  teachings  or
scriptures of the buddhas.

The Buddha arose from  his  meditative  equipoise  and  said,  “Well  done.”
Likewise, when we manage to gain some understanding of the  ultimate  nature
of reality, this is also a cause for the buddhas to rejoice.  This  is  what
really pleases the buddhas. It is the supreme and the best offering  to  the
buddhas. The buddhas will rejoice. Likewise the gods and the asuras  and  so
forth will also feel happy. They will help us and not disturb us.

Although the buddhas are powerful but,  in  order  for  us  to  receive  the
inspiration and blessings from the buddhas, first  we  must  be  a  suitable
receptacle for receiving the blessing.  When  we  engage  in  the  threefold
activity of hearing, reflection and meditation on emptiness, the  perfection
of wisdom, definitely  this  will  make  us  a  receptacle  to  receive  the
blessings.

This concludes our study of The Heart of Perfection of Wisdom  Sutra.  Based
on the benefits that were taught by the buddhas—the benefits  that  one  can
gain from learning, reflecting, thinking and meditating on it—from that,  we
can infer that all of us have accumulated a vast amount of merit. We  should
rejoice in that.

                                ~~~~~~~~~~~~

I was asked, “What is a bodhisattva mahasattva?” Bodhi refers to  the  great
enlightenment so a bodhisattva is an aspirant to  enlightenment.  What  this
person is aspiring to is the truth body, the dharmakaya.  He  sees  that  as
the object to be achieved.  From  that  perspective,  he  is  a  bodhisattva
because he aspires to achieve that.

Because he aspires to full enlightenment for the  benefit  of  all  sentient
beings, therefore he is  a  mahasattva.  Sattva  is  loosely  translated  as
being. So, he is a great being, a mahasattva, because  he  aspires  to  that
enlightenment for others.

We  are  looking  at  the  entomology  of  the  words,   ‘bodhisattva’   and
‘mahasattva.’
• Because he aspires to the  dharmakaya  in  order  to  accomplish  his  own
  purpose, he is a bodhisattva.
• Because he aspires to this enlightenment also to  accomplish  the  welfare
  of others, he is called a mahasattva.

Khen Rinpoche announced that there will be a teaching on  mind  training  by
Geshe Thubten Sherab, the ex-principal of Kopan Monastery,   on  Tuesday  30
July 2013.




Interpreted by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme; transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek,  Vivien  Ng
and Aki Yeo; edited by Cecilia Tsong


-----------------------
[1] “Where would I possibly find enough leather/ With  which  to  cover  the
surface of the earth?/ Yet (wearing) leather just on the soles of my  shoes/
Is equivalent to covering the earth with it.” (Verse 13, Chapter 5).

