Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/HeartSutra/lesson1.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:52:27.523468
================================================================================


Khen Rinpoche (in English): You have completed the exams. There are many
questions. If you really want to know then discuss with each other and find
out the answer; why you are wrong, why you are right. Find out from each
other. If you still cannot get why you are wrong, then you ask me. Okay?
But this time, nobody get 100marks. Many people say difficult. I mean, just
an exercise as I mentioned to everyone. The exam is just to exercise your
brain. When you exercise your brain, your brain gets younger, and more
healthy. That’s the idea. So you can take as that. So don’t be too stressed
about the exam. You get right, it is also okay. You get wrong, it is also
okay. Not so much about the mark. Maybe some people worry, they expect 100
mark and they didn’t get, upset. It is not like that. So take as exercise,
and is part of learning. Whether you get good mark, you get bad mark,
doesn’t matter. Sometimes there maybe mistake giving mark. One or two mark
will be different. There is no argue. The mark doesn’t go anywhere. So just
accept that. Sometimes could be mistake. That’s not so much problem. So
after the class, I will give back (the exam paper). I’m just wondering,
anybody think these questions are so difficult, just ask one. From here,
somebody feel such a difficult question, want to ask me. Only one. Then
after finish this class, then you take your exam papers.
Before we start on the Heart of the Perfection of Wisdom Sutra, I will talk
a little bit about the paths and grounds.  Ideally, in order to learn and
to really understand the Heart of the Perfection of Wisdom Sutra, one must
have a prior knowledge and understanding of the mode of progressing along
the paths according to the Consequence Middle Way School. I think I have
talked a little bit about that in the previous classes when we were looking
at Tenets. In order to learn and to understand the Heart of the Perfection
of Wisdom Sutra, we must have a clear understanding of the presentation of
the coarse and subtle selflessnesses according to the CMWS. In order to
learn and to understand the Heart of the Perfection of Wisdom Sutra, you
should re-visit what we had covered recently in the previous module, in
particular, you should re-visit the section on the CMWS presentation of:
- what are the main objects of abandonment
- what is meant by the afflictive obscurations and the knowledge
obscurations
- the illustrations that are posited for these two obscurations
If you remember from our previous discussion on the CMWS with regards to
the hearers, solitary realizers and the bodhisattvas, with respect to the
main object of meditation, there is no difference in the main objects of
meditation; whether it is a hearer, solitary realizer or bodhisattva.
However there is a main difference in their main object of abandonment.
You must have some understanding on these things in order to appreciate the
explanation of the Heart of the Perfection of Wisdom Sutra. If you remember
that at the very end of the tenets root text in the section of CMWS, there
is a discussion on how:
- the abandonment of the afflictive obscurations is simultaneous with the
attainment of the 8th bodhisattva ground (or 8th bhumi)
- the abandonment of the knowledge obscurations is simultaneous with the
actualization of the four bodies of Buddha.
So that was what being mentioned towards the very end of that text. That is
just a brief mention of how the abandonment of the afflictive obscurations
is simultaneous with the achievement of the 8th eight bodhisattva ground
and the abandonment of the knowledge obscurations is simultaneous with the
actualization of the four bodies. In order to have some understanding of
what is meant by those statements, now we are going to look at the
presentation of the paths and grounds according to CMWS.
Many of you may know that in the Heart of the Perfection of Wisdom Sutra,
there is this mantra:
Tadyatha gate gate paragate parasamgate bodhi svaha.
Essentially, that mantra shows how the bodhisattvas progress along the
different Mahayana paths. The main subject matter of the Heart of the
Perfection of Wisdom Sutra is showing how the bodhisattvas on the basis of
realizing emptiness progress on the various Mahayana paths in order to
achieve full enlightenment.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): Okay, that is complete the heart sutra. Express
one. Ten minutes.
There is a chart (see below) that shows the five Mahayana paths. I will
attempt to give a brief explanation of the paths and grounds according to
this chart.
All the four Buddhist tenets assert the three vehicles: the hearer vehicle,
solitary realizer vehicle, and the bodhisattva vehicle (or the great
vehicle, the Mahayana).
All three vehicles talked about the five paths. So there are five paths of
the hearers, five paths of the solitary realizers and the five paths of the
bodhisattvas. The five paths for all three vehicles have the same name.
So what are the five paths? The five paths are:
   1. The path of accumulation
   2. The path of preparation
   3. The path of seeing
   4. The path of meditation
   5. The path of no more learning.

For those of you who are really interested to gain knowledge and
understanding over time, and for those of you who are really interested to
learn, then it is your personal responsibility to memorize some of these
things, such that you should be able to say at least what the five paths
are: path of accumulation, the path of preparation, the path of seeing, the
path of meditation and the path of no more learning. This is like the
working capital. So if you are not able even to express verbally what these
five paths are, then there is really no way to progress or to learn. That
is your personal responsibility.
If you remember our discussion on the four Buddhist tenets, the first two
Buddhist tenets are Hinayana tenets. They assert that when the hearers and
solitary realizers, complete their respective five paths, they become
hearers arhats and solitary realizer arhats.
They first achieved nirvana with remainder. When they pass away, they
achieve nirvana without remainder. According to these two Hinayana tenets,
when these arhats achieved nirvana without remainder, their mental continua
are severed.
What about those who become buddhas?
According to the two Hinayana tenets, when the Buddha passes away, and
achieves nirvana without remainder, his mental continuum is also severed.
So that is the view or the beliefs of the two Hinayana tenets.
If you look at the Hinayana tenets, they do not assert that the Buddha
continues in some form after passing away in order to benefit sentient
beings. According to Hinayana tenets, once the Buddha passes into the
sorrowless state and achieves the nirvana without remainder, his mental
continuum is severed and there is nothing left of him to hang around to do
things for us sentient beings. So according to the Hinayana tenets, the
Buddha literally disappears into nothingness. His mental continuum is
severed after he passes away into the sorrowless state. The Hinayana tenets
don’t have a presentation or an explanation of the Buddha benefitting
sentient beings in myriad ways. If you think about it, this is quite mind
boggling and is something quite difficult to accept.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): Just repeating the tenets. This one you already
know. You already know what I’m talking now, isn’t it? Anyway, if you don’t
know, then just some imprint there. Okay. I won’t talk too long.
Of the four Buddhist tenets, two are Hinayana tenets and two are Mahayana
tenets. The two Mahayana tenets are the Mind Only School and the Middle Way
School.
Within the Mind Only School, there are different divisions:
- there are some proponents of Mind only who assert that there are three
final vehicles
- there are some proponents of Mind only who assert just one final vehicle
In general, there are three vehicles. However, some of the proponents of
Mind only assert that although there are three vehicles, but in actuality,
there is only one final vehicle. There are also some of the proponents of
Mind only who assert that just as there are three vehicles, there are three
final vehicles.
As for the Middle Way School, although they do assert the three vehicles
-the hearers, solitary realizers and the bodhisattva- but there is just one
final vehicle.
The Mahayana tenets do not accept that upon achieving nirvana without
remainder, the mental continuum is severed. They do not accept that at all;
whether is for the foe destroyers or the buddhas. All Mahayana tenets
assert that upon achieving full enlightenment, the mental continuum is not
severed. Rather, upon achieving enlightenment, which is simultaneous with
the actualization of the four khayas or the four bodies, then the buddhas
work for the welfare of all the numberless sentient beings equaling to the
limitless extent of space forever until the entire samsara is emptied.
All the Mahayana tenets assert that upon achieving full enlightenment,
becoming a Buddha, the Buddha will continue to work for all sentient beings
equaling to the limitless extent of space for as long as samsara exists.
The Mahayana tenets do not accept that the mental continuum of arhat or
Buddha will just be severed upon achieving nirvana. This is the Mahayana
position, and it is the opposite of what the Hinayana tenets assert. The
Hinayana tenets assert that whether it is arhats or the buddhas, after they
having achieved nirvana without remainder, their mental continuum is
severed. So you have these two very different positions. Which one do you
choose? The one that makes more sense and the one that does not contradict
logic should be the valid position.
According to the Mahayana, for those who have completed the hearers path
and the solitary realizers path become hearers foe destroyers (arhats) or
solitary realizers foe destroyers (arhats). But according to the Mahayana,
the job is not done after having become an arhat. They don’t just hang
around and stay on as an arhat forever and ever. According to the Mahayana,
the hearer arhats and solitary realizer arhats will have to enter the
Mahayana path, travel on the various Mahayana paths and eventually achieve
full enlightenment.
This is like a brief introduction of what happens to the hearers, solitary
realizers and bodhisattvas after they complete their path and what they do.
You have to understand what we have just discussed is from the perspective
of sutra. From the perspective of Mahayana tantra, one cannot achieve full
enlightenment by depending on the sutra path alone. Enlightenment is not
possible just by depending on the sutra path alone. Even for an individual
who has travelled the various bodhisattva grounds up to the ten bodhisattva
ground, that bodhisattva cannot achieve enlightenment without depending on
the tantric path. On top of the sutra path, there is also the presentation
of the paths and grounds according to tantra.
From the perspective of Mahayana tantra, even for an individual who has
travelled all the way up to the tenth bodhisattva ground cannot achieve
enlightenment without depending on tantra. That individual will still have
to enter the tantric path in order to achieve enlightenment. So
enlightenment is very far away. Achieving enlightenment is not a stroll in
the park which you can just relax.
Khen Rinpoche (In English): So now we are going to see how far. Just
looking the road, not looking the map. Not think like how far is
enlightenment.
Now is not the time to dwell into the reasons why one needs tantra and why
one cannot achieve enlightenment by depending on sutra path alone. This is
not the time. This will come towards the end of the Basic Program. I think
there is one module dedicated to a brief introduction on the tantric paths
and grounds. At that time, we will talk about the special features of
tantra. It only by understands the special features of tantra that you
appreciate and understand why you need the tantric path on top of the sutra
path.
According to the Mahayana, in order to achieve full enlightenment or
buddhahood, one needs to accumulate the collections over a period of three
great countless eons.
It is the general view of the Mahayana that one needs to accumulate the
collections over the period of three great countless eons. But do not
despair, for according to tantra, it is possible to achieve enlightenment
in one brief lifetime in one body.
We are going to look at the presentation of the paths and grounds, in
particular the Mahayana paths and grounds. We are going to look at the
presentation of the Mahayana paths and grounds according to the highest
philosophical school, Consequence Middle Way School.


From the perspective of the Mahayana sutra, according to the Consequence
Middle Way School, one needs to accumulate the collections over a period of
three great countless eons. Let us look at the accumulation of the
collections during the first great countless eon.
During the first great countless eon, where does it happen in relation to
the five paths?
The five paths can be condensed into two:
    - The path of an ordinary being
    - The path of a superior
The accumulation of the collections in the first great countless eon
happens when one is still an ordinary being.
The accumulation of the collections in the second and third great countless
eons is done as a superior. So the person who is accumulating the
collections in the second and the third great countless eons is not an
ordinary being, the person is already a superior.
The word “arya” in Sanskrit means superior. The accumulation of the
collections in the second and third great countless eon is done as a
superior.
Let us look at the accumulation of the collections in the second great
countless eon specifically.
The accumulation of the collections in the second great countless eon
happens from the first to the seventh ground (bhumi in Sanskrit).  The
first seven grounds are also called the seven impure grounds.
The accumulation of the collections in the third great countless eon
happens from the eighth to the tenth ground. The eighth, ninth and tenth
ground are known as the three pure grounds.
More details on these grounds will come later on. For the time being, now
you know:
    - The first seven bodhisattva grounds are impure grounds
    - The last three (eighth, ninth and tenth) bodhisattva grounds are pure
      grounds
Why the term impure or pure?
Why are the first seven bodhisattva grounds impure?
Why are the last three bodhisattva grounds pure?
The first seven bodhisattva grounds are called impure grounds because the
bodhisattvas on these grounds have not yet abandoned the afflictive
obscurations i.e. they have not been purified of the afflictive
obscurations.
The bodhisattvas on the eighth, ninth and tenth grounds have already
abandoned the afflictive obscurations. Therefore they are purified of the
afflictive obscurations. Therefore, the eighth, ninth and tenth ground are
called pure grounds.
As I mentioned earlier and also during the tenets, the attainment of the
eighth ground is simultaneous with the abandonment of the afflictive
obscurations. When the bodhisattva abandons the afflictive obscurations, he
achieves the eighth ground simultaneously.
When the bodhisattva completes the accumulation of the two collections
during the third great countless eon, he achieves full enlightenment.
When the bodhisattva completes the accumulation of the two collections in
the third great countless eon, then he achieve full enlightenment, he
becomes a Buddha and he achieves the Mahayana Path of No-more Learning.
From the beginning of the Mahayana path of accumulation and all the way up
to the end of the tenth ground, one is still a sentient being. All these
paths are called the Paths of Learning because one is training and is still
learning. The paths of learning occur during the time when one is a
sentient being.
The point behind the terms the Path of Learning and the Path of No-more
Learning is to indicates the fact that as a Buddha, he has completed
everything that to be learned. The Buddha has nothing more to know and to
learn, whereas as a sentient being, one is still learning and one is still
progressing. Therefore, during the time when one is travelling the path as
sentient beings, one is still on the Path of Learning. It is up to us as an
individual to decide whether we want to learn or we don’t want to learn. In
a way, it’s up to everybody as an individual to choose whether you want to
learn or not, but of course in order to make the decision you really have
to know where you are. So it’s every clear that unless you are already a
Buddha then anybody else who is not a Buddha obviously still has things to
learn. Please decide where you are.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): If you are enlightened then no need to come to
class.
Even for those bodhisattvas who have reached the 10th ground, that is
unbelievably high attainment, still have not completed their training. They
still have obscurations to be abandoned. They still have to continue and
joyously persevere in their training in order to become a Buddha. From this
we can understand that until we are a Buddha, there are always things to
learn and there is always room for improvement. It is obvious that as a
sentient being, there is always be the time that we do not understand
certain things. But some people do get discouraged just because they don’t
understand. When they get discouraged, they lose heart. Rather than losing
heart, we should just continue to learn by remembering that we are still a
sentient being. We need to remember this.
Bodhisattvas who are travelling on these five Mahayana paths are either
ordinary bodhisattvas or superior/ arya bodhisattvas.
What are the paths of the ordinary bodhisattvas?
There are two Mahayana paths of the ordinary bodhisattvas:
   1. Mahayana Path of Accumulation
   2. Mahayana Path of Preparation.
When does one become a bodhisattva?
One becomes a bodhisattva when one enters the Mahayana Path of
Accumulation.
When one enters the Mahayana Path of Accumulation one becomes a
bodhisattva. So when one has achieved the Mahayana Path of Accumulation it
is said that one has entered the Mahayana path, and one is on the way to
buddhahood.
When do you become a bodhisattva?
A bodhisattva is someone who has bodhicitta (or the mind of enlightenment
or the spirit of enlightenment). So a bodhisattva is someone who has
generated bodhicitta/ the mind of enlightenment.
Bodhicitta can be divided into:
   1. Contrived bodhicitta
   2. Uncontrived bodhicitta
Contrived bodhicitta is the bodhicitta that arises when one think about it
and put effort. Then the fully qualified bodhicitta arises, but that
requires effort.

But having contrived bodhicitta does not make one a bodhisattva yet. Only
when one generated uncontrived bodhicitta then one becomes a bodhisattva.
Due to familiarity, uncontrived bodhicitta arises spontaneously without
effort at all. This is indicated as “B” in the chart.
When a person generates effortless bodhicitta or uncontrived bodhicitta
that is when the person enters the Mahayana path. That is when he becomes a
Bodhisattva. Here he is an ordinary Bodhisattva.
So whoever generates this uncontrived bodhicitta in their mind, then that
person enters the Mahayana path and is suitable to be called a bodhisattva.

There are two types of individuals who generate bodhicitta and enter the
path:
   1. Those of dull faculties who are followers of faith
   2. Those of sharp faculties who are followers of Dharma
Those who are of sharp faculties are said to be followers of Dharma i.e.
they are followers of reasoning, will generate bodhicitta and then become a
bodhisattva. But before they generate bodhicitta, they investigate, analyze
and think about emptiness.  So those of sharp faculties are said to realize
emptiness first. On that basis then they only go on to generate the
uncontrived bodhicitta and become a bodhisattva. So those persons of sharp
faculties will first develop a correct understanding of emptiness and only
then move on to generating bodhicitta. When they generate bodhicitta they
then become bodhisattvas.
Essentially what is bodhicitta?
Simply speaking, it is the thought thinking “I must achieve full
enlightenment for the benefit of sentient beings.”
So those who are of sharp faculties, before they generate bodhicitta i.e.
the thought that make the pledge to achieve full enlightenment, do analyze
to see why there is a need to achieve full enlightenment. They analyze
whether enlightenment does exist or not, whether it is possible or not,
whether is there such a thing or not. It is only until they see that
enlightenment actually exists and is something that is attainable, they
then make the pledge to achieve full enlightenment.
In order for those who are of sharp faculties, in fact for anyone, to  have
certainty in the heart to see that enlightenment is a possibility, is
definitely exists and is definitely can be achieved,  that individual must
first have an understanding of emptiness - the ultimate nature of reality.
Without this understanding, it is not possible to see the state whereby all
the obscurations can be removed. Therefore, without the understanding of
emptiness, it is not possible to have that certainty. So for those who are
of sharp faculties, until they have achieved an understanding of emptiness,
they will not make the pledge “I want to achieve full enlightenment.” Those
of sharp faculties will only make the pledge to achieve full enlightenment
for all sentient beings after they are fully convinced that enlightenment
exists and is actually possible to be achieved.
In order for any individual to see that enlightenment exists and is
possible to be achieved, that individual must first be convinced and
realized that the obscurations can be eliminated and removed from the mind,
no matter how terrible or how powerful they are. In order to realize that,
one must realize that the antidotes to the obscurations exist, because if
one does not see the antidote, one will not see how the obscurations can be
removed. So before one can see the obscurations can be removed, one must
first realized that antidotes exist.
When we talk about antidote, the conclusion is that there is nothing else
beyond the wisdom that directly perceives emptiness or the mind that
directly perceives the ultimate nature of reality.
When we say that those of sharp faculties realize that the enlightenment is
possible because the obscurations can be removed from the mind, antidotes
do exist and so forth, we are not talking about some kind of understanding
that exist in general. That individual must realize that in his own heart
“Enlightenment can be achieved because I am fully convinced that the
obscurations inside me are temporary and can be removed because it is
possible for me to generate the antidote”. This is a very personal
conviction.  So that is the brief explanation of “A” in the chart.
In Lorig, when we talk about the realization of emptiness, it is either:
- an inferential realization of emptiness  or
- a direct realization of emptiness.
If you do remember the presentation of the mind and awareness, between a
non-conceptual consciousness and a conceptual consciousness, the mind that
realizes emptiness at point “A” is a conceptual one.
For this conceptual consciousness realizing emptiness, between a direct
valid cognizer and an inferential valid cognizer, the mind that realizing
emptiness at “A” is an inferential cognizer realizing emptiness.
The direct realization of emptiness does not happen until the path of a
superior bodhisattva (arya bodhisattva) is manifested, and that happens on
the Mahayana Path of Seeing.
According to the Prasangika, the Middle Way Consequence School, all the
realizations of emptiness prior to point “G”, i.e. prior to entering the
Mahayana path (“A”), after entering the Mahayana path while on the path of
ordinary bodhisattva (from “B” up to but does not includes “G”), that means
on the Mahayana Path of Accumulation and Path of Preparation, are either
inferential cognizers or subsequent cognizers.
As opposed to those who are sharp faculties, the persons of dull faculties
are mainly followers of faith. Based on some belief or faith, they make the
pledge to achieve enlightenment to accomplish the welfare of sentient
beings. So it is still possible to generate bodhicitta without a prior
understanding of emptiness, and there are individuals who do generate a
bodhicitta. When they generate bodhicitta, they enter the Mahayana path,
become a bodhisattva and actualize the Mahayana Path of Accumulation. So
from this, you can see that there are bodhisattvas who do not have any
understanding or realization of emptiness.
|Sharp faculties bodhisattva          |Dull faculties bodhisattva          |
|Followers of Dharma (followers of    |Followers of faith.                 |
|reasoning)                           |Based on some belief or faith (     |
|Analyze and think about emptiness (  |generate bodhicitta ( become        |
|realize emptiness ( generate         |bodhisattva                         |
|bodhicitta   ( become bodhisattva    |                                    |


The Mahayana Path of Accumulation has three divisions:
   1. Small Path of Accumulation
   2. Medium Path of Accumulation
   3. Great Path of Accumulation
As one progresses along the paths, the quality and the strength of the
antidotes becomes increasingly over time i.e. becomes more powerful
overtime.
But with respect to the objects of abandonment, they become smaller over
time. One starts off with huge mass of objects of abandonment and then
become smaller and smaller over time.
In the case of generating the antidotes on the Mahayana Path of
Accumulation, one starts with small Path of Accumulation. As the antidotes
strengthen, one moves from the small Path of Accumulation to the medium
Path of Accumulation and then from the medium Path of Accumulation to the
great Path of Accumulation.
When one enters the Mahayana Path of Accumulation, one enters from the
Mahayana small Path of Accumulation. Such an entry is contingent on
generating the uncontrived bodhicitta. So when one generates the actual
full realization of bodhicitta, one enters the Mahayana small Path of
Accumulation.
When we talk about mind generation, there are many divisions of mind
generation. The mind generation at the point when one enters the Mahayana
small Path of Accumulation is called the Earth-liked mind generation- mind
generation like the earth.
For the bodhisattva who is on the Mahayana small Path of Accumulation, that
Bodhisattva has uncontrived bodhicitta i.e. he has the full realization of
bodhicitta.  But the bodhicitta in the continuum of the bodhisattva of the
Mahayana small Path of Accumulation is subject to degeneration. That means
it is not stable and can deteriorate.  It is said that there are some
Bodhisattvas at this juncture get discourage thinking “Sentient beings are
difficult” or meet a Hinayana guru, or for whatever reason, they decide to
give up the idea of achieving enlightenment and fall into the Hinayana
path. So it is possible that there are bodhisattvas on the Mahayana small
Path of Accumulation lose their bodhicitta and fall into the Hinayana path
and become arhat to achieve liberation from samsara.
It is said that it is possible for bodhisattva on the Mahayana small Path
of Accumulation to be disheartened and give up the idea of achieving
enlightenment and fall into the Hinayana path. Most likely such
bodhisattvas are bodhisattvas who are of dull faculties.  It is quite
unlikely the bodhisattvas of sharp faculties would give up their bodhicitta
because they have already concluded in their own mind; “Enlightenment is
something that is needed. It is very good and it is possible for me and I
want it”. So it is unlikely that bodhisattvas of sharp faculties would ever
give their bodhicitta.
The bodhisattva who is on the Mahayana small Path of Accumulation will
progress to the Mahayana medium Path of Accumulation. When the Bodhisattva
reaches the Mahayana medium of Path of Accumulation, the bodhicitta in his
continuum has become very stable.  So the Bodhisattva on the Mahayana
medium Path of Accumulation will never ever give up the bodhicitta. He will
never ever give up the thought to achieve enlightenment for the benefit of
all sentient beings. His bodhicitta becomes very stable.  The bodhicitta/
the mind of enlightenment of the bodhisattva at this juncture is called
Gold-liked bodhicitta; the mind of enlightenment is like gold. Just like
the actual gold which will never change into something else and
deteriorates, the mind of enlightenment of bodhicitta in the continuum of
the bodhisattva on the Mahayana medium Path of Accumulation will never
change and never deteriorate.
At “C”, once the Mahayana medium Path of Accumulation is achieved, it is
not possible for the bodhisattva to fall down into the Hinayana because if
his bodhicitta will never degenerate, then it is not possible for him to
fall into the Hinayana.
Khen Rinpoche: (in English): So that’s why it is important to come to ABC
to know the “A”, “B”, “C.”  You know what is A, you know what is B, you
know what is C
Khen Rinpoche: (in English): Of course that’s why ABC exists. Joking. There
is another handout, you can read that. Next class we go through this these
two together. Hopefully I can finish one more class. So you can read the
chart also. Maybe one class I will finish this chapter.
It will be good if you get a clear general idea of how an individual
progresses along these paths. So we should refer to the chart to get a
clearer idea.






