Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/HeartSutra/lesson6.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:52:27.467658
================================================================================


Student: Why one must take the engaged bodhisattva vows to be enlightened?
Why can’t the bodhisattva just trains in the six perfections alone to get
enlightened?
Answer: If one is able to practice the six perfections, then I personally
think that it doesn’t have to be preceded by making a pledge, which
essentially is the vow. What the bodhisattva vow is making a pledge to
practice the six perfections isn’t it? Before one engages in the six
perfections, one must really want to engage in them, akin to making a
pledge.
Imagine that you are headed to an important destination. Before you set
your foot for that important destination, you must first have the idea of
going, and then you kind of want to go. It is just like a pledge or a
commitment ‘I will go.’ Base on that, you then actually set-forth. But
there are cases that people just go wherever it takes them; they just go
without thinking.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): But these people do not reach that place. Reach
different place.
I think if it is an important task, that important task probably has to be
preceded by a commitment to do it and to accomplish that task.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): Maybe like that.
In Lama Tsongkhapa’s praise to Shakyamuni Buddha through his teaching on
dependent origination, Lama Tsongkhapa mentioned that indeed he is so
fortunate to have found even just a little faith in the Buddha before his
life come to an end. Likewise, we have the opportunity to look into the
Buddha’s teachings. When you study such philosophical teachings, they are
challenging. But through whatever learning and reflection on the teaching
of the Buddha, if you do come to gain some faith in the Buddha, that will
make you very fortunate. Even if you don’t managed to achieve any
experiences or realizations, but if you are able to develop some faith in
Buddha based on your learning and reflections, then that makes you a very
fortunate person. This is something to keep in your mind, to remember them
and then just feel happy. In particular you need to realize that having an
opportunity to study and to learn the teaching of the Buddha on emptiness
is really so fortunate. This is something you should keep in mind all the
time.
Now you have the opportunity to learn together with many people, so the
presence of other people in the same class is a condition for your studies.
Generally, it is difficult if you are studying alone, or you are just
listening alone. It is much more challenging than if you are doing the same
thing with a group of people. The presence of other people in the class is
a helpful condition for your own studies. As such, you can consider
everyone in this class as precious, and as helpful. Therefore, it is good
to have mutual consideration and respect for one another. Thinking in such
a way is helpful.
A monastery is a great seat of learning. People of the same class and
people who share the same teacher are generally very close-knit people, and
are very harmonious. They have the strong feeling of togetherness. Of
course, at times there will be disagreement, but in general, the overall
feeling is “We are together in the same class”, or “We have the same
teacher”.  The feeling of unity is very strong. This is the culture in the
great seat of learning in the monastery. Likewise, we could adopt the same
kind of thinking here. You all are together in the same class and have the
feeling of unity, therefore practice pure perception with one another. If
there is this kind of feeling of unity or oneness, then when it comes to
activity such as discussion, there should not be any problems in conducting
discussion and so forth. Without this, even to be able to do discussion
would be difficult. It is possible that at times there will be
disagreements between people. This is just normal. You just have to keep in
mind that coming together in unity and in harmony.
Basically all of you are looking at the same material and studying the same
thing. So when it comes to learning, you should not have this idea and
feeling; “This is terrible! It is so difficult!”  Rather, you should learn
willingly, voluntarily and happily. It is the same with coming to class.
You should come to class willingly, voluntarily and happily. In order for
you to do it willingly, voluntarily and happily, whether it is coming to
class or studying or learning, it must come on a basis of you knowing what
it is in there for you such as the benefits pertaining to studying
emptiness. We have talked a little bit about the benefits and the merit.
Willingness is a happy feeling of doing something voluntarily and it has to
come on the basis of knowing the benefits. Without that, it may be really
difficult.  You come to class after a day work and feeling tired. If you do
not understand what is in for you and do not see the benefit, then of
course it would be difficult. You have to understand that you are very
fortunate even just be able to do a little bit of learning despite living
in such a busy country with such a busy life. Please keep this in mind at
all time.

The sutra starts with:
Thus did I hear at one time. The Bhagavan was dwelling on Mass of Vultures
Mountain in Rajagriha together with a great community of monks and a great
community of bodhisattvas. At that time, the Bhagavan was absorbed in the
concentration on the categories of phenomena called “Profound Perception.
Up to this point of the sutra, this section constitutes the prologue.
The Perfection of Wisdom Sutra is mostly classified under the sutra pitaka.
That would make The Heart of the Perfection of Wisdom Sutra part of the
sutra pitaka as well.
The sutra starts with, “Thus did I hear at one time.”
The “I” indicates the compiler i.e. the person who compiled this particular
sutra.
If The Heart of the Perfection of Wisdom Sutra falls into the sutra pitaka,
that would make Ananda the compiler of the sutra.
In the last lesson we looked at the compilation of the Buddhist teachings.
From a common perspective, the teachings were compiled under three
councils. Those teachings that were compiled are now commonly known as the
Pali Canon. The Pali Cannon consists of the Hinayana teachings.
If you look at the compilation of Buddhist teachings from the Mahayana
perspective, then Vajrapani would be the compiler of this sutra.
‘Thus did I hear at one time. The Bhagavan was dwelling on Mass of Vultures
Mountain in Rajagriha together with a great community of monks and a great
community of bodhisattvas’ - by reading this section of the sutra, you will
get the idea that the Buddha taught this very special teaching The Heart of
the Perfection of Wisdom Sutra at the special place called the Mass of
Vultures Mountain.
Who did the Buddha speak to?
The teachings were heard by a great community of monks and a great
community of bodhisattvas. This means that the listeners consist of the
persons of the three lineages, or the three vehicles.
‘At that time, the Bhagavan was absorbed in the concentration on the
categories of phenomena called “Profound Perception”’ - this indicates the
cause for the question that is going to come soon.
At that time, the Bhagavan was absorbed in the concentration on the
categories of phenomena called “Profound Perception.” Also, at that time,
the bodhisattva mahasattva arya Avalokiteshvara looked upon the very
practice of the profound perfection of wisdom and beheld those five
aggregates also as empty of inherent nature.
 All these are put together is the cause for the question that Shariputra
will ask.
‘At that time, the Bhagavan was absorbed in the concentration on the
categories of phenomena called Profound Perception’ - this indicates that
the Buddha, while remaining in this meditative equipoise, and with that
concentration, he blessed Shariputra. Essentially, in this particular
concentration, the Buddha blessed Shariputra so that he would initiate the
series of questions which will be followed by answers from Avalokiteshvara.
Next is the condition or cause for the question to be asked, ‘Also, at that
time, the bodhisattva mahasattva arya Avalokiteshvara looked upon the very
practice of the profound perfection of wisdom and beheld those five
aggregates also as empty of inherent nature.’
Following this is the question from Shariputra:
Then, through the power of Buddha, the venerable Shariputra said this to
the bodhisattva mahasattva arya Avalokiteshvara: “How should any son of the
lineage train who wishes to practice the activity of the profound
perfection of wisdom?”
In the Tibetan translation of the sutra, it says “How should any son of the
lineage train”. The Chinese translation that is purported to be the
translation of the Sanskrit version, “the daughter of the lineage” is also
there; so “the son and daughter of the lineage”. But in the Tibetan
edition, which is a translation from the Sanskrit version, only “the son of
the lineage” is mentioned.
If only “the son of the lineage” is mentioned, then “the son of the
lineage” refers to Avalokiteshvara.
Then who will cover the people who are not Chenrezig that would probably
include the daughter of the lineage?
In the Tibetan edition, it only has the “son of the lineage”. If it is
based on that, “the son of the lineage” refers to the person to whom the
question is asked, and in this case is Avalokiteshvara.
“How should any son of the lineage train who wishes…” - the ‘who’ would
cover both the sons and daughters of the lineage. If you read it in such a
way, then it is alright, because the person who is going to practice the
Perfection of Wisdom is not just Avalokiteshvara, basically any sons or
daughters of the lineage.
If you do not know how to explain, then there will be problems because
there will be people who say, “Where are the daughters? Only the sons can
practice?” One has to be careful in explaining such things.
In some editions of the Chinese translation which is purported to be the
translation from the Sanskrit version, at this point of the sutra, the
daughter of the lineage is also mentioned.
He said that and the bodhisattva mahasattva arya Avalokiteshvara said this
to the venerable Sharadvatiputra. “Shariputra, any son of the lineage or
daughter of the lineage who wishes to practice the activity of the profound
perfection of wisdom should look upon it like this, correctly and
repeatedly beholding those five aggregates also as empty of inherent
nature.
‘He said that and the bodhisattva mahasattva arya Avalokiteshvara said this
to the venerable Sharadvatiputra. “Shariputra, any son of the lineage or
daughter of the lineage who wishes to practice the activity of the profound
perfection of wisdom should look upon it like this”’ - up to this point is
the transition.
Then the transition is made to the actual explanation:

‘Correctly and repeatedly beholding those five aggregates also as empty of
inherent nature’ - this is the actual explanation.
On the actual explanation, between the brief explanation and the detailed
explanation,
‘Correctly and repeatedly beholding those five aggregates also as empty of
inherent nature’ constitutes the brief explanation.
The detailed explanation starts from: Form is empty.  Emptiness is form…
 ‘Correctly and repeatedly beholding those five aggregates also as empty of
inherent nature’ - this section is the brief explanation. This indicates
the general procedure of the practice for the Path of Meditation, Path of
Accumulation, Path of Preparation, Path of Seeing and Path of Meditation.
So this sections ‘correctly and repeatedly beholding those five aggregates
also as empty of inherent nature’ is to be applied to all these four paths.

Form is empty. Emptiness is form. Emptiness is not other than form. Form is
also not other than emptiness. In the same way, feeling, discrimination,
compositional factors, and consciousness are empty. This section shows the
way to meditate on emptiness while on the Path of Accumulation and the Path
of Preparation.
If you remember the discussion from the Paths and Grounds:
 • On the Path of Accumulation and Path of Preparation, the meditation on
   emptiness is done via a meaning generality or mental image of emptiness.
 • On the Path of Seeing, emptiness is perceived directly.
 • On the Path of Meditation, one meditates on the emptiness that one has
   seen directly, basically familiarizing oneself with what one has seen
   directly while on the Path of Seeing.
‘Correctly and repeatedly beholding those five aggregates also as empty of
inherent nature’ - the ‘also’ here indicates not only form and so forth are
empty of inherent existence. Even the collections of forms and so forth are
empty of inherent existence.
According to the CMWS, emptiness of inherent existence is synonymous with
the emptiness of existing from its own side. Basically, there are no
phenomena that exist from their own side.
According to the CMWS, all phenomena are posited as mere appearances of the
mind, which means that there are no phenomena that exist from their own
side just like the appearance of a dream elephant to the dream
consciousness. In the dream, there is an appearance of a dream elephant,
but that appearance of the elephant is not coming from the side of the
object. For there is no such an object, but there is still this appearance.
That appearance is an appearance to the perceiving consciousness and in
this case is the dreaming consciousness. This dream elephant is essentially
an appearance to this dreaming consciousness. Likewise, all phenomena do
not exist from their own side. They are mere appearances of the mind.
Now think of the emptiness of inherent existence by using the analogy of a
dream elephant. In the dream, you have the appearance of a dream elephant.
The dream elephant does not exist from its own side. There is nothing from
the side of the object, but it is a mere projection of the mind. It is an
appearance to the dreaming consciousness. It is a creation of the dreaming
consciousness. It is not like there is a real elephant right there
functioning. Likewise, all phenomena, anything that exist, exist as a
creation of the mind, as something that is merely imputed by thought.
Phenomena do not exist from their own side. We should use this analogy to
understand that how all phenomena do not exist from its own side. Rather,
all phenomena are posited as mere appearance to the mind.
According to the CMWS, all phenomena are posited as mere appearances to the
mind. All phenomena are merely imputed by thought and are the creation of
the mind. For there are just mere appearances to the mind, because there is
nothing from the side of the object, and we understand this based on the
analogy. Of course, phenomena do exist, but how do they exist? They exist
as mere appearances to a conventional mind/ consciousness. This is how they
exist; as mere appearances to the mind; the mere appearances that appear to
a conventional consciousness.
If you are not satisfied with that level of appearance, and if you look
further, you will not able to point out that thing. It is not findable. If
you are not satisfied with the mere appearance, and you poked further, at
the end of the day you will not be able to point what exactly is that
thing. It exists. How does it exist? It exists as mere appearances.
If you look for the imputed object, you cannot find it, but yet it exists.
How does it exist? It exists as mere appearance. We have to be satisfied
with that. That is how thing exists. Anything beyond that, you will run
into problem. If you try to look for the object, you will not able to find,
but yet it exists. How does it exist? It is that mere appearances to the
mind. You have to satisfy with that.
As I have mentioned before, one of the most important things is to first
understand before you can even have any hope of understanding what
emptiness of inherently existence is. One the very first thing that you
must understand is how all phenomena are merely imputed by mind/thought.
That is the first step.
You have to understand how all phenomena are merely imputed by thought. The
word ‘merely ‘eliminates inherently existence. The word is not for fun.
Let’s goes back to the example of mistakenly a coil of rope to be a snake.
It happens at the time especially when the conditions are there such as the
weather condition and so forth. When the conditions are gathered, we have
mistakenly a coil of rope to be a snake. First, the coil of rope appears as
snake. Of course, it has to appear as snake; otherwise we won’t believe
there is a snake. On top of it appearing as a snake, we believe it is a
snake. There is an appearance as a snake there from the side of the rope
and the mind assents to that appearance, and believing that there is a
snake there. The mind is grasping, and believing that there is a snake
there.
The coil of rope appearing as a snake, then we assent to the appearance and
believe that there is a snake. This induces fear and we start to worry.
Without this, there is no fear. But with the mind assenting to the
appearance, and believing that there is a snake, the fear arises. The
reality is that it is just only a coil of rope. There isn’t a snake there.
When we look at the coil of rope, from the beginning to the end, we will
not be able to find a snake on a rope. There is no snake about the rope,
there is no snake in the rope, there is no snake on the rope, and the rope
is not the snake. That is very clear. But still there is a mind believing
that it is a snake. Is this snake imputed by mind or not?  The coil of rope
is not a snake but we believe that it is a snake. Is this belief that there
is a snake made up by mind? It is imputed by mind or not?
From this, we can see that the coil of rope appearing as a snake is a
fabrication of the mind. It is not coming from the side of the rope. The
rope appearing as a snake is not coming from the side of the rope. It is a
fabrication of the mind. The mind imputes snake. This shows that the snake
is imputed by mind. The coil of rope as a snake is completely imputed by
the mind. It has nothing to do with the coil of rope.
The coil of rope appearing as a snake is the result of your mind’s
fabrication or it is due to pollution or corruption from the side of the
rope? If you look for the snake in that coil of rope, there is nothing
about the coil of rope that there is a snake. From the top, bottom, left,
right, inside and outside, there is no snake there, but the coil of rope
appearing as a snake. Is the coil of rope appearing as a snake a
fabrication of your mind or not?
You think about it. The coil of rope appearing as a snake is a mere
appearance of the mind.
You apply your understanding of the analogy to an actual object, for
example, the sense of ‘I’ or me.
What is this ‘I’ in the sense of ‘I’ or the thought apprehending ‘I’?
This ‘I’ is the same like the appearance of a coil of rope as a snake in
that. It is the same in that it is a mere appearance to the mind.
Ven Gyurme: I am not saying that it is the same. You have to be careful
with the English.
According to the CMWS, the ‘I’ is that which is merely imputed in
dependence upon the basis of designation, the aggregates.
The aggregates are the body and mind, and when elaborated, there are the
five aggregates:
   1. Form
   2. Feeling
   3. Discrimination
   4. Compositional factors
   5. Consciousness
These five aggregates are the basis of designation of the person. In
dependence upon the aggregates, the ‘I’ is merely imputed.
You have to look among the five aggregates which is the basis of
designation of the ‘I’. If you look for the ‘I’ among the five aggregates:
aggregate of form, aggregate of feeling, discrimination, compositional
factors and consciousness, one by one, you will not be able to find the
‘I’. The ‘I’ is not the aggregate of feeling, the ‘I’ is not the aggregate
of form and so forth.
This is the same as in the analogy of mistakenly a coil of the rope to be a
snake. If you look for a snake in that coil of rope from beginning to end,
from this section to another section, left, right, in, out, you will not be
able to find anything that is a snake. Likewise, if you look for the ‘I’
among the aggregates, which is the basis of designation for ‘I’, starting
from form, feeling, discrimination, compositional factors and
consciousness, you will not be able to point to something that is the ‘I’.
If you think about it, what exactly is the ‘I’? The ‘I’ is that which is
merely labeled/ merely imputed by thought in dependence upon the
aggregates, which is the basis of designation, just as the snake which is
merely imputed upon the coil of rope. Just as there is no snake on the coil
of rope, in the rope, on the rope, outside the rope, likewise there is no
‘I’ on the aggregates. The ‘I’ is not the aggregates. The ‘I’ cannot be
found upon the aggregates. At the end of the day, what is the ‘I’? The ‘I’
is that which is merely imputed in dependence upon the aggregates, just as
how the snake is merely imputed upon the coil of rope.
Phenomena are merely imputed because they cannot be found among the basis
of designation. The basis of designation is not the phenomenon that is
imputed. Therefore, phenomena are merely imputed by thought. We can use the
various analogies to help us to understand this. The analogy of mistakenly
a coil of rope as a snake is one. There is also the analogy of a dream
elephant, the analogy of mirage, the analogy of an echo, and there are many
such examples.
If you look for the ‘I’ or the self among the basis of designation, the
aggregate of form, feeling and so forth, the ‘I’ is not form, ‘I’ is not
feeling, ‘I’ is not this and that. The ‘I’ cannot be found among the basis
of designation, and the basis of designation is not the ‘I’.
If the ‘I’ is not there, is the ‘I’ of the different entity from the
aggregates?  If you look for an ‘I’ that is of the different entity from
the aggregates, you will also not be able to find the ‘I’. Inside don’t
have, outside don’t have. The ‘I’ is not the aggregates. The ‘I’ is also
not of a different entity from the aggregates.
Are we saying that the ‘I’ doesn’t exist? No, the ‘I’ exists.
Then how does it exist if it is not one with the aggregate and it is not
inherently different from the aggregates? Does it mean it doesn’t exist?
No, it exists.
How does it exist? It has to exist because we experience it. It is kind of
nonsense to say that ‘I’ does not exist. Of course, ‘I’ exist. It is
commonly known in the world that ‘I’ exist. ‘I’ has to exist. It definitely
exists.
According to CMWS, the pinnacle of the view, the ultimate reality ‘I’ does
not exist from the side of the aggregates. So, phenomena do not exist from
the side of the basis of designation. Phenomena are not the basis of
designation. Phenomena do not exist from the side of the basis of
designation but yet phenomena exist.
How do they exist? At the end of the day, phenomena are that which are
posited by a conventional consciousness. That is nothing beyond this, and
nothing lesser than this. This is about it already. It exists. It doesn’t
exist from the side of the basis of designation, but yet it exists. How
does it exist? It exists merely posited by the mind and specifically
posited by conventional consciousness. There is no other way out already.
The coil of rope appearing as a snake is essentially a fabrication of the
mind. It is imputed by mind. What is the self or ‘I’ at the end of the day?
It is none other than that which is merely imputed in dependence upon the
aggregates. So, both are the same in being merely imputed by mind.
In the case of mistakenly a coil of rope as a snake, although the idea of a
snake is imputed but in reality there is no snake. That means the coil of
rope is not the snake. But in the case of the ‘I’, the ‘I’ exists, although
it is the same in that it is merely imputed by mind but one exists and one
doesn’t exist. There is a huge difference.
The mind apprehending a coil of rope as snake is a wrong consciousness
because the coil of a rope is not the snake. There has never been a snake,
there is no snake there, inside, outside, on top, left, right, there is no
snake. There is nothing snake about it. Although it is merely imputed by
the mind but in this case there is no snake there. Snake does not exist, so
it is a wrong consciousness. But in the case of the thought conceiving ‘I’,
me, apprehending ‘I’, this is a factually concordant thought because the
‘I’ does exist.
This is a potentially very disturbing or complicated because we are
comparing two things:
   1. Appearance of rope as a snake
   2. Thinking of the self or the person (Appearance of ‘I’)
There is an appearance of a rope as a snake. So, essentially it is an
appearance of a snake.
Then there is an appearance of “I”. Both are merely imputed by thought/mind
but yet one does not exist in reality and another exists in reality. That
is the problem. Both are imputed by mind but how do you account for one
exists and the other one doesn’t exist?
The essential point about settling the view of emptiness and completing it
is that while you see things and events do not exist inherently yet at the
same time you can fully explain how it functions. All phenomena are merely
imputed yet they perform functions. They actually work. The first thing to
really concentrate on is to figure out in your heart to really understand
what it means when the CMWS says that all phenomena are merely imputed by
mind. We have to use the various analogies:  analogy of the dream elephant,
analogy of mistaken a coil of rope as a snake, analogy of an illusion,
analogy of a mirage, analogy of an echo, all these analogies. The first
essential thing to understand is: Are things merely imputed by mind? If so,
how phenomena are merely imputed by mind? That is the first thing to
settle.
According to the CMWS, all phenomena are merely imputed by mind/thought.
Anything that is not merely imputed by thought but existing from its own
side or inherent existence is the object of negation (object of
refutation). This is what we need to refute and negate on the basis of
knowing how all phenomena are merely imputed by mind.
We have settled all phenomena are merely imputed by mind. Anything that is
not that is the object of negation.
The mind assenting to inherently existence, the mind conceiving inherently
existence or the mind apprehending things existing inherently is what we
called an apprehension of true existence.
The mind which conceives things and events to be inherently existence from
their own side and not being merely imputed by mind is called an
apprehension of true existence.
An apprehension of true existence is the mind conceiving things and events,
any phenomena, to exist inherently.
If things really exist exactly in the way according to how the mind views
the world then that would show indeed that is inherently existence, that is
true existence, and that is existence from its own side.
CMWS says that all phenomena do not exist inherently. They do not exist
from their own side. There isn’t a single atom of inherently existence.
There is no single atom of existence from its own side. Everything is
merely imputed by thought that includes the ‘I’, the self and person.
Nagarjuna in his Precious Garland says, “Person is not the earth, not the
water, not the wind, not the fire, not space. The person is also not the
collection of all these six and so forth. The person is also not something
other than all these”.  The different elements that constitute the person,
but the person is not each of these. The person is not the collection of
all these. Then what is the person?
If the person is not the element individually, it is also not the
collection of elements then what is the person? Does it exist? It has to
exist.
So what is the answer? The person is that which is merely imputed in
dependence upon the collection of the elements. Basically, you could think
of the aggregates. If we look for the phenomenon among its basis of
designation, for example, the ‘I’ or the person, if we look for the ‘I’ we
cannot talk about the ‘I’ or the person without talking the body and the
mind. If the ‘I’ exist inherently then it should exist among the basis of
designation, but the ‘I’ is not this aggregate, the ‘I’ is not that
aggregate and so forth. If we look for the ‘I’ among the aggregates, we
will not be able to find the ‘I’, but this doesn’t mean that we have found
the non-existence of the ‘I’. The correct analysis would lead us in the
direction whereby we are beginning to feel that we are not finding the
inherently existence ‘I’. That is the correct direction. It is not about
finding the non-existence of the ‘I’.
The wrong conclusion is the ‘I’ doesn’t exist. That is wrong, completely
wrong. The analysis should conclude with the understanding that the ‘I’
indeed is not inherently existence. There isn’t an inherently existence
‘I’.
Of course, the inherently existence ‘I’ doesn’t exist. We have to look for
it among the aggregates in order to convince ourselves. If we look for it,
what should we find at the end of the day? We should find the non-existence
of the inherently existence ‘I’. What you should find at the end of the day
is that the inherently existence ‘I’ doesn’t exist.
Finding that the inherently existence ‘I’ does not exist is not the same as
finding that the ‘I’ does not exist.
According to the CMWS, just because we have discovered a particular object
in question does not exist inherently it doesn’t mean that we have found
its non-existence. When things don’t exist inherently it does not mean they
cannot exist. All phenomena do not exist inherently but they exist as
merely imputed by thought.
Phenomena that are existence obviously exist. But existence and inherently
existence are not the same. Existing doesn’t mean things exist inherently.
Things are dependently originated/ dependently arisen. There are phenomena
that come about by depending on causes and conditions. That is talking
about the dependent arising at the level of causality. So there are
phenomena that come about through causes and conditions. Those phenomena
came about in dependence upon causes and conditions. They are coming into
being in dependence on causes and conditions.
Because things are dependently arisen, things are dependently originated
therefore things do not exist inherently. That is the essence.
Phenomena come into being are created in dependence on some other factors,
whatever the factors may it be. Therefore, that makes that particular
phenomenon dependently arisen and dependently arisen phenomenon is not
inherently existence. Something which is dependently originated is not
inherently existence.
Dependently arisen and inherently existence are mutually exclusive. They
contradict one another. If something exists by depending on something else,
it cannot be inherently existence. It is an auto-cancellation.
One of the best reasoning to gain an understanding on inherently existence
is to use the logic of dependently arising. By using the logic of
dependently arising, one comes to understand how things are empty of
existing inherently and also you have to account how things exist as merely
imputed by thought/mind.
Go back to the analogy of mistakenly a coil of rope as a snake. There is an
appearance of a snake right there from the side of the coil of the rope.
Now we have concluded that appearance is a fabrication of the mind, and is
the creation of the mind. That appearance is not coming from the side of
the rope. That snake is just mere imputation by thought. That is the
reality about it but that is not how it appears. Although the snake is just
mere imputed by mind onto the coil of rope, during that scenario the mind
does not realize that it is not imputed by mind. There is an appearance of
a snake right there, projecting itself from the side of the coil of the
rope. Although that is not the reality but this is how it appears. The
reality is that it is merely imputed by mind but nevertheless that
appearance of a snake is coming right there completely from the side of the
coil of the rope. Likewise, although the ‘I’ is in reality, what the
‘I’/person/self is none other than that which is merely imputed in
dependence upon the aggregates, which is the basis of designation.
When we have the sense of ‘I’, it doesn’t appear as merely imputed. No way,
never ever for us. It never appear as merely imputed. The ‘I’ seems to
exist among the body and mind. We think it is coming completely from the
side of the body and mind.
While that is the reality of the ‘I’ and all other phenomena, they are just
merely imputed in dependence upon their basis of designation. In the case
of the person, the ‘I’, the self, it is just that which is merely imputed
in dependence upon the aggregates, which is the basis of designation.
Although that is the reality but that is not how ‘I’ and phenomena appear
to us. They don’t appear to us as merely imputed, they appear to us as
existing right from the side of the basis of imputation. That is not the
real problem. We completely assent to their appearance. We believe
completely in that appearance. This is how it is. It exists in the way it
appears. This is the root of our circling in samsara. This is the root, the
final root, the ultimate root.
Going back to the analogy of mistakenly the coil of the rope as a snake,
although there is no snake from the side of the rope, the snake is just
mere imputation by mind but there is the appearance of the snake right
there from the side of the rope. Not only is that the appearance, we assent
to the appearance and believe that there is a snake there. Because of this
belief then there is fear. Although there is no snake there but yet our
belief that there is a snake there causes the fear and all the problems to
come. Likewise, all our problems and sufferings come from assenting to the
appearance of the inherently existence ‘I’, and believing that the ‘I’
indeed is inherently existence.
So, in the section of the sutra that says: “correctly and repeatedly
beholding those five aggregates also as empty of inherent nature”, that is
the brief explanation of the emptiness of inherently existence.
The extensive explanation comes after that starting with the four-fold
emptiness.

(For reference only, need to verify further)
|Thus did I hear                 |The teaching was heard directly from      |
|                                |Buddha Shakyamuni himself, and not from   |
|                                |the third party.                          |
|At one time                     |This teaching was only heard once,        |
|                                |indicates how rare it is to be able to    |
|                                |hear the teaching on the Perfection of    |
|                                |Wisdom Sutra                              |
|                                |It can also mean that the listener is of  |
|                                |very sharp wisdom, because just by hearing|
|                                |it once he remembered everything          |
|Thus did I hear at one time     |The perfect time                      |Pro|
|                                |                                      |log|
|                                |                                      |ue |
|The Bhagavan                    |The perfect teacher                   |   |
|Mass of Vultures Mountain       |The perfect place                     |   |
|Together with a great community |The perfect entourage or the perfect  |   |
|of monks and a great community  |congregation                          |   |
|of bodhisattvas                 |                                      |   |
|A great community of monks      |The hearer and the solitary realizer  |   |
|                                |foe destroyers                        |   |
|A great community of            |The bodhisattvas                      |   |
|bodhisattvas                    |                                      |   |
|At that time, the Bhagavan was  |The Buddha conferred blessing to          |
|absorbed in the concentration on|Shariputra, while remaining in meditative |
|the categories of phenomena     |equipoise focusing on emptiness, and with |
|called “Profound Perception     |the concentration on the categories of    |
|                                |phenomena called “Profound Perception”.   |
|                                |The blessing caused Shariputra to engage  |
|                                |in question and answer session with       |
|                                |Avalokiteshvara.                          |
|Also, at that time, the         |Here it shows the condition for           |
|bodhisattva mahasattva arya     |Shariputra’s questions. While Buddha was  |
|Avalokiteshvara looked upon the |in meditative equipoise, Avalokiteshvara  |
|very practice of the profound   |was also in meditative equipoise looking  |
|perfection of wisdom and beheld |upon the very practice of the profound    |
|those five aggregates also as   |perfection of wisdom and beheld those five|
|empty of inherent existence.    |aggregates also as empty of inherent      |
|                                |existence.                                |
|                                |After this, Shariputra begin his          |
|                                |questions.                                |
|Then, through the power of      |Shariputra did not ask the question merely|
|Buddha, the venerable Shariputra|through his own volition, but rather he   |
|said this to the bodhisattva    |asked the question to Avalokiteshvara due |
|mahasattva arya Avalokiteshvara:|to the power of Buddha.                   |
|“How should any son of the      |The Chinese translation that is purported |
|lineage train who wishes to     |to be the translation of the Sanskrit     |
|practice the activity of the    |version, the “daughter of the lineage” is |
|profound perfection of wisdom?” |also mentioned.                           |
|                                |In the Tibetan translation from the       |
|                                |Sanskrit version, only “son of the        |
|                                |lineage” is mentioned.                    |
|                                |If only the “son of the lineage” is       |
|                                |mentioned, then this refers to the person |
|                                |to whom the question is asked. In this    |
|                                |case is Avalokiteshvara.                  |
|                                |The ‘who’ would cover both the sons and   |
|                                |daughters of the lineage, because the     |
|                                |person who is going to practice the       |
|                                |Perfection of Wisdom is not just          |
|                                |Avalokiteshvara, basically any sons or    |
|                                |daughters of the lineage.                 |
|He said that and bodhisattva    |                                      |Tra|
|mahasattva arya Avalokiteshvara |                                      |nsi|
|said this to the venerable      |                                      |tio|
|Sharadvatiputra: “ Shariputra,  |                                      |n  |
|any son of the lineage or       |                                      |   |
|daughter of the lineage who     |                                      |   |
|wishes to practice the activity |                                      |   |
|of the profound perfection of   |                                      |   |
|wisdom should look upon it like |                                      |   |
|this,                           |                                      |   |
|, correctly and repeatedly      |                            |Brief    |Act|
|beholding those five aggregates |                            |explanati|ual|
|also as empty of inherent       |                            |on       |Exp|
|nature.                         |                            |         |lan|
|                                |                            |         |ati|
|                                |                            |         |on |
|“Form is empty.  Emptiness is   |The way to meditate on      |Detailed |   |
|form.  Emptiness is not other   |emptiness while on the Path |explanati|   |
|than form; form is also not     |of Accumulation and the Path|on       |   |
|other than emptiness. In the    |of Preparation.             |         |   |
|same way, feeling,              |                            |         |   |
|discrimination, compositional   |                            |         |   |
|factors, and consciousness are  |                            |         |   |
|empty.                          |                            |         |   |

Summary:
According to CMWS, no phenomena exist from their own side, but all
phenomena are posited as mere appearances of the mind, just like the
appearance of a dream elephant to the dream consciousness. Of course,
phenomena do exist. How do they exist? All phenomena exist as something
that is merely imputed by thought. They exist as mere appearances to a
conventional consciousness. The word ‘merely ‘eliminates inherently
existence.
In the example of mistakenly a coil of rope to be a snake due to certain
conditions, the coil of rope appearing as a snake is not coming from the
side of the rope. It is a fabrication of the mind. The mind imputes the
snake. This shows that the snake is imputed by mind. It has nothing to do
with the coil of rope.
What is this ‘I’ in the thought apprehending ‘I’?  Just like the appearance
of a coil of rope as a snake, the ‘I’ is the same in that it is a mere
appearance to the mind.
According to the CMWS, the ‘I’ is that which is merely imputed in
dependence upon the basis of designation, the aggregates. The five
aggregates (form, feeling, discrimination, compositional factors and
consciousness) are the basis of designation of the person. In dependence
upon the aggregates, the ‘I’ is merely imputed.
The ‘I’ is not one with the aggregate and the ‘I’ is not inherently
different from the aggregates. The ‘I’ does exists but I’ does not exist
from the side of the aggregates. The ‘I’ is that which is merely imputed in
dependence upon the aggregates, just as how the snake is merely imputed
upon the coil of rope.
So, phenomena do not exist from the side of the basis of designation.
Phenomena are not the basis of designation. Phenomena are that which are
posited by a conventional consciousness.
The mind apprehending a coil of rope as snake is a wrong consciousness
because the coil of a rope is not the snake.
The thought conceiving ‘I’ apprehending ‘I’ is a factually concordant
thought because the ‘I’ does exist.
According to the CMWS, all phenomena are merely imputed by thought.
Anything that is not merely imputed by thought but existing from its own
side or inherent existence is the object of negation.
The mind which conceives phenomena to be inherently existence from their
own side and not being merely imputed by mind is called an apprehension of
true existence.
CMWS says that all phenomena do not exist inherently. They do not exist
from their own side. There isn’t a single atom of inherently existence.
Everything is merely imputed by thought that includes the ‘I’, the self and
person. If we look for the ‘I’ among the aggregates, we will not be able to
find the ‘I’, but this doesn’t mean that we have found the non-existence of
the ‘I’. The analysis should conclude with the understanding that the ‘I’
indeed is not inherently existence.  We should find the non-existence of
the inherently existence ‘I’.
Note that finding that the inherently existence ‘I’ does not exist is not
the same as finding that the ‘I’ does not exist.







