Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/HeartSutra/lesson4.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:52:27.478542
================================================================================


Student: How do bodhisattva superiors on the Mahayana Path of Seeing and
Mahayana Path of Meditation accumulate merits when they are in post-
meditative equipoise?
Answer: There are many ways in which these bodhisattvas go about
accumulating the collections of merit. If you remember from the previous
discussion about the qualities these bodhisattva superiors possess, let us
take the example of the bodhisattva superiors on the 1st ground, Very
Joyful. These bodhisattvas are able to travel in an instant to a hundred
Buddha pure lands, and in an instant, they can send out a hundred
emanations.
The purpose of travelling to the pure lands is to listen to the teaching
from the buddhas.
These bodhisattvas on the 1st ground are able to send out a hundred
emanations. With these emanations, they work for the welfare of sentient
beings.
These are the various ways in which they accumulate the merit. Of course,
these bodhisattvas engage in the practices of the perfections such as the
perfection of generosity, the perfection of ethics, the perfection of
patience, the perfection of joyous perseverance and so forth.
It is said that the bodhisattva superiors on the 1st ground make numberless
prayers, numberless tens of hundreds of thousands of aspirational prayers,
which are very strong and powerful.  It is said that all these numberless
prayers that the bodhisattvas made can be condensed into the Prayer of
Samantabhadra, which is commonly known as The King of Prayers. So it is
said that when we recite and make aspirations using The King of Prayers, it
is very powerful, precisely because this prayer contains the essence of all
the numberless prayers made by the bodhisattvas. That is the Prayer of
Samantabhadra, or commonly known as The King of Prayers.
If you were to condense The King of Prayers, then you will have those two
verses that are commonly recited when we make dedications, for example, the
verse that starts with “just as Samantabhadra and Manjushri know ….”

I have given you a rough explanation of the Mahayana paths and grounds over
the last three lessons. I think most you are aware that in the Heart of the
Perfection of Wisdom Sutra, there is this mantra:
 “The mantra of the Perfection of Wisdom: ‘Tadyatha Gate Gate Paragate
Parasamgate Bodhi Svaha’”
Because now you have some idea of the Mahayana paths and grounds, now we
can look at how the five Mahayana paths can be explained or condensed in
this mantra.
In the mantra ‘Tadyatha Gate Gate Paragate Parasamgate Bodhi Svaha’, there
are ‘gate gate” -two ‘gate’.
When translated into Tibetan, ‘gate’ means go.
Here there are two ‘gate’, so that means ‘go, and go’.
In essence, the first ‘gate’ means to go into the Path of Accumulation.
The second ‘gate’ means to go to the Path of Preparation.
Basically, the first two ‘gate’ means that one has to enter and trains in
the Path of Accumulation and the Path of Preparation. So, the first two
‘gate’ collectively means to train in the Path of Accumulation and the Path
of Preparation.
If you already have some idea of what the Path of Accumulation and the Path
of Preparation are, then it does make more sense when I say that this two
‘gate’ mean to trains in the Path of Accumulation and the Path of
Preparation, isn’t it? In order to really appreciate this first two ‘gate’,
you really have to have some idea of what exactly is the Path of
Accumulation, what happens on the Path of Accumulation, what kind of
qualities are acquired.  Similarly, when we are told that we should go to
the Path of Preparation, it is not going to make any sense unless you have
some idea of what a Path of Preparation is, what does it involve, what kind
of training is required and what qualities that are attained and so forth,
isn’t it?
In one of the previous lesson, I have explained briefly on how the
transition is made from the Path of Accumulation to the Path of
Preparation; when the transition is made, when the bodhisattvas move from
the Path of Accumulation to the Path of Preparation.
What is the boundary between these two paths? Essentially, one has to gain
this special concentration which is a union of calm abiding and special
insight. In general, we say this, but that is not enough. Just achieving a
concentration which is a union of calm abiding and special insight does not
necessary mean you are on the Path of Preparation. However, if one
generates a special concentration which is a union of calm abiding and
special insight focusing on emptiness (the ultimate nature of reality),
then that bodhisattva makes the transition from the Path of Accumulation
into the Path of Preparation. That is very specific.
If you remember that the Mahayana Path of Accumulation is divided into
three:
   1. The Mahayana small Path of Accumulation
   2. The Mahayana middling Path of Accumulation
   3. The Mahayana big Path of Accumulation
The bodhisattvas obviously engage in learning, hearing and reflection, and
work very hard in their practice.
What is their main goal at this point in time when the bodhisattvas on the
Mahayana small Path of Accumulation and the Mahayana middling Path of
Accumulation?
On the Mahayana small Path of Accumulation and the Mahayana middling Path
of Accumulation, the bodhisattvas are trying to use all their available
means in order to generate the wisdom of realizing emptiness.
When the bodhisattvas on the Mahayana big Path of Accumulation, they have
already realized emptiness. They have generated the meditative serenity or
calm abiding focusing on emptiness.
So, on the Mahayana great Path of Accumulation, the bodhisattvas achieve
the meditative serenity or calm abiding focusing on emptiness.
When that bodhisattva achieves the special insight focusing on emptiness,
that bodhisattva makes the transition from the Mahayana great Path of
Accumulation to the Mahayana Path of Preparation.
What is it that enables the bodhisattva on the Mahayana great Path of
Accumulation to make the transition and to cross over into the Mahayana
Path of Preparation?
It is not bodhicitta. It is basically the wisdom of realizing emptiness.
It is the gradual strengthening of wisdom of realizing emptiness, in terms
of depth, profundity, clarity, basically the quality of the mind. As the
quality of the wisdom of realizing emptiness increases, this is how they
move from one milestone to another.
In essence, this is what the bodhisattvas do on the Mahayana Path of
Accumulation and the Mahayana Path of Preparation. Of course there is the
practice of the six perfections but essentially, they are developing their
understanding and their realization of emptiness.  It is the strengthening
of that wisdom of realizing emptiness that enables them to move higher and
higher on the path.
As I mentioned before, when the bodhisattvas on the Mahayana Path of
Preparation are able to start doing something with their apprehension of
true existence, they are able to start harming their ignorance. The
bodhisattvas on the Mahayana Path of Preparation acquire that ability to
harm their manifest conception of true existence.
The great Lama Tsongkhapa said in his Three Principle Aspects of the Path
that without the wisdom of realizing emptiness, even though you have
generated the determination to be free (renunciation) and the mind of
enlightenment (bodhicitta), you cannot cut the root of samsara.
Lama Tsongkhapa said that even if you have bodhicitta, but if you do not
possess the wisdom of realizing emptiness, you cannot do anything, nothing
at all. You cannot even start to damage your ignorance - the root cause of
samsara.  Therefore, the wisdom of realizing emptiness is of utmost
importance. It is this wisdom of realizing emptiness that is the only
antidote to the afflictions/ destructive emotions.
There are five different Mahayana paths.
Why are there these different paths?
In a way these different paths highlights the positive development of that
wisdom of realizing emptiness.
It is highlighting the progress of that particular mind improving in
quality and strength and so forth. Therefore, you have these different
paths. It is the development of the wisdom of realizing emptiness that
becoming better and better.
The whole point of doing any practice, in this case, the whole point of
trying to actualize the paths and travel to the end of the paths is to
destroy the afflictions in our minds and to destroy the destructive
emotions.
In order to destroy the afflictions, you must have the antidote. You must
have the solution. The solution or the antidote has to be powerful enough
to overcome and to destroy these afflictions. The only antidote that can
cut and destroy ignorance is the wisdom of realizing emptiness.
Back to the mantra, after ‘gate gate’ is ‘paragate’.
‘Para’ means the other side.
So ‘paragate’ means to cross over, literally means to ‘go over that side’.
In the case of ‘paragate’, in general ‘para’ means over there.
Here, ‘para’ means Path of Seeing.
So ‘paragate’ means ‘to go’.
Therefore ‘go, go and then go over’.  Literally, ‘go over to the Path of
Seeing.’
The bodhisattva on the Mahayana Path of Accumulation and the Mahayana Path
of Preparation are bodhisattvas, but they are ordinary bodhisattvas. They
are still ordinary beings. Once the bodhisattva enters into the Path of
Seeing, henceforth he is a superior.
So ‘paragate’ is the demarcation between an ordinary being and a superior.
There is a huge difference between an ordinary being and a superior.
Here, an ordinary being is crossing over, going beyond the realm of an
ordinary being.
When the bodhisattvas cross over, he becomes a superior. So that is the
demarcation between an ordinary being and a superior. You could say it is
the demarcation between transcendental and worldly.
On the Mahayana Path of Preparation, the ordinary bodhisattvas meditate on
emptiness.
The Mahayana Path of Preparation is divided into four stages.
On those four stages of Mahayana Path of Preparation, the bodhisattvas
meditate on emptiness -the ultimate nature of reality- in order to suppress
the manifest conception of true existence.
He suppresses the manifest conception of true existence with his wisdom of
realizing emptiness but his wisdom of realizing emptiness is still a
conceptual consciousness; in that he realizes emptiness via meaning
generality.

The perception of emptiness is still based on the meaning generality of
emptiness. As the bodhisattva progresses on the Mahayana Path of
Preparation, the object of emptiness becomes clearer and clearer.  Come the
time when the bodhisattva gains a clear appearance of emptiness, i.e. when
he perceives the object ‘emptiness’ directly for the first time without the
need for any meaning generality or mental image of emptiness, that
bodhisattva enters the Mahayana Path of Seeing.
That is how the bodhisattva makes the transitions from the Mahayana Path of
Preparation to the Mahayana Path of Seeing. This transition is again made
based on the development of that mind realizing emptiness. The transition
is not made based on the bodhicitta. In this case, the mind realizing
emptiness transforms from a conceptual realization of emptiness into a
direct perception of emptiness.
It is only at this point in time that the bodhisattvas, in fact, can be
anyone, acquires for the very first time in their whole existence an actual
antidote that is strong enough to directly counteract the afflictions.
In this case, the bodhisattva very first time gaining this powerful
antidote that is really able to counteract and destroy the afflictions.
What are the things that are and will be abandoned by this wisdom directly
perceiving emptiness?
In the last lesson, you remember that we talked a little bit about the
Mahayana Path of Seeing abandonment and the Mahayana Path of Meditation
abandonment. Of the two, it is the Mahayana Path of Seeing abandonment that
is destroyed first.
When the bodhisattva realize emptiness directly for the first time, that
wisdom directly perceiving emptiness act as the actual antidote to the
Mahayana Path of Seeing abandonment.
What exactly is the Mahayana Path of Seeing abandonment?
It is the intellectually acquired afflictions, perhaps together with their
seeds. These are destroyed or abandoned by the uninterrupted path of the
Mahayana Path of Seeing.
Although at this time, the intellectually acquired afflictions together
with the seeds are destroyed by the uninterrupted path of the Mahayana Path
of Seeing, but the intellectually acquired afflictions are not the root of
samsara. The root of samsara is the innate afflictions.
So the innate afflictions are the final roots of samsara.
From our previous studies, we know that the root of samsara consists of
both an apprehension of the self of person and an apprehension of a self of
phenomena.
Whether it is an apprehension of a self of person or an apprehension of a
self of phenomena, it is the innate forms of these two apprehensions
constitute the root of samsara.
The uninterrupted path of Mahayana Path of Seeing destroys the
intellectually acquired afflictions.  Only after that does the work of
destroying the innate afflictions starts.
It is the wisdom directly perceiving emptiness that is the direct antidote
to both the intellectually acquired afflictions and the innate afflictions.
It is the same wisdom.
In terms of the object that is realized by this wisdom, it is the same. It
is not that the wisdom realizing emptiness that act as an antidote to the
innate afflictions will have a slightly higher realization of emptiness. It
is not like that. The object ‘emptiness’ that is realized by the wisdom is
the same. But there is a difference in terms of the collections of merit
that accompanies this wisdom.
Depending on the collections of merit that accompanies this wisdom,
commensurate with the strength of the accumulation of merit that
accompanies this wisdom, then this wisdom could be stronger. It realizes
the same object ‘emptiness’ but in terms of strength, it is stronger.
After abandoning the intellectually acquired afflictions, the bodhisattva
accumulates merit.
Come the time when the bodhisattva accumulation of merit is powerful enough
to enable his wisdom of directly perceiving emptiness to act as a direct
antidote to the innate afflictions that is when the bodhisattva achieves
the uninterrupted path of the Path of Meditation.
Technically, he achieves the 1st ground uninterrupted path of the Path of
Meditation. That 1st ground uninterrupted path of the Path of Meditation is
the direct antidote to the first of the innate afflictions.
How is the transition made from the Path of Seeing to the Path of
Meditation?
In this case, the transition is made when the bodhisattva wisdom directly
perceiving emptiness becomes powerful enough to act as a direct antidote to
the innate afflictions.
When his wisdom directly perceiving emptiness becomes powerful enough to
act as an antidote to the innate afflictions that is when the bodhisattva
makes a transition from the Path of Seeing to the Path of Meditation. It is
in the chart.
Next is ‘parasamgate’.
‘Sam’ means perfectly or thoroughly.  Thoroughly go beyond or perfectly go
beyond.
‘Parasamgate’ shows the Path of Meditation.
It is saying: ‘From the Path of Seeing to go over or cross over to the Path
of Meditation’.
From ‘paragate’, one makes transitions to ‘parasamgate’, it means crossing
over from the Path of Seeing into the Path of Meditation.
What does this show?
This shows that the bodhisattvas have to move on. They have already
realized emptiness, i.e. they have already seen emptiness, the truth,
directly. You could say that there that is nothing else much to see again
as they already have seen it, but the bodhisattvas do not just sit there.
The bodhisattvas are asked to move on into the Path of Meditation.
What the bodhisattvas do on the Path of Meditation, as if they are
realizing emptiness again in which they have already realized it?
What happens on the path of meditation?
As the word ‘meditation’ suggests, they are meditating on emptiness which
they have already ascertained. So they are familiarizing.
Meditate, in Tibetan, has the connotation ‘to familiarize’. So the
bodhisattvas on the Path of Meditation are familiarizing with what they
have already ascertained from before.
Based on the paths and grounds chart, how many uninterrupted paths are
there?
On the Mahayana Path of Meditation, there are 10 uninterrupted paths, and
each of these ten uninterrupted paths is meditations on emptiness.
After abandoning the intellectually acquired afflictions, the bodhisattvas
meditate on emptiness. They familiarize themselves with what they have
already realized in order to counteract and destroy the innate afflictions.

They destroy the innate afflictions with the meditation on emptiness. Of
course, for them it is the direct perception of emptiness.
As in the chart, there are many uninterrupted paths. All the interrupted
paths up to the end of the 7th ground and entering the 8th ground are Path
of Meditation on emptiness. Those meditations of emptiness are done in
order to destroy the innate afflictions.
When the innate afflictions together with their seeds are destroyed, the
bodhisattvas simultaneously achieved the 8th ground. Once they entered into
the 8th ground, the bodhisattvas have no more afflictions as the seeds of
the afflictions are also destroyed. But there are some obscurations left
over that needs to be removed. Those are the knowledge obscurations that
prevent them from being omniscient.
On the 8th, 9th and 10th grounds, they continue their meditation and
familiarization with emptiness in order to destroy the knowledge
obscurations.
So, you see that in the Path of Meditation, it has quite a lot of things to
do.
Relative to the Path of Meditation, the Mahayana Path of Seeing is
relatively very short.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): Look at the chart, it is very short. Mahayana
Path of Meditation is so many.
The chart is the representation of what happens on the path. Based on the
chart, don’t you see it is implying that the innate afflictions are much
more difficult to overcome than the intellectually acquired afflictions?
The intellectually acquired afflictions are abandoned on the Mahayana Path
of Seeing and it is abandoned by just one uninterrupted path. One
uninterrupted path does all the jobs. The whole works of intellectually
acquired afflictions and together with all its accessions of the 18
generations and so forth, the whole works, everything is destroyed in one
go. There is just one Path of Release.
Based on our previous discussion on the innate afflictions, the innate
afflictions are divided into nine levels. Then there are the knowledge
obscurations which are divided into three. All of them make up the innate
afflictions. In order to just overcome or destroy the afflictive
obscurations, so many uninterrupted paths are needed all the way up to the
end of 7th ground. So many uninterrupted paths are needed even just to
destroy the innate afflictions together with the seeds. After that, another
three uninterrupted paths are needed in order to overcome the imprints of
the afflictions.
‘Bodhi’ means enlightenment.
‘Svaha’ in general means establish or literally, plant the base.
Here it means achieve enlightenment.
So, ‘Bodhi’ means enlightenment. What it shows is Mahayana Path of No-more-
learning.
This mantra “Tadyatha Gate Gate Paragate Parasamgate Bodhi Svaha’” is like
a very short version of The Heart of the Perfection of Wisdom Sutra. If you
want to condense The Heart of the Perfection of Wisdom Sutra, you can
condense into this mantra.

|Tadyatha Gate Gate Paragate Parasamgate Bodhi Svaha’                         |
|Gate gate  |go, and go                       |1st ‘gate’ - To go on the      |
|           |                                 |Mahayana Path of Accumulation. |
|           |                                 |                               |
|           |                                 |2nd ‘gate’ - To go on the      |
|           |                                 |Mahayana Path of Preparation.  |
|Paragate   |‘Para’ - to cross over.          |To go on the Mahayana Path of  |
|           |Literally means to ‘go over that |Seeing.                        |
|           |side’.                           |                               |
|           |Bodhisattvas become Superior     |                               |
|Parasamgate|‘Sam’ means perfectly or         |Go perfectly on the other      |
|           |thoroughly.  Literally,          |shore, the Mahayana Path of    |
|           |thoroughly or perfectly go beyond|Meditation                     |
|Bodhi      |Enlightenment.                   |Go perfectly to the Mahayana   |
|           |                                 |Path of No-more-learning,      |
|           |                                 |enlightenment and be firmly    |
|           |                                 |established                    |
|Svaha      |Establish                        |                               |
|           |Literally, plant the base.       |                               |


Sometimes when we do certain rituals and at those times when there are
needs to recite this particular The Heart of the Perfection of Wisdom
Sutra, for whatever reason if there is lack of time, just reciting the
mantra is said to be sufficient.  If you think about the meaning of the
mantra, and if you have an idea of the paths and grounds, although the
mantra itself is very short, the meaning that is encompassed by this mantra
is huge. There is so many things that one can think about when reciting the
mantra.
This presentation of the mode of progress through these various paths and
grounds are spoken for whom?
It is spoken for those who are desiring or looking for liberation.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): That means not for us. Just joking.
The presentation of the paths and grounds are meant for those who desire or
heartfelt looking for liberation. So, it is for individual, who from the
heart, seeking real happiness and liberation. Then the understanding of
paths and grounds is essential. In fact, it is indispensable.
We did talk about the Buddhadharma or Buddha teaching is of twofold:
   1. Scriptural dharma
   2. Realization dharma
Realization dharma is the main one. Within the realization dharma, there
are so many practices and realizations that one can do and achieve. One of
the most important is the view of reality, having the view of understanding
the realization of emptiness, especially for someone, who in the heart,
really looking for permanent peace and happiness. We say liberation.
What is permanent peace and happiness?
Understanding the realization of ultimate nature of reality/ emptiness is
indispensable and is none negotiable. It is indispensable for such a
person. If you think about it, actually the teaching on emptiness and
especially the view of emptiness/the realization of emptiness that is like
the heart essence of the entire Buddha teachings.
The view of emptiness/the ultimate view of reality is like the essence
(pinnacle, the crest, the heart) of the entire Buddhadharma.  In order to
really understand this and really appreciate this from the heart, you have
to know how important the view of emptiness is. We have been talking about
the paths and grounds and how an individual moves and make transitions from
one milestone to the other milestone on the way to enlightenment. The whole
point of practicing or traversing the paths is to counteract and destroy
the cause of suffering - the afflictions/ destructive emotions. If you look
at all the different milestones, how the transition is made? The transition
is made when their view or the realization of the ultimate nature of
reality progresses and develop. That is how the transition is made. From
this, you can see how important the view of emptiness/ the ultimate nature
of reality is. So, it is indispensable. Without which, there is nothing we
can do to our afflictions.
As said in many great treatises, for the reasons that I have stated, the
correct view of the ultimate nature of reality/emptiness is the very heart
or the essence of the entire Buddhadharma. From your own side, it is
important that you gain an understanding and the conviction in your heart
of how important it is to have the correct view of ultimate nature of
reality/ emptiness. It is important to gain a conviction and an
appreciation in your own heart of how holy and precious such a view is. It
is also important for you to gain a conviction and a desire in your heart
to want to understand and actualize this view.  In order to actualize this
realization dharma, the correct view of reality which is the heart essence
or the pinnacle of all the entire Buddhadharma, you have to depend on the
great treatises; those valid texts that show you how to develop the view.
So you have to depend on the scriptural dharma. In order to realize the
realization dharma, you have to depend on the scriptural dharma. Of all the
so many categories of scriptural dharma, those great treatises and texts
that show the unmistaken meaning of emptiness/ the ultimate nature of
reality are like the best of all the scriptural dharma.
Based on your personal learning and reflection, when you come to understand
for yourself of how our affliction is the main cause of all your miseries
and of all the afflictions you will see how it is the ego-grasping –
incorrect sense of “I” - is the source of all the afflictions, therefore,
all the sufferings and all of the problems that comes from it. When we see
how that is the case and if you see how it is the view of the dependent
arising -the understanding of dependent arising- that will enable you to
destroy the root of all your past, present and future miseries . If you
connect these two points then definitely you will gain a very different
kind of appreciation for the teacher, the founder. In this case is Buddha
Shakyamuni who taught this view of dependent arising, then you will be able
to see for yourself of how your own refuge, in this case is the founder,
the Buddha, is just so different, in the class of his own. You can see for
yourself. From that you develop already a heartfelt faith and appreciation
for Buddha.
From the discussion so far you can see how it is not easy really to gain a
personal conviction in your own object of refuge. We are Buddhist, and we
consider Buddha, the founder, to be our object of refuge. In order to
really to be able to gain a personal conviction that your founder is really
of no competition, he is in the completely different class of his own. In
fact one and the only class, others are not classes at all. In order to
gain that understanding, you really have to gain a conviction in his
teachings especially in all the things that we have talked about; how the
afflictions and especially ego-grasping is the root of all our problems and
how it is only his teaching on the dependent origination and dependent
arising that can destroy the root of all our sufferings. When you see that
only then you will start to gain an appreciation on how great the Buddha
is. Otherwise, it is difficult. For many people, when they think of Buddha,
they probably think that he has no enough power. I mean not as powerful as,
in the traditional Indian context, people think of Brahma and Shiva.
Perhaps in our context, we think of Jade Emperor (and other local deities).
We always think that Buddha doesn’t have much power. We like to pray to all
these different (worldly gods).  This is the sign that we don’t really
understand. When you compare Buddha and other objects of refuge, you have
to think clearly.  Of course, you turn to a refuge in order to solve your
problem. But there are two ways of solving a problem:
   1. Getting at the root and eliminate the problem once and for all.
   2. The usual way of solving is just addressing the symptoms, but not
      really addresses the root cause of the problem.
By relying on these worldly gods, they do help you temporary, but it
doesn’t solve the problem. Therefore, we have to discover for ourselves how
it is our ignorance which is the root of all our problems and how it is
only the Buddha’s presentation on the ultimate nature of reality/emptiness
and, especially, through his teachings on dependent arising is the only
antidote to destroy the root of our sufferings.  When we see this, we put
these two together, then we will begin to realize how precious Buddha is,
how different he is and he is completely in the class of his own. Only then
we really have a deep appreciation and have very different kind of faith
and trust in Buddha. In order to develop such kind of conviction and faith
therefore it is very important to educate ourselves to learn. That is one
of the reasons why I always encourage and persuade all of you to learn and
study. That is the point. You really have to learn.
We need faith before we can aspire to something. We must have faith in a
particular object or goal before we can aspire. It is only with a strong
aspiration for that goal, only then will that translate into effort. When
we put in effort we will achieve the goal. So, in order to have the goal,
we need to have joyous perseverance. A real sustain effort can only come
from a stable aspiration. Stable aspiration cannot arise without a stable
faith. There are many different levels of qualities and many different
kinds of faith. The faith that we are talking about here is the faith that
arises from understanding. You see the point? In order to have this kind of
faith, we have to investigate, learn and study. Whatever you are doing here
is a supporting condition in order for you to move towards having real
faith, which will then help you to stabilize aspiration, which then
translate into stable effort and the result.
We are actually very fortunate even to have this opportunity to hear and to
reflect on the teachings of the Buddha. Even if we don’t achieve anything
spectacular out of this endeavor or we don’t achieve any realization, just
having an opportunity to learn and to have some understanding of these
teachings makes us really very fortunate.


Comes the day when we are able to develop this real faith and trust in the
Buddha, the trust that comes from understanding, then we could say that
this is one of the ways that we have actually make our current human life,
this human existence, meaningful. Therefore we should try to make sure that
whatever we do here, educating ourselves through learning and through
reflection, becomes the supporting cause for us to move closer and closer
to generate this stable and unshakeable conviction and faith.
Many great masters of the past have said that of all the dharma
understandings that an individual can have, the highest understanding is
the understanding of dependent arising. The heart of all the realizational
dharma is the mind realizing emptiness. The best of the scriptural dharma
is the great treatises and the teachings that show the meaning of dependent
arising which points to emptiness. Based on those scriptural dharma,  come
the day when we gain an actual correct understanding of emptiness, that
understanding that we will come to possess in the future is the highest of
all the dharma knowledge that we can have.
If you remember from our past discussion on the four Buddhist tenets, isn’t
it the case that all four Buddhist tenets are equivocal in saying that real
permanent peace and happiness, liberation from samsara, can only be
attained when an individual realizes selflessness. The four Buddhist tenets
differ as what constitute the view of emptiness but they all are the same
in saying that without realizing selflessness there is no way to progress
on the path to liberation. In fact, the modes of progress on the path to
liberation are explained primarily on the realization of selflessness.
All four Buddhist tenets accept the four seals that attest a particular
doctrine is the teaching of Buddha.
The four seals are:
   1. All compounded phenomena are impermanent
   2. All contaminated phenomena are misery
   3. All phenomena are empty and selfless.
   4. Nirvana is peace
If you look at the four seals, the third seal ‘All phenomena are empty and
selfless’ is extremely important because it is only on the basis of the
third seal then you can have the fourth seal ‘Nirvana is peace.’
How peace is achieved? How is peace possible? How is nirvana possible? How
is nirvana achieved?
That whole explanation has to come based on the understanding of the third
seal: How all phenomena are empty and selfless.
We can relate the four seals to the four noble truths in this way:

|Four seals                       |Four noble truths   |
|All compounded phenomena are     |True origin         |
|impermanent                      |                    |
|All contaminated phenomena are   |True suffering      |
|misery                           |                    |
|All phenomena are empty and      |True path           |
|selfless                         |                    |
|Nirvana is peace                 |True cessation      |


Without the understanding of how all phenomena are selfless, how all
phenomena lack a self, we are not going to have the nirvana that is peace.
Therefore, the realization of selflessness is indispensable in achieving
nirvana/liberation and enlightenment. Therefore, all the four Buddhist
tenets assert these four seals.
All four Buddhist tenets assert the four seals. That mean they all assert
that all phenomena are empty and selfless. Having said that all four
Buddhist tenets have different opinion as to what that means, they have
different explanation of what exactly selflessness is, as you saw in the
previous module on Tenets. The meaning of selflessness is just different as
everybody has their own take.
In short, the explanation of emptiness by the CMWS is the most correct and
to the point. It is the most profound and most correct. According to them,
all phenomena, person and otherwise, are empty of existing inherently. The
explanation of selflessness by the CMWS is really the correct one and which
accord with reality. Having said that, it is quite natural for people to
ask; “Why do I have to study all these? Just tell me the Prasangika. Why
tell me all these long grandmother stories?” Naturally you will think: “Why
tell me so much? Just tell me the essence, the executive summary.”
Why are there these different presentations of selflessness? This is
because there are differing views as to what constitute the root of
samsara. Everybody agrees that the grasping of the self is the root of
samsara but people have different opinions as to what grasping at the self
means. In short, there are four different views as to what really the root
of samsara is. So, when they propose a solution for this, it will not be
just one solution but there will be going to have four proposals. That is
the reason why there are four different presentations of what selflessness
is. It is CMWS’ explanation of what the root of samsara is the clearest,
most profound but yet very subtle. Since their presentation of what exactly
the root of all our problems is so precise, so profound but yet so subtle,
this make their presentation of selflessness the best. Since they have
identified the problem correctly then obviously the solution they proposed
on the view of selflessness is the most profound, most correct, most
refined, and most subtle.
The teaching mentions the extensive great benefit of hearing the teaching
on emptiness and reflecting on emptiness. According to the Three Hundreds
Verses of Perfection of Wisdom, it gives an example of someone who makes
offerings of the seven kinds of precious jewels. How many of such seven
kinds of precious jewel? The seven precious jewels that are enough to fill
the entire existence; not just this universe, not just this galaxy but
whatever there is space. If you think about the merits of filling the whole
of existence with the seven kinds of precious jewels and then offer that to
all the Buddhas, there is no need to talk about the amount of merits that
one can accumulate. When these merits are compared to the merits of someone
who just having taken a four-lines verse from the sutra teaching on
emptiness and teaching to others, these merits are much greater compared to
the earlier example.
In general, it is good and useful to remember the benefits of doing a
particular thing, it motivates you. Just based on this quotation, you have
some understandings of the merits that you accumulate just by learning
about emptiness, thinking about emptiness, it is much more than filling up
the whole world (with precious jewels). The point is that you have to
remember because there are people, who in the course of the study, get
bored and they think, “What is the point of learning all this intellectual
garbage? Why I am doing all these?  Would it be better if I do the hundred
thousand prostrations or I do the hundred thousand mandala offerings so
that I can accumulate merits?” However, if you think about this particular
quotation, there is no comparison, assuming that the Buddha doesn’t lie. If
you think about it, the Buddha probably doesn’t lie. That is why you think
about the benefits and the merits of learning and reflecting on
selflessness. If you ascertain for yourself that indeed there are these
benefits and indeed there are such merits, of course you will find your
effort at learning and reflecting on emptiness to be worthwhile. Then you
will realize that you are damn lucky and fortunate. Then you are able to
rejoice.
If you have an overview of the importance of realizing or understanding
emptiness based on our earlier discussion, how the root of all our problems
is the ignorance and how the only antidote that can destroy ignorance is
the mind realizing emptiness which has to come from understanding dependent
origination or dependent arising, then you will be able to appreciate the
benefit that is mentioned in this sutra, for example, the benefits that you
can get.

