Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/HeartSutra/HeartSutra/Paths & Grounds according to Middle Way Consequence School.pdf
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:52:29.635042
================================================================================

 1 Mahayana Paths and Grounds  
 according  to the Middle Way  Consequence School  
 
PATH OF THE ORDINARY BODHISATTVA  
 
When one travels on the path of accumulation and path of preparation, one accumulates merit for the 
1st great countless aeon  
 
 Mahayana P ath of Accumulation  is divided into 3:  
 
Small  
 
When one generates the altruistic aspiration to enlightenment (bodhicitta), one enters the 
Mahayana path and one becomes a bodhisattva.  
 
Middle  
 
When one achieves the middle path of accumulation, one’s bodhicittta will never degenerate 
henceforth.  
 
Great  
 
One achieves the meditative stabilization  of the stream of doctrine  
 
 
 Mahayana P ath of Preparation  is divided into 4. Each is further divided into 3.  
 
When one achieves the union of calm ab iding and special insight focu sing on emptiness, one enters 
the path of preparation.  
 
This division into 4 is posited by the way of the stages of gradual diminishment of the elaborations of 
dualistic appearance at the time of setting in equipoise on emptiness and by the way of the stag es of 
newly attaining a special capacity to overcome the 4 manifest conceptions of apprehender and 
apprehended as inherently existent.  
 
Heat  
 
One overcomes the manifest form of the conceptions of the thoroughly afflicted class of 
phenomena as truly existen t. 
 
 Peak  
 
One overcomes the manifest form of the conceptions of completely purified phenomena as truly 
existent.  
 
 2  Forbearance  
 
One overcomes manifest form of the conception of the true existence of the apprehender that 
apprehends the person as substantia lly existent.  
 
 Supreme Dharma  
 
One overcomes the manifest form of conception of the true existence of the apprehender that 
apprehends the person as imputedly existent.  
 
 
PATH OF THE BODHISATTVA SUPERIOR  
 
When one travels from the 1st ground to the 7th ground, one accumulates merit for the 2nd great 
countless aeon.  
 
The 1st ground to the 7th ground are called impure grounds . 
 
When one travels from the 8th ground to the 10th ground, one accumulates merit for the 3rd great 
countless aeon.  
 
The 8th, 9th and 10th grounds are called pure grounds . 
 
 Mahayana P ath of Seeing / 1st Ground – Very Joyful  
 
One directly perceives emptiness and one enters the 1st ground uninterrupted path of seeing 
which is the direct antidote to the acquired afflictive obstructions includ ed in the desire, form 
and formless realms. Simultaneously one achieves the 1st ground. There are 8 uninterrupted path s 
of seeing.  
  
One achieves the 1st ground path of release when  the acquired afflictive  obstructions are 
abandoned.  There are 8 paths of release.  
 
When one rises from the 1st ground path of release, one achieves the 1st ground post equipoise 
primordial awareness.  
 
In the post meditative session one accumulates merit in order to abandon the gross of the big 
innate afflictive obstruction.  
 
(Uninterrupted paths are the direct antidotes that destroy the seeds of afflictions. A distinct cessation 
comes into being with the removal of each form of affliction. A path of release immediately follows each of 
the uninterrupted paths. These paths are sai d to maintain the conditions of abandonment that are brought 
about by the uninterrupted paths. Uninterrupted paths are like "Expelling thieved of the mental afflictions" 
and path of release "closes the door on them, preventing their return")  
 
 
 3  Mahayana Path of Meditation  
 
When sufficient merit has been accumulated, one enters the 1st ground uninterrupted path of 
meditation  which is the direct antidote to the gross of the big innate afflictive obstruction.  
 
2nd Ground  - Stainless  
 
One achieves the 2nd groun d path of release when the gross of the bi g innate afflictive 
obstruction is abandoned.  
  
When one rises from the 2nd ground path of release, one achieves the 2nd ground post equipoise 
primordial awareness.  
 
In the post meditative session one accumulates m erit in order to abandon the subtle of the big 
innate afflictive obstruction.  
 
When sufficient merit has been accumulated, one enters the uninterrupted path of the last 
moment of the second ground  that is the direct antidote to the subtle of the big innate  afflictive 
obstruction.  
 
3rd Ground - Luminous  
 
One achieves the 3rd ground path of release when the subtle of the bi g innate afflictive 
obstruction is abandoned.  
  
When one rises from the 3rd ground path of release, one achieves the 3rd ground post equip oise 
primordial awareness.  
 
In the post meditative session one accumulates merit in order to abandon the middling of the big 
innate afflictive obstruction.  
 
When sufficient merit has been accumulated, one enters the uninterrupted path of the last 
moment of  the third ground  that is the direct antidote to the middling of the big innate afflictive 
obstruction.  
 
4th Ground - Radiant  
 
One achieves the 4th ground path of release when the middling of the bi g innate afflictive 
obstruction is abandoned.  
  
When one r ises from the 4th ground path of release, one achieves the 4th ground post equipoise 
primordial awareness.  
 
In the post meditative session one accumulates merit in order to abandon the small  
of the big innate afflictive obstruction.  
 4 When sufficient merit has been accumulated, one enters the uninterrupted path of the last 
moment of the fourth ground that is the direct antidote to the small of the big innate afflictive 
obstruction.  
 
5th Ground  - Difficult to Learn  
 
One achieves the 5th ground path of release  when the small of the bi g innate afflictive obstruction 
is abandoned.  
  
When one rises from the 5th ground path of release, one achieves the 5th ground post equipoise 
primordial awareness.  
 
In the post meditative session one accumulates merit in order to abandon the big of the middling 
innate afflictive obstruction.  
 
When sufficient merit has been accumulated, one enters the uninterrupted path of the last 
moment of the fifth ground  that is the direct antidote to the big of the middling innate afflictive 
obstruction.  
 
6th Ground  - Manifest  
 
One achieves the 6th ground path of release when the big of the middlin g innate afflictive 
obstruction is abandoned.  
  
When one rises from the 6th ground path of release, one achieves the 6th ground post equipoise 
primord ial awareness.  
 
In the post meditative session one accumulates merit in order to abandon the middling of 
middling innate afflictive obstruction.  
 
When sufficient merit has been accumulated, one enters the uninterrupted path of the last 
moment of the sixth ground  that is the direct antidote to the middling of middling innate afflictive 
obstruction.  
 
7th Ground  - Gone Afar  
 
One achieves the first path of release of the seventh ground when the middling of middlin g 
innate afflictive obstruction is abandoned.  
  
When one rises from the first path of release of the seventh ground, one achieves the first post 
equipoise primordial awareness of the 7th ground.  
 
In the post meditative session one accumulates merit in order to abandon the small of middling 
innate afflic tive obstruction.  
 
 5 When sufficient merit has been accumulated, one enters the uninterrupted path of the seventh 
ground  that is the direct antidote to the small of middling innate afflictive obstruction.  
 
One achieves the second path of release of the seven th ground when the small of middlin g 
innate afflictive obstruction is abandoned.  
 
When one rises from the second path of release of the 7th ground, one achieves the second post 
equipoise primordial awareness of the 7th ground.  
 
In the post meditative sessi on one accumulates merit in order to abandon the group of small 
innate afflictive obstruction.  
 
When sufficient merit has been accumulated, one enters the uninterrupted path of the seventh 
ground  of the last moment that is the direct antidote to the group of small innate afflictive 
obstruction (big of the small, middling of small and small of small).  
 
8th Ground - Immovable  
 
One achieves the path of release of the 8th ground when the group of small innate afflictive 
obstructions is  abandoned . One abandons c ompletely all afflictions  and their seeds.  
 
When one rises from the 8th ground path of release, one achieves the 8th ground post equipoise 
primordial awareness.  
 
In the post meditative session one accumulates merit in order to abandon the gross of the big 
obstruction to omniscience.  
 
When sufficient merit has been accumulated, one enters the uninterrupted path of the last 
moment of the eighth ground  that is the direct antidote to the gross of the big obstruction to 
omniscience.  
 
9th Ground Excellent Intelli gence  
 
One achieves the path of release of the 9th ground when the gross of the big obstruction to 
omniscience  is abandoned . 
. 
When one rises from the 9th ground path of release, one achieves the 9th ground post equipoise 
primordial awareness.  
 
In the post  meditative session one accumulates merit in order to abandon the subtle of the big 
obstruction to omniscience.  
 
When sufficient merit has been accumulated, one enters the uninterrupted path of the last 
moment of the ninth ground  that is the direct antidot e to the subtle of the big obstruction to 
omniscience.  
 6 10th Ground  - Cloud of Dharma  
 
One achieves the first path of release of the 10th ground  when the subtle of the  big obstruction to 
omniscience is abandoned.  
 
When one rises from the first path of relea se of the 10th ground, one achieves the first post 
equipoise primordial awareness of the 10th ground.  
 
In the post meditative session one accumulates merit in order to abandon the middling 
obstruction to omniscience.  
 
When sufficient merit has been accumul ated, one enters the first uninterrupted path of the tenth 
ground  that is the direct antidote to the middling of the obstruction to omniscience.  
 
One achieves the second path of release of the 10th ground  when the midd ling obstruction to 
omniscience is aba ndoned.  
 
When one rises from the second path of release of the 10th ground, one achieves the second post 
equipoise primordial awareness of the 10th ground.  
 
In the post meditative session one accumulates merit in order to abandon the small obstruction 
to omniscience.  
 
When sufficient merit has been accumulated, one enters the second uninterrupted path of the 
tenth ground  that is the direct antidote to the small obstruction to omniscience.  
 
 
 Mahayana Path of No More Learning  
 
When one abandons the small obst ruction to omniscience, one at tains the state of Buddhahood 
which  is also known as the All Radiant Ground.  One becomes a Buddha Superior.  
 
 
 