Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Engaging in the Deeds of a Bodhisattva/BD_ChI_IV_CommGesheChonyi.pdf
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:52:27.418954
================================================================================

 
 
 
 
 
FPMT  BASIC PROGRAM  HOMESTUDY   
 
Transcript of the 
 
Oral Commentary to Shantideva’s 
 
  
Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds  
 
by 
 
Geshe Thubten Chonyi 
 
PART ONE: CHAPTER I-V 
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre 
2005 
   
 
  
Translation of the oral comment ary by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme 
Oral commentary transcribed, proofread an d checked by staff and students of ABC 
Root verses from the transl ation by Stephen Batchelor 
 Outline from Gyaltsab Je’s Commentary tran slated by Ven. Losang Sopa (Bob Miller) 
Edited for Basic Program Homestudy by Ol ga Planken, FPMT Ed ucation Department, 
August 2006  
 
 
 
 
   
Transcript of the oral commentary: 
© Geshe Thubten Chonyi, Amitabha Buddhist Centre & FPMT, Inc. 
August 2006 
All rights reserved 
   
The Subject Headings from Gyaltsab Je’s 
Commentary to Shantideva’s ‘Eng aging in the Bodhisattva Deeds’: 
© FPMT, Inc. 
August 2006 
All rights reserved 
 
  
No part of this work may be reproduced in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, 
including photocopying, recording, or by any information storage and retrieval system or 
technologies now known or later develo ped, without permission in writing  
from Geshe Thubten Chonyi, Amitabha Buddhist Centre 
and FPMT, Inc. 
 
    
 
 
 
Note from the editor 
 
The root verses  are quoted in their entirety from A Guide to the Bodhis attva’s Way of Life , with the 
permission of the translator, Stephen Batchelor. (Published: Library of Tibetan Works and 
Archives, Dharamsala, 1979)  
Two changes to the original terminology have  been made throughout the translation: sentient 
beings replaces creatures , while child replaces son in epithets, for example, ‘Conqueror’s son’, or 
‘Buddha’s son’. Other slight amendments to th e root verses (made for the Basic Program at 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre) have b een marked with an asterisk.
 
 
The root verses are centered, italicized, and mark ed by the chapter and verse numbers in square 
brackets. 
 
The outlines are from The Subject Headings from Gyaltsab Je’s  Commentary to Shantideva’s ‘Engaging 
in the Bodhisattva Deeds’, translated by Ven. Losang Sopa (Bob Miller), August 2006. They were 
used for the transcripts with permission  from the FPMT Education Department.  
 
The outlines are indented, in bold, and have been  slightly amended by the editor and Amitabha 
Buddhist Centre’s interpretor, Ven. Tenzin Gyurme, for the Basic Program at ABC. The 
amendments are also marked with an asterisk. 
 Students and staff of Amitabha Buddhist Centre produced the transcripts; the oral commentary 
was transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek, Vivien Ng and Angie Xiao; the transcripts were proofread 
and checked by Fiona O’Shaughnessy, Cecilia Tson g, Tara Dhar, Tara Hasnain, and Yap Siew 
Kee.  The transcripts were further prepared for FP MT Basic Program Homestudy by the editor. 
 Olga Planken,  FPMT Education Department, August 2006.  
 
1 Transcripts of the Commentary by Geshe Chonyi 
on Shantideva’s  
Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
 
Lesson 1– chapter 1, verse 1 
Introduction 
The teaching based on the text Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds  authored by the great bodhisattva 
Shantideva is an unmistaken teaching. The bodhisattva Shantideva himself had generated 
bodhicitta in his mental continuum and on this  basis he engaged in the practice of the six 
perfections. This text was composed based on his own experiences and realizations.  
 
In the great treatises composed by the holy mast ers of the past, there is always a promise of 
composition at the beginning of the text. The purp ose of including such a promise is to carry out 
the fulfilment to complete the composition of the text. In the same way, we should make a 
promise to complete this module (which  covers the first half of the text Engaging in the Bodhisattva 
Deeds ) and bring it to fulfilment through setting a st rong determination. It is very important to 
make very strong aspirational prayers to the guru and meditational deities for the success of 
completing this course. It is also very importan t to dedicate the accumulated merit for the benefit 
of all sentient beings at the end of every session. If we do these continuously, we will definitely be 
of benefit to sentient beings after some time.   
The ten chapters of Shantideva’s text Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds  are a commentary 
explaining the meaning of the often-recited de dication prayer for bodhicitta attributed to 
Nagarjuna: 
May the precious bodhi mind 
Not yet born arise and grow, 
May that born have no decline, 
But increase forever more. 
 The ten chapters of the Engaging in the Bodhisattvas’ Deeds  (Bodhisattvacaryavatara ) are: 
1. Explaining the benefits of bodhicitta [The Benefits of the Awakening Mind] 
2. Confessing negativities [Disclosure of Evil] 
3. Thoroughly embracing bodhicitta [Fu ll Acceptance of the Awakening Mind] 
4. Conscientiousness  
5. Relying on vigilance [Guarding Alertness] 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre       Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
F P M T  B a s i c  P r o g r a m                I n t r o d u c t i o n  
 
 
2 6. Patience 
7. Joyous perseverance [Enthusiasm] 
8. Concentration [Meditation] 
9. Wisdom 
10. Dedication  
 
The first two lines of the prayer explain the first three chapters of  the text, presenting the method 
to generate bodhicitta in our mind. Not yet born arise and grow – this indicates the generation of 
bodhicitta which we have not ye t generated before. There must be a means in order for us to 
generate such a bodhicitta mind. The means is that we must first contemplate the benefit of 
having such a mind before we can generate  bodhicitta in our mental continuum. The 
contemplation on the benefits of bodhicitta will increase enthusiasm for developing the 
bodhicitta mind.  
The first chapter, Explaining the benefits of bodhicitta , talks about the advantag es of generating this 
bodhicitta (the altruistic to achieve enlightenment for the benefit of all sentient beings).  When 
we understand the advantages of having the bodh icitta mind, it will inspire us to go for it.  
 The second chapter, Confessing negativities , is to get rid of all obstructing factors, obstacles or 
accumulated negativities before we can generate bo dhicitta in our mental continuum. This is like 
cleaning our house and keeping it neat before we invite a very important person, such as king, to 
our house. If the house is not clean, the invited guest will probably not come at all. In the same 
manner, if we do not purify those negativities accumulated in the past, it will be difficult for us to 
generate bodhicitta in our mental continuum. Theref ore it is important for us to purify our mind 
of these negativities. 
 
The third chapter, Thoroughly embracing bodhicitta , explains how to gather favourable conditions 
for developing bodhicitta in our mind. Favourable  conditions mean accumulating the collections 
of merit such as making offerings. 
 
The third line of the prayer, May that born have no decline , is explained from chapter 4 to 6 on 
how to prevent the bodhicitta in the mental co ntinuum from degenerating. These three chapters 
indicate the method for generating the antidotes. It is insufficient just to prevent the generated 
bodhicitta from degenerating; we must also strive to increase it as well. This is being mentioned 
in the last line of the prayer: But increase fore ver more. For this to happen, we must rely on 
joyous perseverance, concentration & wisdom as in chapters 7 to 9 of this text.  
 
In summary, the text Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds  is divided into three main sections along 
the lines of the prayer a ttributed to Nagarjuna: 
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre       Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
F P M T  B a s i c  P r o g r a m                I n t r o d u c t i o n  
 
 
3 The first three chapters are:  
1.  Explaining the benefits of bodhicitta,   
2.  Confessing negativities  
3.  Thoroughly embracing bodhicitta  These are the methods for generating bodh icitta that has not yet been generated 
 The following three chapters are: 4.  Conscientious    5.  Relying on vigilance 6.  Patience  These are the methods to prevent bodhicitta from degenerating. 
 The next three chapters:  7.  Joyous perseverance 8.  Concentration  9.  Wisdom  These are the methods to increase bodh icitta that had been degenerated. 
 The last chapter:  10.  Dedication  This is a concluding prayer for dedication.  The bodhisattva deeds summarise the practice of the 6 perfections. The fi rstst two perfections, 
the perfection of generosity and perfection of et hics are not treated as separate chapters. Some 
commentaries mention that generosity is being taug ht in chapter five (Relying on vigilance) but 
some other commentaries mention that generosity is being taught in chapter ten: dedication. 
(Geshela thinks that it should be covered in ch apter five.) The remaining perfections (patience, 
joyous perseverance, concentration and wisdom) ar e covered in separate chapters in this text. 
 Due to our limited minds, we may feel that it is difficult for us to generate the bodhicitta mind. 
When we recite this dedication prayer, bodhicitta seems to be just an object of the prayer. But by 
using scriptural authority, through valid quotat ions, and through logic and reasoning, we can 
conclude that it is possible to generate the mi nd of bodhicitta. This depends on many factors 
such as the amount of effort we put in and how we approach this practice. As explained in the 
previous module [Lam rim], the methods for genera ting bodhicitta are the seven cause-and-effect 
personal instruction and exchanging self and others.  The main body of this commentary is divided into four outlines: 
 
1   The meaning of the title 
2   The translator's homage May the precious bodhi min d 
Not yet born arise and grow,   
May that born have no decli ne, 
But increase forever more . 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre       Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
F P M T  B a s i c  P r o g r a m                I n t r o d u c t i o n  
 
 
4 3   The meaning of the text 
4   The conclusion 
1  The meaning of the title 
The original Sanskrit title of this text is Bodhisattvacaryavatara . 
In English this can be rendered as Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds . 
 
Of the word “bodhi”, which is byang chub  (jang chub) in Tibetan, byang  means to purify – this 
indicates that all the obstructions to liberati on and obstructions to omniscience have been 
completely purified in the state of enlightenment. Chub  means to realise all good qualities. 
“Sattva” is sems dpa  (sem pa) in Tibetan; sems dpa  means the heroic one, which shows that the 
state of mind of the bodhisattva is very cour ageous, of strong determination and with great 
compassion for sentient beings. 
2  The translator's homage 
Homage or prostration to all the buddhas and bodh isattvas - such homage is in accordance with 
the tradition laid down by the gr eat Dharma kings with the intentio n for the reader to identify to 
which “basket” [pitaka] of Buddha’s teachings the or iginal text belonged. In this case homage has 
been made to the buddhas an d bodhisattvas because the Bodhisattvacaryavatara  belongs to the 
sutra pitaka. 
 
Texts are classified in this way as follows: 
• vinaya pitaka – dealing mainly with the higher training in ethics, then homage is paid to 
the omniscient one 
• sutra pitaka – dealing mainly with the higher training in  concentration, then homage is 
paid to the buddhas and bodhisattvas 
• abhidharma pitaka – dealing mainly with the higher training in wisdom, then homage is 
to be paid to youthful Manjughosha, the embodiment of enlightened wisdom. 
 
The purpose of the translator paying homage to  the buddhas and bodhisattvas is to remove 
obstacles and ensure completion of their work. 
3  The meaning of the text  
A The act of introducing the explanation of the stages of the Mahayana path 
B The actual explanation of the stages of the path 
3A The act of introducing the explanation of the stages of the Mahayana path 
1  Expression of worship 2  The pledge to explain [this material] 
3  Expressing humility and how Shantideva was inspired to compose [this text] 
3A1 Expression of worship 
A The purpose 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre       Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
F P M T  B a s i c  P r o g r a m                I n t r o d u c t i o n  
 
 
5 B A short expression of worship 
C The meaning of these words 
[1,1a] 
Respectfully I prostrate myself to the Sugatas 
Who are endowed with the Dharmakaya 
As well as to their Noble Children 
And to all who are worthy of veneration 
 
The actual text begins with Shantideva paying homage to the Three Jewels - the Buddha, Dharma 
and Sangha. We should go for refuge and make  offerings to the Three Jewels and entrust 
ourselves to the Buddha, Dharma and Sangha for success in whatever we do; whether standing, 
walking, sitting etc. If we do th is at the beginning of each activi ty, this will help to pacifying any 
potential obstacles that might arise. This is the uncommon practice of the Mahayana refuge.  
3A1A The purpose 
The purposes of Shantideva paying homage to the three jewels are threefold: to accord with the 
tradition of the past masters, to eliminate the ob stacles that might arise while composing the text 
and as a cause for attaining definite goodness. 
3A1B  A short expression of worship 
Besides making prostration to the Three Jewels, one should also make prostrations to all suitable 
objects of veneration; including one’s abbot, pr eceptor and all those worthy of veneration.  
3A1C   The meaning of these words 
Su – bliss, goodness, excellent; gata – gone ; sugata  means “one who has gone to bliss”. One can 
explain the word sugata  from the perspective of the qualitie s of abandonment or the qualities of 
realisation. The qualities of abandonment have  three characteristics: good abandonment, 
irreversible abandonment and thorough aban donment. Abandonment means exhaustion of 
afflictions. The qualities of realisation have th ree characteristics: knower, stable knower and 
complete knower. The dharmakaya – the truth body of the Sugata refers to  the natural purity of 
the Buddha’s mind and the mind of the Buddha th at is free of all adventitious obscurations. 
Sugata refers to the Buddha Jewel, dharmakaya refe rs to the truth body of the Buddha and is the 
Dharma Jewel, noble children refers to the arya bodhisattvas and is the Sangha Jewel.  
 After paying homage to the Three Jewels, next comes the promise of composition:  
 
[1,1b] 
Here I shall explain how to engage in  the vows of the Buddha’s Children, 
The meaning of which I have condensed in accordance with the scriptures. 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre       Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
F P M T  B a s i c  P r o g r a m                I n t r o d u c t i o n  
 
 
6 Lesson 2 – chapter 1, verse 1-4 
3A1C The meaning of these words 
Su – bliss, goodness, excellent, gata – gone; s ugata  means ‘one gone to bliss’. One can examine 
the word sugata from the perspective of the qualities of abandonment or the qualities of 
realisation.  
 When we examine the word sugata  from the perspective of the qu alities of abandonment, this 
refers to the Buddha having achieved the st ate of abandonment of the two obstructions 
(obstructions to liberation and obstructions to omniscience). The qualities of abandonment have 
three characteristics: good or excellent abandonm ent, irreversible abandonment and thorough or 
complete abandonment.  Good abandonment  refers to the Buddha having  completely achieved the state of 
abandonment, which is the exhaustion of all the a fflictions (obstructions to liberation). This is 
called good abandonment because it is supe rior to the non-Buddhists. This state of 
abandonment can never be achieved by the non-Buddhist. Irreversible abandonment  means that 
the Sugata has achieved the state that will neve r fall back to cyclic existence again. This 
irreversible abandonment is supe rior to the state that the stre am-enterer and once-returner are 
abiding in. (Stream- enterer refers to a superior being on the Hinayana path  of seeing, who  will 
never  be reborn in the three lower realms again.  Once-returner refers to a superior being on the 
Hinayana path of meditation who will return to the desire realm on ly one more time). Thorough 
abandonment  refers to the state of abandonment achi eved by the Buddha that is characterised 
by abandonment of the two obstructions –obstr uctions to liberation and obstructions to 
omniscience. This thorough aban donment is superior to the Hi nayana arhat or foe-destroyer. 
(Obstructions to liberation refers to obstruct ions which are afflictions; obstructions to 
omniscience refers to obstructio ns which are not afflictions) 
 When we examine the word sugata from the perspect ive of the qualities of realisation, this refers 
to the omniscient wisdom that realises all phen o m e n a  d i r e c t l y .   T h i s  i s  s u p e r i o r  t o  t h e  n o n -
Buddhists. The qualities of realisation have th ree characteristics: knower, stable knower, 
complete knower.   Knower  refers to the omniscient wisdom of the Buddha that directly sees the meaning of 
selflessness. This knower is superior to the non-Buddhists. Stable knower  refers to the stable 
wisdom of the Buddha that directly sees the mean ing of selflessness and is the antidote to the 
innate afflictions and their seeds
1. This stable knower is superior because this characteristic is not 
                                              
1 All the faults we possess are in cluded in the two obstructions, obstructions to liberation  (also known as afflictive 
obstructions ) and obstructions to omniscience . Obstructions to liberation such as ignorance, anger and 
attachment prevent us from attaining liberation from sams ara. The imprints of the afflictions are obstructions to 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre       Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
F P M T  B a s i c  P r o g r a m                I n t r o d u c t i o n  
 
 
7 possessed by the superior beings of the Hinayana path. Complete knower  refers to the wisdom 
possessed by a buddha that completely understand s all the three paths (the  paths of the hearer, 
solitary realiser and bodhisattva) an d that is also able to teach it di rectly to others.  The Sugata [or 
buddha] is thus superior to an arhat or foe-destroyer. 
 If we look at the meaning of “sugata” from the vi ew point of the path, then  the path to bliss is 
the Mahayana path. The goal is en lightenment.  As bliss is  achi eved as the result of having 
completed the Mahayana path, the Sugata is known as the One Gone to Bliss.  
 The two qualities (qualities of abandonment and qualities of realisation) as possessed by the Sugata are posited as the Buddha Jewel and the Dharma Jewel. From the perspective of the 
Prasangika-Madhyamika school, the natural abando nment, which is one portion of the state of 
abandonment of the Sugata, refers to the fact that  the Buddha’s mind is empty of true existence. 
T h i s  m i n d  i s  a l s o  s e p a r a t e d  o r  f r e e  f r o m  a l l  a d ventitious defilements or afflictions. These two 
make up the state of abandonment achieved by th e Sugata and this is posited as true cessation. 
 True cessation refers to the Buddha’s mind bein g empty of true existence and the Buddha’s mind 
being completely free from all afflictions and its imprints.  
[1,1a] 
Respectfully I prostrate myself to the Sugata 
Who are endowed with the Dharmakaya 
As well as to their Noble Children 
And to all who are worthy of veneration 
                                                                                                                                                          
 
omniscience; they  prevent us from realising all objects of knowledge dire ctly and simultaneously. 
 
Obstructions to liberation can be divided into: acquired  obstructions to liberation (acquired afflictive 
obstructions), wich can be seeds or manifest, and innate  obstructions to liberation (innate afflictive obstructions); 
these can be in the form of seeds, or manifest. 
 
Acquired afflictive obstructions are intellectually acquired  and arise from  the influence of wrong tenets or wrong 
beliefs. For example, following wrong tenets or wrong be liefs, and supported by wrong reasoning, the conception 
of a person as being truly existent can be generated . A mind that follows this wrong reasoning has intellectually 
acquired afflictive obstructions. The seed that is being plac ed by such a conception is also an acquired afflictive 
obstruction. 
 Innate afflictive obstructions have been in our minds si nce beginningless time and arise due to our fami liarity with 
and predisposition to the conception of grasping at the person as being truly or inherently existent. The innate 
afflictive obstructions arise naturally due to our familiarity with them; they  do not come from wrong tenets or 
wrong beliefs. Such innate grasping at a self of persons is an innate afflictive obstruction. The seed that is placed by such an obstruction is also an innate afflictive obstruction. 
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre       Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
F P M T  B a s i c  P r o g r a m                I n t r o d u c t i o n  
 
 
8 This verse refers to  the three objects of refuge : the ultimate Buddha Jewe l, the ultimate Dharma 
Jewel and the ultimate Sangha Jewel. 
 
• ultimate Buddha Jewel: the nature tr uth body and the wisdom truth body 
• conventional Buddha Jewel: the complete enjoyment body & the supreme emanation 
body 
 
• ultimate Dharma Jewel: true paths and true cessations 
• conventional Dharma Jewel: scri ptural teachings of the Buddha 
 
• ultimate Sangha Jewel: arya bodhisattvas 
• conventional Sangha Jewel: a group of four or more fully ordained monks   
 
The wisdom truth body is the mind that is comp letely free from the two obstructions; the nature 
truth body is the emptiness of a buddha’s mind ; the supreme emanation body  is a buddha’s 
form body that can be perceived by fortunate ordinary beings. (eg. Buddha Shakyamuni); the 
complete enjoyment body is a buddha’s subtle form body that can be perceived only by  superiors bodhisattvas.   Those who are endowed with the dharmakaya ar e the sugatas (dharmakaya refers to the truth 
body of a buddha). The Sugata is posited as the Bu ddha Jewel.  This also implies that the Sugata 
includes the complete enjoyment body and the supreme emanation body.  These two bodies are 
posited as the final Sangha Jewel. These two bodies are also the Buddha Jewel. Buddha and 
Buddha Jewel are synonymous.  When we say buddha, it does not necessarily refer to any particular person. This is in accordance 
with the great treatises and the explanation of the texts. The word buddha here refers to the true 
path and true cessation in the mental continuum of the enlightened ones. It also refers to the 
bodies possessed by that mental continuum.   A buddha or an enlightened one refers to th e state of complete abandonment of the two 
obstructions and their imprints. Therefore the true  cessation and true path in the continuum of 
a buddha superior are  posited as buddha. The bo dy possessed by that continuum is posited as 
buddha as well. The true paths and true cessations possessed by the Sugata can also be posited as 
the final Dharma Jewel and the ul timate Buddha Jewel. In the co ntext of Shantideva’s homage, 
the Sangha Jewel refers to the superior beings  on the Mahayana path or arya bodhisattvas, but 
they are not the final Sangha Jewel.    After paying homage to the Three Jewels, next comes the promise of composition:  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre       Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
F P M T  B a s i c  P r o g r a m                I n t r o d u c t i o n  
 
 
9 3A2 The pledge to explain [this material] 
A Identifying the subject matter that  is to be explained 
B Rejecting the fault [of this material being of Shantideva's] own fabrication 
C Rejecting [the  idea that it is unnecessary] repetition 
D Identifying four [elements of the explanation] such as its purpose  
 [1,1b] 
Here I shall explain how to engage in  the vows of the Buddha’s children, 
The meaning of which I have condensed in accordance with the scriptures. 
 
“Here I shall explain how to engage in the vows of  the Buddha’s children” indicates the pledge to 
compose. 
 “The Buddha’s children” refer to the sons and daug hters of the Sugata who have gone to bliss - 
the bodhisattvas who are  travelling on the Maha yana path to enlightenment by practicing the six 
perfections.   
“The vows of the Buddha’s children” is a translation of the Tibetan term dom. Some 
commentaries interprete dom as the vows of the Buddha’s childr en (or the bodhisattva vows), but 
Gyaltsab Je says this interpretation is too limite d. He interpreted the word  as “to include”, which 
means dom refers to all the essential practices of the bodhisattvas which are summarised in the 
practices of the six perfections. 
 
However, in another commentary, Gyaltsab Je s ays that it is alright to interpret the word dom as 
the bodhisattva vows if we look at  the bodhisattva vows from the pe rspective of the three types of 
the bodhisattvas’ morality. Gyaltsab Je said that if we look at the word dom from the perspective 
of these three types of morality, then it is alright because these three types of morality encompass 
the entire practice of the six perfections. 
 
Morality or ethical discipline is the wish to abandon harming other sentient beings. The three 
types of morality are: 1. the ethi cs of restraining from activities that are the basis of harm, 2. the 
ethics of engaging in virtuous actions, and 3. the ethics of benefiting sentient beings 
3A2A Identifying the subject matter that is to be explained 
“The vows of the Buddha’s children” shows the subj ect matter of the text th at is to be composed, 
which deals with the practices of the bodhisattvas, the practice of bodhicitta and the practice of 
the six perfections. 
 Shantideva is trying to explain how the bodhisattvas, upon generating the altruistic intention to 
attain enlightenment for the benefit of all sentie nt beings (bodhicitta), then practice the six 
perfections in order to achieve the stat e of enlightenment to become buddhas 
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre       Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
F P M T  B a s i c  P r o g r a m                I n t r o d u c t i o n  
 
 
10 3A2B Rejecting the fault [of this material being of Shantideva's] own fabrication 
How is Shantideva going to explain the practices of the bodhisattvas? This  is mentioned in the 
line: “The meaning of which I have condensed in accordance with the scriptures”. The line “In 
accordance with the scriptures” shows how Shantideva is going to compose the text. Shantideva 
mentioned that he is going to compose the subject matte r of this text in accordance with the 
scriptures and not fabricate it  himself. 
3A2C Rejecting [the idea that it is unnecessary] repetition 
Someone may ask “Why bother to compose this te xt if it is written in accordance with the 
scriptures?” and accuse Shantideva of repeating  su bject matter that is alread y in the scriptures of 
the Buddha. 
 
Shantideva refuted this  with “The  meaning of which I have condensed ” which means that he is 
summarising the bodhisattvas’ practice in accordance  with the scriptures and, therefore, there is 
no fault of repetition.  
 “In accordance with the scriptures” – the scriptures  referred to here are the translated words of  
sutra and tantra of the Buddha (the Kangyur) and probably efers to the Perfection of Wisdom Sutras 
which show the practices of the six perfection s. The actual sutras spoken by the Buddha, 
especially those sutras that contain the practices of the six perfections are very profound and very 
extensive. For the benefit of sentient beings, one needs to internalise and  understand these 
practices from these sutras.  Shantideva said that  he is condensing the meaning of the scriptures 
into this text to benefit sentient beings as  he mentions “The meaning of which I have 
condensed”. 
3A2D Identifying four [elements of the explanation] such as its purpose 
The subject matter is the Maha yana path, the fruit is comple ting the Mahayana path. The 
purpose of this composition is realising the meaning by putting it into practi ce.  The end result is 
achieving the state of Buddhahood.  The main point is to achieve the state of fu ll enlightenment by practicing the path to 
enlightenment and internalising  it to realise it completely.   In order to realise it, we need to identify th e subject matter that is being practised by the 
bodhisattva. In order to identify the subject matter, we need a text that clearly shows the practice.  
3A3 Expressing humility and how Shantideva was inspired to compose [this text] 
A With humility [Shantideva says that he] did not compose this primarily for the benefit of others 
B The reasons he was inspired to compose this treatise 
C Showing that it [might] also be of benefit to others of equal fortune 
Shantideva expresses humility in verse 3 because he has to counter whatev er pride may arise and 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre       Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
F P M T  B a s i c  P r o g r a m                I n t r o d u c t i o n  
 
 
11 this may create obstacles for him when he is co mposing the text. He is also encouraging himself 
and generating enthusiasm to complete the comp osition of this text. If he is down with 
depression, it will also pose  an obstac le for him to complete his composition.  
 
He is composing this text to accomplish his ow n purpose and for the purpose of other sentient 
beings.  We can also apply this attitude in our daily life. If we are full of pride, then it will be an obstacle for us to complete our activities. At the other extreme, if we are depressed, then it will 
also become an obstacle to fulfilling our  goals. We should behave like Shantideva to decrease our pride and to increase our enthusiasm for virtue. 
 
[1,2] 
There is nothing here that ha s not been explained before 
And I have no skill in  the art of rhetoric; 
Therefore, lacking any intention to benefit others, 
I write this in order to acquaint it to my mind. 
3A3A With humility [Shantideva says that he] did not compose this primarily for the benefit of 
others 
With humility, Shantideva says he has no intentio n of benefiting others by composing this text 
because he admits that this text will not contai n anything that has not already been explained 
before by the buddhas and bodhisattvas. Also, he s ays he has no skill in the art of rhetoric or 
poetry. His  purpose in composing this text is to ensure that the qualities that he has already 
achieved in the past will not degenerate and also to increase his own virtue: “I write this in order 
to acquaint it to my mind.”   
 Discussion: if Shantideva had not yet internalized  the subject matter of th e text he was going to 
compose, he would not have been in any position to compose it. If he had already internalised  
the subject matter, then there would have been no reason for him to compose this text to 
acquaint it with his mind. Why did he feel the need to compose this text? 
 
[1,3] 
For due to acquaintance wi th what is wholesome, 
The force of my faith may for a short while increase because of these (words). 
If, however, these (words) are seen by others 
Equal in fortune to myself, it may be meaningful (for them). 
3A3B The reasons he was inspired to compose this treatise 
“For due to acquaintance with what is wholesom e, The force of my faith may for a short while 
increase because of these (words).” Shantideva said  that by composing this text, it will act as a 
condition to help himself to increase his virtue and also to increase his faith. 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre       Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
F P M T  B a s i c  P r o g r a m                I n t r o d u c t i o n  
 
 
12 3A3C Showing that it [might] also be of benefit to others of equal fortune 
“If, however, these (words) are seen by others eq ual in fortune to myself, it may be meaningful 
(for them).” He hoped that  others, equal in fortun e to himself, having seen this text, will  benefit 
from this text as well  
3B The actual explanation of the stages of the path 
1 Encouraging [the reader] to take the essence from this basis of  leisures and endowments 
2 Explaining how to take the essence 
3B1 Encouraging [the reader] to take the essence from this basis of leisures and endowments 
[1,4] 
Leisure and endowment are very hard to find 
And, since they accomplish what is meaningful for humanity, 
If I do not take advantage of them now, 
How will such a perfect opportunity come about again? 
 
“Leisure and endowment are very hard  to find”: this human life is pr ecious as it has eight leisures 
and ten opportunities that make it  an ideal opportunity for training  the mind in all the stages of 
the path to enlightenment. This human life eq uipped with these leisures and opportunities is 
e x t r e m e l y  d i f f i c u l t  t o  f i n d  a s  i t  i s  v e r y  r a r e  f o r anyone to create the causes for achieving such 
leisures and opportunities. Once found, one mu st make full use of it to practice and to 
accomplish the holy Dharma.   In general, the main cause of a human rebirth is the practice of morality. In order to achieve the 
human rebirth with leisures and opportunities, on e must practice stainless morality accompanied 
by the practice of the other perfections. One al so needs to make stainless prayers to gain a 
human rebirth. Training in these three causes is very difficult  and, therefore, attaining a human 
form with leisures and opportunities will al s o  b e  d i f f i c u l t .  A s  e x p l a i n e d  i n  t h e  L a m  R i m  
Chenmo, the difficulties in obtaining human re birth with leisures and opportunities are 
explained:  1) through analogy, 2)  in  terms of numbers and 3) through causes. 
 Shantideva is encouraging the reader to take  the essence from this basis of leisure and 
opportunities as we now have a most rare and pr ecious fully-endowed human form. The first line 
of verse 4 indicates the difficulties of obtaining a human rebirth with all the leisures and opportunities. The next three lines indicate the gr eat purposes that can be achieved on the basis 
of a human rebirth with such leisures and opportunities.  On the basis of a human rebirth with these leis ures and opportunities, one can achieve higher 
rebirth as a human and god. One can also achieve the definite goodness of liberation or enlightenment on the basis of a human rebirth wi th these leisures and opportunities. One needs 
to put in effort to achieve this higher goal inst ead of sitting around idly and putting off the time 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre       Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
F P M T  B a s i c  P r o g r a m                I n t r o d u c t i o n  
 
 
13 to practice dharma by thinking that one will not die.  One’s time of death is uncertain and if one 
was to die suddenly without practicing the dharma, th en it will be very difficult to obtain another 
human rebirth with such leisures and opportunities again in the future.  
 
Obtaining such a human rebirth again in the futu re is almost impossible because most of the 
time, in cyclic existence, we have been taking rebirth in situations where we do not posses the 
leisures and opportunities to practice the Dhar ma. As the precious human rebirth is so rare, 
therefore, it is very precious. Therefore, we sh ould use it for the great purposes once we have 
obtained it as it does not last forever.   A perfect human rebirth  is endowed with two unique sets of privileges: the leisures and 
opportunities (endowments).  Leisure  means freedom from rebirth in  any of the eight conditions 
that lack leisure, and opportunity (endowment)  refers to the good conditions amenable to the 
practice of Dharma. If we have a human life with all these eight leis ures, we shall find it relatively 
easy to overcome any other unfavourable co nditions that we might experience. The ten 
opportunities are all necessary conditio ns for our practice of the Dharma. 
 The eight leisures  are characterised by being born free from  certain kinds of existence that lack 
the conditions to be able to practice Dharma. There are four human states  and four nonhuman 
states  that lack the leisure to be able to practice Dharma. 
 The four nonhuman states that lack leisure  for the study and practice the Dharma are: rebirth 
as a hell being, rebirth as an animal, rebirth as  a hungry ghost, and rebirth as a long-life god. 
The four human states that lack leisure  to be able to study and practice the Dharma are: rebirth 
in a land where there is no dharma (as barbar ians), rebirth in a place where a buddha has not 
descended, meaning a place where a buddha has not come and taught, rebirth with extreme 
mental or physical defects, and rebirth with strong  wrong views, particularly in relation to cause 
and effect, past and future lives, or the three objects of refuge.  The second set of privileges that we experience , having gained a perfect human rebirth, are the 
ten opportunities , five of which pertain to ourselves, and five of which pertain to external 
conditions.  The five opportunities pertaining to oneself  are: 
1. being born as a human being 
2. born in a central place where the dharma flourishes 
3. having perfect and complete senses and sense organs 
4. not having committed one of the five heinous crimes, and thus having the potential to 
change one's karma.  
5. having faith in the Lamrim, and in the thr ee vast collections of Buddha's teaching 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre       Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
F P M T  B a s i c  P r o g r a m                I n t r o d u c t i o n  
 
 
14 The five opportunities pertaini ng to external conditions  are: 
1. having been born in a time when a buddha has descended into the world  
2. having been born in a time when  a buddha has taught the dharma 
3. the teachings of the Buddha still remain in the world 
4. there are still people practicing the teachings 
5. that, through the kindness and compassion of ot hers, it is possible that practitioners have 
the opportunity to receive material support that enables them the freedom to practice. 
 
Thus it is very important for us to recognise that the eight leisur es and ten opportunities are very 
difficult to find and we need to check whether we  posses all these 18 char acteristics. If we do 
have most of them, we should practice the Dharma as what we have obtained is very rare indeed. 
But if we do not make use of our present existenc e to the fullest for practicing dharma, it will be 
extremely difficult to gain such a beneficially endowed form again.  From Basic Program Module 1 – Middle Lam Rim: 
 
THE REFUGE JEWELS 
 
 BUDDHA DHARMA SANGHA 
 
NATURE OF THE 
REFUGE JEWEL 
  
A buddha’s body  
Accomplishment of the mind  
A being  
 
FINAL 
  
Illustrated by all buddhas  (with the four bodies of a buddha)  
True paths or true cessation in the mind of a buddha superior   
Shakyamuni Buddha 
 
 
ULTIMATE  
Nature truth body (emptiness of the enlightened mind) and wisdom truth body (omniscience of a buddha’s mind)   
 True paths and true cessations in the mind of a superior being  
 A superior being 
 
 
CONVENTIONAL 
   
Complete enjoyment body and supreme emana-tion body    
Scriptural teachings of the Buddha  
A group of four or more fully ordained monks. 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre       Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
F P M T  B a s i c  P r o g r a m                I n t r o d u c t i o n  
 
 
15 Lesson 3 – chapter 1, verse 4-10 
3B The actual explanation of the stages of the path 
1 Encouraging [the reader] to take the essence from this basis of  leisure and endowments 
2 Explaining how to take the essence 
3B1 Encouraging [the reader] to take the essence from this basis of leisures and endowments 
[1,4] 
Leisure and endowment are very hard to find 
And, since they accomplish what is meaningful for humanity, 
If I do not take advantage of them now, 
How will such a perfect opportunity come about again? 
 
“Leisure and endowment are very hard to find” - Th is line refers to the fact that a human life 
qualified with leisure and endowment (or opportunitie s) is difficult to obtain. Once human life is 
endowed with these characteristics, one can achieve great purposes on this basis by practicing the 
teaching of the Buddha. However if we were to postpone our practice and hope to do it later, we 
have to understand that death is certain but the time of our death is uncertain and there are so 
many conditions that contribute to our death. Our body is very fragile and is not stable.  
 
Verse 4 reminds us of how to take this opportun ity since we have already obtained this human 
life endowed with leisures and opportunities. We  should not leave it empty handed or not doing 
anything with it. If we do not practice this te aching, then this whole life is empty and without 
any meaning after we die. If we do think about this from different perspectives we understand 
how special is the opportunity that we are ha ving now as a human life endowed with eight 
leisures and ten opportunities, which is very diffi cult to find. On top of this, we have met with 
the teaching of the Buddha, we have also met with the Mahayana teaching and many teachers 
who are able to show us the prac tices that relate to things that  we need to abandon and things 
that we need to cultivate. We must move our mind in the direction of the dharma after having these conditions; at least we should start the practice of dharma from now onwards. However 
small the virtue might seem, we should start doing it now.  We should investigate into when we spend our life  in meaningless or in non-dharmic ways. If we 
find that we are wasting our time by not practici ng the teachings, we sh ould then remember to 
recite this verse to remind ourselves of the opportunities that we have now and encourage 
ourselves to do the dharma practice.   Going by the outline on the commentary composed by Gyaltsab Je, this particular verse 4 falls 
into the outline: Encouraging [the reader] to ta ke the essence from this basis of leisures and 
endowments. There are also different commentar ies on this text and different commentaries 
have different outlines. Some commentaries explain this verse from the perspective of it being a
Amitabha Buddhist Centre       Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
F P M T  B a s i c  P r o g r a m                C h a p t e r  O n e  
 
 
16 suitable basis for developing bodhicitta, that human rebirth is the best basis for developing 
bodhicitta. Based on the Buddhist cosmology that de scribes  the four continents, it is said that 
human rebirth in the southern continent Jambudvipa (which we are in) is th e best basis of all the 
human rebirths in the four continents.  We have  to understand that we have now achieved the 
basis and the best basis for developing bodhicitta.   
3B2 Explaining how to take the essence 
A A general presentation 
B An explanation of each topic individually 
3B2B An explanation of each topic individually 
1 Reflecting on the benefits of cultivating bodhicitta 2 The way to train in the conduct once one has developed the two bodhicittas 
The First Chapter: Explaining the Benefits of Bodhicitta 
3B2B 1 Reflecting on the benefits of cultivating bodhicitta 
A Explaining this chapter’s material 
B The chapter’s name 
3B2B 1A Explaining this chapter’s material 
1 Instructions on the reasoning behind abandoning negativities and practicing virtue 
2 Reflecting extensively upon the benefits of bodhicitta 
3B2B 1A1 Instructions on the reasoning behind abandoning negativities and practicing virtue 
[1,5] 
Just as a flash of lightning on a dark, cloudy night 
For an instant brightly illuminates all, 
Likewise in this world, through the might of Buddha, 
A wholesome thought rarely  and briefly appears. 
 
There are three things shown in verse 5: the practi ce of refraining from negativities, the practice 
of accomplishing virtue, the practice of  subduing or restraining one’s mind  
 “Just as a flash of lightning on a dark, cloudy night”  – night, as opposed to day; dark night  refers 
to the night when we don’t see the moon and th e sky is covered with clouds. When there is a 
flash of lightning in such a night, in that inst ant, one might be able to see the forms of the 
buildings that are being illuminated by the lightn ing. The night refers to  the time where the sun 
of the Buddha’s wisdom is not shining. Dark refe rs to the ignorance rega rding what is to be 
abandoned and what is to be cultivated. Clouds that obscure the sky is like the three mental 
poisons in our mind.  This is an analogy that describes the situation th at we are in. Our mind is obscured by the three 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre       Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
F P M T  B a s i c  P r o g r a m                C h a p t e r  O n e  
 
 
17 mental poisons and is ignorant of the practices to be abandoned and what is to be cultivated. 
Sometimes, but rarely, due to the prayers made by  the buddhas when they develop bodhicitta for 
the benefit of sentient beings combined with the merit we have accumulated in the past, a 
wholesome thought does appear in our mind. So metimes, the wish to engage in virtue or 
aspiration does arise in our mind. This kind of rare occurrence of virtuous  thought or aspiration 
for virtue that arises in our mind is brief and tran sient; like the flash of lightning that appears in 
the sky in the dark cloudy night that illuminate s the environment for a br ief instant. When this 
kind of virtuous thought does arise in our mind, it is not going to last as it will invariably fade 
even if we do generate a strong powerful thought of virtue. So it is important that we seize this 
opportunity to practice the dharma teaching wh en virtuous thoughts arise in our mind, as 
virtuous thought rarely occur. This  is what has happened to us - we rarely entertain the virtuous 
thought that arises in our mind and it does not last for a long  time when it does arise.  
 
At times we may have some aspiration for virtue but we just ignore it and postpone it until the 
aspiration starts to disappear as time goes on. We should not allow this to happen as it is rare for us to generate any virtuous thought and when it  does arise, it does not last. We need to 
investigate by looking into our own mind and ex amine what we are doing with our body, speech 
and mind in each and every day and night, and count the number of virtuous thoughts and the 
number of negative thoughts that arise. Needle ss to say, we probably have more non-virtuous 
thoughts. Even when a seemingly virtuous thou ght arises, we need to examine whether this 
virtuous thought in reality is pure in nature or not. As we are always under the control of self 
cherishing thoughts and the eight worldly dharmas, it is difficult to see some sort of virtue in 
whatever things we do everyday. This verse is desc ribing the situation that we are in; it is like 
someone walking around in the dark cloudy night.  When we are doing our prayers or even when 
in retreat, if we look for virtuous states of mind, we will find them very rare.  
When we are talking about virtue; virtuous action s, virtuous thoughts, dharma practices- what 
makes something that is virtue or what makes an action that is dhar ma? If that virtuous action or 
virtuous thought is an antidote, either partially or  fully, to the afflictions in our mind or negative 
emotions or if that action will benefit us in our future life, then this part icular thought or action 
can be considered as virtue. Other than that it is not virtue. When this  virtuous thought does 
arise in our mind, the first thing is to seize it and not let it degenerate. We should try to do 
something to enhance it.  According to Gyaltsab Je’s commentary for this te xt, the commentary that we are using, the first 
five verses are summarizing the following: abando ning negative actions, accumulating virtue and 
subduing the mind. In some commentaries, verse 5 is placed under the he ading: the mind basis 
for developing bodhicitta. The previous verse de scribes how a human life endowed with leisures 
and opportunities is the best rebirth on a physical  basis for developing bo dhicitta. Verse 5, being 
placed under the outline: the mind basis for de veloping bodhicitta, mean s that before we can 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre       Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
F P M T  B a s i c  P r o g r a m                C h a p t e r  O n e  
 
 
18 develop bodhicitta, our mind must be in a virtuo us state. On this basis, we can develop the 
altruistic intention of this bodhicitta.  
 
These verses are saying that we have both suitable body and mind for developing bodhicitta. We 
have obtained a human life endowed with leisur es and opportunities whic h is the supreme basis 
f o r  d e v e l o p i n g  b o d h i c i t t a .  W e  a l s o  h a v e  a  s u i t a b l e  b a s i s  o f  m i n d  t h a t  c a n  b e  u s e d  t o  d e v e l o p  bodhicitta because virtue (in the form of virtuous  thought or aspiration of virtue) does arise in 
o u r  m i n d ;  e v e n  t h o u g h  i t  i s  r a r e .  T h e r e f o r e  w e  h a v e  a  s u i t a b l e  b a s i s  o f  b o d y  a n d  m i n d  f o r  developing bodhicitta. After obtaining such a wo nderful basis, we should strive to develop 
bodhicitta and train in the six pe rfections. By doing this, we will achieve enlightenment soon.  
 As a human being it is already hard enough to generate virtuous though t which is completely 
pure in nature; it is very rare. We will be finished if we were to be born as an animal or hungry g h o s t  o r  i n  h e l l  a s  i t  i s  a l m o s t  im p o s s i b l e  t o  develop bodhicitta in the lower realms. At times 
when we are sick and not feeling well, it is very difficult to generate any virtuous thought. If we were born in the lower realms as hell beings, an imals or hungry ghosts, it would be even more 
difficult to generate any virtuous thoughts as th e suffering would be more intense, hundreds and 
thousands of times more than the suffering that we have when we are sick in the human realm. 
3B2B 1A2  Reflecting extensively upon the benefits of bodhicitta 
A Explaining the benefits of bodhicitta 
B Identifying the nature of bodhicitta 
C The reasons there are such benefits D Praising the person who cultivates bodhicitta 
3B2B 1A2A Explaining the benefits of bodhicitta 
1 The potential to destroy all negativities and accomplish all virtues 2 Attaining the special name and purpose 
3 Explaining the benefits by means of an analogy 
3B2B 1A2A 1 The potential to destroy all negativities and accomplish all virtues 
A Destroying great negativities B The potential to accomplish supreme bliss 
C The potential to accomplish whatever one wishes 
3B2B 1A2A 1A Destroying great negativities 
[1,6] 
Hence virtue is perpetually feeble, 
The great strength of immorali ty being extremely intense, 
And except for a Fully Awakening Mind 
By what other virtue will it be overcome? 
 
Verse 6 talks about the power of  bodhicitta. Once it is generated, it has the potential to destroy 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre       Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
F P M T  B a s i c  P r o g r a m                C h a p t e r  O n e  
 
 
19 or purify those powerful negative actions done in the past.  
 
“Hence virtue is perpetually feeble”, this is becaus e virtue occurs rarely. If it does occur, it will 
not last for a long time. The negativities that we  have accumulated are very powerful as shown in 
“The great strength of immorality  being extremely intense”. The nega tive action is likened to the 
dark cloudy night which is strong and powerful that can throw us in to the lower realm. It is very 
difficult to stop these.  
 If we were to develop bodhicitta-the altruistic in tention to attain enlightenment for the benefit of 
all sentient beings, it can overcome the powerful  negative actions that were accumulated in the 
past. Thus bodhicitta is likened to the sun and wh en the sun rises, it will dispel the darkness in 
the sky. Except for bodhicitta, by  what other virtue will all th ese negativities be completely 
overwhelmed or suppressed? Only bodhicitta can.   From verse 6 onward, we are talking about the bene fit of bodhicitta. Bodhicitta can even purify 
all those powerful negativities resulting from th e negative actions that been accumulated in the 
past. Once we develop this bodhicitta, not only can the negativities accumulated in the past be 
purified,  future rebirth in the lower realm will be  cut off as well. There are many ways to practice 
to purify negativities that were accumulated in the past, but in this context,  bodhicitta is the most 
powerful antidote.   “ A n d  e x c e p t  f o r  a  F u l l y  A w a k e n i n g  M i n d ,  B y  w h a t  o t h e r  v i r t u e  w i l l  i t  b e  o v e r c o m e ? ”  –  T h i s  means that of all the different type of methods to purify nega tivities, developing bodhicitta 
should be the principal method. 
3B2B 1A2A 1B The potential to accomplish supreme bliss 
[1,7] 
All the Buddhas who have cont emplated for many aeons 
Have seen it to be beneficial; 
For by it the limitless masses of beings 
Will quickly attain the supreme state of bliss. 
 Verse 7 describes that once we develop bodhicitta , we can for sure accomplish the supreme state 
of bliss (full enlightenment).   “All the buddhas” refers to all those who have co mpleted the accumulation of two collections of 
merit and wisdom over the three great countless eo ns. All this was done with the sole intention 
of benefiting living beings by giving them te mporal and ultimate happiness. These buddhas had 
thought about it for a long time and had seen that it  is only bodhicitta that will enable anyone to 
really achieve the goal of benefiting the limitless masses of sentient beings. It is bodhicitta that 
will cause one to lead all these sentient beings to the supreme state of bliss, the state of full 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre       Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
F P M T  B a s i c  P r o g r a m                C h a p t e r  O n e  
 
 
20 enlightenment. When we develop bodhicitta, we are able to take care of the welfare of the 
limitless number of sentient beings. In fact, it is  basically bodhicitta that enables anyone to do 
that. The solitary realizers and hearers that en ter the path cannot work for the benefit of all 
sentient beings. It is only the bodhisattvas wh o can work for the limitless number of sentient 
beings. What makes the bodhisattvas able to do th is? It is bodhicitta. As we can see, people who 
have a good heart, who have pure intentions, can benefit more sentient beings and even animals. 
Bodhicitta is the state of mind that works for the limitless number of sentient beings. If we were 
to develop the bodhicitta mind, we definitely ca n achieve this goal. Whoever develops bodhicitta 
will be able to work for the benefit of the limitle ss number of sentient beings and be able to lead 
all sentient beings to the state of full enlightenm ent – this is one benefit of bodhicitta and the 
essence of this verse. 
3B2B 1A2A 1C The potential to accomplish whatever one wishes 
[1,8] 
Those who wish to destroy the many sorrows of (their) conditioned existence, 
Those who wish (all beings) to ex perience a multitude of joys, 
And those who wish to experience much happiness 
Should never forsake the Awakening Mind. 
 
If we were to develop bodhicitta, we will be able to destroy the suffering that is found in samsara; birth, aging, sickness and death. If we have bodhicitta, we will be  able to eliminate the suffering 
that sentient beings are experiencing in this life and in their future lives. We will also be able to help all sentient beings to achieve all the diffe rent kinds of joy and bliss. Therefore those who 
wish this to happen should ne ver give up on bodhicitta. 
 Verse 8 is saying that if we want all our wishes to be fulfilled and al so want to fulfill all the wishes 
of living beings, then we should never forsake bodhicitta. We should de velop bodhicitta and it 
will be wonderful if we are able to do so. In short, if we have bodhic itta, we will accomplish 
whatever we wish. 
3B2B 1A2A 2  Attaining the special name and purpose 
[1,9] 
The moment an Awakening Mind arises 
In those fettered and weak in the jail of cyclic existence, 
They will be named a 'Child of the Sugatas', 
And will be revered by both humans and gods of the world. 
 Regardless of whether you are female or male, old or young, rich or poor, once you have develop 
bodhicitta, you will be called a “child of the su gatas’ or bodhisattva (attaining the special name). 
Upon generation of bodhicitta in one’s mind, on e will be revered and respected by both humans 
and gods of the world (attaining the special purp ose). The bodhisattva is a worthy object of 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre       Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
F P M T  B a s i c  P r o g r a m                C h a p t e r  O n e  
 
 
21 veneration and worship even by the buddhas themse lves. This is because bodhicitta is like the 
teacher of the buddhas themselves. As in this wo rld, people who are considered good hearted are 
respected and honored by people. Needless to say that those who develop bo dhicitta will become 
a suitable object of veneration even by the bu ddhas themselves because a bodhisattva is someone 
who possess bodhicitta, the mind of enlightenment which seeks en lightenment for the benefit of 
all sentient beings without exception.  
3B2B 1A2A 3 Explaining the benefits by means of an analogy 
A An analogy of the inferior becoming the supreme 
B An analogy of the difficulty in obtaining it and its great value C An analogy of an inexhaustible effect and [an effect that] is magnified 
D An analogy of the potential for being protected from great fear 
E An analogy of destroying negativities without difficulty F The way benefits are taught in the sutras 
3B2B 1A2A 3A An analogy of the inferior becoming the supreme 
[1,10] 
It is like the supreme gold-making elixir, 
For it transforms the unclean body we have taken 
Into the priceless jewel of a Buddha-Form. 
Therefore firmly seize this Awakening Mind. 
 
Like an elixir that has the power to transform ba se metal into gold, bodhicitta can transform this 
contaminated body of ours into the form body of the Buddha. If we have bodhicitta, we will be able to achieve the unsurpassed state of full enli ghtenment. On the basis of this human body, we 
can develop bodhicitta. If we medita te on the instruction, we will be able to achieve the state of 
full enlightenment. Hence this analogy is called  “the analogy of the inferior becoming the 
supreme”. “Therefore firmly seize this Awakening Mind” - hold on to it in a stable way without 
giving up. In another commentary, this verse falls under the headline called “Showing the 
achievement of Buddhahood through the analogy of th e gold-making elixir”. If we have the elixir 
of bodhicitta, we can even transform our current st ate of body into the state of full and complete 
enlightenment.    
Amitabha Buddhist Centre       Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
F P M T  B a s i c  P r o g r a m                C h a p t e r  O n e  
 
 
22 Lesson 4 – chapter 1, verse 10-17 
3B2B 1A2A 3 Explaining the benefits by means of an analogy 
A An analogy of the inferior becoming the supreme 
B An analogy of the difficulty in obtaining it and its great value 
C An analogy of an inexhaustible effect and [an effect that] is magnified 
D An analogy of the potential for being protected from great fear E An analogy of destroying negativities without difficulty 
F The way benefits are taught in the sutras 
3B2B 1A2A 3A An analogy of the inferior becoming the supreme 
[1,10] 
It is like the supreme gold-making elixir, 
For it transforms the unclean body we have taken 
Into the priceless jewel of a Buddha-Form. 
Therefore firmly seize this Awakening Mind. 
 
Like a special elixir that has the power to tr ansform base metal into gold, bodhicitta can 
transform this unclean body of ours into the form body of the Buddha. If we have bodhicitta, we 
will be able to achieve the unsurpassed state of full enlightenment. On the basis of this human 
body, we can develop bodhicitta. If we meditate on  the instruction, we will be able to achieve the 
state of full enlightenment. Hence this analogy is called “the analogy of the inferior becoming the 
supreme”. “Therefore firmly seize this awakening mind” advises us to firmly hold on to this 
awakening mind - bodhicitta.  It is not very clear in the commentary of this verse how bodhicitta, when likened to the supreme 
gold-making elixir, can transform the unclean body of ours into the form body of a buddha. This 
verse is literally saying that bodhicitta can tran sform this unclean body of ours into the form 
body of a buddha; whether this can happen in reality or not, we need to check out.  
 In the tantric teaching of the Buddha, it does explain that there are methods to transform our 
impure body into the pure body of a buddha. If we look at it from the viewpoint that “through the power of generating bodhicitta, we will ac hieve the form body of a buddha”, then there 
should not be any problem. On the basis of taking  on the unclean body of ours and on the basis 
of this rebirth, through the forc e of generating bodhicitta, we wi ll be able to achieve the form 
body of the Buddha in the future. It is definitely alright to say this.  In another commentary, this verse is placed unde r the headline called “Showing the achievement 
of buddhahood through the analogy of supreme gold -making elixir”. If we have the elixir of 
bodhichitta, we can even transform our current stat e of body into the state of full and complete 
enlightenment.  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre       Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
F P M T  B a s i c  P r o g r a m                C h a p t e r  O n e  
 
 
23 3B2B 1A2A 3B An analogy of the diffic ulty in obtaining it and its great value 
[1,11] 
Since the limitless mind of the Sole Guide of the World 
Has upon thorough investigati on seen its preciousness, 
All beings wishing to be free from worldly abodes 
Should firmly take hold of this precious Awakening Mind. 
 
Imagine that there is a skillful trader, whose only thought is  benefiting others, acting as a guide 
leading a group of people to an island to find  precious gold and gems . Upon finding the gold 
and gems, this group of people will cherish it.  The trader is likened to the Buddha, who is endo wed with intelligence and with the motivation 
to benefit others, has skillful means and benefits  sentient beings through many activities. The 
Buddha, as sole guide of the world, with his inte lligence, has seen that the best means or method 
to benefit all the destitute and suffering sentient beings is this precious  bodhicitta. The Buddha, 
having seen for himself that it is bodhicitta that  can accomplish all the purposes and wishes of all 
the sentient beings, taught this to all his disciple s. Therefore it says that one should firmly take 
hold of this bodhicitta, cherish it and never give it up. 
3B2B 1A2A 3C An analogy of an inexhaustible effect and [an effect that] is magnified 
[1,12] 
All other virtues are like plantain trees; 
For after bearing fruit, they simply perish. 
Yet the perennial tree of the Awakening Mind 
Unceasingly bears fruit and th ereby flourishes without end 
 In this analogy, bodhicitta is likened to the pe rennial tree  which always bears fruit unceasingly; 
unlike the plantain tree which only bears fruit once. We can understand this by looking at it 
from the perspectives of the three types of pe rsons with different spiritual capacities:   
• The motivation of the person of small capacity in  his dharma practice is to achieve the higher 
rebirth of human and god. Once he has achieved  his goal, all those actions upon bearing fruit 
will cease to give rise to effects again in the future. 
• The motivation of the person of  medium capa city in his dharma practice is to achieve 
liberation from  cyclic existence. Upon achievin g that goal, all the virtues that the person has 
accumulated in the past cease to give rise to effects again in the future.  
• The motivation of the person of great capaci ty in his dharma practice is to achieve 
enlightenment for the benefit of all sentient beings. Thus the actions that he performs 
towards achieving this goal will continuously give rise to positive effects until enlightenment is achieved.  
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre       Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
F P M T  B a s i c  P r o g r a m                C h a p t e r  O n e  
 
 
24 There is an example given in sutra, an analogy of a medicinal plant. If  the medicinal plant is 
supported by the four elements in the correct pr oportions, the medicinal plant will continuously 
give rise to fruits. In the same way, if one dedi cates one’s virtue towards achieving enlightenment, 
that virtue will give rise to positive effects until full enlightenment is achieved. Another analogy 
given in sutra: if a drop of water is added to th e ocean, the drop of water will not dry up until the 
ocean itself dries up. In the same way, if one dedicates one’s action towards enlightenment, the 
effects of that action will never cease. 
  Verse 12 says that all roots of virtue that are done with bodhicitta moti vation will continuously 
give rise to positive effects until the state of full enlightenment is achieved. At the end of any 
particular virtuous action, if one dedicates the virtue of that action to the state of full 
enlightenment, then those roots of virtue will ne ver be exhausted and will give rise to effects 
continuously and unceasingly till the state of full enlightenment.  It is very important to always dedicate one’s  root of virtue or merit towards achieving 
enlightenment for the benefit of sentient beings . Of all the kinds of dedication that one can 
make, this (i.e. dedicating towards full enlighte nment) is the supreme dedication as it covers 
every type of dedication including extensive dedications.  Verse 12 seems to be saying that if we do something beneficial in helping others in this life but  do not dedicate it, then whether this action will benefit us in our future lives or not remains to 
be seen. If we dedicate it for the sake of future rebirths, then it will only ripen for that purpose, 
i.e. something good will happen in future lives. If  we dedicate whatever virtuous actions we have 
done for our attainment of enlightenment, the effects of the actions will be seen right until 
enlightenment is reached. It seems that it is the motivation and the dedication that determine 
the result of a particular action. It’s the same with making or using nuclear energy or nuclear 
weapons – the effects of these actions depend on one’s motivation and one’s dedication. If we do 
an act that is motivated by bodhicitta and at the end we dedicate the root of virtue of the action 
towards achieving enlightenment, then until enli ghtenment is achieved, the root of virtue will 
continuously give rise to beneficial effects like  the perennial trees that bear fruit continuously; 
not like the plantain tree such as the banana tree which bears fruit only once.  Bodhicitta is likened to perennial trees in that th e virtue that is accumulated with the motivation 
of bodhicitta continually bears fruit and does not stop giving rise to beneficial effects. 
3B2B 1A2A 3D An analogy of the power for being protected from great fear 
[1,13] 
Like entrusting myself to a brave man when greatly afraid 
By entrusting myself to this (Awakeni ng Mind) I shall be swiftly liberated 
Even if I have committed extremely unbearable wrongs. 
Why then do the conscientious no t devote themse lves to this? 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre       Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
F P M T  B a s i c  P r o g r a m                C h a p t e r  O n e  
 
 
25  
Verse 13 says that bodhicitta is so powerful that even if one has committed very powerful 
negative actions; just by generating bodhicitta a ll these negative actions can be purified. Basically 
we can entrust ourselves to bodhicitta, like when we are afraid, we look for refuge and entrust ourselves to a brave man or powerful person for protection. Even if we have accumulated 
negativities that can throw us into the lower real ms, if we entrust ourselves to take refuge in 
bodhicitta we will be saved from the lower realms.  Verse 14 has two outlines: 
[1,14ab] 
Just like the fire at the end of an age, 
It instantly consumes all great wrongdoing. 
3B2B 1A2A 3E An analogy of destroying negativities without remainder 
According to the Buddhist cosmol ogy, at the end of an age when the world would be destroyed, 
destruction happens in stages – first, the world wi ll be attacked by fire, then water, followed by 
wind. At the beginning of the force of destruction during the end of this world, seven suns will 
arise and will burn up everything in samsara up to the form realm of the first concentration - the 
realm, the environment and the beings there will be completely destroyed. The form realm of the 
second concentration will be destroyed by water.  The form realm of the third concentration will 
be destroyed by wind. The form realm of the fourth concentration and the remaining four 
realms of the formless realm will remain as they are.   Just like the fiery conflagration at the end of this age that will burn everything in the form realm  
of the 1st concentration with no remainder, when one generates bodhicitta, the generated 
bodhicitta will consume all the great wrong doings  that includes all the negativities that will 
throw us into the lower realms.  There are different classification s of karma or actions – there is karma whose effects will be 
experienced very quickly and there is karma whose effects will not be experienced that quickly.  
By generating bodhicitta, it can even completely purify those powerful negativities that can give 
rise to effects very quickly.  This verse says that when we generate bodhicitta , even those powerful negativities that can give 
rise to effects very quickly will be completely purified. (To completely purify a negative action means that one will not experience the fruitional re sult of the negative action, i.e. one will not be 
born in the lower realm.) Therefore this verse is saying that even the five heinous actions (also 
called the five acts of immediate retribution) ca n be completely purified by the generation of 
bodhicitta.    Qualm: But aren’t the five acts of immediate retribution supposed to be actions whose effects 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre       Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
F P M T  B a s i c  P r o g r a m                C h a p t e r  O n e  
 
 
26 one will definitely experience? The effects or results here refer to the fruitional result, i.e. rebirth 
in the lower realms. Since one definitely has to  experience the fruitional result of the five 
heinous actions, how can we say that bodhicitta ca n completely purify these five heinous actions? 
 Reply: If we answer in this way, then there is no problem: If your generation of bodhicitta has not purified those five acts of immediate retribut ion, then you will definitely have to experience 
the effects. In other words, whet her it can be purified or not de pends on the strength of your 
bodhicitta.  These lines “Just like the fire at the end of an age, It instantly consumes all great wrongdoing.” 
are saying that even those heavy negative actions whose results one will definitely experience, can 
be purified by a single instant of bodhicitta.  Is there any significant difference between verse 13 and verse 14?  Verse 13 says that if one entrusts oneself to bodhicitta, one will be able to be liberated from the 
heavy negative actions. Verse 14 says that if one generates bodhicitta, one will purify all the heavy 
negative actions.  The analogy of verse 13 is that of entrusting onesel f to a brave man when one is afraid. Here it is 
talking about how bodhicitta overwhelms the fear of  having rebirths in the lower realms. It is not 
talking about bodhicitta destroying the fear or thoroughly eradicating the fear of going to the 
lower realms.  The analogy of verse 14 is that of  the fire at the end of the age instantly consuming everything in 
its path. By generating bodhicitta, it will instantly purify all those negative actions. This refers to 
the differences in the strength of  bodhicitta. Since bodhicitta on ce generated can be increased, 
this means that some bodhicitta can be more  powerful than others. There are cases where 
bodhicitta in some people’s minds is so powerful  that it can completely destroy the results of  
negative actions.  In some sutras, there is an analogy of lighting  up the butter lamp that instantly dispels the 
darkness of a pitch dark house. In the same w ay, when one generates powerful bodhicitta, one 
can instantly purify those negativities accumu lated over one thousand eons including those 
negative actions that can throw one into the lower realms and the five acts of immediate 
retribution. 
3B2B 1A2A 3F The way benefits are taught in the sutras 
[1,14cd] 
Its unfathomable advantages were taught 
To the disciple Sudhana by the wise Lord Maitreya. 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre       Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
F P M T  B a s i c  P r o g r a m                C h a p t e r  O n e  
 
 
27  
This refers to what Lord Maitreya taught the wise disciple Sudhana in the Array of Stalks Sutra . In 
this sutra, bodhicitta is likened to the seed of all the buddha qualities: 
  
O Noble Son, the awakening mind is  like the seed of all the buddha s’ qualities. Since it increases 
the wholesome qualities of all beings it is like a fi eld; since it supports each and every creature, it is 
like the earth; since it perfectly severs all povert y, it is like the god of  wealth; since it affords 
complete protection to all bodhisattvas, it is like a father; since it perfectly accomplishes all aims, it 
is like the king of wish-fulfilling gems; since it completely fulfills all intentions, it is like an 
auspicious vase...O Noble Son, the awakening mind  is endowed with such excellent virtues as 
these as well as limitless other benefits. 
3B2B 1A2B Identifying the nature of bodhicitta 
1 Divisions of the nature 
2 Explaining the divisions by way of analogy 
3 Explaining the different benefits of aspiring and engaging bodhicitta 
3B2B 1A2B 1 Divisions of the nature (entity) 
[1,15] 
In brief, the Awakening Mind 
Should be understood to be of two types; 
The mind that aspires to awaken 
And the mind that ventures to do so. 
 
The entity of bodhicitta is divided into two:  the mind that aspires to awaken – aspiring 
bodhicitta, and the mind that ventures  to do so – engaging bodhicitta 
 Bodhicitta is the main mind that is accompanied by the mental fact or of aspiration that seeks to 
attain the state of full enlightenm ent for the benefit of all sentient beings. The mental factor that 
aspires to achieve enlightenment for others is the mental factor of aspiration; this mental factor 
of aspiration accompanies a main mind, and this main mind is called bodh icitta. Bodhicitta is 
sometimes referred to as an aspiration; technicall y bodhicitta is not a mental factor but is the 
main mind. 
[1,16] 
As is understood by the distinction 
Between aspiring to go and (actually) going, 
So the wise understand in turn 
The distinction between these two 
3B2B 1A2B 2 Explaining the divisions by way of analogy 
Aspiring bodhicitta is likened to wishing to go to  the destination. Engaging bodhicitta is likened 
to the actual going. The distinction between as piring bodhicitta and en gaging bodhicitta is 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre       Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
F P M T  B a s i c  P r o g r a m                C h a p t e r  O n e  
 
 
28 whether that aspiration is conjoined with the prac tice of the bodhisattva deeds (the practice of 
the six perfections) or not. Engagi ng bodhicitta is conjoined with an action, it is conjoined with 
the practice of the six perfections.  
 Both aspirational and engaging bodhicitta are main minds.  
3B2B 1A2B 3 Explaining the different bene fits of aspiring and engaging bodhicitta 
A The benefits of aspiring bodhicitta 
B The benefits of engaging bodhicitta 
3B2B 1A2B 3A The benefits of aspiring bodhicitta 
[1,17] 
Although great fruits occur in cyclic existence 
From the mind that aspires to awaken, 
An uninterrupted flow of merit does not ensue 
As it does with the venturing mind. 
 
Qualm: There is no benefit at all just to generate  aspiring bodhicitta. This is a waste of time if 
not conjoined with the practice of the six perfections.  This verse is saying that there are many benefits ju st by generating aspiring bodhicitta. It is true 
that by just generating aspiring bodhicitta, it is not conjoined with the practice of six perfections. 
But since one has generated the aspirating bodhici tta, it is a cause for enlightenment.  One can 
also derive temporal benefits of higher rebi rth of human and god. One can also eradicate 
samsaric poverty.  Since there are such benefits by generating aspiri ng bodhicitta alone, obviously the benefits by 
generating engaging bodhicitta conjoined with the practice of the six perfections would be 
d i f f e r e n t  a s  s h o w n  i n  “ A n  u n i n t e r r u p t e d  f l o w  o f  m e r i t  d o e s  n o t  e n s u e ,  a s  i t  d o e s  w i t h  t h e  venturing mind”.   
In the Array of Stalks Sutra , there is a quotation mentioning that bodhicitta is likened to a 
diamond. Even a small broken pi ece of diamond can surpass other ornaments such as gold, silver 
etc for eradicating poverty. Similarly, just by generating aspiring bodhicitta alone, one will 
overwhelm the qualities of the solitary realizer and the hearer although they do possess many 
qualities. This aspiring bodhicitta can he lp one to overcome poverty in samsara.  
 In the Advice to the King Sutra , the king, who was very busy with his duties and had no time to 
practice the six perfections, was told that it was enough for him to just generate aspiring 
bodhicitta. This king was advised to always reme mber bodhicitta whether he was walking, sitting 
down, eating etc and to always hold it in his mind. 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre       Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
F P M T  B a s i c  P r o g r a m                C h a p t e r  O n e  
 
 
29 Lesson 5 – chapter 1, verse 17-26 
[1,4] 
Leisure and endowment are very hard to find 
And, since they accomplish what is meaningful for humanity, 
If I do not take advantage of them now, 
How will such a perfect opportunity come about again? 
 
[1,5] 
Just as a flash of lightning on a dark, cloudy night 
For an instant brightly illuminates all, 
Likewise in this world, through the might of Buddha, 
A wholesome thought rarely  and briefly appears. 
 
We should contemplate  the meaning of these two verses over and over ag ain. At times when we 
are free, we can recite these two verses and spen d some time reflecting on the meaning of these 
two verses.   Our state of mind is basically as described in verse 5.  It is so rare and difficult for us to generate a 
positive state of virtuous mind. But this does no t mean that it will not happen. When it does 
happen, we must seize on it and engage in virtue.   This is quite obvious if we examine our own situat ion. It is very rare and difficult for us to 
generate any virtuous thought or engage in any vi rtue. By looking at our own mind, we can safely 
say that what we are really concerned about in our daily lives is bread and butter issues, and we 
work solely for the benefit of the happiness of this life. This is basically what we are working for. 
It is very rare for us to have any intention or the wish to engage in any kind of dharma practice 
or virtue.  
 On top of that, it is even rarer for us to develop some sort of intense yearning or aspiration to engage in the study of the profound teaching of the Buddha. The fact that  we produce some sort 
of aspiration or yearning of wanting to study th e great treatises and teachings of the Buddha is 
something that has happened thro ugh the power of blessing of th e Buddha that has entered into 
our continuum, as stated in verse 5.  But it is not due to this reason alone.  Obvi ously we have accumulated the karma and merit in 
our past lives, which when combined with the ble ssing of the Buddha, results in our having such 
an aspiration now. If we think about it, this is something that seems to be quite impossible. So it 
is kind of impossible that we have the wish or as piration to study the great treatises and difficult 
texts. But it has happened.  We should not leave it alone.  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre       Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
F P M T  B a s i c  P r o g r a m                C h a p t e r  O n e  
 
 
30 It is not sufficient just to develop the aspiration once. We must keep the aspiration going and 
sustain the desire to study over time. This is im portant. If not, we migh t get discouraged because 
studying this text is difficult. Because of that and if we are not able to sustain this aspiration, we 
might give up our study. So it is important for us to sustain our aspiration to continue our study.  
 Practicing the dharma is difficult, especially tr ying to study and reflect on the great texts and 
treatises. The main thing is not to give up as it will be a waste. Reflecting on verses 4 and 5, we 
should set a long term goal and think of achievin g happiness in the future, especially our future 
lives, and with that, we should pursue our study.  There are many benefits, as mentioned in the text , to listening to the teachings as described in 
the story of the pigeon and Vasubhandu. The pi geon used to sit on top of the roof of 
Vasubhandu’s house. Vasubandhu, who was a grea t scholar of the  Abhidharma (the text on 
knowledge) used to recite the Abhidharma texts from his memory. Just by hearing Vasubhandu’s recitation, the pigeon was reborn as a huma n and later also became a great scholar. 
 W e  a r e  b e t t e r  t h a n  t h e  p i g e o n  a s  w e  n o t  o n l y  l i sten to the teachings but we are also able to 
understand at least some part of the teachings. Then, in our future  lives, we definitely have the 
opportunity to continue to study the great treatise s. The fact that we have the chance to study  
this great text that teaches bodhicitta is defi nitely due to the result of having accumulated 
virtuous karma in the past. We should rejoice about this.   Verse 4 is talking about how rare and difficult it is for us to obtain a human life of leisure and 
opportunity. It is also implicitly  stated that once we achieve such  leisure and opportunity, we can 
achieve great purposes and higher goals with them . At the same time we have to recognize the 
f a c t  t h a t  i t  i s  n o t  e a s y  t o  g e n e r a t e  v i r t u o u s  t h o u g h t s ,  a s  s t a t e d  i n  v e r s e  5 .  W h e n  a  v i r t u o u s  
thought does arise in our mind or when the mind is in the virtuous state, we should seize the 
opportunity and try to engage in  virtue. We should reflect on the meaning of the two verses 
when we have time. By reflecting on the me aning, our mind will definitely change.  
 
A human life endowed with leisure and opportunity is  difficult to find and once found is able to 
fulfill great purposes. As virtuous thoughts rarely  arise in our mind, engaging in virtue is very 
difficult. Even if a virtuous thought does arise, it  is very weak and does not last for a long time. 
The negativities that we have ac cumulated in the past are very po werful. In order to overcome all 
these negativities, we need to generate equally st rong or even stronger antidotes to counter the 
negativities. For this reason, the text goes on to talk about bodhicitta.  In short, these verses talk about the power of bo dhicitta that has the power to destroy even the 
most powerful non-virtue and negativities. It is  the means of pacifying and getting rid of these 
negativities, therefore bodhicitta is praised as the supreme and best means. Bodhicitta is the 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre       Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
F P M T  B a s i c  P r o g r a m                C h a p t e r  O n e  
 
 
31 aspiration or intention to achieve the state of fu ll and complete enlightenment for the benefit of 
others.  
3B2B 1A2B 3 Explaining the different bene fits of aspiring and engaging bodhicitta 
A The benefits of aspiring bodhicitta 
B The benefits of engaging bodhicitta 
 
When bodhicitta is divided, then there are two: aspiring bodhicitta or aspirational bodhicitta, 
and engaging bodhicitta or engaged bodhicitta. 
 The distinction between aspirational bodhicitta an d engaged bodhicitta is made on the basis of 
whether the mind generation of bodhicitta is conjoined with the practi ce of the bodhisattva 
deeds (the practice of the six perfections) or not. 
3B2B 1A2B 3B The benefits of engaging bodhicitta 
[1,18] 
And for those who have perfectly seized this mind, 
With the thought never to turn away 
From totally liberating 
The infinite forms of life, 
 
[1,19] 
From that time hence, 
Even while asleep or unconcerned, 
A force of merit equal to the sky 
Will perpetually ensue. 
 
If we adopt engaged bodhicitta and generate this in our mind – taking on the promise to liberate 
an infinite number of sentient beings from th e miseries and suffering of cyclic existence and 
place them in the state of unsurpassed and fully co mplete enlightenment - if we hold on to this 
form of bodhicitta, then it is  said that inconceivable and immeasurable benefits will follow. 
 
Besides merely wishing to attain enlightenment for the benefit of sentient beings, if one promises 
to train in the six perfections or bodhisattva deeds, one will accumulate immeasurable merit 
continually in each and every single instant whet her we are falling asleep, sitting, standing, lying 
down or whatever we are doing. On top of the aspirational bodhicitta, if our mind generation of 
bodhicitta is conjoined with the practice of the bodhisattva deeds, then all our virtue will be 
much more powerful and we will  continually coll ect virtue without a break and those virtues will 
also increase.   The difference in benefits between aspirational bodhicitta and engaging bodhicitta is explained 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre       Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
F P M T  B a s i c  P r o g r a m                C h a p t e r  O n e  
 
 
32 in the last two lines of verse 17: 
 
[1,17cd] 
An uninterrupted flow of merit does not ensue, 
As it does with the venturing mind 
 The  “venturing mind” is engaging bodhicitta. As great as these benefits are, however, an 
uninterrupted flow of merit does not arise from th e aspiring bodhicitta the way it does from the 
engaging bodhicitta. The benefit of having engaging  bodhicitta is that we continually accumulate 
virtue in each and every single instant and thos e virtues will also increase. What is the reason 
that there are such benefits th at can be derived from generati ng bodhicitta?  The reasons are 
mentioned in the following outlines. 
3B2B 1A2C The reasons there are such benefits 
1 Establishing [the benefits]by quoting scripture 
2 Establishing [the benefits] by means of logic and reasoning 
3B2B 1A2C 1 Establishing [the benefits] by quoting scripture 
The benefits of bodhicitta as established through scriptural authority, are explained in verse 20. 
 
[1,20] 
For the sake of those inclined towards the lesser (vehicle), 
This was logically asserted 
By the Tathagata himself 
In the Sutra Requested by Subahu  
 
The quotation from the  Subahupariprccha Sutra reads: 
 
If one perseveres for the sake of bringing happin ess and benefit to an infinite number of beings, 
then the infinite roots of virtue from this infini te aim that bears in mind the happiness and benefit 
of all sentient beings shall incr ease, expand and reach towards fulfilment every moment, day and 
night, regardless of whether one is unconscientious or even asleep. 
 
This quotation from the Buddha is specifically made to a person of indefinite Hearer lineage (of indefinite lineage means those who can change th eir lineage) and also for those who are afraid 
when they look at what they have to do in or der to achieve enlightenment; such as having to 
accumulate the two collections of merit and wisdom  for an inconceivable period of time. Because 
of this, they may fall into the Hinayana path. Th e Buddha talked about the benefits of bodhicitta 
to these types of persons to prevent them from fa lling into the Hinayana path due to the fact that 
they are afraid of having to sp end so much time finishing the a ccumulations. In this sutra, the 
Buddha was saying that when we generate engagi ng bodhicitta, whatever we are doing, whether 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre       Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
F P M T  B a s i c  P r o g r a m                C h a p t e r  O n e  
 
 
33 sleeping, lying down, working etc, we will accumulate merit continually without a break. So by 
generating engaging bodhicitta, there is no need to be discouraged or be disheartened about the 
time needed to finish the two accumulations.  
3B2B 1A2C 2 Establishing [the benefits] by means of logic and reasoning 
A The validity of obtaining benefits from aspiring bodhicitta 
B The validity of obtaining benefits from engaging bodhicitta 
3B2B 1A2C 2A The validity of obtai ning benefits from aspiring bodhicitta 
1 As the functions of accomplishing virtue are limitless, the benefits are great 2 There is no altruistic intenti on that surpasses [aspiring bodhicitta] 
3 How could such an intention to benefit sentie nt beings not bring about benefit for oneself as 
well? 4 Conclusion and praise 
3B2B 1A2C 2A1 As the functions of accomplishing virtue are limitless, the benefits are great 
The function of accomplishing virtue is limitless.  Since the perspective is big, the benefits are 
great which are covered in verses 21 and 22. (Wha t we are aiming for is something very big, 
therefore the benefit of having such a wide perspective is also great.) 
 
[1,21] 
If even the thought to relieve 
Living creatures of merely a headache 
Is a beneficial intention 
Endowed with infinite goodness, 
 
[1,22] 
Then what need is there to mention 
The wish to dispel their inconceivable misery, 
Wishing every single one of them 
To realize boundless good qualities? 
 
Verse 21 is saying that even the beneficial inte ntion to relieve sentient  beings from just a 
headache, just by generating this thought “may he be relieved from that headache”,  will produce infinite goodness. Of course it goes without saying  that if we wish all sentient beings be happy 
and  free from all suffering, it will produce greater goodness.    If merely having the wish to relieve one sentient  being of a particular sickness itself will bring 
about so much benefits and merits, then it goes without saying that when we wish for infinite 
countless sentient beings to be free from all phys ical and mental suffering or whatever miseries, 
and also want them to be endowed with all the qualities of the Buddha, then obviously we do 
not need to talk about the benefit of such a noble ideal and such a noble mind. 
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre       Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
F P M T  B a s i c  P r o g r a m                C h a p t e r  O n e  
 
 
34 There is an account of a person in hell, who upon  seeing another hell being undergoing so 
m u c h  s u f f e r i n g  d u e  t o  h a v i n g  a n  i r o n  w h e e l  g r i n d i n g  h i s  h e a d ,  g e n e r a t e d   u n b e a r a b l e  
compassion for that person and prayed “may th at person be free from suffering and may the 
wheel come to my head instead and I shall take on the suffering”. Just by generating such a 
thought, he passed away from that rebirth as a he ll being and was reborn in the god realm. It 
goes without saying if you have the thought of wi shing limitless and countless sentient beings to 
be free from all suffering and wanting to place th em in the state of full enlightenment, one will 
experience great benefit with this kind of mind.  
 The function or goal of accomplishing virtue is limitless. Since the goal and perspective is very 
big, the benefits of aspirational  bodhicitta are also great.  
3B2B 1A2C 2A2 There is no altruistic intention that surpasses [aspiring bodhicitta] 
[1,23] 
Do even fathers and mothers 
Have such a benevolent intention as this? 
Do the gods and sages? 
Does even Brahma have it? 
 Let us examine the persons who are close to us such as our parents or  loved ones and check 
whether they have such benevolent intention or aspirational bodhicitta. How about the gods of 
the world, sages and those who have clairvoyance - do they have such a benevolent intention? 
Does even Brahma, who was said to have gene rated the four immeasurable thoughts  and 
controlled this world, have this ki nd of bodhicitta? This verse is saying that even the people who 
give us temporary happiness in this world and wh o can help us such as our parents, the gods, 
sages and even Brahma (the samsaric god who ru les the world) do not have this bodhicitta. 
3B2B 1A2C 2A3 How could such an intention to benefit sentient beings not bring about benefit for 
oneself as well? 
[1,24] 
If those beings have never before 
Even dreamt of such an attitude 
For their own sake, 
How would it ever arise for the sake of others? 
 
If we look at verses 23 and 24, verse 23 is qu estioning whether our pa rents, gods, sages and 
Brahma have this bodhicitta and verse 24 gives the answer that they do not have this bodhicitta 
as they never even have it for themselves, so there is no possibility that th ey think of it for other 
people.   What do people such as our parents, gods, sage s, Brahma and even ourselves hold close to our 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre       Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
F P M T  B a s i c  P r o g r a m                C h a p t e r  O n e  
 
 
35 hearts or cherish? Basically it is our own purpose.  What do we hold most dear? Basically ourselves 
and  our own purpose. Whatever we do is to fulfill the purpose of self-cherishing and our own 
purpose. Have we ever thought about ac hieving enlightenment for ourselves?  
 
When we are awake, obviously we have not though t about this. This also does not happen in our 
dream, as an object of fantasy. We do not dr eam about achieving enlightenment for ourselves. 
Even when we are awake, we do not plan to ha ve enlightenment for ours elves. This is already 
difficult to do for our own sake. How it is possible to wish, to have that kind of attitude for other 
sentient beings?  So verse 24 is saying how difficult  it is to generate bodhicitta and if somebody does generate 
bodhicitta, then it is an amazing and unbelievab le happening. We all are expert at cherishing 
ourselves and this is what we do all the time. Ev en those who are experts at cherishing themselves 
do not even think of achieving enlightenment fo r themselves, so how could it be possible for 
them to achieve enlightenment for the benefits of others? With this as the reason, therefore, this 
verse says that even fathers and mothers, gods, and sages do not have bo dhicitta. Even such a 
powerful god such as Brahma who is said to cont rol the world does not generate bodhicitta. This 
shows that bodhicitta is not a shared or common quality that can be accomplished by any 
person. It shows that bodhicitta is an un shared quality of the Mahayana vehicle.  
3B2B 1A2C 2A4 Conclusion and praise 
[1,25] 
This intention to benefit all beings, 
Which does not arise in othe rs even for their own sake, 
Is an extraordinary jewel of the mind, 
And its birth is an unprecedented wonder. 
 Such an intention to benefit all beings does not arise in others even for their own sake and even 
for an instant, so this precious mind of bodhicitta is difficult to  generate. It does exist in the 
continuum of bodhisattvas who generate it and ha ve the intention to relieve all the sufferings of 
sentient beings and wish to place all sentient beings in happiness. With  that thought in mind, 
bodhisattvas have the desire to achieve enlighte nment and work to generate its causes. When one 
sees that this mind is generated in the contin uum, it is like an amazing and wonderful thing. 
 If we ourselves happen to produce this kind of  thought in our own mind, then it will be an 
‘unprecedented wonder’ as this has not happened before. Once bodhicitta arises in our mental 
continuum, we should strive to maintain it an d increase it and not let it degenerate. When 
bodhicitta arises in the mental continuum of other living beings, then obviously it is also a 
marvelous and wonderful thing and those beings be come objects of veneration and respect. Since 
we consider it  marvelous and amazing when so mebody generates bodhicitta, we should also 
strive to produce it in our own mind.  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre       Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
F P M T  B a s i c  P r o g r a m                C h a p t e r  O n e  
 
 
36  
Bodhicitta is an extraordinary jewel of the mind; it  is very special. Even if somebody possesses the 
six types of clairvoyance or even  if the person has the wisdom th at directly realizes emptiness, 
these things do not make them  Mahayanist. Whether one ente rs the Mahayana path or not 
depends on whether one has this extraordinary jewel of the mind - bodhicitta. If one has bodhicitta, then one is a Mahayani st. Therefore, bodhicitta is called ‘an extraordinary jewel of 
the mind’. Basically verses 21 to 25 establish the benefits of aspi rational bodhicitta by means of 
reasoning.  
3B2B 1A2C 2B The validity of obtaining benefits from engaging bodhicitta 
1 The actual [benefits of engaging bodhicitta] 
2 The validity of those 3 Dispelling doubts 
3B2B 1A2C 2B1 The actual [benefits of engaging bodhicitta] 
[1,26] 
How can I fathom the depths 
Of the goodness of this jewel of the mind, 
The panacea that relieves the world of pain 
And is the source of all its joy 
 
If there are so many benefits that can be derive d from generating aspira tional bodhicitta, then 
obviously many more benefits will come by co njoining the aspirational  bodhicitta with the 
practice of the six perfections.  
 When we generate engaging bodhicitta, it is like ned to medicine that relieves the world of pain, 
and it is able to bestow on sentient beings the happiness of humans and gods. If we talk about 
the wonderful benefits of such medicine, one can never stop – there are so many benefits, it is 
immeasurable.  
 
In one of the sutras Buddha ta lks about the benefits of en gaging bodhicitta, saying: “ If the benefits 
of engaging bodhicitta were to take a form, even space wouldn’t be able to contain them ”. 
 
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre       Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
F P M T  B a s i c  P r o g r a m                C h a p t e r  O n e  
 
 
37 Lesson 6 – chapter 1, verse 23-36 (end) 
   [1,23] 
Do even fathers and mothers 
Have such a benevolent intention as this? 
Do the gods and sages? 
Does even Brahma have it? 
 
[1,24] 
If those beings have never before 
Even dreamt of such an attitude 
For their own sake, 
How would it ever arise for the sake of others? 
 
[1,25] 
This intention to benefit all beings, 
Which does not arise in othe rs even for their own sake, 
Is an extraordinary jewel of the mind, 
And its birth is an unprecedented wonder. 
 
Verses 23 to 25 are saying that this thought of bene fiting all sentient beings is extremely difficult 
to obtain. We know this from our own experience  on how extremely difficult it is to generate 
this kind of thought of wanting to benefit all sentient beings. 
 Look at the people who have benefited us in this  life, especially our parents, who have shown us 
such kindness, taken care of us and given us an education since we  were young. Even generating 
a thought to benefit them is sometimes so difficult . Of course, as it is already difficult even to 
think of benefiting those people who have been  kind to us, what is there to say about how 
difficult it is to generate some thought to bene fit those who have harmed us? Obviously, we don’t 
even have to talk about generating the th ought to benefit all  sentient beings.  
 From this, you can see how extremely  difficult it is to generate this bodh icitta. The teaching is 
not saying that we will be unable to or it is not possible to generate such a mind.  What it is 
saying is that it is an extremely difficult task. But if the mind is trained or one familiarizes oneself 
with this type of training, then it is  possible to generate such a thought.  
 Basically, verses 21 to 25 establish the benefits of  generating aspirational bodhicitta. One should 
have the aspiration to generate this intention to achieve enlightenment for the benefit of all 
sentient beings - “How wonderful it would be if I have bodhicitta. I will generate bodhicitta and I 
will do it by myself. I will put effort in generati ng bodhicitta. Please, Guru Deity, bless me to be 
able to do so.” We should always train our mind in this way.  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre       Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
F P M T  B a s i c  P r o g r a m                C h a p t e r  O n e  
 
 
38  
Generating bodhicitta is an extremely difficult task. Why? This is because we have been under 
the control of the self-cherishin g thought from time without beginning. Without getting rid of 
the self-cherishing thought,  there is no way for us to generate bodhicitta. Of course, bodhicitta is 
the supreme and most powerful anti dote to self-cherishing thought. 
 
[1,26] 
How can I fathom the depths 
Of the goodness of this jewel of the mind, 
The panacea that relieves the world of pain 
And is the source of all its joy? 
 This chapter talks about the bene fits of  bodhicitta. We should  understand the benefits of 
bodhicitta, know its extraordinary qualities. By  understanding the qualities of bodhicitta, one 
will naturally develop an aspiration to generate it  in our own mind. So it is important always to 
aspire and to pray, “How wonderful it would be if I were to generate bodhicitta, I will generate bodhicitta”. It is important to pray in such a w ay. If we generate bodhicitta in our own mental 
continuum, we will attain happiness for ourselves and others will be happy as well. This goes 
without saying. 
3B2B 1A2C 2B The validity of obtaining benefits from engaging bodhicitta 
1 The actual [benefits of engaging bodhicitta] 
2 The validity of those 
3 Dispelling doubts 
3B2B 1A2C 2B2 Establishing the validity through reason 
[1,27] 
If merely a benevolent intention 
Excels veneration of the Buddhas, 
Then what need to me ntion striving to make 
All beings, without exception, happy? 
 
This “benevolent intention” refers to the aspirati onal bodhicitta. Just having this intention to 
achieve enlightenment for the benefit of all sentie nt beings and if one were to produce such a 
thought, the merit that one will accumulate wi ll exceed the merit that one will accumulate by 
making countless offering to billions of buddhas. This is as quoted in the King of Concentrations 
Sutra , “The merit that one accumulates from just generating this bodhicitta exceeds making 
countless offering everyday to billions and billions of buddhas.”   Just by generating this mere in tention to achieve enlightenment fo r the benefit of sentient beings 
would bring forth such an inconceivable amount of  merit. Therefore it goes without saying that 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre       Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
F P M T  B a s i c  P r o g r a m                C h a p t e r  O n e  
 
 
39 for someone who puts a lot of effort into engagi ng in the bodhisattva’s deeds on the basis of 
having generated this bodhicitta, obviou sly the merit would be much greater. 
 
In short, the merit that is derived from engaged bodhicitta is far greater than the merit that one 
accumulates just by having aspirational bodhic itta. The difference between  these two is due to 
the practice of engaging in the bodhisattva deeds.  The mere generation of aspirational bodhicitta 
is not conjoined with the practice of the bodh isattva deeds whereas engaged bodhicitta is the 
generation of bodhicitta conjoi ned with the practice of the bo dhisattva deeds. Here one is 
actually putting effort into doing something to move towards the goal of enlightenment. 
Obviously the merit that comes from engaged bo dhicitta is far more superior and greater. 
3B2B 1A2C 2B3 Dispelling doubts 
[1,28 ] 
Although wishing to be rid of misery, 
They run towards misery itself. 
Although wishing to have happiness, 
Like an enemy they ignorantly destroy it  
 
[1,29] 
For those who are deprived of happiness 
And burdened with many sorrows, 
It satisfies them with all joys, 
Dispels all suffering, 
 
[1,30] 
And clears away confusion. 
Where is there a comparable virtue? 
Where is there even such a friend? 
Where is there merit similar to this? 
 Verses 28 to 30 are under the outline “dispelling qualms” – dispelling the qualms regarding the 
benefits of engaged bodhicitta.  The last two lines in verse 27 “Then what need to mention striving to make all beings, without 
exception happy?” is saying that because we are di rectly engaging in the practices to fulfil one’s 
aspiration of becoming enlightenment, the merit from engaged bodhicitta is greater than that 
coming from aspirational bodhicitta.  However,  there some doubts or qualms that needs to be clarified.   Qualm: When we have engaged bodhicitta, we are actually engaged in doing whatever is 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre       Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
F P M T  B a s i c  P r o g r a m                C h a p t e r  O n e  
 
 
40 necessary to fulfil the welfare of others.  Somebo dy might raise this objection saying “Aren’t we 
all expert in achieving our own happiness?  Aren ’t we expert in getting rid of suffering for 
ourselves? If that’s the case, sinc e we are expert in doing that, wh y do we need to work to make 
others happy? Why do we need to work towards eliminating the suffering of others?” In other 
words, why do we need buddhas? Why do we need bodhisattvas? 
 
Answer: The answer is in verse 28. There is a need  to benefit others. There is a need to have  
engaged bodhicitta to benefit others. Why? It is true that all sentient beings want happiness and 
do not want suffering. Motivated by the desire to avoid suffering, they   do whatever is necessary 
to achieve their goal of getting happiness and avoiding suffering. But because their minds are 
clouded by ignorance, especially the ignorance of the law of caus e and effect, even though they 
want happiness and do not want suffering, they enga ge in wrong actions in order to achieve their 
goal. Although sentient beings have the wish of wanting to be happy and to avoid suffering, they 
engage in unskillful or mistaken methods to ac hieve their goal. For example, when some people 
are tormented by the suffering of hunger and thirst , to remove this type of suffering, they might 
engage in killing another sentient being. In order to satisfy one’s desires, one will steal or engage 
in sexual misconduct. In short, sentient bein gs engage in the ten non-virtuous actions. 
 The situation of sentient beings is likened to a butterfly that, attracted by  the heat of the butter 
lamp, flies towards it and gets burnt by the flame. Similarly, sentient beings want to be happy but 
engage in mistaken actions. Sentient beings do not like suffering yet their minds are obscured by 
the ignorance that prevents them from seeing the causes of their sufferings. Sentient beings do 
not like suffering, yet they spontaneously run af ter the causes of suffering and engage in the 
causes of suffering.   All sentient beings would like to attain higher rebirths as humans and gods and may even have 
the intention to attain liberation from all suffe ring. Although they have such an intention or 
motivation, because their minds are clouded by th e ignorance regarding what is to be abandoned 
and what is to be cultivated to achieve their go al, because of this ignorance, they mistakenly 
abandon the causes of the happiness that they are looking for and engage in the causes that lead 
them to suffering. 
 As the text says, the way we strive to achieve our own happiness, whatever methods or approaches we take, it cannot even compare to th e way the bodhisattvas work in order to achieve 
the welfare of others. Basically, we are comparin g our abilities to work for our own happiness 
and the ability of the bodhisattvas to work for th e benefit of other sentient beings. Although we 
are working for our own happiness, we are unable  to achieve it. Whereas the bodhisattvas who 
are working only for others, they are able to gi ve us the happiness that we are looking for.  
 The bodhisattvas possess bodhicitta in their mind and have the intention to work for the benefit 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre       Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
F P M T  B a s i c  P r o g r a m                C h a p t e r  O n e  
 
 
41 of others to eliminate suffering and to achieve happiness for others. They are able to engage in 
activities to fulfil that goal. Bodhisattvas are able to do things that we are unable to do. 
Compared to bodhisattvas, we are sentient beings  with our minds clouded by ignorance of what 
is to be abandoned and what is to be cultivated. We do not know how to cultivate the causes of happiness and also do not know the causes of su ffering. Comparing our selves  to bodhisattvas, 
bodhisattvas are beings who possess bodhicitta and ar e able to engage in activities that  actually 
bring benefit to others.   Bodhisattvas, motivated by loving kindness and co mpassion, are able to satisfy the bodies and 
minds of sentient beings and enable them to achieve higher rebirths  as humans and gods. 
Bodhisattvas are motivated by compassion to help sentient beings  stuck in samsara, to cut the 
causes of cyclic existence. With  great wisdom, the bodhisattvas ar e able to show sentient beings, 
correctly, what is to be abandoned - especially the ignorance relating to the law of cause and 
effect - and what is to be cultiv ated. In short, bodhisattvas are able to bestow on sentient beings, 
who are deprived of happiness, the happiness that th ey are looking for. Bodhisattvas are also able 
to eliminate the suffering of sentient beings. Bodh isattvas are also able to eliminate the ignorance 
of sentient beings.   What is there that can compare to such a benevole nt intention or this bodh icitta? As in verse 30 
“Where is there a comparable virtue?” The bodh isattvas are able to give happiness, eliminate 
suffering and the ignorance of sentient beings because they possess bodhicitta. When we are 
comparing bodhicitta to other kinds of virtue, ther e is no other virtue that can be compared with 
bodhicitta. There is no other virtue that  has the same  benefit as bodhicitta. 
 Bodhicitta is also able to stop all harms and it  is something that enables us to obtain all the 
benefits. “Where is there even such a virtuous  friend?” There is none that can compare to 
bodhicitta. “Where is there merit similar to this?”  Bodhicitta is able to produce in the mind a 
special kind of joy in the short run and in the lo ng run. There is no merit that can compare to 
bodhicitta.   In essence, we should strive to  generate bodhicitta and maintain  that bodhicitta which has been 
generated. Basically, we need to generate bodhicitta. Of all the ki nds of virtue that one can find, 
bodhicitta is supreme. When we talk about virtuo us friends, bodhicitta is  supreme. When we 
look into the kinds of merit, especially in te rms of completing the accumulation of merit, 
bodhicitta is supreme. 
3B2B 1A2D Praising the person who cultivates bodhicitta 
1 They are worthy of praise because even though they have not been entrusted [with a specific 
task], by drawing upon great compassion, they act to assist others 
2 If someone who accomplishes the slightest of benefits is worthy of compliments, someone who accomplishes all benefit and bliss is worthy of the highest praise 
3 They are worthy of praise because they are the supreme field 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre       Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
F P M T  B a s i c  P r o g r a m                C h a p t e r  O n e  
 
 
42 3B2B 1A2D 1 They are worthy of praise because even though they have not been entrusted 
[with a specific task], by drawing upon great compassion, they act to assist others 
[1,31] 
If whoever repays a kind deed 
Is worthy of some praise, 
Then what need to mention the Bodhisattvas 
Who do good without it being asked of them? 
 
In this world, especially when we are down wi th suffering and then somebody comes along to 
help us. Later, when we see the person again, we will remember that this person has helped us 
before. This person is usually being praised as a good person.  What about someone who has grea t compassion and engages in activities to benefit sentient 
beings, without the hope of the favour being return ed or receiving any benefit from such actions? 
Or someone who looks at sentient beings without any bias? Such a person only works to benefit 
all sentient beings and all the activities of such a bodhisattva is only virtue. Obviously then such a 
person is worthy of praise by all humans and gods.   This verse is saying that if someone who benefits us in this life is worthy of praise and can be considered a good human being, it goes without saying that bodhisattvas who are always working 
for the benefit of all sentient beings with th e mind of great compassion and unconditionally, 
without any bias or hope of anything in return, su ch bodhisattvas are definitely objects worthy of 
praise by all humans and gods.   Therefore, bodhisattvas are suitable objects of homage and of prostration. Bodhisattvas help 
others without being asked or being requested. Wh en they help others, they don’t ask anything 
in return. Why are they working for sentient bein gs? This is because they are driven by great 
compassion. Of course, someone who accomplishes  something successful in this world is an 
object of praise. With reference to the bodhisa ttvas, it goes without saying that someone who 
accomplishes all benefit and bliss are worthy of the highest praise as seen in verses 32 and 33: 
3B2B 1A2D 2 If someone who accomplishes the sli ghtest of benefits is worthy of compliments, 
someone who accomplishes all benefit and bliss is worthy of the highest praise 
  [1,32] 
The world honors as virtuous 
One who sometimes gives a little, plain food 
Disrespectfully to a few beings, 
Which satisfies them for only half a day. 
 
[1,33] 
What need be said then of one 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre       Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
F P M T  B a s i c  P r o g r a m                C h a p t e r  O n e  
 
 
43 Who eternally bestows the p eerless bliss of the Sugatas 
Upon limitless numbers of beings, 
Thereby fulfilling all their hopes? 
 
We are looking at the nature of the act of generosity in verse 32. The object of this act of 
generosity is just a few sentient beings who are lo wer in status than the giver. What they are being 
given is some plain food enough to satisfy them for half a day, just to keep them from starving; the food is not given all the time but only for a short period of time, and the food is given in a 
disrespectful way. Someone who performs such an ac t of generosity, with all these characteristics, 
is usually called a good person or a virtuous pers on in this world, such a person is considered 
s u i t a b l e  t o  b e  p r a i s e d .  I f  s u c h  a  p e r s o n  i s  a suitable object of praise, then what about 
bodhisattvas?  Bodhisattvas work not for one or two sentient be ings but for all sentient beings. The object of 
their action is limitless. They work all the time for sentient beings. They work until samsara ends. 
They work to bestow upon sent ient beings the unsurpassed bli ss of the Buddha. By doing so, 
they will be able to fulfil all the hopes of al l sentient beings. They are motivated by love and 
compassion and they have respect for sentient bein gs. Such are the characteristics of bodhisattvas 
working for sentient beings. Obviously, if someon e who performs an act of generosity in this 
world is considered a worthy object of praise, th en it goes without saying that bodhisattvas are 
worthy of the highest praise. As said in the text, the bodhisattvas are even able to give away their 
bodies to benefit others. It goes without saying th at giving away material possessions is nothing to 
them.  So bodhisattvas are the great benefactors.  
3B2B 1A2D 3 They are worthy of praise because they are the supreme field 
A The reasons it is unreasonable to belittle a bodhisattva in even the slightest way 
B The reasons it is reasonable to cultivate faith 
C Thus, it is befitting to pay homage to them and go for refuge 
3B2B 1A2D 3A The reasons it is unreasonable to belittle a bodhisattva in even the slightest way 
 [1,34] 
The Buddha has said that wh oever bears a harmful thought 
Against a benefactor such as a Bodhisattva 
Will remain in hell for as many aeons 
As there were harmful thoughts 
 
Why is it incorrect to criticize bodhisattvas in ev en the slightest way? This is explained in verse 
34. In this world or society, if a person crit icizes someone who has fame and is also very 
generous, that person who criticizes him will be d eemed bad or uncivilized. If this is the case for 
such an ordinary person, then it goes without s aying that anybody who criticizes the bodhisattva 
will accumulate a lot of negative karma. Bodhis attvas are called great benefactors because they 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre       Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
F P M T  B a s i c  P r o g r a m                C h a p t e r  O n e  
 
 
44 able to give away everything for the sake of sentient beings. 
 
If some foolish sentient beings engage in ac tions with their bodies and speech to harm the 
bodhisattvas, obviously they accumulate very powe rful negative karma. Ev en if they do not do 
anything actively with their body and speech, bu t motivated by a mind of anger or even just 
entertain the thought of wanting to harm, hurt, put down or criticize the bodhisattva, that 
negative karma is already very powerful. As said  in the root text, a person who bears a harmful 
thought towards the bodhisattvas will  remain in the Avici hell for ma ny eons.  This is said by the 
Buddha himself. 
 In one of the sutras, Buddha said to Manjushri, “If anyone who just have the wish to harm the 
bodhisattvas or just have the wish to criticize, belittle or put down the bodhisattvas, that sentient 
being is making preparations to go to hell”. In  the same sutra, it was mentioned that, with the 
exception of bodhisattvas criticizing another bodhis attva, there is no other greater non-virtue that 
can throw us into the lower realms.   Why is there such strong negativity associated with criticizing or belittling bodhisattvas? What 
happens when you harm bodhisattvas? You are ac tually harming the causes of a buddha. When 
you are harming bodhisattvas, you are actually ha rming the causes of happiness of humans and 
gods. These are the two reasons why there is su c h   s t r o n g  n e g a t i v e  k a r m a   w h e n  o n e  h a r m s  
bodhisattvas. When you are harming bodhisattvas , you are damaging the causes of a buddha. 
You are harming the source of happiness of humans and gods.   
Chandrakirti composed a text, Engaging in the Middle Way , which starts with a famous verse of 
homage, where Chandrakirti pays respect to th e mind of great compassion. In that verse 
Chandrakirti says:  all the hearers and solitary realizers arise from the Subduer, the Buddha. 
Where does the Buddha arise from? The Buddha comes from the bodhisattvas. Where do the 
bodhisattvas come from? Bodhisattvas come from  bodhicitta. Bodhicitta is generated through 
great compassion. Therefore, great compassion is  important in the beginning, in the middle and 
at the end. Therefore, at the be ginning of this text, instead of paying homage to the Buddha and 
bodhisattvas as usual, Chandrakirti pays homage  and makes prostrations to great compassion.  
 In another sutra it is mentioned that the act of  harming or criticizing a bodhisattva has greater 
n e g a t i v i t y  t h a n  d e s t r o y i n g  s t u p a s  e q u a l  i n  n u m b e r  t o  t h e  g r a i n s  o f  s a n d  i n  t h e  G a n g e s  R i v e r .  Stupas are said to arise from the buddhas. Buddhas arise from bodhisattvas because of 
bodhicitta. Stupas therefore arise from  bodhicitta as their root cause.  
 So these are reasons why it is incorrect to criticize or belittle bodhisattvas. 
  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre       Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
F P M T  B a s i c  P r o g r a m                C h a p t e r  O n e  
 
 
45 3B2B 1A2D 3B The reasons it is reasonable to cultivate faith 
[1,35ab] 
However, if a virtuous attitude should arise (in that regard), 
Its fruits will multiply far more than that. 
 
Previously, we looked at the negativity of harmin g, criticizing or putting down bodhisattvas. This 
was on the negative side. What if you generate fa ith towards bodhisattvas? What results will arise? 
Those intelligent ones who genera ted the mind of clear faith towa rds bodhisattvas, the result of 
this faith will multiply even more strongly th an the power of the negativity for criticizing 
bodhisattvas.   If you compare these two actions: the act of criticizing bodhisattv as and the act of faith towards 
bodhisattvas, the fruit of the latter will multiply fa r more than the act of criticizing bodhisattvas. 
Let us say, all sentient beings in the worlds of th e ten directions would all be blind. If we were to 
restore their eyesight, this merit cannot even compare to just looking with eyes of faith 
respectfully towards a bodhisattva; the la tter action brings  even more merit.  
 Verse 34 is telling us the negativity of criticizin g or belittling bodhisattvas. Verse 35 is telling us 
the benefit we will obtain if we are able to cult ivate a clear mind of faith towards bodhisattvas.  
 The best means for avoiding criticizing bodhisa ttvas and the best method for cultivating faith 
towards bodhisattvas can be found in the four wh ite dharmas and  the four black  dharmas. The 
best antidote is generating the attitude that all sentient beings are buddhas.   One of the white dharmas involves generating the attitude that all sentient beings are buddha, 
and it is an antidote to one of the black dharmas of criticizing or disparaging bodhisattvas out of 
a n g e r .  A s  i t  i s  h a r d  t o  k n o w  w h o  i s  a  b o d h i s a ttva and who is not, it is your bad luck if you 
happen to criticize someone who is a bodhisattva.  But if one treats all sentient beings with 
respect and one of them happens to be a bodhisa ttva, then we can accumulate a lot of merit.  
 There are many ways to avoid the pitfalls of cr iticizing bodhisattvas. On e is by generating the 
attitude of regarding all sentient beings as buddha. Another is by focusing on the positive and good qualities of sentient beings instead of focu sing on their faults. Although sentient beings 
might have faults, if those sentient beings were to cultivate the antidotes, those faults can be 
removed. Since there is great danger of making a big loss and there is the possibility of making a 
big gain with regards to how we treat bodhisattvas, to avoid the pitfalls, the text gives this advice: 
1. cultivate the attitude that all sentient beings are buddha 
2. focus on the good qualities of sentient beings 
3. contemplate the fact that the faults of sentie nt beings can be removed if they meet with 
the correct antidotes. 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre       Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
F P M T  B a s i c  P r o g r a m                C h a p t e r  O n e  
 
 
46  
(From Module 4, Middle Length Lam Rim    Lesson 10) 
Black dharma White dharma (as antidote to black 
dharma) 
1. Deceiving abbots, mast ers, gurus, and those 
worthy of offerings 1. Forsaking consciously lying to any living 
being whatsoever even in  jest or even for the 
sake of your life. 
2. Making others feel regret about something that is not regrettable 2. Causing the living beings that you are helping to mature to not want the modest vehicle but to adhere to perfect enlightenment. 
3. Speaking disparagingly, etc., to beings who have correctly entered the Mahayana. 3. Developing the idea that all bodhisattvas are the Teacher.  
4. In an absence of sincerity, using deceit and misrepresentation to get the service of others. 4. Not deceiving but remaining sincere to all living beings. 
3B2B 1A2D 3C Thus, it is befitting to pay homage to them and go for refuge 
With the reasons we have discovered , the conclusion, therefore, is that  it is befitting for us to pay 
homage to the bodhisattvas and go to them for re fuge. This is mentioned in the last two lines of 
verse 35 and verse 36. 
[1,35cd] 
When Bodhisattvas greatly suffer they generate no negativity, 
Instead their virtues naturally increase. 
 
[1,36] 
I bow down to the body of those 
In whom the sacred pr ecious mind is born. 
I seek refuge in that source of joy 
Who brings happiness even to those who bring harm. 
 Bodhisattvas can bear any kind of harm or sufferi ng they meet, even at the cost of their lives. 
They have patience with all kinds of harm an d sufferings. When they meet with conditions 
where they may have to suffer, instead of gene rating anger, these conditions will assist the 
bodhisattvas in their practice of patience and also increase the bodhisattvas’ patience. 
 Bodhisattvas, like wish-fulfilling jewels, are able  to fulfil the wishes and happiness of sentient 
beings and also to remove all sufferings of sentie nt beings. To such wish-fulfilling bodhisattvas, 
we should prostrate with our body, speech and mind. 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre       Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
F P M T  B a s i c  P r o g r a m                C h a p t e r  O n e  
 
 
47 3B2B 1B The chapter’s name 
This chapter is called the explanation of the benefi ts of bodhicitta. This fi rst chapter is basically 
on the benefits of bodhicitta. We should contemplate it and if we are able to see all the benefits 
of bodhicitta, naturally, an aspiration to de velop bodhicitta will arise. Once we have the 
aspiration to develop bodhicitta, we should do something about it. 
 
The last verse says bodhisattvas are suitable an d worthy to be objects of homage. We should 
prostrate to the bodhisattvas.  Within the category of bodhisattv as, there are some who are more senior than others. Is it all 
right for senior bodhisattvas to prostrate to juni or bodhisattvas? The answer is yes. By cultivating 
the attitude that the junior bodhisattva is a Bu ddha, the senior bodhisattva can prostrate to the 
junior bodhisattva. In general, it is all right for the senior bodhisattvas to prostrate to the junior 
bodhisattvas. But there are certai n restrictions, depending on th e place and time. Even in the 
situation where it is inappropriate for a senior bodhisattva to prostrate to the junior bodhisattva, the bodhisattva can still pay mental homage even though he does not show veneration with his 
body or speech.  Verse 36 is saying bodhisattvas are suitable object s of homage, suitable objects of prostration and 
suitable objects of refuge. The reason why a bodh isattva is a suitable object of refuge, praise, 
homage or prostration is not because of the person  himself. A bodhisattva is a special person, but 
what makes the bodhisattva special is the bodhicitta that a bodhisa ttva has. It is bodhicitta which 
makes the bodhisattva a suitable object of prostrat ion. What is it that ma kes bodhicitta such an 
amazing or marvellous thing? This is be cause of the benefits it can bring.  
 In the text, we talked about the difficulty of ge nerating bodhicitta. We don’t think of achieving 
perfect enlightenment even for ourselves. Obviously, if we can’t conceive of it for ourselves, then 
conceiving it for others and wish ing all other sentient beings to be happy and for them to achieve 
a state of perfect Buddhahood is inconceivable or  something that seems almost impossible. The 
main thing is to reflect on the benefits of bodhic itta. Once we see the bene fits of bodhicitta, then 
the wish to develop it will arise. We  should try to train in bodhicitta. 
  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre       Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
F P M T  B a s i c  P r o g r a m                C h a p t e r  O n e  
 
 
48 Lesson 7 – chapter 2, verse 1-9 
 
The prayer of refuge and generating bodhicitta that we just recited is called sangye chö tsog ma in 
Tibetan. It is important not just to recite this prayer but also to remind ourselves the purpose of  
reciting it. This prayer symbolises something very important. Since we consider ourselves 
Buddhists, then all our actions should always be conjoined with the two mental states of refuge 
and bodhicitta. It is important that these attitudes should be a part of us and we should make it a 
habit always to remind ourselves of this. 
 In the last session, we looked at the faults and disadvantages of criticising a bodhisattva. 
Criticising or belittling a bodhisattva is a very, ve ry serious negative action as seen in verse 34 of 
chapter I.  
[1,34] 
The Buddha has said that wh oever bears a harmful thought 
Against a benefactor such as a Bodhisattva 
Will remain in hell for as many eons 
As there were harmful thoughts 
 If one were to generate positive thoughts or to ac t in a positive way in relation to a bodhisattva, 
then one would  experience positive effects as  mentioned in the first two lines of verse 35: 
[1,35 ab] 
However, if a virtuous attitude should arise (in that regard), 
Its fruits will multiply far more than that. 
 In general, we can’t say for sure who is a buddh a, who is not a buddha, who is a bodhisattva and 
who is not a bodhisattva. In order to be safe , the supreme method to avoid the pitfall of 
generating negative actions towards them is to cu ltivate the pure perception of sentient beings, 
seeing these beings in their pure forms. Even at times when we see faults in others, we have to 
remind ourselves that those faults are conditione d phenomena  – that means, they are subject to 
change.  When those sentient beings apply the co rrect antidotes, those faults can be removed. 
 This practice of pure perception starts with on e’s guru, one’s spiritual master, followed by one’s 
friends, those who are around us all th e time, especially our Dharma friends. 
 There are many reasons why we sh ould practice this way of th inking, this pure perception. 
Looking at it in a simple way, we  are all from the same centre an d we need to have mutual love 
and affection for one another. At the next level,  since we are all followers of Lama Tsong Khapa 
and follow the teachings of Je Rinpoche, from that  point of view, since we are all the same, then 
we should also cultivate that attitude of  pure perception. Then, if we bring it up another level, 
we are all followers of the Buddha’s teachings, and if we bring it up yet another level, we are all 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre       Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
F P M T  B a s i c  P r o g r a m                C h a p t e r  O n e  
 
 
49 human beings, we are all part of humanity. Bringing it up to the next level, we are all the same in 
that we all have consciousnesses and we are all sent ient beings. If we cultivate this perception by 
moving up the different levels as mentioned above,   then our ability to deal with more people 
increases. That means we will be able to make more friends and cultivate more relationships and 
so forth. Anger towards sentient beings will also decrease. 
 When one is practising pure perception, one pays respect with one’s body, speech and mind, 
firstly, to one’s spiritual master and then one extends it to all ordained persons and to all sentient beings.   In Singapore, in the local context, if you were  to look at the Chinese Mahayana community, you 
would generally find the respect that they show to wards ordained persons is very, very high – they 
w o u l d  e v e n  p e r f o r m  s u c h  a c t s  o f  h o m a g e  a s  b o w i n g  d o w n  d i r e c t l y  a t  t h e  f e e t  o f  a n  o r d a i n e d  person and so forth. If we were to compare our centre and what peop le do in the Chinese 
Mahayana tradition, we would  not show respect to such an extent.  Showing respect with one’s body, speech and mind is something good and is necessary. As long 
as a person bears the signs of ordination, that person is an object of homage. There are many 
reasons why it is important to remember this.  When I mention such things , people might think I am asking them to show me more respect – 
people might misunderstand. That is not the point.   The point here is that in general, when you 
see any ordained persons, you should show respec t in the proper way. This is a practice that 
benefits ourselves so I would like to say, please try to develop this practice.  If we compare ourselves to other Buddhist tr aditions, either locally or with the other 
organisations, we are different in that people here do study the teachi ngs of the Buddha and 
practise. I think we can say that we have bette r knowledge of the teachings of the Buddha than 
others; that we can explain the teachings of the Bu ddha with the help of reason and logic.  We 
have many good qualities that ot hers do not possess. In that se nse, we are better than others. 
 Our external behaviour should, therefore, reflec t whatever knowledge we might have. When one 
knows certain things, but that is not reflected in one’s actions of body, speech and mind by 
showing proper respect and so forth, then ther e is a discrepancy and disparity, between our 
knowledge and behaviour, isn’t it? In that case, one needs to close  the gap between the two.  
 
Specifically, we are now studying the te xt of the bodhisattvas’ practices called Engaging in the 
Bodhisattva Deeds . Since we are studying this text, at the same time, we need to have harmonious 
relations with one another, so that,  even if th ere should be no great benefit that  comes from 
understanding this text, at least, within the centre, we should have harmony. Between the 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre       Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
F P M T  B a s i c  P r o g r a m                C h a p t e r  O n e  
 
 
50 students and the members, we should cultivate loving kindness towards, respect for and pure 
perception of one another.  
 
I think I have mentioned this before in the past. For example, if some new people were to walk 
into the centre for the first time trying to look for something, we could  at least approach these 
newcomers, introduce ourselves and generally make th em feel at home – basically talk to them. If 
people came to the centre and they did not  feel  welcomed, nobody talking  to them or nobody 
welcoming  them or helping them out, then it’s not their fault, it’s our fault – the fault of the 
people who make up the centre. It is something we need to change.   Also, with regards to any ordained person who wa lks in to the centre, m aybe we don’t show them 
enough (at this point, Geshe-la in terjects: “Don’t show them black face!”) respect – we treat them  
as if they were lower in status than ourselves,  in a casual manner.  We need to change this. 
 If you think about it, there is a need to impr ove the centre and this is not just the sole 
responsibility of the teacher, the Exco (Executive Committee) or the staff of  the centre.  It is the 
responsibility of everyone who comes to the centre . Why do we need to do this? We are not like 
a business organisation that has the goal of ma king more money or other worldly concerns. The 
purpose of improving the centre is to provide the favourable conditions for us to spread the pure 
teachings, to help the teachings to be preserved and to flourish.   With regards again to ordained persons, if we cr iticise them or we do anything inappropriate to 
them, then we will accumulate nega tive karma. On the other hand, if we accord respect or relate 
to them in the proper way, then it serves to increase our own merits.  
 I would like to say that whatever I mentioned he re, we should try to change these things. We 
should not just  leave it at the level of listenin g.  We should try and see what we can all do to 
change the situation because if we don’t change the situation, then it is just listening.  
 Sometimes, people might feel that the teachings do not have an impact on their minds or they 
feel that the teachings are not beneficial and ther e is no feeling for the teachings and so forth. 
But whether we benefit from the teachings depend s on ourselves and how we listen, whether we 
see the reasoning behind what is said and whether we contemplate what we have heard. If we do 
such things, then, on an individual level, we will receive some benefit.   The example here of according proper respect to ordained persons and not putting them down -  
one should understand why we should not do th ese things. Not all Sangha members are perfect. 
All have faults. But what makes them special, what  makes them better is that they hold the vows. 
It is not because they are free of faults.   
Amitabha Buddhist Centre       Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
F P M T  B a s i c  P r o g r a m                C h a p t e r  O n e  
 
 
51 When we say you should not criticise an ordained  person or put down an ordained person, it 
does not mean that you are surrendering your in dependence, that your right to free speech is 
being suppressed, that you cannot complain, you ca nnot  do anything. That is not what is meant 
by ‘you cannot criticise an ordained person’ – it  does not mean that whatever ordained persons 
do, even if they were to do bad things, then we s ay,  “Oh, they are doing wonderful things or it’s 
a good thing they are doing.”   That is not what  is meant. Of course, when you see something, 
which   is not right, which n eeds correction,  then one can re spectfully approach and ask the 
ordained person,  ”I don’t understand why you are doing this. What is your reason for doing 
this?”  One can discuss the matter and seek a solution. That is th e meaning of not criticising and 
not belittling an ordained person.  
 This thing about having mutual respect – it a pplies to everyone. All the students and members 
within the centre should have mutual respect for one another. If that were not present, not 
developed, then obviously, one would go on to show disrespect to ordained persons and once 
that happened, one would also go on to show disres pect to one’s spiritual master, one’s guru. It is 
a progressive thing. And if that really happened , all the way up, then we would be the ones to 
suffer the loss.  The best advice is to cultivate the attitude th at all sentient beings are buddhas and regarding 
them as buddhas, to show respect with one’s bo dy, speech and mind. This should be applied to 
whoever comes to the Centre, wh oever walks into the Centre. 
 Taking our five-year Basic Program as an example,  s o  f a r ,  w e  h a v e  b e e n  r e c e i v i n g  p r a i s e  f r o m  
other people – many people have been coming to  class. We are much better when compared to 
o t h e r  c e n t r e s .  L a m a  Z o p a  R i n p o c h e  i s  a p p a r e n t l y  v e r y  p l e a s e d  w i t h  w h a t  h a s  h a p p e n e d .  T h e  main person in this centre is, of course, Lama Zopa Rinpoche. He has mentioned privately to me 
that he is pleased with what has happened. He ha s also mentioned it publ icly to members of the 
centre that he is pleased with what has happened with the Basic Program. The success, to date, is 
not entirely due to the teacher or the translator  but due to everyone’s effort. It is the common 
effort put in by everyone involved in this program.   So, so far, so good. But we have not finished wi th the five-year program yet. We still need to 
generate enthusiasm for our studies and the de termination to continue with them. Actually, 
what we are doing here becomes an offering of pr actice to Rinpoche. It is something that pleases 
the mind of Rinpoche.   Rinpoche has mentioned that the whole purpose for setting up a centre 
is to enable people to come into contact wi th and to study the teachings of the Buddha. 
Rinpoche said this purpose has now been fulfilled. We need to keep this in mind, to continue to come to class and to continue in our studies.   
Amitabha Buddhist Centre       Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
F P M T  B a s i c  P r o g r a m                C h a p t e r  T w o  
 
 
52 The Second Chapter: Confessing Negativities 
3B2B 2 The way to train in the conduct once one has developed the two bodhicittas 
A Embracing bodhicitta  
B The way to train in the conduct of the perfections [Chapters Four to Ten] 
3B2B 2A Embracing bodhicitta 
1 First, practicing the branches of preparation- prostration, offerings, and going for refuge- and 
then confessing negativities- adverse conditions- by means of the four powers  2 The actual embracing of bodhicitta after having first gathered the accumulations: The 
conducive conditions such as rejoicing in virtue [Chapter Three] 
3B2B 2A1  First, practicing the branches of preparation- prostration, offerings, and going for refuge- and then confessing negativities- adverse conditions- by means of the four powers 
A Explaining the chapter’s material B The chapter’s name 
3B2B 2A1A Explaining the chapter’s material 
1 Offerings 2 Homage 
3 Refuge 
4 Confessing negativities by means of completing the four powers 
3B2B 2A1A 1 Offerings 
A The need to make offerings B The actual making of offerings 
3B2B 2A1A 1A The need to make offerings 
[2,1] 
In order to seize that precious mind 
I offer now to the Tathagatas, 
To the sacred Dharma, the stainless jewel, 
And to the Sons of Buddha, the oceans of excellence, 
 
Why do we need to make offerings? This is indicated in the first line of verse 1, “In order to seize 
that precious mind”.  In the previous chapter we looked at the immeas urable benefits of bodhicitta. If one were to 
generate bodhicitta, one would accumulate i mmeasurable benefits. The purpose of making 
offerings is to generate this mind  of enlightenment or bodhicitta th at  is likened to a jewel that 
fulfils all wishes and is the source of all excell ence, the well-being and happiness of oneself and all 
s e n t i e n t  b e i n g s .  T h e  r e a s o n  w e  n e e d  t o  m a k e  o fferings is to generate this bodhicitta in our 
mental continuum.  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre       Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
F P M T  B a s i c  P r o g r a m                C h a p t e r  T w o  
 
 
53 The objects towards whom these offerings are made  are special. They are: the Tathagata or the 
buddhas - those who have gone into the sphere of reality that possesse s the two purities; the 
Dharma: the true paths and true cessations; and the Sangha: this primarily refers to the arya 
bodhisattvas like Chenrezig and Manjushri 
 As said in the root text, “the disciples of Bu ddha, the oceans of exce llence”; this means they 
possess oceans of qualities. Here the sons or di sciples of Buddha refers to the arya bodhisattvas 
from the first ground upwards. When bodhisattvas  attain the first ground, they acquire twelve 
special qualities. Those qualities multiply a thou sand fold as the bodhisattvas move up to the 
next ground. For example, a bodhisattva on the secondnd ground has the qualities acquired on 
the first ground multiplied a thousand times.  There is also another explanation that affixes th e phrase, the Oceans of Excellence, individually 
to the Three Jewels. It can also be explained fr om that perspective. The phrase, the Oceans of 
Excellence,  can be affixed to the Dharma Jewel and also to the Buddha Jewel.  There is another explanation to this verse. In one commentary, it is said th at in order to seize or 
to generate this precious bodhic itta, this awakening mind, which is a mind that is very precious, 
very holy and very pure, we need to rely on different things.   W e  n e e d  t o  m a k e  o f f e r i n g s  t o  o r  r e l y  o n  p u r e  f i e l d s  o r  p u r e  o b j e c t s .  F r o m  t h e  p e r s p e c t i v e  o f  one’s object, the object to whom one is making the offerings – that is the object or field. We also 
need pure and perfect offering substances in term s of very pleasant offering substances. The pure 
objects that one offers can also include the Dh arma, one’s practice. Obviously, one’s attitude, 
one’s motivation or one’s intention behind the acti on should also be pure in the sense that the 
act of offering is not being influenced by, for example, miserliness. And the action of making 
offerings needs to be pure and not mixed with ne gativity, for example, not mixed with the act of 
killing or stealing.  We should include the word “well” (ie proper or pe rfect way) as in “I offer well”. This is in the 
Tibetan text but is not translated in the English te xt we are using. It shou ld be there. There is a 
commentary that explains the meaning of “I offer well to the Tathagata”. Why is the word “well” 
there? It is because one is making all these offe rings with the intention to achieve enlightenment, 
one is making all these offerings for the benefit of all sentient beings, and one is making very 
pleasing offerings in the sense that it is conjoi ned with the understanding of the emptiness of the 
three circles. It is not polluted by the stains or  by the class of adventitious phenomenon. Basically 
it is not polluted by the impure stains of phen omena. And one dedicates the act of offering to 
achieve enlightenment for the benefit of all sentie nt beings. These are the five reasons why an act 
of offerings would be considered well-done.  The three circles as applied to this act of offe ring are: the object involved – the offering 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre       Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
F P M T  B a s i c  P r o g r a m                C h a p t e r  T w o  
 
 
54 substances, the object of the action of offering  – the buddhas and bodhisattvas, and the agent or 
the person who is performing this action. One reflects on how all these three are empty of 
existing inherently while making the offerings. 
 When one is making offerings to the Three Jewe ls, one can also think how the Three Jewels are 
the unsurpassed objects of offering, how they are th e objects or fields that give us the greatest 
benefit, how the Three Jewels are supreme of al l sentient beings. In the Lamrin Chenmo the 
different ways of making offerings, the distinctio n in terms of thought or intention is mentioned. 
When we are talking about the distinction or di fference in terms of thou ght or intention, we 
should think about how the objects to whom we ar e making offerings , ie. the Three Jewels,  are 
the unsurpassed fields of merit, how they are the be st fields that give us the greatest benefit, how 
they are the supreme of  all sentient beings. Ba sically, you are not expecting anything from this 
offering and not hoping for any return or expecting to reap any benefit, that is not the intention.  
And when we talk about the distinction in terms of  intention or thought, we can also reflect on 
the purity of the three circles.  The meaning of the phrase, “I offer well to the Tathagata...” is explained through the distinction 
in terms of thought or intention. What we have been discussing so far is the kind of attitudes or 
thought that will make one’s act of offering well done. 
3B2B 2A1A 1B The actual making of offerings 
1 Offering unowned substances 
2 Offering one’s own body 
3 Mentally emanated offerings 
3B2B 2A1A 1B1 Offering unowned substances 
A Offering substances 
B How to offer them C The reason one offers unowned substances 
3B2B 2A1A 1B1A  Offering substances 
[2, 2] 
Whatever flowers and fruits there are, 
And whatever kinds of medicine, 
Whatever jewels exist in this world 
And whatever clean, refreshing waters; 
 
[2, 3] 
Likewise gem-encrusted mountains, 
Forest groves, quiet and joyful places, 
Heavenly trees bedecked with flowers 
And trees with fruit-laden branches; 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre       Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
F P M T  B a s i c  P r o g r a m                C h a p t e r  T w o  
 
 
55 [2, 4] 
Fragrances of the celestial realms, 
Incense, wishing trees and jewel trees, 
Uncultivated harvests, and all ornaments 
That are worthy of being offered; 
 
[2, 5] 
Lakes and pools adorned with lotuses, 
And the beautiful cry of swan, 
Everything unowned 
Within the limitless spheres of space. 
 
Basically we are talking about the different kind s of offering substances that  are unowned: 
flowers, different kinds of medicines as mentioned in the text, precious thin gs in this world such 
as gold, silver and jewels, different bodies of clean, refreshing water, gem-encrusted mountains 
such as the seven golden mountains, forest gr oves, quiet and joyful places, heavenly trees 
ornamented with beautiful flowers, fruit trees that give harvests of good fruits, fragrances of the 
celestial realms which appease the gods, naga s and human beings and wish-fulfilling trees, 
uncultivated harvests which are  crops that grow  by themselves and need no farming, different 
kinds of ornaments, lakes and pools adorned with lotuses and the beautiful cry of swans. 
 Basically, we are talking about all the different kind s of substances, everything in this world that  
does not belong to ourselves. We can visualiz e them and make them objects of the mind. For 
example, we can offer places that have pools and gardens where we go for picnics. Also mountains contain many kinds of precious substa nces such as natural mines, etc. One takes 
them as objects of the mind, visualize them and o ffer them to the Three Jewels as extensively as 
one can. For someone who has an  active mind that jumps everywhere, one can take this 
opportunity to create virtue by visualizing all th ese different kinds of substances and using them 
as offerings. 
3B2B 2A1A 1B1B  How to offer them 
[2, 6 ] 
Creating these things in my mind, I offer them 
To the supreme beings, the Buddhas, as well as their Children, 
O Compassionate Ones, think kindly of me 
And accept these offerings of mine. 
 
“Creating these things in my mind”: visualise al l these offering substances and take them as 
objects of the mind and make all these offeri ngs of unowned substances to the buddhas and 
bodhisattvas with respect, faith and reflec ting on the purity of the three circles. 
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre       Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
F P M T  B a s i c  P r o g r a m                C h a p t e r  T w o  
 
 
56 “O Compassionate Ones, think kindly of me, and accept these offerings of mine” : make 
offerings to the compassionate ones who only act to benefit sentient bein gs, those who are always 
under the influence of great compassion. Make all these offerings to them and make requests to 
them to remember us, to think kindly of us. It is good to remember these different attitudes 
whenever we make offerings, and with whatever offerings we make. In this case, the objects of 
one’s offerings are the buddhas as well their chil dren, the bodhisattvas. The offering substances 
here are those things that are unowned and one ta kes all these substances as the objects of the 
mind, taking these objects and making them as belonging  to oneself and then one makes these 
offerings.  
3B2B 2A1A 1B1C  The reason one offers unowned substances 
[2, 7 ] 
Having no merit, I am destitute, 
And I have no other gifts to offer. 
O Protectors, you who think of helping others, 
By your power accept these for my sake. 
 Some people might wonder why we could not  just  offer the things that we own ourselves. Why 
do we have to offer unowned substances? The reas on is that since one has not created the roots 
of virtue that comes from the p r a c t i c e  o f  v e r y  p o w e r f u l  a c t i o n s  o f  g e n e r o s i t y  i n  t h e  p a s t ,  
therefore, at the present mome nt, one does not own excellent substances – very pure and 
wonderful substances  - that can be offered. We are poor in these beautiful, excellent substances. 
Since we do not possess such roots of virtue th a t  e n a b l e  u s  t o  o w n  s u c h  e x c e l l e n t  o f f e r i n g  
substances, the only way we can offer them is to  visualize all those that are unowned by us and 
make offerings of them instead. The only way is  to visualise the unowned substances and holding 
those substances in one’s mind and offer them  to the buddhas and bodhisattvas and request 
them to accept these offerings.  From the Buddha’s side, there is no need for any of  these offerings as the  Buddha does not lack 
of any of this offering substances. Buddhas do no t have self- grasping and also do not have the 
attitude that “these things belong to me an d they are mine”. The whole purpose of making 
offerings is to enable us to complete the accumu lation of merit. Basically, visualise extensively 
and then make unowned substances as offerings to the buddhas and bodhisattvas. The practice 
of making unowned substance is actually taught in the Sutra of the Clouds of Jewels . 
3B2B 2A1A 1B2 Offering one’s own body 
[2, 8] 
Eternally shall I offer all my bodies 
To the Conquerors and their Children, 
Please accept me, you Supreme Heroes, 
Respectfully shall I be your subject. 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre       Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
F P M T  B a s i c  P r o g r a m                C h a p t e r  T w o  
 
 
57 [2, 9] 
By being completely under your care, 
I shall benefit all with no fe ars of conditioned existence; 
I shall perfectly transcend my previous transgressions 
And in the future shall commit no more. 
 
This practice is offering so mething that belongs to us. 
 
Lesson 8 – chapter 2, verse 9-16 
 
You will have noticed that after reciting the Heart Sutra , we recited verses from the root text itself. 
I thought that this recitation may be beneficial for all of us in class. One benefit is that we will 
become more familiar with the verses with repeated  recitation over time. Secondly, since this is a 
special text composed by the bodhisattva Shantide va himself, just by reciting and reading the 
text, that act of recitation alone will generate vast stores of merit for all of us. 
 In the monastery back in South India, the monks will usually gather and recite prayers for a few 
hours before any debate session. The monks will make strong prayers for success in their studies 
and debates. Similarly, for us here to have su ccess in our studies, we need to make extensive 
prayers. We should make extensive prayers when we  recite the verses from the text during the 
preliminary ritual.  There is a saying that have been  passed down from generation to  generation back in the great 
monasteries that there is no need to perform sp ecial rituals or pujas to clear away obstacles for 
study for monks in the monastery. Usually, the monk s are advised to take their recitation of the 
common prayers seriously when they gather before the debates or when they have opportunity to 
do prayers together. The monks are advised to refl ect carefully when they are reciting the prayers 
and to set a good motivation and contemplate well.  By doing that alone, all the obstacles that 
might come about during the course of  study will naturally be removed.  
 Similarly, in the course of our study, when we are doing our prayers before class, we should have the same thought as well. We sh ould make strong prayers during the recitation and prayers 
thinking at the same time, “May this recitation practice remove all obstacles and unfavourable 
conditions that might come about in the course of our study and practice”. With this thought 
and respectfully with our body, speech and mind, we engage in the practice of recitation.  Even though we might have the wish to study and practice the teachings of the Buddha but there 
are so many kinds of obstacles such as outer ob stacles, inner obstacles and even obstacles that 
exist on the secret level that may arise along the way. When we meet with such obstacles, 
sometimes, things may get tough. The best way to pacify any of th ese obstacles is to make very 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre       Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
F P M T  B a s i c  P r o g r a m                C h a p t e r  T w o  
 
 
58 strong prayers combined with very strong determination to continue one’s studies.  
 
It is possible that, sometimes, when reciting th ese preliminary prayers, we may get bored or we 
may not be able to see the reason for doing them and see them as a chore. We do not recite these 
prayers for no reason, without any great purpose. Th ere are many benefits. In fact, since this text 
is composed by the great bodhisattva, Shantide va, the benefit and merit that one accumulates 
just by reciting this text is inexpressible. We should remind ourselves of this  when we recite the 
text or prayers. We should do them enthusiastically.   
From the time we start reciting the Heart Sutra  and all the way till the end of the session when we 
dedicate the merit, whatever goes on during the session is considered  virtuous action. Basically 
we should try to do whatever we can to make the whole session enjoyable from our own side and 
to do it enthusiastically; instead of thinking that  we are doing this with no choice, like paying 
taxes. When we talk about virtue when engaging  in dharma practice, the purpose is to remove 
suffering. If our dharma practice leads to suffer ing, then I don’t see much point in doing them. 
Dharma practice is basically done with the mind and it should contribute to the goal of removing 
suffering. It is something that should be done willingly from one’s own side. When one sees the 
point, one would want to do the practice. The main purpose of doing dharma practice is to 
change the mind. Basically, this practice should  be coming from our own side enthusiastically 
and not done through force. 
3B2B 2A1A 1 Offerings 
A The need to make offerings 
B The actual making of offerings 
3B2B 2A1A 1B The actual making of offerings 
1 Offering unowned substances 2 Offering one’s own body 
3 Mentally emanated offerings 
 
Offering unowned substances was covered in the previous lesson. 
3B2B 2A1A 1B2 Offering one’s own body 
This is shown in verses 8 and 9: 
[2,8] 
Eternally shall I offer all my bodies 
To the Conquerors and their Children,  
Please accept me, you Supreme Heroes,  
Respectfully shall I be your subject. 
 
[2,9] 
By being completely under your care, 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre       Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
F P M T  B a s i c  P r o g r a m                C h a p t e r  T w o  
 
 
59 I shall benefit all with no fear s of conditioned existence;  
I shall perfectly transcend my  previous transgressions  
And in the future shall commit no more. 
 
Here we are offering our bodies to the conquero rs and their children, the bodhisattvas. Basically, 
we are saying, “I am offering this body, please accept it”. Why are buddhas known as conquerors 
or sometimes also translated as the victorious ones  or victors? This is because they have achieved 
complete victory over the four maras2. 
 After offering our bodies to the conquerors and th eir children and asking them to accept us, we 
become part of their entourage or subjects. Then , one willingly follows the advice of the buddhas 
and bodhisattvas and undertake whatever tasks th ey have set out for us. From our own side, we 
offer ourselves to the victorious ones and bodhisattvas thinking, “I  will follow whatever advice or 
tasks you have for me and I will do it”. By entr usting ourselves in such a way to the buddhas and 
bodhisattvas, offering our bodies  and thinking, “I will accomplish  whatever you have set out for 
me,” one comes under the refuge or protection  of the buddhas and bo dhisattvas. Since one 
                                             
 
2 The four maras are: the mara of the afflictions, the mara of the aggregates , the mara of the Lord of Death  and 
the mara of Devaputra .  
 The mara of the afflictions: the two primary causes why we are still circling in cyclic existence are karma and 
afflictions. Karma is motivated by afflic tions and our afflictions are the primary cause of cyclic existence. Afflictions 
disturb our mental peace when they arise in the mind. Thes e afflictions are within us and are not external. In our 
mental continuum, they are posited as the mara of affliction. Motivated by different afflictions, we engage in 
different types of actions and then accumulate the karma that ca uses us to be in cyclic existence. As a result of this, 
we have to take on contaminated mental and physical aggreg ates over and over again in cyclic existence. This set of 
contaminated mental and physical aggregates is due to karm a and afflictions. This explains the second seal: that all 
contaminated things are miserable.   The mara of aggregates refers to the contaminated mental and physical aggregates that we have as the result of 
karma and our afflictions. The contaminated mental and physical aggregate are due to the process of karma and afflictions and cannot be good as th ey are in the nature of suffering. 
 The Devaputra mara (devaputra literally means son of deva ): this refers to the manifestation of the state of 
attachment that appears in our mind. When we see somethin g attractive, we get attached to it and this attachment 
manifests in our mind. Attachment is an affliction and when attachment ma nifests in our mental continuum, it 
disturbs the peace in our mind. It also  affects our mind and we lose our po wer of analysis and intelligence. We 
cannot think rationally and cannot differentiate what is good and what is bad.  The mara of the Lord of Death refers to the phenomenon of death itself. We have to be born and die over and 
over again under the control of the power of our afflictions.   These four maras are not external phen omena that are separate from our me ntal continuum but they are within 
us, they are in our mental continuum. Because we are unde r the bondage of these maras,  we are always suffering. 
(from ABC Basic Program Modu le 3, Tenets, Lesson 8) 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre       Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
F P M T  B a s i c  P r o g r a m                C h a p t e r  T w o  
 
 
60 comes under the protection of the buddhas and bo dhisattvas, then one has no fear. On the basis 
of this fearlessness, then one thinks, “I will act to benefit all sentient beings.” 
 
Even though one might come under the protec tion of the Three Jewels, due to having 
accumulated great stores of negativities in the pa st,  if we have not purified these negativities, 
then we can forget about fulfilling the purposes of others, as we won’t even be able to fulfil our own goals and wishes. Therefore, we need to enga g e  i n  t h e  p r a c t i c e  o f  c o n f e s s i o n  t o  p u r i f y  
whatever negativities we have accumulated in th e past and generate the power of restraint to 
restrain ourselves from committing any further negati vities in the future, ev en at the cost of our 
lives.  What happens when we offer the bodies that we  cherish so much to the Three Jewels? After 
completely entrusting ourselves to the Three Jewe ls and after taking refuge, we will come under 
the protection of the Three Jewels and become  part of the entourage of the buddhas and 
bodhisattvas. Literally, we become the se rvants of the buddhas and bodhisattvas. 
 What happens after we become the servants of the buddhas and bodhisattvas? What should we 
do from then on? From then on, what we have to do is to avoid creating negative actions and we need to benefit others, because the buddhas’ acti vities are basically working for the benefit of 
sentient beings. Remembering that, we make the pr omise and think, “I will fulfil this and work 
for the benefit of all sentient beings”.   Everyday, in the morning, when we wake up, we can generate this attitude and offer ourselves 
wholeheartedly and completely to the buddhas and bodhisattvas. This  will make a lot of 
difference. If we offer ourselves wholeheartedly, the negativities that we have accumulated will 
definitely decrease with time. When we wake up, with the knowledge that it is the wish of the 
buddhas and bodhisattvas that no sentient beings  come to any harm or suffering, we completely 
entrust ourselves to the buddhas and bodhisattv as, offer ourselves completely and make the 
p r o m i s e  t h a t  “ I  w i l l  n o t  h a r m  o r  h u r t  a n y  s e n t i e n t  b e i n g s ” .  I f  w e  c a n  d o  t h i s  c o m p l e t e l y  a n d  wholeheartedly, this becomes the best protection for ourselves. 
 Among all the kinds of protections that one can medi tate on, it is said that entrusting one self 
completely to the buddhas and bodhisattvas and o ffering our bodies is the best protection. From 
then on, the Buddha will always be looking after us. If we can offer ourselves completely to the 
buddhas and bodhisattvas, without leaving anything  behind, then, it is said it will grant us 
protection and we will not be affect ed by any outer and inner obstacles. 
3B2B 2A1A 1B3 Mentally emanated offerings 
A Surpassable offerings 
B Unsurpassable offerings 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre       Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
F P M T  B a s i c  P r o g r a m                C h a p t e r  T w o  
 
 
61 3B2B 2A1A 1B3A  Surpassable offerings 
1 Ablutions 
2 Clothing 
3 Ornaments 
4 Scents 5 Flowers 
6 Incense 
7 Food 
8 Light∗  
9 Offering an inestimable palace 
10 Parasol 
11 Music 12 An unbroken continuum of blessings in the form of offerings 
3B2B 2A1A 1B3A 1 Ablutions 
A Site for ablutions B The way [to perform] the ablution ceremony 
C Towel (Drying the holy body) 
3B2B 2A1A 1B3A 1A Site for ablutions 
First we have to generate the ba th-house - the place where we o ffer ablutions to the buddhas and 
bodhisattvas. This is mentioned in verse 10: 
[2,10] 
To very sweetly-scented bathing chambers,  
With brilliantly sparkling crystal floors  
And exquisite pillars ablaze with gems,  
With canopies above aglow with pearls, 
 
We generate the bath house through visualizing it in  the space in front of us. It is not the actual 
bath-house sitting in front of us. This is a mentally emanated offering. It is an offering that is done with the mind. One first visualizes the bath-house.  The practice of offering ablutions or a bath to  the Three Jewels is in  accordance with the 
traditions of ancient India. In the past, when one invited the king  or somebody very important to 
one’s home, one would usually wash their feet first.  This is  an act of reverence to the guest or 
the very important person when they arrive. Afte r that, scented water will be offered and lastly, a 
flower garland will be given.  The reason why we offer a bath to the Three Jewe ls is not because there is something wrong with 
their bodies, speech and minds. It is not that th ey possess faults that obscure their holy bodies, 
speech and minds. The reason that we offer ablution s to the Three Jewels is to purify the faults 
and negativities of our own body, speech and mi nd. The way to perform the ablution ceremony 
is shown in verse 11 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre       Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
F P M T  B a s i c  P r o g r a m                C h a p t e r  T w o  
 
 
62 3B2B 2A1A 1B3A 1B The way [to perform] the ablution ceremony 
[2,11] 
I beseech the Tathagatas  and their Children 
To come and bathe their bodies 
From many-jewelled vases, filled wi th waters scented and enticing, 
To the accompaniment of music and song 
 
We have already visualized the bath-house in the space in front of us. Next, we invite and 
visualize all the buddhas and bodhisattvas goin g to the bath house an d then we offer the 
ablutions or bath to them with many jewelled vases that are completely filled with scented waters, 
accompanied with music and song.   
How do we offer the bath to all these guests? However many buddhas and bodhisattvas there are 
in the space in front of us, we emanate the same nu mber of replicas of ourselves in front of these 
guests, making this bath offering. Or,  instead of visualizing replicas of ourselves, we can emanate 
from our hearts offering goddesses equal in number  to our guests. On this basis, we make the 
bath offering to all of them. All this happens in th e bath-house. The budd has and bodhisattvas 
are sitting there and all the goddesses or replicas of ourselves go up to them and offer ablutions 
or bath to the buddhas and bodhisattvas, holding  many jewelled vases filled with scented water. 
At the same time, the whole ceremony is accompanied with offerings of music and beautiful 
sound.   By performing this bath offering or offering ablutions to these buddhas and bodhisattvas, we 
should think that all the negative karmas and ob scurations of ourselves and all sentient beings 
have been purified. At the same time, we can also think that whatever  harm that we might 
receive from the landlords (the spirits who own th e place) and the host of  harm-givers (who are 
very nasty and can harm people residing at the pl ace),by offering this bath , we think that all the 
negative thoughts in their minds and their wish es to cause harm to others are completely 
purified. All kinds of contagious diseases are also  completely purified. At the end, we visualize 
that bodhicitta is generated not only in our minds but also in the minds of all sentient beings. By 
doing this bath offering, we can visualize that all the different kinds of negative minds in the 
continuum of different kinds of sentient beings are completely purified. Then all of us and all sentient beings generate bodhicitta.  It is also said that for those of us who have diffi culties when it comes to listening to or studying 
the teachings, who keep on falling asleep and wh o have an unclear mind due to the mind being 
completely obscured by the different layers of ob scurations, then doing this bath offering is one 
of the supreme means to get rid of these obscurations.    Most of us have seen how the bath offering ritual is done externally. Normally, we have a vase 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre       Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
F P M T  B a s i c  P r o g r a m                C h a p t e r  T w o  
 
 
63 container and a mirror. One will hold a kata at th e beginning of the ritual, at the time when one 
generates the bath-house. One then  pours some water from the vase onto  the mirror. This is 
what is being done externally. Internally,  we have  to visualize  what has just been explained so 
far. Of course, it would be ideal if we can have all the external substances such as the vase and 
the necessary instruments that are required to perf orm the ritual. Even if we don’t have  access to 
the external substances, however, we can st ill do the practice through visualization. 
3B2B 2A1A 1B3A 1C Drying the holy body 
Next is the drying of the holy bodies as  shown in the first two lines of verse 12: 
[2,12] 
Let me dry their bodies with incomparable cloths 
Clean and well-anointed with scent,  
And then may I present these Holy Beings  
With fragrant garments of suitable colors. 
 “Let me dry their bodies with incomparable cl oths, clean and well-anointed with scent” - the 
drying of the holy body is done with a towel ma de of exquisite and precious divine cloth. This 
incomparable cloth or towel is ‘clean and well-anoi nted with scent’. We can visualize that the old, 
discarded garments of the merit field, together wi th the bath offering to wels, transforming into 
light. Some commentaries said th at we should visualise this light absorbing into the point 
between the eyebrows of oneself and all sentient beings. In other commentaries, it is mentioned 
that the discarded garments and the offered towels  absorb into the aspect of red light and yet 
other commentaries said that they  absorb in the aspect of yellow light. This doesn’t matter as we 
can choose any of these options.   The essence is that all the discarded garments and the offered towels absorb into light and 
dissolve at the point between the eyebrows of on eself and all sentient beings. After having 
perform the visualization of the discarded garments  and the offered towels dissolving  into light 
and absorbing at the point between the eyebrows of  oneself and all sentient  beings, at the end, 
we can think: “May I and all sentient beings achi eve the qualities of the ex alted wisdom of all the 
buddhas”. 
3B2B 2A1A 1B3A 2 Clothing 
Then we make garment offerings after the offering of ablutions in the last two lines of verse 12: 
“And then may I present these Holy Beings with  fragrant garments of suitable colors”. ‘Of 
suitable colours’ means beautiful colours. There are different kinds of guests. For the members of 
the merit field who are in the aspect of fully ordained monks, we offer them the 3 saffron-
coloured robes. For the members of the guests wh o are in the aspect of the complete enjoyment 
body (sambhogakaya), we offer garm ents of different colours, shap e and of very soft and subtle 
material. We offer the necessary garments accordin g to the different aspects of the guests; some 
are in the aspect of the enjoyment body aspect  and some are in the aspect of the supreme 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre       Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
F P M T  B a s i c  P r o g r a m                C h a p t e r  T w o  
 
 
64 emanation body (nirmanakaya) .  
 
At the end of the garment offering s, we think that oneself and al l sentient beings have now put 
on the garments of shame and embarrassment. We al so make this prayer, “May I and all sentient 
beings become adorned with the garments of shame and embarrassment”. We put on the 
garment endowed with shame and embarrassment; what  we want to take off is the opposite of 
shame and embarrassment - what we do not want  is non-shame and non-embarrassment. Since 
this is the case, we should never put on the garment of non-shame and non-embarrassment. We 
need the two mental factors of shame and embarra ssment, therefore, metaphorically, we need to 
put on the garment adorned with shame and embarrassment.3 
 
At the end of offering garments to the guests of the merit field,  we make this prayer: “May I and 
all sentient beings always be adorned with excellent garments.” 
3B2B 2A1A 1B3A 3 Ornaments 
 [2,13] 
I adorn with manifold ornaments  
And various raiments fine and smooth,       
The Aryas Samantabhadra, Manjughosha,  
Avalokiteshvara and all the others. 
 
We have made garment offerings in the previous ve rse as raiments also mean clothes. This verse 
is making offerings of many suprem e ornaments. This is the practice  of offering a lot of different 
kinds of beautiful ornaments to the eight great bo dhisattvas (the eight close sons of the Buddha) 
such as Arya Samantabhadra, Manjughosha, Aval okiteshvara, Maitreya and others. When we see 
the representations of these eigh t bodhisattvas, we would be able to see that they are adorned 
with different kinds of ornaments such as earrings, necklaces, anklets, bracelets etc. At the end of 
making this ornaments offering, we think, “I and all sentient beings have now achieved the 
perfect signs and marks of the Bu ddha.” We think this way, and at  the same time, we also make 
the prayer:  “May I and all sentient beings achi eve the perfect signs and marks of the Buddha.” 
                                              
3 Shame is an avoidance of misdeeds on account of ones elf, embarrassment is an avoidance of misdeeds on 
account of others. What is the differe nce between shame and embarrassment? Although both of them are similar 
in terms of avoiding misconduct, shame is such that, when one is about to engage in misconduct, one avoids it, 
thinking, “This is not something I should do”. In the case  of embarrassment, when one comes close to engaging in 
misconduct, one avoids it on account of others, thinking, “I f others were to despise me [as a result of my engaging 
in misconduct], this would not be fitting.” One avoids misconduct due to concern about the displeasure of one’s 
gurus or teachers – the principal object [causing] this avoidance. ...If shame and embarrassment are absent, one will 
be unable to restrain oneself from any misconduct whatso ever, for, without fear about the fruition from one’s own 
side, and lacking concern about the displeasure of one’s gurus,  teachers, and so forth, there will be no way to cease 
misconduct. (from ABC Basic Program Mo dule 2 - Minds and Mental Factors)  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre       Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
F P M T  B a s i c  P r o g r a m                C h a p t e r  T w o  
 
 
65 3B2B 2A1A 1B3A 4 Scents 
[2,14] 
Just like polishing pure, refined gold  
I anoint the Buddha's forms, which blaze with light,  
With the choicest perfumes, whose fragrance permeates  
A thousand million worlds. 
 
The literal translation is the offering of anoin tment. We offer different kinds of perfumes to 
different parts of the buddhas’ bodies. By anoi nting the buddhas’ holy bodies with different 
kinds of perfume, we should think and pray: “Due to these roots of virtue, may I and all  sentient 
beings obtain the golden complexion of the Buddh a’s holy body.” The Buddha’s body is in the 
colour of pure refined gold and this is  one of the holy signs of the Buddha. 
3B2B 2A1A 1B3A 5 Flowers 
[2,15] 
And to the highest objects of giving, I offer  
Beautiful, well-arranged garlands,  
As well as enchanting, sweet-smelling flowers  
Such as lilies, jasmine and lotus blooms. 
 We offer different kinds of flowers, such as the utpala flowers, to the merit field sitting in front of us and we visualize scattering the flowers toward s each of the member of the merit field. In the 
root text, flower garlands are mentioned as well, so we offer flower garlands to the merit field 
that is  in the aspect of the complete enjoyment body. 
 In the commentary it is mentioned that it is ina ppropriate to offer flower garlands to the merit 
field in the aspect of the supreme emanation body  (nirmanakaya) because this is the aspect of 
non-attachment and non-desire. Because of this, we  should not offer flower garlands but instead 
we offer loose scattered flowers. We visualize th e scattered flowers transforming into the aspects 
of beautiful palaces, victory banners, parasols etc. , instead of just falling all over the place and 
making a mess. You might have noticed that previo usly we only talked about offering ornaments 
to the complete enjoyment bodies (sambhogakay a) and not to the supr eme emanation bodies 
(nirmanakaya). This is because the supreme emanation bodies are associated with non-
attachment and non-desire.   In one commentary, it is said that we should ma ke this prayer after we offer the flowers to the 
merit field: “May I and all sentient beings achiev e the 37 branches of enlightenment”. There is a 
whole set of qualities which are ca lled the 37 aspects of enlightenment or literally translated as 
the 37 branches/limbs of enlightenment. Within these 37 aspects there are different groups of 
different qualities; one group is called the eight- fold noble path (eight qualities belonging to 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre       Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
F P M T  B a s i c  P r o g r a m                C h a p t e r  T w o  
 
 
66 superior beings) and another group is called the seven branches (or seven limbs) of 
enlightenment. In the commentary, it is mentione d that after making the flower offerings, we 
should pray to achieve these seven branches of enlightenment.   However, I cannot find any explanation in the commentary on what is the connection between 
the practice of flower offerings and attaining thes e 7 branches of enlightenment. I think this may 
relate to the story of when Shakyamuni Buddha was born, when he walked seven steps and after 
each step, a flower appeared miraculously on th e ground. In total,  seven flowers appeared. At 
the end of the seven steps, the Buddha said,  “I am the supreme one and I will teach the Dharma 
in this world.” 
3B2B 2A1A 1B3A 6 Incense 
 [2,16] 
Also, I send forth clouds of incense  
Whose sweet aroma steals away the mind,  
As well as celestial delicacies  
Including a variety of foods and drinks 
 
The offering of incense is done in the first two li nes of  verse 16: “Also,  I send forth clouds of 
incense whose sweet aroma steals away the mind”.  The incense possesses a very sweet smelling 
aroma such that, when one comes in  contact with it, it captivates  the mind as mentioned in the 
words  “steals away the mind”. As said in the text, we offer “clouds of incense” and one  way of doing this is this: we can visualize  the incense  smoke rising to the sky like clouds. We can also 
interpret “‘clouds of incense” to mean many, in  terms of the number of incense offerings that 
one makes.   The entity of the incense is the smell itself. While retaining its entity, we can visualise that it 
takes on the aspect of different kinds of lette rs (eg. the syllables AH, HUM,...), vowels and 
consonants as well as transforming into the aspect s of the seven kinds of precious jewels that are 
carried by the wind to the ten directions, offeri ng  them to the buddhas and bodhisattvas.  The 
buddhas and bodhisattvas are pleased with this o ffering. This is one way of doing the offering.  
 Another way of doing this is according to the lite ral interpretation of “I send forth clouds of 
incense,” by visualizing clouds of incense smok e and making this offering to the buddhas and 
bodhisattvas. At the same time, visualize that th e incense offering has the power to remove all 
mental anguish or suffering once one come s into contact with it or smells it.  
 When making this incense offering to the buddh as and bodhisattvas, think that any  sentient 
being who comes into contact with  this nice-smelling incense, immediately upon coming into 
contact with this offering, all th eir sufferings are eliminated and they are satisfied with great bliss 
and happiness. This visualization should be done  when we are making incense offerings. We 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre       Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
F P M T  B a s i c  P r o g r a m                C h a p t e r  T w o  
 
 
67 should put into practice what we have learnt here in class. It will be very good if we can perform 
the incense offering with this visualization.   
 
After making the incense offering, we should make this prayer :May I  and all sentient beings be 
adorned with the beautiful scent of morality th at pleases the holy minds of the buddhas and 
bodhisattvas. There is a connection here. It is me ntioned, in reality, th at those who keep pure 
morality do smell nice naturally withou t need for putting on any anointment. 
3B2B 2A1A 1B3A 7 Food 
The offering of food is done in the last two li nes of  verse 16: “As well as celestial delicacies 
including a variety of foods and drinks”.   We visualize different kinds of delicious foods of a hundred tastes. When we invite someone 
important, such as a king or minister to our ho me, we should offer them food and drink. In the 
same way, we should offer the best food and dr ink to all the buddhas and bodhisattvas. At the 
end of a making the food and drink offering, we make the prayer: “May I and all sentient beings 
be sustained in future by the food of concentration”. Instead of living on gross food as we do as 
human beings, instead, we make a prayer that we may be sustained by the food of concentration. 
  
Lesson 9 – chapter 2, verse 17-23 
 In the putline, we are at number eight from amon g the surpassable offerings, the first subdivision 
of the mentally emanated offerings, this is the offering illumination, or light. 
3B2B 2A1A 1B3A 8 Light 
 [2,17] 
I offer them jewelled lamps 
Arranged on golden lotus buds; 
Upon land sprinkled with scented water 
I scatter delicate flower petals. 
 The light offering appears in the first two lines of verse 17: “I of fer them jewelled lamps arranged 
on golden lotus buds”. The container for the ligh t offering is the golden lotus buds. Contained 
within the golden lotuses are various kinds of pr ecious jewels such as vaidurya or lapis lazuli, 
which give out light. We offer these kinds of light.  Usually we offer butter lamps and oil lamps as light o fferings. This text says to visualize a very big 
container as big as the three thousand million world systems with a wick as big as Mount Meru. The amount of butter or oil is as much as the oc eans can contain. When we make light offerings, 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre       Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
F P M T  B a s i c  P r o g r a m                C h a p t e r  T w o  
 
 
68 we should make it in such a way as to make the offering very extensive. We can visualize five light 
rays coming from the butter lamp or the oil la mp completely filling the entire space in the 
universe and offering it to all the buddhas and bodhisattvas.   Since we do make light offerings at home as well as at the centre, it would be good to do this visualization whenever we perform light offerings.  I f  w e  c a n  v i s u a l i z e  i n  s u c h  a  w a y ,  w e  w i l l  
accumulate immeasurable merits. In reality, we mi ght be offering just one butter lamp and also, 
in reality, we cannot have such a big butter la mp. But we can visualize it in such a way to 
accumulate immeasurable merit. We are now talking about mentally emanated offerings, 
offerings that are made with the mind. Therefore, we are using our minds to offer in an extensive 
way.   After we have finished with the practice of maki ng light offerings, we should dedicate the merit 
and pray that due to these light offerings, may the ignorance of oneself and all sentient beings be 
eliminated and may oneself and all sentient bein gs gain the great wisdom that understands and 
realizes all the objects of knowledge.  It will be good if we can make the link between what we are studying and our everyday practice since we do offer light frequently. We should ma ke use of what we have learnt in class and 
practice it immediately by doing the appropriat e visualization and, at the end, making the 
respective prayers and dedication. 
3B2B 2A1A 1B3A 9 Offering an inestimable palace 
Next is the practice of offering an inestimable pa lace, which is the literal translation of “celestial 
mansion.” This outline is in accordance with G yaltsab Rinpoche’s commentary   but the outline 
of some other commentaries mentions “offering the ground” with a separate outline for “offering an inestimable palace”.  We will be following Gyaltsab Rinpoche’s commentary, which explains 
the last two lines of verse 17 and verse 18. 
[2,17cd] 
Upon land sprinkled with scented water 
I scatter delicate flower petals. 
 
[2,18 ] 
To those who have the nature of compassion, 
I offer palaces resounding with melodious hymns, 
Exquisitely illuminated by hanging pearls and gems 
That adorn the infinities of space. 
 
We first look at the practice of offering the ground. The ground is made of jewels, is very even and is anointed with sweet-smelling incense. Growing on the ground are different kinds of 
flowers of different colours. This is how we shou ld visualize when we are offering the ground to 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre       Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
F P M T  B a s i c  P r o g r a m                C h a p t e r  T w o  
 
 
69 all the buddhas and bodhisattvas. The jewelled ground  is very pleasant to walk upon. It is just 
like walking on a spongy surface. We offer this beautiful ground with the appropriate 
visualization to all the buddhas and bodhisattvas  and dedicate the merit and pray: Due to this 
merit, may I and all sentient beings achieve the mind generation like the earth. 
 If we look at bodhicitta in terms of the entity, it  is divided into two:- aspirational bodhicitta and 
engaged bodhicitta. If we look at  bodhicitta in terms of analogy (used to describe the different 
kinds or levels of mind generation), there are twenty-two examples. Of the twenty-two examples, 
the first one is called the mind generation of bo dhicitta like the earth, which is related to the 
Mahayana path of accumulation.  Next is the practice of offering an inestimabl e palace. The reason it is called an inestimable 
palace is because it is so huge that it cannot fit into our minds. It is obviously very beautiful and 
is made of different precious jewels. Inside th is inestimable palace or mansion, we should 
visualize many offering goddesses who hold in their hands musical instruments making beautiful music and singing with beautiful captivating voices . The different sides of the palace are adorned 
with hanging jewels. Light rays of different colo urs are emitted from these jewels that fill the 
entire space.  In short, we visualize light rays coming from th e inestimable palace adorned with jewels filling 
the entire space. We offer this to all the buddh as and bodhisattvas who are in the nature of 
compassion. After offering this inestimable palace  or mansion we pray: Due to this merit, may I 
and all sentient beings proceed to the city of grea t liberation. ‘Great liberation’ means the state of 
enlightenment or buddhahood. 
3B2B 2A1A 1B3A 10 Offering Parasols 
Next is the offering of parasols in verse 19: 
[2,19] 
Eternally shall I offer to all the Buddhas 
Jewelled parasols with golden handles 
And exquisite ornaments embellished to the rims, 
Standing erect, and their sh apes beautiful to behold 
 Verse 19 is describing the type of parasols we should offer. We visualize that and we offer it to all the buddhas and bodhisattvas. Afte r offering these parasols, we pray and dedicate that, due to 
this merit, may I and all sentient beings be free of the suffering of the  heat of cyclic existence in 
general and, specifically, the sufferings of the lower realms. Due to this merit, may I and all 
sentient beings come under the protection of the Three Jewels.  There is a historical account of how Brahma an d Indra offered 500 parasols made of different 
jewels, such as vaidurya, to the Buddha. The parasol protects us from  heat as we move under the 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre       Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
F P M T  B a s i c  P r o g r a m                C h a p t e r  T w o  
 
 
70 shadow of the parasol. If we un derstand the analogy, we will unde rstand this prayer. Sometimes, 
such parasols are offered to His Holiness wherever he goes. Traditionally, the parasol is offered to 
His Holiness and carried over him as he moves. Parasols are also traditionally offered to the 
Ganden Tripa, the throne holder of the Gelugpa tradition.   In short, we visualize beautiful and pleasant parasols and offer them to all the buddhas and 
bodhisattvas. At the end, we make this prayer : May I and all sentient beings be free of the 
suffering of the heat of samsara and the lower realms. May all sentient beings come under the 
protection of the Three Jewels. 
3B2B 2A1A 1B3A 11 Offering Music 
[ 20 ] 
In addition, may a mass of offerings 
Resounding with sweet and pleasing music, 
(Like) clouds that appe ase the misery of all, 
Each remaining (for as long as necessary) 
 
We are offering beautiful sounds, such as sweet and pleasing music coming from different musical instruments. This music is very powe rful. Immediately upon hearing this sound or 
music, all the sufferings of sentient beings are el iminated and their minds are satisfied.  We offer 
this type of sweet and pleasing music and pleasa nt sounds to all the buddhas and bodhisattvas 
and think that their holy minds are very pleased. 
3B2B 2A1A 1B3A 12 An unbroken continuum of blessings in the form of offerings 
[2,21] 
And may a continuous rain 
Of flowers and precious gems descend 
Upon the reliquaries and the statues, 
And upon all the jewels of Dharma. 
 
“And upon all the jewels of Dh arma” means the Dharma Jewel which is the object of refuge and 
not referring to some jewels which are called th e jewels of dharma. There are the conventional 
Dharma Jewel and the ultimate Dharma Jewel. The conventional Dharma Jewel refers to the 
twelve categories of scriptures. The ultimate Dhar ma Jewel is the true paths and true cessations. 
 The other holy objects mentioned here are the re liquaries and the statues, which refer to the 
stupas that contain the relics of the buddhas and any paintings, statues or representations of the 
Buddha.   These are the objects to which we are going to ma ke the offering. The offe ring is the continuous 
rain of flowers and precious jewels. We think: “May this rain of flowers and jewels descend upon 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre       Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
F P M T  B a s i c  P r o g r a m                C h a p t e r  T w o  
 
 
71 all these holy objects continuously, without break, until the end of samsara”. In some 
commentaries, this is placed under the outline “Offerings arising from the power of prayers.” 
 
In short, we make this prayer: May this offering of flowers and jewels descend continuously upon the Three Jewels (referring to all the holy object s such as the Dharma Jewel, statues and stupas) 
until the end of samsara. We visualize a rain of flowers and jewels descending continuously upon 
the Three Jewels and make this prayer: May this rain of offerings continuously descend until the 
end of samsara.  In this text, when it talks about the making of actu al offerings, offerings that are actually set out, 
it does not talk about making offerings on an extensive scale. But when it comes to mentally 
emanated offerings, we are advised to vi sualize them in a very extensive way.  
 The reason is because the author here is the great bodhisattva, Shantideva. At that time 
Shantideva was abiding in the yoga without elaborat ion i.e. Shantideva lived in a very simple way, 
he did not have any jewels for offerings. If we can visualize making  offerings in the way 
explained earlier, we will accumulate a lot of me rit. This is how the wise ones, those who are 
skilled, make their offerings.  We should not look down or pay scant attention to the practice of mentally emanated offerings. 
There are a total of twelve kinds of mentally emanated offerings mentioned in this text. We 
should make these offerings as explained ea rlier continuously, over and over again.  
 As mentioned in the commentary, when we talk about the practice of deity yoga, whether we 
visualize ourselves as the deity or we visualize the deity in front of us, this practice  accumulates a 
lot of merit but this is something we have to do continuously. Comp aring that to this practice of 
making offerings, even if we we re to make those offerings as ex plained here just once, we will 
accumulate a lot of merit. These practices of making offerings accu mulate a lot of merit and  with 
less hardship. Even if we were to visualize these offerings to all the buddhas and bodhisattvas for 
just an instant in the mind, we will accumulate  a great amount of meri t. We will finish the 
accumulation of merit and wisdom and purify the ob scurations. This also he lps in our practice of 
listening, reflection and meditation.  Sometimes, we make offerings with what we actual ly own (external offering substances). If those 
offering substances are obtained through wrong livelihood or those substances are obtained 
through creating negative karma, then those o fferings that we offer will not become  pure 
offerings. Sometimes, these offerings are mingled wi th miserliness and pride. This is not the case 
when we make mentally emanated offerings as me ntally emanated offerings are said to be very 
vast, extensive and very pure.  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre       Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
F P M T  B a s i c  P r o g r a m                C h a p t e r  T w o  
 
 
72 When we are doing some sort of practice everyd ay, we can perform the visualization of making 
offerings of these twelve kinds of mentally eman ated offerings. We can go through the offerings 
individually and then spend two or three minutes on  each of those offering s, visualizing it very 
extensively and making those offerings to the Th ree Jewels. If we do this, we will accumulate 
merit, purify our mind of obscurations and it also becomes the cause for our wishes to succeed. 
Ideally, when we recite the respective verses for the different kinds of offerings, we should stop 
for a while and do the appropriate extensive visu alization to the Three Jewels. After this, we 
move on to the next offering by reciting the corresponding verses. 
 
We should do this practice at our own pace and fa miliarize ourselves with this practice. If we do 
this practice, it will bring great benefit. We shou ld practice what we have learnt. The purpose of 
reciting different prayers is to have the meanin g of the prayers arise in our own mind. Here we 
are talking about offerings and the appropriate visu alization. If we are already familiar with the 
practice and are able to create this visualization in our own mind, then there is not much need to 
rely on the words of the prayers. We can si t quietly and perform this visualization.  
 Sometimes, when we are not doing anything or th e mind is spacing out or just thinking about 
this and that, an hour will just pass by. If we  do the appropriate visualization of the various 
offerings and make the relevant dedication prayers, even though we find an hour have passed by, we will reap the great benefit of doing this practi ce. When we do such pr actice of offerings and 
then finish the accumulation of merit, our mind s will become happy and we will achieve mental 
peace. When we talk about practicing the dharma , it is primarily done with the mind and not 
with the body and speech. This  is the connection between what is mentioned here and the 
practice of mentally emanated offerings as ment ally emanated offerings is done with the mind. 
3B2B 2A1A 1B3 Mentally emanated offerings 
A Surpassable offerings 
B Unsurpassable offerings 
3B2B 2A1A 1B3B  Unsurpassable offerings 
[2, 22 ] 
In the same way as Ma njughosha and others 
Have made offerings to the Conquerors, 
Similarly do I bestow gifts upon the Tathagatas, 
The Protectors, their Children and all. 
 
Great bodhisattvas, like Manjushri and Samantab hadra, emanate skies of offerings and offer 
them to all the buddhas and bodhisattvas. This verse is saying, in the same way, I, like them, will 
emanate clouds of offerings filling the entire  space and offer it to all the buddhas and 
bodhisattvas.   
Amitabha Buddhist Centre       Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
F P M T  B a s i c  P r o g r a m                C h a p t e r  T w o  
 
 
73 What kind of visualization is to be done here? First, we visualize the bodhisattva Samantabhadra. 
Then, we visualize, from the heart of this bodhisa ttva, emitting thousands of billions of light rays 
of different colours. The number of light rays is equal to the number of bu ddhas in existence. At 
the tip of each of these thousands of billions of  light rays emitted from the heart of bodhisattva 
Samantabhadra are replicas of bodhisattva Sama ntabhadra. From the heart of each of these 
replicas of bodhisattva Samantabhadra, again thou sands of billions of light rays are emitted from 
each heart. The offerings then come from these immeasurable manifestations of Samantabhadra. 
At the end, we have the whole sky filled with o fferings that  are made to  all the buddhas and 
bodhisattvas. This is how bodhisattva Samantabha dra made offerings to the buddhas. His way of 
making offerings is inconceivable and indescribable. 
 As mentioned in the verse, in the same way as bodhisattva Samantabhadra, we shall make 
offerings, filling the entire space, to all the bu ddhas and bodhisattvas. This is the practice of 
making unsurpassable offerings.  Previously, we  talked about meditating  on great compassion 
and meditating on bodhicitta.  Those practices are also considered unsurpassable offerings. 
 The method of making offerings like bodhisattva Samantabhadra: here this visualization is not 
done from our own heart but we visualize ligh t rays coming from the heart of bodhisattva 
Samantabhadra. Before that, we have to visualize first the objects to which we want to make the 
offerings – i.e. all the buddhas an d bodhisattvas in the space in front of us. Then we visualize 
bodhisattva Samantabhadra. If we don’t know what he looks like, we can visualise a figure in the 
bodhisattva aspect and think that th at is bodhisattva Samantabhadra.  
 Then we visualize thousands of billions of ligh t rays emitting from the heart of bodhisattva 
Samantabhadra. At the tip of each  of the light rays are replicas  of bodhisattva Samantabhadra. 
Again, from the heart of those replicas of bodh isattva Samantabhadra emit thousands of billions 
of light rays. At the tips of those emitted light rays are manifestations of bodhisattva 
Samantabhadra. From the heart of those mani fested bodhisattva Samantabhadra come forth 
clouds of offerings and those offerings are offered to all the buddhas and bodhisattvas. We should attempt to make this visualization clearer by familiarizing with it. This is how bodhisattva 
Samantabhadra made offerings. We should emulat e him and make offerings in the same way to 
all the buddhas and bodhisattvas. This is the reason why we visualize bodhisattva 
Samantabhadra.  Different great bodhisattvas have their own charac teristics and special features. We are told that 
Chenrezig is the nature of compassion, Manjushri is the nature of wisdom and Samantabhadra is 
famed for the practice of making offerings that arise through the power of his prayers. 
Bodhisattva Samantabhadra is famed for making extensive prayers and the offerings he made 
arose through the power of his prayers. Because of  this reason, in this context, we visualize 
bodhisattva Samantabhadra. Bodhisattva Samantabhadra composed the King of Prayers.  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre       Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
F P M T  B a s i c  P r o g r a m                C h a p t e r  T w o  
 
 
74  
The practice of making extensive offerings like  bodhisattva Samantabhadra makes the mind big. 
When our mind is getting narrow, by doing this visualization, it will help to make the mind 
bigger. If we do such visualization in our own room and is able to sustain it, even though the room is small, we will feel that we have arrived in another big world. There are some people who lock themselves in a small room, surrounded by the four walls.  This condition makes their 
minds very small. This visualization may help them to make their minds more spacious. The 
main thing here is that by doing such visualiz ation, one can accumulate huge amounts of merit 
in an instant.   Here, we have finished the outline on offerings [2A1A a] 
3B2B 2A1A Explaining the chapter’s material 
1 Offerings 
2 Homage 
3 Refuge 
4 Confessing negativities by means of completing the four powers 
3B2B 2A1A 2 Homage 
A Verbally expressing homage B Physically prostrating 
3B2B 2A1A 2A Verbally expressing homage 
Pleasing by speech appears in verse 23: 
[2, 23 ] 
I glorify the Oceans of Excellence 
With limitless verses of harmonious praise; 
May these clouds of gentle eulogy 
Constantly ascend to their presence 
 
“With limitless verses of harmonious praise”: wi th very enchanting beautiful voices, we make 
oceans of praise. What do we praise? We prai se the qualities of the holy bodies, speech and 
minds of all the buddhas and bodhisattvas. We can interpret “Oceans of Excellence” as the 
Three Jewels as well. With very enchanting beauti ful voices, we make oceans of praise, very vast 
extensive praises which are inexhaustible and offe r them to the buddhas and bodhisattvas or the 
Three Jewels.  I f w e w an t  t o  d o  i t  i n  an  ext en s i v e w ay, t hen  we can visualize emanating countless replicas of 
ourselves singing praises to all the buddhas and bo dhisattvas. If we want to do it in a more 
extensive way, then we visualize each of thes e replicas of ourselves having many heads and 
reciting praises. It is also mentioned in the text , we can also visualize ea ch of these faces having 
many tongues. It is a bit weird for us as we have only one head, one face and one body. To speak 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre       Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
F P M T  B a s i c  P r o g r a m                C h a p t e r  T w o  
 
 
75 of oneself having many heads and tongues seems fu nny. In reality, we don’t have such a body but 
this is done with the mind so visualize like that . Through visualization, we can visualize anything 
and it is a matter of getting used to it. Whenever we recite our prayers, we should recite them in 
as beautiful a voice as we can and offer that to all the buddhas and bodhisattvas. 
 
 
Lesson 10 – chapter 2, verse 24-26 
 We have already finished with the section on me ntally emanated offerings, of which there are 
twelve mentally emanated surpassable offerings, and the unsurpassable offerings.  For those who have time, one should familiarise oneself with those different kinds of offerings 
and try to make those offerings with one’s mind by  visualising them; try to create images of them 
and make those offerings. As said in the comment ary, just by making those emanated offerings 
even for a single instant, one can accumulate a lot of merit.  For the practice of unsurpassable offerings, we should think,  “In the way the great bodhisattva 
Samantabhadra made offerings by emanating countl ess replicas of himself and making offerings 
filling the entire space, to all the buddhas and bo dhisattvas, so, likewise, in the same way, I would 
like to make offerings, just like him.”  Samantabhadra is a bodhisattva and not only a bodhisattva but an arya bodhisattva, someone 
who is abiding on the grounds. If such a bodhis attva makes such extensiv e offerings to all the 
buddhas and bodhisattvas, it goes without saying th at we ordinary beings have to make  extensive 
offerings to them too.  
Bodhisattvas like Samantabhadra make such extensive offerings in order to finish the 
accumulation of merit. They make emanated o fferings filling the entire space in order to 
accumulate vast amounts of merit. Relying on the factor of wisdom alone is not sufficient. They 
have not yet achieved the final goal, although th ey are bodhisattvas, beca use they still have the 
obstructions to omniscience i.e. they have obsc urations in their mind that prevent them from 
having complete knowledge of all phenomena. In order to remove such obstructions to 
omniscience, they need to accumu late vast stores of merit. Bodhisattvas have to do that.  
 
Since  this is the case for these high level bodhisa ttvas, then it goes without saying that for us as 
o r d i n a r y  b e i n g s ,  w h o  a r e  b o u n d  b y  a f f l i c t i o n s ,  s o  w e  h a v e  t o  s t r i v e  i n  t h e  p r a c t i c e  o f  m a k i n g  offerings, like the bodhisattvas , by mentally emanating skies of  offerings and by making these 
offerings continuously, day and night non-stop.   The reason why we need to make extensive offerings is already stated in the first line of verse 1 of 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre       Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
F P M T  B a s i c  P r o g r a m                C h a p t e r  T w o  
 
 
76 chapter two. “In order to seize that precious mi nd” means in order to generate this precious 
mind; this precious mind is bo dhicitta, the altruistic intention to achieve enlightenment for the 
benefit of all sentient beings. In order to genera te this precious mind within our own continua, 
we need to make these offerings. It is a very difficult thing  to generate bodhicitta especially if we 
do not purify our minds of obscurations; obviously, it is going to be difficu lt. What prevent us or 
create obstacles for us from developing bodhicitta  are the obscurations and negativities which we 
have accumulated. We need to purify those nega tive obscurations, and we need to accumulate 
the collection of merit that will provide the favo urable conditions for developing bodhicitta.  
 So we need to gather the necessary conditions and eliminate the opposing ones. Therefore, we 
need to make these offerings, different kinds of offerings to the Buddh a, Dharma and Sangha, 
the Three Jewels. The text speaks of many different kinds of offeri ngs, that is, offering unowned 
substances, offering one’s own body and the practi ce of mentally emanated offerings. We have 
already dealt with those, we have completed the outline on offerings. We are now at the outline 
of offering homage. 
3B2B 2A1A 2 Homage 
A Verbally expressing homage 
B Physically prostrating 
 
When we talk about homage or prostrations, there are different kinds of prostrations - 
prostrations that are done with the body, sp eech and mind. Based on the outline of this 
commentary, first is the practice of making prostr ations with one’s speech or paying homage that 
involves reciting praises to the buddhas and bodh isattvas. With  melodious and beautiful voices, 
pleasant tunes and with  minds of faith, we offer these by reciting different verses of praise. There 
are many different kinds of praises that one can recite and offer to the Three Jewels. There are 
some praises that use the names of the buddhas and there are some prayers that talk about the 
qualities of the buddhas, their compassion, wisd om and power. There are many different kinds 
of prayers and verses of different praises that we  can do. Whatever pr aises we know, we can 
recite them with a melodious tune and offer th em to the buddhas and bodhisattvas and we can 
think: “Due to all these praises, the buddhas experience great bliss in their holy minds.”  
 
The next outline deals with the physical prostrations or paying physical homage. 
3B2B 2A1A 2B Physically prostrating 
1 [To the] Three Jewels ∗ 
2 The basis for the arising of bodhicitta and so forth 
3 Prostrating to the abbot, acharya, master and so forth 
3B2B 2A1A 2B1 [To the] Three Jewels 
The practice of paying physical homage to  the Three Jewels is shown in verse 24: 
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre       Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
F P M T  B a s i c  P r o g r a m                C h a p t e r  T w o  
 
 
77 [2, 24 ] 
With bodies as numerous 
As all the atoms within the universe, 
I prostrate to all the Buddhas of the three times, 
The Dharma and the Supreme Community. 
 
We make physical homage to the Three Jewels: th e buddhas of the three times (past, present and 
future), the Dharma Jewel (comprising of the sc riptural Dharmas and the realisational Dharmas) 
and the Sangha Jewel which refers to the suprem e community. These are the objects to whom we 
make physical prostrations.  
 How should we perform such a prostration? We visualise making prostrations with bodies as 
numerous as all the atoms that can be found in th e universe of the ten directions. We then show 
our respect by putting both of our hands togeth er in the mudra of prostration and pay homage 
to the Three Jewels.  There are two kinds of physical prostration: th e short prostration involves touching the five 
p o i n t s  o f  o n e ’ s  b o d y  t o  t h e  g r o u n d  ( t w o  h a nds, two knees and the forehead) and the long 
prostration is, basically, laying  one’s body flat on the floor. 
 What about making mental prostrations? While on e is physically prostrating, one’s mind is 
reflecting on the qualities of the Three Jewels. When we reflect on the qualities of the Three 
Jewels, then faith and respect will arise for th em. Within this mental state, we perform the 
prostration. 
3B2B 2A1A 2B2 The basis for the arising of bodhicitta and so forth 
[2, 25 ] 
Likewise I prostrate to all the reliquaries, 
To the bases of Awakening Mind, 
To all learned abbots and masters 
And to all the noble practitioners. 
 Literally, we are physically prostrating to the bases for the generation of bodhicitta. This is 
indicated in the first two lines of verse 25: “Likewis e I prostrate to all the reliquaries, to the bases 
of the awakening mind”. Literally, ‘reliquaries’ refe rs to the base of offerings. What is meant by 
prostrating to the bases for the generation of bodhicitta? We ge nerate bodhicitta within our 
mental continuum; what is it that helps us to generate bodhicitta or what are some of the 
conditions? They are the representations of the Buddha’s holy body, speech and mind such as 
the physical representation of a statue of the Buddha, the Mahayana script ure etc. These are the 
bases for the generation of bodhic itta, so we make prostrations to them. One pays homage with 
physical prostrations to the person who is the condition for us to develop bodhicitta in our 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre       Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
F P M T  B a s i c  P r o g r a m                C h a p t e r  T w o  
 
 
78 mental continua as well as the place where we develop bodhicitta. 
3B2B 2A1A 2B3 Prostrating to the abbot, acharya, master and so forth 
This is shown in the last two lines of verse 25: “ To all learned abbots and masters and to all the 
noble practitioners”. “To all learned abbots and masters”: we make prostrations to the abbots 
and the masters. Here the word is “masters” but th e Tibetan word is lopon, which in Sanskrit is 
acharya. The abbots and masters or acharyas refe r to those who conferred on us ordination vows 
of monks and nuns be they novice vows or vows of full ordination. There is a person who acts as 
the abbot in the ceremony. There is also an ac harya who performs the ac t of transmitting or 
giving the vows. We make prostrations to these two persons.  “To all the noble practitioners”: in Tibetan, the noble practitioners are called  tulshug,  which 
literally means someone who has abandoned the form er conduct of a lay life and now engages in 
the lifestyle or conduct of ordination or becomes an ordained person. Tulshug can also be interpreted from another perspective: it can refer to any practitioner or person who is correctly 
following the footsteps of the Buddha, i.e. taki ng the Buddha as the example and doing what has 
been done by the Buddha. From this perspective, this can include lay people as well. Of course 
ordained people are still included. Whether as l ay practitioners or ordained persons, they have 
abandoned the way and the mode of conduct of non-Buddhists and adopted the way or mode of 
conduct of Buddhists.  In short, we make prostrations to all the abbots , masters and to all practitioners, those who are 
following in the footsteps of the buddhas. We are saying that any person who is a follower of the 
Buddha, who is within the communi ty of Buddhist practitioners, becomes an object of homage, 
an object of prostration of one’s body, speech and mind. This implies mutual respect for anyone 
belonging to this group.   We are like one family because all of us are the followers of the same teacher and it is important 
to have mutual respect and to practise pure perception towards one another, as mentioned 
earlier at the end of chapter one. When we talked  about the need to practise perfect perception, 
the advice is “to see all sentient beings as the Buddha”.   When we put our hands together in the mudra of prostration, our two palms should not be 
pressed completely flat against each other. It is  said that making prostr ations with both palms 
completely pressed against each other is actually  the tradition of non-Bu ddhists. We should place 
the palms of our hands together to form the shap e of a lotus, leaving some space in the middle. 
Buddha explained this practice in the Great Nirvana Sutra . We should put our palms together, 
making the shape of a blossomed lotus with spac e in the middle. We are advised to visualise 
holding a wish-fulfilling jewel inside the palms, with the thumbs touching and tucked inside the 
palms.   
Amitabha Buddhist Centre       Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
F P M T  B a s i c  P r o g r a m                C h a p t e r  T w o  
 
 
79 When we prostrate, we should straighten ou r  b o d i e s  u p r i g h t  w h e n  w e  g e t  u p  f r o m  e a c h  
prostration. If possible, we should touch our fo reheads, throats and hearts with both of our 
palms in the mudra of the blossoming lotus. Firs t, we touch our crowns with our palms. At the 
same time, we contemplate the qualities of the ho ly body of  the Buddha. We generate faith by 
doing this. Then, we touch our palms together to our throats and reflect on the qualities of the 
holy speech of the Buddha and generate faith. Fi nally, we touch both of our palms to our hearts 
and, at that time, we contemplate the qualities of the Buddha’s holy mind . This is a method for 
us to generate faith in the Buddha. 
 At the same time when we touch our palms to our crowns, we make the prayer: ‘May I and all 
sentient beings achieve all the qualities of the Buddha’s holy body.’ When we touch our palms to 
our throat, we make the prayer, ‘May I and all sentie nt beings achieve all the qualities of the holy 
speech of the Buddha.’ When we touch our palms to  our heart, we make the prayer, ‘May I and 
all sentient beings achieve the qual ities of the Buddha’s holy mind.’ 
 There are some who contemplate, when they touch their palms to the crowns, that all negativities 
they have accumulated with their bodies are comp letely purified. When they touch their palms to 
their throats, they visualise that  all negativities they have a ccumulated with their speech are 
purified. When they touch their palms to their hearts , they visualise that all negativities they have 
accumulated with their minds are purified.   When we perform short prostrations, there are five  points of our body touching the ground: the 
two knees, the two palms and the forehead. When these five points of our bodies touch the 
ground, we make the prayer, “May I and all sentient  beings be freed from the five obscurations.” 
  It is extremely important to prostrate correctly. Th e number of prostrations is not that important 
but it is important that the quality of the prostr ation is done very well. We should not rush but 
contemplate. As already explained earlier, we ca n think of many things when we prostrate. We 
should not do them hastily. When we do prostr ations, we should remember those visualizations 
and do them with very clear minds. We sh ould do them with a mind of faith.  
 It is important to do prostrations that are of good quality. It is said that it is better to do good 
quality prostrations than many but mindless pr ostrations. Compared to making many of those 
mindless prostrations, where the mind is not thinking of anything, doing a fewer number of good prostrations creates far more merit – immeasur able merit. In fact there are many things to 
think about when we touch the three points of ou r body with our palms. If we do them very 
quickly, there is  nothing to co ntemplate as there is not enough time. We should do them  at a 
comfortable pace.   When we put our palms together at our crowns, we  reflect on the inconceivable qualities of the 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre       Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
F P M T  B a s i c  P r o g r a m                C h a p t e r  T w o  
 
 
80 Buddha’s holy body. When we touch our palms to  our throats, we think of the inconceivable 
qualities of the Buddha’s holy speech. The ho ly speech of the Buddha is said to possess 60 
different qualities. When we touch our palms to our hearts, we think of the inconceivable 
qualities of the Buddha’s holy mind. For exampl e, how the Buddha is someone who has perfect 
compassion. We do these prostrations with faith and make this prayer, “How wonderful it would 
be if I and all sentient beings ac hieve these inconceivable qualities.” 
 
By doing this reflection, we do long prostrations  with our whole bodies in contact with the floor. 
One will accumulate a lot of merit. The temporal  benefit is that however many number of atoms 
is covered by our bodies on the ground, that is the number of rebirths as a wheel turning king for which  we have created the causes  for  in the future. Ultimately, these prostrations act as the  
causes for us to achieve the state of full enlighte nment. Whether we experience those benefits or 
not depends on how well we do our prostrations , such as contemplating the qualities of the 
body, speech and mind of the Buddha with a mind of  faith. If we were to do the  prostrations 
with all these contemplations, we will ob tain all these benefits in the future. 
 While we are prostrating, we visualise our fath ers on the right, our mothers on our left, our 
enemies in front of us, and surrounding them are all other sentient beings. We visualise we are 
making prostrations together. We visualise making  prostrations with all  sentient beings and 
prostrating to the Buddha, Dharma  and Sangha, the Three Jewels.  
3B2B 2A1A Explaining the chapter’s material 
1 Offerings 
2 Homage 
3 Refuge 
4 Confessing negativities by means of completing the four powers 
3B2B 2A1A 3 Refuge 
A Causal refuge B Resultant refuge 
  
Both causal and resultant refuges are covered in verse 26: 
 
[2, 26 ] 
I seek refuge in all the Buddhas 
Until I possess the essence of Awakening; 
I seek refuge in Dharma 
And in the assembly of Bodhisattvas. 
 
The meaning of refuge is this: one makes the me ntal commitment to take refuge in the Three 
Jewels, motivated or driven by the desire to be  free from fear and suffering. On the basis of 
having fear and wanting to be free from sufferi ng, one makes the mental promise or commitment 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre       Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
F P M T  B a s i c  P r o g r a m                C h a p t e r  T w o  
 
 
81 to the Three Jewels. The entity of refuge is making the mental commitment or promise to the 
Three Jewels on the basis of having a wish to be free from suffering and having fear. 
 
Before undertaking this commitment, it has to be  preceded by two causes of refuge. There are 
two causes of refuge: the fear of having to unde rgo the sufferings of cyclic existence in general 
and the suffering of the lower realms specifical ly and combined together with the faith of 
conviction in the Three Jewels’ ability to protec t us from those fears. These two causes must 
precede the mental promise or mental commitme nt which is the real entity of refuge.  
 In the outline on refuge, there is causal refuge and resultant refuge. 
3B2B 2A1A 3A Causal refuge 
What is causal refuge? We are going for refuge  to something that is external and not found 
within us and is not part of our consciousnesses. We are taking refuge in something that  can be 
found in the mental continua of those who ha ve already accomplished (or established or 
achieved) the Three Jewels themselves. With th at as the basis, we make a commitment or 
promise. We make the commitment or promise to somebody.   We are making a commitment to something that exists outside of our mental continua; an 
external object i.e. the external Three Jewels . We have Shakyamuni Buddha who has achieved 
enlightenment. We have the Dharma Jewel that  refers to the true paths and true cessations. 
Then we have the Sangha Jewel which refers to the arya bodhisattvas and Superior Beings like Manjushri or the 8 close sons of the Buddha. We hold them as objects of refuge to protect us from our fear and suffering. We take them as the base for generating this mental commitment, 
making this promise based on the desire  to be free from suffering and fear.  
 What are the objects of resultant refuge? The object s of resultant refuge are the Three Jewels that 
have yet to be achieved by oneself but which will be achieved by oneself in the future. They are 
the Three Jewels that one will become (one will manifest, one will achieve) in the future. These 
become the objects of refuge or the base for deve loping this mental promise. We are saying, ‘ I 
am making a mental promise or commitment to become the Three Jewels.’ The practice of 
resultant refuge is actually going for refuge in th e Three Jewels that we wi ll become in the future. 
We are relying on them as the base.  Aspirational bodhicitta is generating the intent ion to achieve enlightenment for sentient beings. 
When one generates aspirational bodhicitta , one makes a commitment, ‘ I will become a 
Buddha; I will achieve enlightenment for the bene f i t  o f  a l l  s e n t i e n t  b e i n g s . ’  T h a t  k i n d  o f  
intention is aspirational bodhicitta and it is also resultant refuge.  
 Aspirational bodhicitta is an act of generating  the intention to achieve enlightenment for the 
benefit of all sentient beings and, at the same ti me, it is also a practice of resultant refuge. In 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre       Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
F P M T  B a s i c  P r o g r a m                C h a p t e r  T w o  
 
 
82 reality they are one. Aspirational bodhicitta is  both. If we isolate them conceptually, we can 
designate them with different names.  
 
If we are looking at aspirational bodhicitta from  the perspective of “for the benefit of sentient 
beings, I will achieve enlightenment,” it is given the name generating aspirational bodhicitta or 
mind generation.  If we look at aspirational bodhicitta from the pe rspective of making a promise that “I will achieve 
enlightenment for the benefit of sentient beings”,  then it is given the name resultant refuge.  
 Actually they (mind generation and resultant refuge) are both the same mind; we are just 
isolating them conceptually. We are talking about th e same thing; it is just that they are being 
given different names depending on how we look at it.   If you look at refuge from the perspective of mo tivation, you can have Hinayana refuge (refuge of 
individual liberation vehicle) and Mahayan a refuge (refuge of the great vehicle). 
 With further elaboration, we can also have the re fuge that is associated with the persons of the 
three different capacities, small, medium and gr eat. For persons of small capacity, the person 
makes the commitment saying: “I will go for refu ge to the Buddha, Dhar ma and Sangha for the 
rest of this life out of fear of the suffering of  the lower realms.” The person of medium capacity 
has a slightly different motivation for going fo r refuge. That person makes a commitment to go 
for refuge to the Buddha, Dharma and Sangha for as long he lives out of the fear of having to undergo the sufferings of cyclic existence. The person of grea t capacity makes the commitment 
saying,  ‘I go for refuge until I am enlightene d to the Buddha, Dharma and Sangha motivated by 
the fear of falling into the extr eme of cyclic existence and the extreme of individual peace or 
liberation, for oneself and all sentient beings.’  There is another kind of refuge called worldly refuge. This is the refuge we take. It is called worldly refuge as it is associated with the affair s or happiness of this life. One goes for refuge to 
the Buddha, Dharma and Sangha out of fear of sickness, obstacles and problems in this life 
alone. In some texts, it is uncertain whether this kind of mental attitude or this kind of refuge is a refuge or not - one needs to chec k. This is because it is not on e of the three that are mentioned 
above. At the very least, in order for our refuge to become refuge we have to be motivated by a 
fear of suffering of the lower realms.  In the food offering prayer, Buddha is the un surpassed (which means no n-higher) teacher. The 
unsurpassed teacher is the Buddha. The unsurpa ssed refuge is the Dharma and the unsurpassed 
guide is the Sangha.  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre       Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
F P M T  B a s i c  P r o g r a m                C h a p t e r  T w o  
 
 
83 Lesson 11 – chapter 2, verse 26-31 
 
It is important for us to set the correct motivati on for listening to the te achings. This time, we 
have  attained a human life of leisure and opportunity and we have also met the teaching of  the 
Buddha which is difficult to meet . At such a time, when all the outer and inner conditions are 
present and complete, we need to prac tise the teachings of the Buddha.  
 Before we can practise the teachings of the Buddha, we need to know how to go about doing such a practice. In order to understand the way to  practise the teachings of the Buddha, we first 
need to receive the teachings. We need to listen to the teachings. It is for this reason that we 
n e e d  t o  e n g a g e  i n  t h i s  s e s s i o n .  W e  s h o u l d  r e f l e c t  o n  h o w  f o r t u n a t e  i t  i s  f o r  u s  t o  h a v e  t h i s  opportunity to actually engage in the activity of  listening to the Buddhadharma. We should try to 
generate a sense of happiness and enthusiasm.  In the last session, we looked at  the practice of making prostrat ions. We can make prostrations 
with our bodies, speech and minds. With our speec h, we offer praises or recite praises with a 
melodious voice. With the mind, one reflects on  the qualities of the Buddha and generates a 
sense of faith in them. With one’s body, one can do the short prostration that involves touching 
the five points of one’s body to the ground  or one can do the full length prostration. 
 Before we make any prostration, we sh ould recite the prostration mantra:  
Om namo manjushriye namo sush riye namo uttama shriye soha  
 It is taught that there is inconceivable benefit if we recite this mantra wh en we prostrate. If we 
prostrate after reciting this prostration mantra, ev ery prostration we perfor m  is equivalent to one 
thousand prostrations. The benefit of prostratin g with this mantra is similar to hearing and 
reflecting on the meanings of th e three scriptural collections. It is said that if we prostrate 
continuously after reciting this mantra, we can achi eve the path of seeing in this very life itself. 
 Whether we  benefit in this way from prostratin g, as mentioned in the previous lesson, depends 
on how well we perform our prostrations. The qual ity of the prostration is most important. I do 
not think that the number of prostrations is the main thing. It is the quality that determines 
whether we will obtain the benefit earlier mentio ned . A lot of contemplation is involved when 
we perform a prostration - what do we need to  contemplate when we place  our palms at our 
crowns, at our throats and at our hearts?   When we perform a  prostration, th e main thing is to generate fait h in the Three Jewels. If we are 
able to perform our prostrations with this kind of reflection, then we will be able to obtain all the 
benefits mentioned before. The text also mentions  temporal benefits such as pacifying sicknesses 
and harms. It is said that we should also visualise countless replicas of ourselves when 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre       Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
F P M T  B a s i c  P r o g r a m                C h a p t e r  T w o  
 
 
84 prostrating. If we are able to sustain our visualisation, and keep our minds focussed on what we 
need to do with our bodies, speech and minds th roughout the prostrations, then we will gain 
immeasurable benefits. Usually when we perform pr ostrations, we are only performing them with 
our bodies,  but our minds are distracted and thinking  of  something else. Yes, it is true that we 
can still accumulate merit from performing the pros trations with our bodies but if we can sustain 
our focus on performing  proper prostrations with our bodies, speech and minds, then obviously the merit we accumulate will be much greater.   We are performing prostrations everyday and even if we cannot do  many of them at the moment, 
we can, at least, make three pros trations in the morning  and three prostrations at night. In this 
way, we  perform  six prostratio ns every day. We should make a commitment  to do this number 
of prostrations as a daily minimum . When we perform prostrations, we should not feel that it is an obligation, like paying taxes. We should in stead contemplate and understand  the benefits 
and prostrate voluntarily from our own side to  the Three Jewels. Even though we are only 
making six prostrations a day, multiplied by whatever number of days we have left in this life,  by the end of this life, we will have accumulated thousands of prostrations.   Usually, when we are asked about the practice of prostration, we explain how  we do it with our bodies in such and such a way -  this is only a limited explanation. The whole purpose of studying 
this is to understand this practi ce so that when someone asks us what is a prostration and why we 
are doing it, we shall be able to explain to them the different ways of performing prostrations, involving not only the body but also the speech and the mind .  
3B2B 2A1A 3 Refuge 
A Causal refuge 
B Resultant refuge 
 
What is the meaning of refuge? Refuge is a ment al promise or commitment that is made on the 
basis of the desire to be free from suffering an d fear.  In order for our mental commitment or 
promise to be pure and strong, we mu st possess the two causes of refuge. 
 
Before undertaking this commitment, it has to be  preceded by two causes of refuge. There are 
two causes of refuge: the fear of having to unde rgo the sufferings of cyclic existence in general 
and the suffering of the lower realms specifically, combined together with the faith of conviction 
in the Three Jewels’ ability to protect us from those fears. These two causes must precede the 
mental promise or mental commitment which is the real entity of refuge.  Without the two causes of refuge, one’s mental commitment or one’s refuge cannot be pure and 
strong; one’s refuge is only at the level of wo rds. What we are discussing here is basic and 
therefore accords with this ‘Basic’ Program. There are some of us who have been calling ourselves 
Buddhists for many years and say,  “I have re ceived my refuge vows”, and might have even 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre       Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
F P M T  B a s i c  P r o g r a m                C h a p t e r  T w o  
 
 
85 received the bodhisattva and tantric vows, but if we were asked, “What is  refuge? What is the 
entity of refuge? What are the different kinds of refuge? Why do we go for refuge?” we would  be 
stuck for answers to these questions. 
  As discussed in the previous lesson, there is causal refuge and resultant refuge. 
3B2B 2A1A 3A Causal refuge 
What is the object of refuge in the context of causal refuge? It is something that is external to one’s mental continuum. We are go ing for refuge to the Three Jewe ls, which are external to our 
mental continua. This means the Three Jewels that  have already been achieved or are present in 
the mental continuum of someone other than oneself.  We have the fear and the desire to be free 
from suffering. With that as the bases, one go es for refuge to the Three Jewels with the 
conviction in their ability to protect us from  those fears. That constitutes causal refuge. 
3B2B 2A1A 3B Resultant refuge 
What are the objects of refuge in the context of resultant refuge? It is the Three Jewels that one 
will become and achieve in the future. Again, the ba ses of refuge are the fear of and the desire to 
be free from suffering. One then goes for refuge to  the Three Jewels that one will become in the 
future with the conviction that those Three Jewels  have the ability to protect oneself and others 
from suffering. By recognizing this, one then makes a mental commitment. That constitutes the 
resultant refuge.  Discussion: The Three Jewels that we will become in  future, do they exist or  not? If they do not 
exist, then they are not objects of refuge. An d the Buddha that one will become in the future, 
does that exist or not? If yes, is that a Buddha or  a sentient being? If it is a Buddha, shouldn’t it 
exist now?  Let us take the example of Bu ddha Shakyamuni or any other pa st buddhas . Those buddhas are 
the teachers of refuge. The true path and the true cessation that one will achieve in the future is 
the Dharma Jewel. That is the actual refuge. Th e superior beings and superior bodhisattvas are 
the Sangha Jewel. They assist us in the practice of refuge. Causal refuge and resultant refuge do not apply here as both are mixed together.  [In response to a question from a student:] It is  possible that causal refuge may arise in one’s 
continuum before resultant refuge but it is not ne cessarily so. It is possible that resultant refuge 
arises first. One makes the commitment based on  the understanding that  one has the potential 
to become the Three Jewels. In that case, resultant refuge arises first.  If we look at refuge from the perspective of mo tivation, then we have: refuge associated with 
persons of small capacity, refuge associated with persons of medium capacity and refuge 
associated with persons of great capacity. These are different kinds of refuge based on different 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre       Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
F P M T  B a s i c  P r o g r a m                C h a p t e r  T w o  
 
 
86 motivations. And even if one’s objects of refuge  are the Three Jewels wh o have already achieved 
their own levels of perfection, but if one’s motiva tion for taking refuge is worldly, then one’s 
practice of refuge will not be included in any of the practices of refuge listed above. 
 With reference to the Sugata (the One Gone to Bliss, or the Buddh a), there are different 
meanings of the Buddha depending on whether we are explaining it  from the perspective  of the 
Hinayana or the Mahayana. They both have thei r own  explanation for  the term ‘sugata’. 
According to the Hinayana, the Buddha’s body is  not the Buddha Jewel. Why? This is because 
the Buddha’s body is the same body that he had before he achieved enlightenment. According to 
the lower tenets, the Buddha achieved enlighte nment in one sitting. From the moment he 
entered the path of preparation, he went th rough the different paths until he achieved 
enlightenment. Since that is believed to be the case, the body of the Buddha is true suffering. 
Since it is true suffering, it cannot be a Buddha Je wel. The Hinayana posits the realizations in the 
continuum of the Buddha as the Bu ddha Jewel. This refers specific ally to the true paths in the 
mental continuum of the Buddha.  The same applies to the Sangha Jewel. When we talk about the sangha, we have the sangha who 
are trainees and sangha who are non-trainees (ie. they have gone beyond or have completed their  
training). Their holy bodies again are not posite d as the Sangha Jewel, according to the Hinayana 
because they are deemed to be true suffering. According to the lower or Hinayana tenets, the realisations, specifically the true  paths, in the mental continua of the sangha (both trainees and 
beyond trainees) are posited as the Sangha Jewel. That is the object of refuge.  
 What about the Dharma Jewel? The Dharma Jewe l is posited as true cessation that is the 
abandonment of any obscurations, which can eith er be an obstruction to liberation or an 
obstruction to omniscience. The true cessation is  the abandonment of any afflictions (be it an 
obstruction to liberation or an obstruction to  omniscience) in the mental continuum of a 
Superior Being. That state of abandonment that is  true cessation is posited as the Dharma Jewel. 
 That is how  the Three Jewels are posited by the  Hinayana.  According to the Mahayana, the complete enjoym ent body and the supreme emanation body of 
the Buddha are posited as the Buddha Jewel. The true paths and true cessations in the mental 
continua of the  superior beings are posited as  the Dharma Jewel. The superior bodhisattvas 
abiding on the grounds are posited as the Sangha Jewel.  We have the unsurpassed teache r who is the Buddha, the unsurp assed refuge, the Dharma and 
the unsurpassed guide,  the Sangha. Of thes e three, the Dharma is  the actual refuge. 
 The Buddha said, “The Dharma is the actual refuge. I have already shown you the path to 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre       Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
F P M T  B a s i c  P r o g r a m                C h a p t e r  T w o  
 
 
87 liberation. Whether you achieve the path of libera tion or not depends on your effort. We must 
actualise the actual refuge ourselves. That is wh at will protect us from our fear and suffering”.  
 
When we actualise the Dharma Jewel, we will achi eve liberation,  the state that is completely free 
from all sufferings. Whether we can achieve the state of liberation or not depends on our own 
effort. If we did not  achieve that state of libera tion, we would never be free from suffering. If we 
did not  actualise the actual refuge, the Dharma , then neither the Buddh a nor the Sangha Jewel 
could do anything about our suffering.   The Buddha has said he could not wash away our negativities with water. He could not  remove our suffering with his hands. He protects us by showing us the true meaning of reality, 
emptiness. Freeing ourselves from the sufferings of the lower realms and cyclic existence is not 
something that can be achieved by prayers alone. We need to engage in virtue that can actually 
bring about freedom from those sufferings. We can take the pratimoksha vows or the 8 
Mahayana Precepts. When we take these precepts and keep them purely, we are abiding in pure 
morality. It is this practice of pure morality th at protects us from the fear and suffering of the 
lower realms.   The Buddha is posited as an object of refuge because, in order for us to enter the path, we must be shown the correct path. It is the Buddha wh o performs that function of showing us the 
unmistaken path. Because of this, the Buddh a is  posited as an object of refuge. 
  It is the same with the sangha. Wh y is the sangha  posited as an object of refuge? In order for us 
to actualise the practice of refuge, we need a helper and friend. Not just anyone but a good helper and friend to help us in the practice of refuge. Because of this, the Sangha Jewel is posited 
as the object of refuge. 
 
The Buddha is the founder or teacher of refuge. The Dharma Jewel is th e true paths and true 
cessations,  which is the actual refuge. More impo rtantly, the true paths and true cessations that 
we will attain in the future is the actual refuge. In order to actualise this refuge, we need friends 
or people to support  us along the way. This is where the Sangha Jewel comes in. 
3B2B 2A1A Explaining the chapter’s material 
1 Offerings 
2 Homage 3 Refuge 
4 Confessing negativities by means of completing the four powers 
3B2B 2A1A 4 Confessing negativities by means of completing the four powers 
A A general presentation 
B An extensive explanation 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre       Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
F P M T  B a s i c  P r o g r a m                C h a p t e r  T w o  
 
 
88 3B2B 2A1A 4A A general presentation 
Next is the practice of confession through appl ying the four powers: the power of eradication, 
the power of applying remedies, the power of turning away from faults and the power of the 
foundation or support.  From the very start, it is important for us to try our best not to be stained by any negativity. As we 
are completely under the power and influence of  the three mental poisons, we accumulate 
negativities and negative actions. When this  happe ns, we need to purify those negativities. It is 
s a i d  t h a t  e v e n  v e r y  p o w e r f u l  o r  v e r y  h e a v y  n e g a tivities – even those negative actions that will 
usually bring about very quick suffering results - can be purified through the proper application 
of the four opponent powers.   
There are many reasons why negativities can be pu rified. This is because the nature of the mind 
is clear light. The mind by nature is free from afflictions and has never been polluted by them. 
The afflictions are adventitious. When an antidote is applied, they can be removed. These are 
some of the reasons that prove that negativities can be purified.   The first opponent power is the power of eradic ation. Sometimes, the power of eradication is 
translated as the power of regret, but in Tibetan, it is translated as the power of eradication,  which means generating regret for the negative actions that one has done. 
3B2B 2A1A 4B An extensive explanation 
1 An extensive explanation of the first power 
2 The second power: The power of the support 
3 The third power: The power of applying the antidote at all times 
4 The fourth power: The power of turning away from wrongdoing 
3B2B 2A1A 4B1 An extensive explanation of the first power 
A Having investigated the way in which the negativity was performed, feeling regret 
B Cultivating regret by fearing [the prospect] of  dying while still in possession of the negativity 
and going for refuge C Cultivating regret by reflecting extensively on the way one has performed pointless 
negativities 
D Reflecting on the way in which negativities bring about fear 
3B2B 2A1A 4B1A  Having investigated the way in which the negativity was performed, feeling 
regret 
1 Requesting the attention of the object to whom you confess negativities 
2 Confessing negativities performed in the past by  means of their time, cause, and aspect, etc.  
3 Confessing strong negativities [that were directed at] special objects 
4 Confessing with regret by reflecting on the undesired effects 
3B2B 2A1A 4B1A 1 Requesting the attention of the object to whom you confess negativities 
[2, 27 ] 
With folded hands I beseech 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre       Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
F P M T  B a s i c  P r o g r a m                C h a p t e r  T w o  
 
 
89 The Buddhas and Bodhisattvas 
Who possess the great compassion 
And reside in all directions. 
 
Here one invokes the attention of the objects of  refuge, the buddhas and bodhisattvas, who are 
in the nature of great compassion and residing in the ten directions. With folded hands, one 
beseeches and asks them to pay attention to oneself saying,  “I am now going to confess my 
negativities.” 
3B2B 2A1A 4B1A 2 Confessing negativities performed in the past by means of their time, 
cause, and aspect, etc.  
[2, 28 ] 
Throughout beginningless cyclic existence 
In this life and in others, 
Unknowingly, I committed evil deeds 
And ordered them to be done (by others). 
[2, 29 ] 
Overwhelmed by the deceptions of ignorance 
I rejoiced in what was done, 
But now seeing these mistakes, 
From my heart I declare them to the Buddhas. 
 
From time without beginning up to the present moment, due to being under the power of 
ignorance and being ignorant about the law of ca use and effect, one has created many negative 
actions and one has also caused others to create negative actions.  One has also rejoiced in the 
negative actions of others. One is saying here, “I feel very strong regret from the depths of my heart for all these negative actions that I have accumulated”. The word ‘confession’ in Tibetan is 
bshags pa, which means non-concealing (not wit hholding anything or not hiding). Within the 
mental state of regret, one is saying,  “I have do ne this or done that.” I have heard it mentioned 
that the word bshags pa or confession, in anot her context, means splitting a log into two to 
expose what is within.   In the presence of all the buddhas and bodhisa ttvas, while feeling regret without concealing  
anything, one confesses all the negativities th at one has accumulated in the past, all the 
negativities that one has caused others to engage in and also all negativities that one has rejoiced 
in. 
3B2B 2A1A 4B1A 3 Confessing strong negativities [that were directed at] special objects 
[2, 30 ] 
Whatever harmful acts of body, speech and mind 
I have done in a disturbed mental state, 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre       Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
F P M T  B a s i c  P r o g r a m                C h a p t e r  T w o  
 
 
90 Towards the three jewels of refuge, 
My parents, my spiritua l masters and others, 
 
Here, one confesses, with regret, all negativities  that were committed out of ignorance, under the 
influence of the three mental pois ons, in relation to the special objects such as the Three Jewels, 
one’s father and mother and one’s guru. Without concealing or hiding anything, one confesses 
all these negativities. 
3B2B 2A1A 4B1A 4 Confessing with regret by reflecting on the undesired effects 
[2, 31 ] 
And all the grave wrongs done by me, 
So thoroughly evil and polluted 
By an abundance of faults, 
I openly declare to the Guides of the World. 
 
One generates regret by reflecting on the unde sired effects of the negativities that one has 
accumulated in the past.   When we discuss the effects of negative actions,  we refer to the three types of results. For 
example, with the act of killing: The fruitional effe ct of the act of killing is rebirth in the lower 
realms. If it is a very powerful act of killing, then  it will throw us into th e hell realms. One should  
also reflect on the causally concordant effects and the environmental effects of the negativities 
accumulated in the past.   Causally concordant effects can be divided into two: causally concordant behavioural effects and  causally concordant experiential effects. For example: the negative action of killing. The 
fruitional effect of the act of killing can be a rebi rth in the hell realms; when the fruitional effect 
of the act of killing is exhaus ted and one passes away as a hell be ing, even if one were to be 
reborn as human being, the causally concordant  effect of the act of killing that would be 
experienced in that human rebirth would be to have a short life. That would be the causally 
concordant experiential effect of killing. Even if one were to be born as a human being, because of having killed in the past, one would have the habit of liking to kill again. That is the causally concordant behavioural effect.  What about the environmental effect of the act of killing? One will be reborn in a place or country that has famines, or one has difficult y finding food. One will also have  a lot of 
sicknesses. 
  This is just one illustration of one act of killing. A single act of killing has these four results. By 
reflecting on the four karmic effects of a specific  negative action, we generate regret in our own 
mental continua. Whether we will succeed in ge nerating a genuine sense of regret or not 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre       Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
F P M T  B a s i c  P r o g r a m                C h a p t e r  T w o  
 
 
91 depends on whether we have reflected well on thes e four effects. The depth of our reflection of 
our negative actions depends on whether we have the strong faith of conviction in the law of 
cause and effect.  
 It is said, in some texts, that of all the differ ent kinds of results, the worst one is the causally 
concordant behavioural effect. The habit of repe ating the same negative action over and over 
again is worse than the fruitional effect of having to take rebirth in the hell realms.  Even if we were to take rebirth in the lower realms as a result of a  negative action, when the karma is completely exhausted, one would be reborn in a higher realm again. But because of having engaged in and becoming habituated to ki lling in the past, we will continually engage in 
those actions again in our future rebirths. We natu rally develop a liking to killing. Because of this 
c a u s a l l y  c o n c o r d a n t  b e h a v i o u r a l  e f f e c t ,  w h e n  w e  e n g a g e  i n  t h e  a c t i o n  o f  k i l l i n g ,  w e  h a v e  t o  experience another set of results again and take an other rebirth in lower realms. In this way, the 
causally concordant behavioural effect is the wors t as there is no end to  its harmful effects.  
Therefore, it is important to stop our familiarity with negative actions. Wh en we find that we are 
predisposed towards or naturally habituated to ce rtain negative actions, we need to stop our 
familiarity with them. We should try to familiar ise ourselves instead with virtuous practices. 
                  In one Vinaya sutra, Buddha has said,  “All fully orda ined monks, to lose one’s  life is easy but to 
go against one’s practice of morality is not as simple  as that.”  Buddha is trying to say that even if 
one were to lose one’s life, this would not mean  one would  definitely go to the hell realms. 
When  one has pure morality, one wi ll not go there. However, even if one did  not die, but if one 
does not practise pure morality, then one would go to the hell realms in the future. 
 Q. The outline “confessing with regr et by reflecting on the undesire d effects” does not seem to be 
reflected in verse 31. 
 The “undesired effects” from the outline is indi cated by the third line of verse 31: “With  an 
abundance of faults.” ‘Faults’ refers to all th e unwanted effects such as the fruitional effect, 
causally concordant effect and environmental effect  of any particular action. The ‘faults’ refer to 
reflecting on all the effects of th e negativities that have been ac cumulated since there are so many 
effects or results that come from committing a single negative action.      
Amitabha Buddhist Centre       Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
F P M T  B a s i c  P r o g r a m                C h a p t e r  T w o  
 
 
92 Lesson 12 – chapter 2, verse 32-41 
 
As said by Lama Tsong Khapa in The Foundation of All Good Qualities :  
 
This life is as imperman ent as a water bubble;  
Remember how quickly it decays and death comes.  
After death, just like a sh adow follows the body,  
The results of black and white karma follow. 
 
Finding firm and definite conviction in this,  
Please bless me always to be careful  
To abandon even the slig htest of negativities  
And to accomplish all virtuous deeds. 
 
Although we leave our bodies behind at the time  o f  d e a t h ,  w e  c a r r y  i n t o  o u r  n e x t  l i v e s   t h e  
imprints of all the actions that we  have committed in this life. Thes e imprints follow us “just like 
the shadow follows the body”. We should first develop stable conv iction in the law of cause and 
effect. After that,  we should always live our li ves conscientiously. After death, we do not just 
disappear but we move on to the next life. 
 What is it that moves on from life to life? It is the merely labelled “I” or self which moves on from life to life. We also bring with us all the imprints of the positive and negative actions that 
we have performed in the past. We know the unwanted experience of suffering arises as the 
result of negative actions that  we have accumulated and that happiness comes from the positive 
actions that we have accumulated.  If we do not want to experience suffering, we have to remove 
the causes of suffering, which are the negative actions that we have  accumulated. In order to do 
that, we have to purify our mental continuum  of all the negative actions that we have 
accumulated in the past. Before we can do that, we need to know how to purify.  
 If we have accumulated very strong negative karma, then, at the time of death, it is said that we 
will experience intolerable suffering. We woul d also undergo very heavy suffering in the 
intermediate state. Because of those negative acti ons, we are thrown into  the lower realms where 
there is great suffering. In order for us not to ex perience the results of the negative actions that 
we have accumulated in the past, we need to purify these negativities.  
 The way to do this is to confe ss them. We need to engage in th e confession practice that is 
complete with the four opponent powers. When our practice of confession is not accompanied 
by the four opponent powers, then no purification can take place.   We must first learn how to do a proper practice of confession. In essence, we generate the mind 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre       Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
F P M T  B a s i c  P r o g r a m                C h a p t e r  T w o  
 
 
93 of restraint restraining  ourselves from committing  additional negative actions in the future and 
we generate regret for whatever negative action s we have already accumulated in the past. By 
relying on the antidote, which is  any virtuous action, we purify the negativities accumulated. 
 We have completed the first opponent power, th e power of eradication,  which is generating 
regret for whatever negative actions we have  accumulated in the past. The outline ‘having 
investigated the way in which the negativity was performed, feeling regret’ was completed  last 
week. 
3B2B 2A1A 4B1B  Cult ivating regret by fearing [the pr ospect] of dying while still in 
possession of the negativity and going for refuge 
[2, 32 ] 
But I may well perish 
Before all my evils have been purified; 
So please protect me in such a way 
As will swiftly and surely free me from them. 
[2, 33 ] 
The untrustworthy lord of death 
Waits not for things to  be done or undone; 
Whether I am sick or healthy. 
This fleeting lifespan is unstable. 
 
If we were to die without purifying the negativi ties we have accumulated in the past, without 
generating regret for such negativities, without generating restraint from committing such actions 
again in the future, without having accumulated any kind of virtue that can act as antidotes 
against these negativities, without having done all these and if we were to die, it would be very 
likely we would be taking rebirths in the lower realms. If that were to happen, what would we  do? Obviously, we have to look for refuge.   Although we need to purify our past negativities , sometimes we think that, probably, we will not  
die today. It is wrong to hold on  to the attitude that “Probably, I am not going to die today so I 
can leave this purification of negative karma to a later time.” It is wrong to hold on to such a 
thought because it is said in th e root text that our  fleeting li fespan is unstable. The Lord of 
Death will not  wait for us to finish our purifica t i o n  p r a c t i c e .  H e  w i l l   n o t   c h e c k  i f   w e  a r e  
committing negative actions or not, wh ether we are sick and so forth.  
 Verses 32 and  33 point out that we are definitely  going to die as death is certain but the time of 
death is uncertain. Since that is the case, it  is wrong to hold on to this attitude of 
procrastination, to think that,  “I would probably not die today” and not working to purify our 
n e g a t i v e  k a r m a .  I t  i s  i m p e r a t i v e  t h a t  w e   s t a r t  t o  p u r i f y  o u r  p a s t  n e g a t i v e  k a r m a  f r o m  t h i s  moment on. If we did not start the practice of purification immediately, if we were to die 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre       Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
F P M T  B a s i c  P r o g r a m                C h a p t e r  T w o  
 
 
94 suddenly, then because we have not purified our negative actions, we would have to experience 
the results of those negativities, which is rebirth in the lower realms.  
 
Our bodies and life spans are likened to the candle flame being blown by the wind.  We do not know when or where we are going to die and wh at we are going to die from.  There is no 
certainty at all regarding  these factors . It is al so uncertain whether we are going to die today or 
not. So, our bodies and life spans are likened to the candle flame that is in  danger of being 
blown out by the wind.   There are  also many other conditions that can ca use us to pass away from this life. The fact that 
we can go to sleep and that we are still breathing when we wake up the next day is actually  very 
amazing.  Nagarjuna said this in  The Letter to a Friend. It is amazing that the candle flame can 
withstand the wind blowing at it from all directions . In the same way, it is an amazing thing that 
we can wake up in the morning after having gone  to sleep for the whole night, as there are so 
many more conditions for death than life.   In essence, this outline is pointing out that  if  we are going to die without doing any purification 
practice at all  then, definitely, we are going to experience great suffering. By thinking along these 
lines, we can generate strong regret. 
3B2B 2A1A 4B1C  Cultivating regret by reflecting extensively on the way one has performed 
pointless (meaningless) negativities 
1 Regretting negativities we have performed for the sake of close friends, our body and material 
resources because we did not know that they are unreliable 
2 An example of them becoming only an object of memory at the time of death 
3 Regretting the negativities we perform even now as we pursue unreliable things 
4 Regretting negativities we perform due to not realizing that the time of our death is not certain 
3B2B 2A1A 4B1C 1 Regretting negativities we have performed for the sake of close friends, 
our body and material resources because we did not know that they are unreliable 
[2, 34 ] 
Leaving all I must depart alone. 
But through not having understood this 
I committed various kinds of evil 
For the sake of my friends and foes. 
 
[2, 35 ] 
My foes will become nothing. 
My friends will become nothing. 
I too will become nothing. 
Likewise all will become nothing. 
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre       Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
F P M T  B a s i c  P r o g r a m                C h a p t e r  T w o  
 
 
95 At the time of death, we leave behind our close friends, relatives and people  we like. We leave 
behind our bodies, possessions, wealth, jewellery, clothing etc. We leave all these behind and  go 
on alone to the next life. At the time of death, we  cannot  take anything along with us – not  our 
possessions or friends, not even our bodies. We have  to go alone. This is what will happen at the 
time of death to all of us.   Because we have not understood this, we have committed various kinds of negative actions for 
the sake of sustaining our friends and defeating ou r enemies. We do all sorts of negative actions 
motivated by anger, attachment or hatred, such as  killing, stealing and so forth. All these actions 
that we have already committed are meaningless and pointless.   Why are these actions that are done to sustain our friends and defeat our foes considered to be meaningless or pointless? Whether we subdue or de feat our enemies, it is a matter of time that 
they themselves would also die and move on to the next life. Because of that, there is no need to 
subdue them. Therefore,  it is pointless to accumu late so many negativities in our quest to defeat 
or overcome them.  It is also pointless to engage in so many negati ve actions for the purpose of sustaining those who 
are on our side and close to us,  such as  friends and  relatives.. They  will definitely die one day.   Our friends and enemies will definitely die one day;  we ourselves will also definitely die one day. 
Therefore, it is pointless or mean ingless to accumulate so many ne gative actions for their sake. In 
fact, all living beings will definitely die, sooner or later.   In this life, we do all sorts of actions, moti vated by negative emotions such as jealousy, 
attachment and hatred to support those who are close to us such as  our friends and relatives. We 
engage in so many negative actions for their sake. We  engage in so many negative actions for the 
sake of subduing or destroying our enemies. Al l these actions are meaningless because, at the 
time of  death, all those dear ones whom we have fought so hard to make happy are of no use to us. This also applies to our enemies. Whether we su bdue them or not, at the time of death, they 
cannot hurt us anymore.   Thus,  engaging in negative actions for the sake of  our friends and foes is pointless, as our foes 
will become nothing; our friends will become nothing and we ourselves will also become nothing. Reflect on how all things and cond itioned phenomena are impermanent; how our 
friends and our foes and we, ourselves are in the nature of impermanence. By practising in this 
way, we can stop attachment to our frie nds and  anger and hatred to our foes.  
 Even for people whom we hate or dislike,   when we see that person is on the verge of dying, due to illness, it is very unlikely that we will still have a very strong sense of hatred or anger towards 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre       Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
F P M T  B a s i c  P r o g r a m                C h a p t e r  T w o  
 
 
96 that person. At the very worst, we might rejo ice that the person is dying, thinking ‘Good 
riddance!’, but this would be quite extreme.  
 
Reflect on the fact that our enemies are  in the na ture of impermanence, that  their time of death 
is uncertain. Reflect on the fact that we ourselves and  our friends  are also definitely going to die one day; although it is also unce rtain whether that will happen today or not. If we were to reflect 
well on these points, we would be able to redu ce our anger to our enemies  and our attachment 
to our loved ones. 
3B2B 2A1A 4B1C 2 An example of them becomi ng only an object of memory at the time of 
death 
[2, 36 ] 
Just like a dream experience, 
Whatever things I enjoy 
Will become a memory. 
Whatever has passed will not be seen again. 
 
All the effort we put into subduing our enemies, pleasing and sustaining our loved ones, all our desire for and attachment to respect, fame, glor y, the objects of the five senses, whatever has 
happened to us in this life would only become insu bstantial memories at  the time of death. They 
become objects that cannot be  touched, relied upon or used . When we dream and come into 
contact with objects of the senses, we do enjoy them, but when we wake up, the dream 
experience becomes nothing. That is an  analogy fo r what will happen to us at the time of death.  
 Whatever experiences we had in life, those expe riences that we shared  with our friends or 
enemies and all those sense objects that we enjo yed in this life – they all become simply  
memories. When we are alive, we use all these differe nt kinds of things but, at the time of death, 
we would not be able to do so. In fact, all th ese experiences become objects of memory. Apart 
from that, we do not derive any actual benefit from them. The point here is that there is no 
meaning in creating or accumulating negativities for the sake of all these experiences which will 
surely become only objects of memory at the time of death. 
3B2B 2A1A 4B1C 3 Regretting the negativities we perform even now as we pursue unreliable 
things 
This means generating regret for the negativities that we are still continuing to create in our 
pursuit of things that we realise are actually unre liable. You know it is not going to help you, you 
know it is unreliable but yet you still do it. So , here we generate regret for the negativities 
accumulated along the way. 
[2, 37] 
Even within this brief life 
Many friends and foes have passed, 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre       Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
F P M T  B a s i c  P r o g r a m                C h a p t e r  T w o  
 
 
97 But whatever unbearable ev il I committed for them 
Remains ahead of me. 
 
In this life, many  friends and enemies have already passed away and have all become only  
memories. Apart from being a mere memory, these friends who have passed away were not of the 
slightest benefit to us. Similarly, the enemies wh o have passed away were also just memories and 
are no longer able to harm or cause us any problems. We can see that this is the case.  
 A dead person cannot do anything to us; they become useless. But that is not the case with the negativities that have been  accumulated for th eir sake. They will not disappear and they will 
soon result in an  effect. The imprints of the negative actions that we have accumulated for the 
sake of our friends and foes follow us from life to life - just as the shadow follows the body -  until they ripen one day.  Then, we would have to experience the effect alone. We created those 
actions for their sake but, at the end, we have  to experience the suffering result alone. We 
generate  a strong regret for these negativities, when we recognise this. 
3B2B 2A1A 4B1C 4 Regretting negativities we perf orm due to not realizing that the time of our 
death is not certain 
[2, 38] 
Thereby, through not having realized 
That I shall suddenly vanish, 
I committed so much evil 
Out of ignorance, lust and hate 
 
We are like guests visiting for a short period of  time in the present life . We do not know where 
we came from and we have no idea where we are going to go in our next life. Because of not realizing how quickly we will move on to the next  life, we come under the control of grasping. 
We hold the wrong conception of  grasping at impermanent things as permanent and we do not 
know what is to be abandoned and what is to be cultivated. As a result,  we generate very strong attachment for those on our side such as friends and relatives and because of the hatred for those 
we do not like, we engage in all sorts of negati ve actions like killing and stealing. Not realising 
this, we have accumulated so many negativities in the past. Now is the time to generate regret for 
these negativities accumulated out of ignorance, not knowing that the time of death is uncertain.   
3B2B 2A1A 4B1D  Reflecting on the way in which negativities bring about fear  
1 Death is certain as you cannot add to your lifespan yet it decreases without respite and to die 
while still possessing negativities is fearful 
2 One will have to experience suffering in th is life as well if negativities are not purified 
3 The reason great fear arises 
4 The way in which [negativities] cause one to  be tormented by suffering in future lives 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre       Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
F P M T  B a s i c  P r o g r a m                C h a p t e r  T w o  
 
 
98 3B2B 2A1A 4B1D 1 Death is certain as you cannot add to your lifespan yet it decreases 
without respite and to die while st ill possessing negativities is fearful 
 
[2, 39 ] 
Remaining neither day nor night, 
Life is always slipping by 
And never getting any longer. 
Why will death not come to one like me? 
 
We must start confessing and purifying those negativities that we have already accumulated because we are definitely going to die. Our life sp an is being  exhausted second by  second and is 
not increasing in any way. It is  like leaving a cu p of water out for a couple of days - it will soon 
dry up through evaporation. Our co ntinually decreasing life span is  likened to that. This is the 
same as what was taught in the Lam Rim Chen Mo in the section on the reflection on death and 
impermanence and on how we are definitely going to die. We have a karmic life span. If we have 
the karma to live for ten years, then we live for te n years. If we have the karma to live fifty years, 
t h e n  w e  l i v e  f o r  f i f t y  y e a r s .  I f  w e  h a v e  t h e  k a rma to live a hundred years, then we live for a 
hyndred years. Depending on the karma that we have accumulated, we will live for a fixed number of years. As it is not possible to extend  our life span, we cannot do much about it.  
 Reflect on the fact that all sentient beings and ourselves are in the nature of impermanence and 
that our lives are slipping away by the hour, by the minute and by the second. In each and every 
single moment, we are closer to death.  By reflecti ng in this way, we come  to the conclusion that 
death is certain and that we are definitely going to die. With this understanding, we generate 
regret for the negativities that we have already ac cumulated in the past and with regret, we engage 
in the practice of confession.  
3B2B 2A1A 4B1D 2 One will have to experience suffering in this life as well if negativities are 
not purified 
A Friends and loved ones cannot prot ect you from the suffering of being killed [losing one’s life] 
if negativities are not cleansed B The fear that comes from not performing meritorious acts 
C The anguish of regret 
3B2B 2A1A 4B1D 2A Friends and loved ones cannot protect you from the suffering of being 
killed [losing one’s life] if negativities are not cleansed 
[2, 40] 
While I am lying in bed, 
Although surrounded by my friends and relatives, 
The feeling of life being severed 
Will be experienced by me alone. 
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre       Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
F P M T  B a s i c  P r o g r a m                C h a p t e r  T w o  
 
 
99 [2, 41ab ] 
When seized by the messengers of death, 
What benefit will friends and relatives afford? 
 
Our life span is already being exhausted when we are about to die. Even though close friends, relatives and the doctor surround us, they are of no benefit or use to  us. “The feeling of life being 
severed” – the feeling of losing one’s life will be one’s personal experience alone. At the time of death, due to the power of the negativities that we have accumulated, we will also experience 
different kinds of hallucinations. Having visions of the messengers of death, we become afraid 
and terrified. But, again, this is something that ca n only be experienced by our selves alone. Even 
though our loved ones are around us, they cannot protect  or help us at all.  
 Death is accompanied by its own set of sufferings . But this is something that we will have to 
experience alone. On top of that, we have accumulated negative ac tions and through their 
power, we will experience very frightful visions of the messengers of death. We also have to 
experience this alone. The only thing that is of any benefit to us or the only thing that can 
protect us at the time of death is the Dharma. 
3B2B 2A1A 4B1D 2B The fear that comes from not performing meritorious acts 
[2, 41 cd ]  
My merit alone shall protect me than, 
But upon that I have never relied 
 
The last two lines of verse 41 show us the fear that  comes from not engaging in virtuous actions.  
The only thing that protects us at the time of  death is the virtuous actions that we have 
accumulated in our life. Those virtuous acti ons become the supreme refuge. But that is 
something that we have never thou ght about. If we would have lived ethically and had engaged in 
the practice of morality or any kind of virtue, th ose virtues would protect us at the time of death. 
If we have accumulated such virtuous actions in th e past, then that is good. If we have not, we 
should generate regret for not having done so.  In essence, what will protect us at  the time of death? It is the vi rtuous actions that we have done 
in the past. If we have not accumulated any virt uous actions in our lives, we should generate 
regret for not having done so. What will cause an guish, fear and suffering at the time of death? 
All these experiences are the results of negativities  that we have accumula ted in the past. If we 
had accumulated very powerful virtue, there would be no cause for fear or worry at the time of 
death. Fear of suffering will not arise at the time of death. 
  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre       Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
F P M T  B a s i c  P r o g r a m                C h a p t e r  T w o  
 
 
100 Lesson 13 – chapter 2, verse 41-53 
 
The great Nagarjuna once said that, in this world,  if someone were to put rubbish or vomit into a 
precious, golden bejewelled container,  then th at person would be considered very foolish or 
stupid indeed.   We need to reflect on this statement as individu als  and look at our own situation. We have now 
achieved the precious human rebirth and met  the teachings of the Buddha. We call ourselves 
Buddhists and there are many of us who ha ve taken the different levels of vows and 
commitments. But instead of accumulating virtue , we spend our time committing  negativities. 
That is both  very unskilful and unwise. When we fi nd that we are in such a situation, we need to 
pull ourselves out of that situation. The negati ve actions that we accumulate come from a  
negative motivation and the three mental poisons. Therefore,  it is important for us to try to 
reduce the three mental poisons in our minds,  as was explained in the previous lesson.  
 We have attachment for friends, relatives and lo ved ones and we have hatred or anger for those 
we do not like. The stronger the negative emotio ns involved,  the actions that are motivated by 
such negative emotions will also be much strong er. For example, when one’s attachment is very 
strong, when that attachment causes us to en gage in negative actions then, correspondingly, 
those actions will also be very powerful. It is, ther efore, very important for us to work very hard 
to reduce  the strength of the three mental poisons.  As mentioned in the previous lesson, one of the be st ways to reduce the strength of our negative 
emotions is to reflect on impermanence. By re flecting on impermanence, we can weaken our 
feelings of attachment, desire, hatred and so fort h. For example, to reduce hostility or hatred 
towards one’s enemy or someone one dislikes, it is helpful to reflect on how that object of anger 
is, by nature, impermanent. Oneself is al so impermanent. When we reflect well on 
impermanence, it will help us to reduce the inte nsity of our hatred for that person. We should 
reflect on how that person whom  we dislike woul d  definitely die one day and the uncertainty of 
when that the person would pass away.   W e  s h o u l d  a l s o   r e f l e c t  o n  t h e  f e a r  t h a t  w e  would encounter at the time of our own deaths. 
When  we entertain our negative emotions, we crea te negativities that lead to suffering and great 
fear in the intermediate state. Those negative  emotions will throw us into the lower realms. 
 Instead of harbouring hatred or anger towards a particular person, we sh ould reflect that that 
person would definitely die one day and, although  the time of death is uncertain, that person 
would probably experience great fear at both  th e time of death and in the intermediate state and 
might be reborn in the lower realms because of hi s own negative feelings of hostility and  hatred. 
By reflecting on how that person is under the cont rol of his own negative emotions and karma, it  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre       Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
F P M T  B a s i c  P r o g r a m                C h a p t e r  T w o  
 
 
101 becomes possible for us to generate compassion for him instead of hostility or hatred. We can 
reflect in the same way towards our loved ones.  
 
We are not suggesting here that friends or enemies do not exist. What we are trying to do  is to reduce the negative emotions that are usually asso ciated with our friends and foes. In the case of 
our friends, our relatives and our loved ones, we can do the same reflection in order to reduce 
our attachment to them. In the sa me way, they will die one day and it is uncertain when they will 
die. They also have to experience suffering and fe ar at the time of death and in the intermediate 
state. They may  also take rebirth in the lower re alms where they will  experience many different 
kinds of sufferings. By reflecting in this way, we  substitute the attachment or desire we have for 
them with  compassion.   Then what about ourselves? We should reflect on how we are impermanent in nature. We are under the control of our negative emotions and karma and this being th e case, there will be 
always be suffering. We will probably experience gr eat fear and suffering at the time of our deaths 
and  in the intermediate state.  If we are rebo rn in the lower realms, then again we have to 
experience great suffering. By reflecting on thes e different points, we develop renunciation. We 
need to reflect on this and try to put it into practise.  O f  c o u r s e ,  i t  w i l l  b e  v e r y  d i f f i c u l t  f o r  u s  t o  remove our afflictions from the root now but by 
reflecting on these points, we can at least reduce  the strength of the th ree mental poisons when 
they manifest. For example, when desire or strong anger is manifest, we need to reduce the strength of these negative emotions. The way to do  that is to reflect on these points, such as  
impermanence. This is something we must do.   At this time, we have achieved the precious human body and we ha ve the opportunity to listen to 
and discuss the Mahayana teachings. We accept that if we were to engage in negative actions, we 
would have to take rebirth in the lower realms . We accept the existence of hell and the lower 
realms. We also accept the possibility of higher  rebirths as humans and gods. Therefore, we  
know much more than those who have had no exposure to such teachings. 
 When, in spite of  knowing  this, our negative em otions actually increase along the way, then we 
should do something about it.  We may have so me knowledge of the teachings of the Buddha, 
compared to many others, but when it comes to the practice of trying to reduce the negative 
emotions, instead of reducing them, they are actually  on the increase (e.g. if we engage in ways to 
harm others), then we will  be just as Nagarjuna described - very foolish and stupid.   W e  m a y  k n o w  a  l o t  s o  w h e n  w e  m e e t  w i t h  d i f f i c u lties,  we should try to apply and get some 
benefit from  our knowledge.  It seems that, so metimes, we are not able to use and apply the 
knowledge and information we have. So, at times of difficulty, the suffering seems to become 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre       Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
F P M T  B a s i c  P r o g r a m                C h a p t e r  T w o  
 
 
102 worse or the bad experiences seem to be much more difficult to handle. This should not be the 
case.  
3B2B 2A1A 4B1D  Reflecting on the way in which negativities bring about fear  
1 Death is certain as you cannot add to your lifespan yet it decreases without respite and to die 
while still possessing negativities is fearful 
2 One will have to experience suffering in th is life as well if negativities are not purified 
3 The reason great fear arises 4 The way in which [negativities] cause one to  be tormented by suffering in future lives 
3B2B 2A1A 4B1D 2 One will have to experience suffering in this life as well if negativities are not 
purified 
A Friends and loved ones cannot protect you from the suffering of losing one’s life if negativities 
are not cleansed 
B The fear that comes from not performing meritorious acts C The anguish of regret 
 
We have studied outline 2’a’ in the previous lesson. When we do not  purify our negativities, even our friends and loved ones cannot protect us fr om the suffering of dying. We also looked at 
outline 2’b’, on experiencing the fear that comes from not performing virtue.  
  
[2, 41 cd] 
My merit alone shall protect me then, 
But upon that I have never relied 
 
What will protect us at the time of  death? It is our accumulation of virtue. Since there is nothing 
that will benefit us except the virtue that we have collected, we need to accumulate virtuous 
actions. 
3B2B 2A1A 4B1D 2C The anguish of regret 
[2, 42 ] 
O Protectors! I, so unconcerned, 
Unaware of such terror as this, 
Accumulated a great deal of evil 
For the sake of this transient life. 
 
This verse refers to generating regret. It begins  with “O Protectors!” One is calling the buddhas 
and bodhisattvas, who are in the nature of grea t compassion, and declaring to them, ‘I  have 
engaged in so many negative actions to sustain my loved ones, motivated by attachment and to 
defeat and harm my enemies because of not know ing how everything is impermanent, how it is 
pointless and meaningless to work for the affairs of  this life. I have engaged in negativities with 
my body, speech and mind, not havi ng faith and conviction in karma and forgetting that I have 
to die with all these fears. I am now generating regret for my ignorance.’ 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre       Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
F P M T  B a s i c  P r o g r a m                C h a p t e r  T w o  
 
 
103  
One invokes the buddhas and bodhisattvas and  ge nerates regret for the negativities that are 
motivated by the three mental poisons, wh ich will throw one into the lower realms. 
3B2B 2A1A 4B1D 3 The reason great fear arises  
[2, 43 ] 
Petrified is the person 
Today being led to a torture chamber. 
With dry mouth  and dreadful sunken eyes, 
His entire appearance is transfigured. 
 
[2, 44 ] 
What need to mention the tremendous despair 
When stricken with the disease of great panic, 
Being clasped by the physical forms 
Of the frightful messengers of death? 
 
The analogy used here is of a person being led to a place where he will be tortured. The sign that 
this person is very  terrified is the change in his appearance. If that were the case with the person 
who is being led to the torture chamber, then, what would  happe n to us when, due to the power 
of karma and negative emotions, we experienced  the terrifying visions of seeing the frightening 
messengers of death who would be much more po werful than ordinary beings? When we have 
such visions, we would be far more frightened th an the person going to the torture chamber. If 
we would have accumulated very powerful negativiti es, then at the time of death, we would have 
frightening visions of being led away by the me ssengers of death with our hands and legs in 
chains. This is the reason why great fear can arise even in this life. 
3B2B 2A1A 4B1D 4 The way in which [negativities] cause one to be tormented by suffering in 
future lives 
[2, 45 ] 
“Who can afford me real protection 
From this great horror?” 
With terrified, bulging eyes agape 
I shall search the four quarters for refuge. 
 
[2, 46 ] 
But seeing no refuge there 
I shall become enveloped in gloom. 
If there should be no protection there, 
Then what shall I be able to do? 
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre       Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
F P M T  B a s i c  P r o g r a m                C h a p t e r  T w o  
 
 
104 W h e n  w e  t a k e  r e b i r t h  i n  t h e  h e l l  r e a l m s  i n  o u r  n e x t  l i f e  a n d  w e  h a v e  v i s i o n s  o f  t h e  h e l l  
guardians, we shall  generate great fear and experience great mental suffering. Despite looking 
everywhere for refuge and protection, we shall not be  able to find an object of refuge. Because of 
not being able to find refuge or protection anywhere, our minds will be enveloped in gloom, as mentioned in the root text. Theref ore, we should go for refuge from this very moment,  at this 
time when we have a human body, when we have  received  the teachings of the Buddha and we 
have met with guides who can show  us what are the things  to be  abandoned and what are to be 
cultivated. At this point,  we need to practise  pure refuge.  We must go for refuge to the Three Jewels from this moment on. When we are already in the lower realms and in the hell realms, we shall be  experiencing great suffering. If we  started 
looking for help then, it would be too late and nothing could be done. Before this happens, we 
should go for refuge now.  Verses 27 to 46  discuss  the first power, the po wer of eradication, from among the four powers. 
In essence, these are the different ways to gene rate regret that are presented in the extensive 
presentation of the first power.  
3B2B 2A1A 4B2 The second power: The power of the support (foundation) 
A From this very moment, rely on the refuge of the Three Jewels 
B Rely on the children of the Conquerors who possess powerful aspirational prayers 
C Having gone for refuge, practice in accord with their instructions 
3B2B 2A1A 4B2A  From this very moment , rely on the refuge of the Three Jewels 
[2, 47 ] 
Therefore I now seek refuge 
In the Buddhas who protect the world, 
Who strive to shelter all that lives 
And with great strengt h eradicate all fear. 
 
[2, 48 ] 
Likewise I purely seek refuge 
In the Dharma they have realized 
That clears away the fears of cyclic existence, 
And also in the assembly of Bodhisattvas. 
 
Verse 47 starts with the word ‘t herefore’. This shows it is re lated to what we have earlier 
discussed. One should take refuge right now beca use of the fear of having to experience great 
suffering in the lower realms, when it would be too late. Because of the fear of not finding any 
refuge when  one takes rebirth in the hell realms , therefore one should go for refuge to the Three 
Jewels from now on. 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre       Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
F P M T  B a s i c  P r o g r a m                C h a p t e r  T w o  
 
 
105  
“I now seek refuge in the buddhas who protect the world”: first, we go for refuge to the Buddha, 
the protector, who possesses the fully developed po wer to protect us and eliminate our fears. The 
Buddha is also someone who is always working hard  for sentient beings. “From this very moment 
on, I shall go for refuge to the Buddha.”  We also take refuge in the Dharma that will pr otect us from the fear of  cyclic existence. The 
Dharma is what the Buddha has realised. When we refer to the Dharma  Jewel, there is the 
conventional Dharma Jewel, which are the twel ve divisions of scripture, and the ultimate 
Dharma Jewel, which refe rs to the true paths and true cessations. We also take refuge in the 
bodhisattvas who are abiding on the different grounds. To all of them, we go for refuge.  T h e  r o o t  t e x t  m e n t i o n s  t h e  w o r d  ‘ p u r e l y ’ ,  i n  “ I  p u r e l y  s e e k  r e f u g e . ”   I t  i s  e x p l a i n e d ,  i n  s o m e  commentaries, that one’s refuge should be done without deceit or dissimulation. One’s practice 
of refuge should not be tainted by doubt. The po wer of the foundation refers to the practice of 
refuge in the Three Jewels. As explained before, Buddha is the teacher of refuge, the Dharma is 
the actual refuge and the Sangha are the people wh o help us in our practice of refuge. We go for 
refuge to the Three Jewels by knowing these distinctions.  
3B2B 2A1A 4B2B  Rely on the children of the Conquerors who possess powerful aspirational 
prayers 
[2, 49 ] 
I, trembling with fear 
Offer myself to Samantabhadra; 
To Manjughosha also 
I make a gift of my body. 
 
[2, 50 ] 
To the Protector Avalokiteshvara 
Who infallibly acts with compassion, 
I utter a mournful cry, 
“Please protect this evil-doer!” 
 
[2, 51 ] 
In my search for refuge 
I cry from my heart 
For Akashagarba, Ksitigarbha 
And all the Compassionate Protectors. 
 
[2, 52 ] 
And I seek refuge in Vajrapani, 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre       Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
F P M T  B a s i c  P r o g r a m                C h a p t e r  T w o  
 
 
106 Upon the sight of whom all harmful beings 
Such as the messengers of death 
Flee in terror to the four quarters. 
 
One is going for refuge to the eight great close sons of the Buddha while trembling with fear.  
[The eight great close sons of the Buddha are Samantabhadra, Manjushri, Avalokiteshvara, 
Akashagarbha, Kshitigarbha, Sarvanivaranavis kambini, Maitreya and Vajrapani]. We are 
motivated to go to them for refuge because of our fear of the suffering of the lower realms. 
 We also offer our bodies to our Protector Aval okiteshvara, someone who infallibly acts with 
compassion. He is in the nature of great compa ssion; all his activities and his conduct do not 
contradict this mind of compassion.   These eight great bodhisattvas poss ess the power to protect us from our fear of suffering. We are 
offering ourselves completely to the eight great bodhisattvas with the in tention of seeking their 
help and protection. Once we offer ourselves completely to them, they will protect us.  
 We have discussed the practice of offering ou r bodies in a previous lesson. There are many 
reasons for doing this practice of making offeri ng of our bodies. By doing so, we reduce our 
attachment to our  bodies and  we become the foll owers or entourage of the bodhisattvas. It also  
reminds us to engage in the bodhisattva practices.  The practice of offering our bodies is also performed  in relation to the Buddha and to the guru. For example, when we entrust ourselves completely  to our gurus, then we shall  not experience 
any difficulties when we are advised to do certain things by the gurus. When  we can entrust and 
surrender ourselves or completely to the gurus, th en when it comes to ac complishing their wishes 
or following their advice, we will do so willingly and enthusiastically. All of us find difficulty in 
accomplishing the wishes or advice of our gurus be cause we are not able to  entrust or surrender 
ourselves completely  to our spiritual masters. Be cause of this, we are no t enthusiastic about or 
dislike carrying out their wishes or advice. Difficu lties also arise when the wishes of the gurus go 
against our own wishes.  This outline is talks about going for refuge to the eight close sons of the Buddha and entrusting 
and offering ourselves and our bodies completely  to them. These eight great close sons of the 
Buddha have made very powerful aspirational pr ayers, hence the heading “Rely on the children 
of the conquerors who possess powerful aspirational prayers”.   Sometimes when we walk, we need to rely on a walking stick. For someone who has taken many 
commitments and vows, which they have transg ressed, they should rely on bodhisattva 
Akashagarba (Essence of Space) to purify th ese transgressions and violations, by making 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre       Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
F P M T  B a s i c  P r o g r a m                C h a p t e r  T w o  
 
 
107 prostrations and offerings to him.  
 
Vajrapani works to remove the opposing conditio ns of the bodies , speech and minds of the 
buddhas of the three times. From the time these buddhas generate bodhicitta till the  time they 
achieve enlightenment, and from the time they turn the wheel of Dharma till they pass away to 
nirvana - throughout these periods, Vajrapani wi ll be present to help eliminate the opposing 
conditions to their bodies, speech and minds. Th e common explanation is that Vajrapani works  
to protect oneself from obstacles. From the tant ric viewpoint, Vajrapani is the embodiment of 
the fully developed powers of the buddhas. He is called Vajrapani because he holds a vajra in his 
hand. In Tibetan is chagna dorje;  chag is hand, dorje is vajra an d na is in. Literally, it means 
“vajra in hand”. Vajrapani is the supreme pr otector who protects us from the opposing 
conditions of the body, speech and mind.   We go for refuge to the eight great bodhisattvas to protect us from the fear of having to take 
rebirths in the lower realms. We should cultivat e the habit of being able to remember them and 
hold them in our minds all the time. When problems  arise, we should be able to remember them 
immediately. It is the same with deity practices,  in visualising deities and reciting mantras. The 
point is to be familiar with them.  When our fear arises, we should  spontaneously remember 
them . If we are familiar with the different buddhas and bodhisattvas, we may even dream of 
them. When we are familiar with them, we can rely  on them. At the time of death, when we are 
faced with the  suffering of fear, because we ar e familiar with them, we will remember them and 
think of them at the crucial moment. They  will be able to protect us then.  
3B2B 2A1A 4B2C  Having gone for refuge, practise in accord with their instructions 
[2, 53 ] 
Previously I transgressed your advice, 
But now upon seeing this great fear 
I go to you for refuge. 
By doing so may this fear be swiftly cleared away. 
 
We have transgressed the advice of the Three Je wels and have not engaged in virtue but now, 
seeing how samsara is limitless with all its sufferi ngs, we go for refuge to the Three Jewels. We 
should practice the essential points of abando ning non-virtue and cultivating virtue. One is 
saying, ‘I will now practise in accordance with the instructions of what is to be abandoned and 
what is to be cultivated and by doing so, please swiftly clear away my fears.’ 
 
In summary, the power of the foundation or suppo rt includes both the practice of going for 
refuge to the Three Jewels and the practice of relying on the eight clos e sons of the buddhas. 
Once we have gone for the refuge, we need to practice in accordance with the instructions. This is the meaning of the second power: the power of the foundation.  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre       Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
F P M T  B a s i c  P r o g r a m                C h a p t e r  T w o  
 
 
108 Lesson 14 – chapter 2, verse 54-65 (end) 
 
I would like to tell you about a precept or advice from a text. A faithful student went to his guru, 
a high lama,  for advice that would  be “hammere d like a nail into the mind”, i.e. advice which 
goes directly to one’s heart and brings about some  real transformation. His guru’s advice was as 
follows: 
First we pay homage : “I prostrat e to the venerable lamas.” If you have the desire to practise the 
Dharma, listen to these words.  This precious human rebirth that ca n fulfil great purposes is difficult to obtain and can easily be 
lost as the time of death is un certain. Nothing else except th e Dharma can benefit us in our 
future lives.   There is no point in  just listening to the word s but you must put them in to practice. Don’t you 
regret all the precious time that you have alre ady wasted in this life?  Having accumulated so 
many negativities, one will be reborn in the lowe r realms. Once you are bo rn in the lower realms, 
it will be difficult for you to endure the suffering there. The suffering is inexpressible.  
 If you want to practise the Dharma , you have to do it now. Now, we are sitting on the border 
between happiness and suffering. If  you only accumulate negativi ties, then you are opening the 
door to the lower realms. If that happens, it is  not due to the fault of an external demon or 
spirit.  
 
If we live our life according to and not go agai nst the law of cause and effect, then taking refuge 
under the Three Jewels will be an infallible sour ce of protection. So, from now on, we go for 
refuge from our hearts to the Three Jewels. Fr om now on, whatever we  do, let karma be our 
witness. If we knowingly jump over the cliff and ex pect someone to pull us up  again, then this is 
a vain hope. Renunciation, bodhicitta and the correc t view are the essence of  all the scriptures of 
the Conqueror.  
 
The essence of the above advice is that if on e knowingly accumulates negativities, then these 
negativities will result in one’s rebirth in the lo wer realms. Once we are there, we will find the 
suffering unbearable. Despite knowing this, we ho pe that the Three Jewels will protect us by 
m a k i n g  p r a y e r s ,  “ M a y  I  b e  r e b o r n  i n  S u k h a v a t i ,  t h e  P u r e  L a n d  o f  A m i t a b h a . ”  T h i s  i s  w i s h f u l  thinking.   Having taken a human rebirth, all the favourab le conditions are assembled now  and it is 
important to place as many imprints in our me ntal continuum as possible. From this very 
moment, we should try to make sure that virtuous  imprints are placed in our minds. If we are 
unable to meditate and are unable to place many imprints in our mental continuum in that way, 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre       Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
F P M T  B a s i c  P r o g r a m                C h a p t e r  T w o  
 
 
109 at the very least we can make aspirational praye rs. At this time, instead of moving our minds 
towards the Dharma, we are expect ing the Dharma to come into our minds; this is an arrogant 
way of thinking.  
 The guru is the source of all the excellent collecti ons, morality or ethics is the foundation of all 
the qualities and keeping pure vows and samaya is  the source of all attainments. It is not 
sufficient to leave it at that. One must actually prac tise it. It is not sufficient that the lama is the 
source of all the excellent collections or that  morality and ethics is the foundation of all the 
qualities or that keeping vows and samaya is the source of all attainments. One must actually 
make these conditions come about for oneself. At  this point when we ha ve all the favourable 
circumstances, we should practise  right now. When the Lord of De ath catches us, it would be too 
late.  We have covered this in the last lesson. At the time of death, we will have  frightful visions of the messengers of death. By then, it wi ll be  too late to do anything. We talk about and listen to the 
Dharma but it is very rare for us to  put the Dh arma into practice. It benefits oneself   if one 
practises whatever one knows even it is just on e piece of advice or a single word. But if one 
knows a lot but one does not  practise, then it is useless.   The Dharma is for subduing the mind. Keep in mi nd all the words that have been spoken here 
and think about them . This advice is specifica lly aimed at us. Although we listen to and  
understand the teachings, we are not able to really  practise the teachings. Instead, we continue to 
engage in negativities and create causes that will lead us to rebirths in the lower realms. We are 
actually opening the doors to rebirths in  th ese realms despite knowing what should  be 
abandoned and what should be cultivated. At th e same time, we are placing our hopes in the 
Three Jewels, expecting them to do something for us. This is a wrong way of thinking.  
 
In essence, we have to practise what we know  and reduce the strength  of the three  mental 
poisons. Depending  on the strength of our thr ee mental poisons, the strength of our negative 
karma will also differ. It is important to strive to reduce the strength of the mental poisons and engage in the practice of confession to puri fy the negativities accumulated in the past.  
 We purify our negativities by applying the four powers. The negativities we have accumulated will 
not disappear or  be purified of their own accord . These negativities can only be purified if we 
confess them through applying the four opponent powers. These negativities will not  disappear 
at the time of death.  
3B2B 2A1A 4B3 The third power: The power of applying the antidote at all times 
A  The reasons it is reasonable to make effort in purifying negativities 
B The reasonableness of making effort quickly 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre       Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
F P M T  B a s i c  P r o g r a m                C h a p t e r  T w o  
 
 
110 3B2B 2A1A 4B3A  The reasons why it is reasonable to make effort in purifying negativities 
1  The need to quickly purify negativities as illustrated by the analogy of disease 
2  Showing the need to purify by means of the analogy of an abyss 
3B2B 2A1A 4B3A 1 The need to quickly purify negativities as illustrated by the analogy of 
disease 
A Stating the meaning of the analogy 
B There are great disadvantages to the disease of  the three poisons; [in addition] the medicine 
for destroying them is rare C Thus it is reasonable to practice in accord with the words of the Teacher, the supreme doctor 
 
Asanga mentioned many antidotes in his Compendium of Advice , which we studied in the earlier  
lam rim module. There are six antidotes:  
• Relying on the scriptures 
• Reflecting on emptiness 
• Relying on recitation 
• Relying on holy objects like statues 
• Making offerings 
• Relying on the names of the buddhas 
3B2B 2A1A 4B3A 1A Stating the meaning of the analogy 
[2, 54 ] 
If I need to comply with a doctor’s advice 
When frightened by a common illness, 
Then how much more so wh en perpetually diseased 
By the manifold evils of desire and so forth. 
 
When we are sick due to the disturbance of the el ements in our bodies,  we suspect we may die. 
So we look for a doctor and then follow the doct or’s advice. We do this for common sicknesses. 
Now we are sick with the perpetual disease that began from beginningless time due to the three 
mental poisons. The way to free ourselves from this  disease of the three mental poisons is to rely 
on the Supreme Doctor’s advice, the teachings of the Buddha. This is the reason why we need to 
purify quickly the negativities we have accumulated. 
3B2B 2A1A 4B3A 1B There are great disadvantages to the disease of the three poisons; [in 
addition] the medicine for destroying them is rare 
[2, 55 ] 
And if all people dwelling on this earth 
Can be overcome by just one of these, 
And if no other medi cine to cure them 
Is to be found elsewhere in the universe 
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre       Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
F P M T  B a s i c  P r o g r a m                C h a p t e r  T w o  
 
 
111 Verse 55 refers to the great faults  of the three mental poisons. We do not have to consider all the 
three poisons. Just one of the thr ee  is sufficient to  overcome all the living beings on this earth: 
“Can be overcome by just one of these” . Entertaining an instant of anger towards a bodhisattva will 
create the cause to go to the lower realms and take rebirth in the unrelenting Avici hell. If 
everyone on this Earth were to generate anger towards a bodhisattva for a single instant, that 
instant of anger would wipe out everyone by throwing him/her into the lower realms in his/her next rebirth. The three poisons are, ther efore, very deadly and very dangerous. 
 What is the medicine that can cure us of thes e three mental poisons? The supreme antidote for 
removing  the three mental poisons is to  meditate  on the path. The path he re refers to the true 
path, the mind that directly realises emptiness. This is the only antido te that can completely 
remove all the afflicti ons from their roots. 
 How do we generate this wisdom? When we look in  all the ten directions for the instructions for 
generating this wisdom, we will only find them in the teachings of the Buddha, nowhere else. We 
can say that nothing else, other than the teaching s of the Buddha, can help us to generate this 
wisdom. This is the direct antidote to all the afflic tions. It is not enough just to say that and then 
sit quietly and do nothing about it. We have to in vestigate. We do not say things for no reason. 
We need to know why such a statement is made . We have to investigate the teachings of the 
Buddha.  Are the teachings of the Buddha perfec t? Why is it that the teachings of the Buddha 
contain the antidotes to remove the three mental  poisons? We have to understand all this. 
3B2B 2A1A 4B3A 1C Thus it is reasonable to practice in accord with the words of the Teacher, 
the supreme doctor 
[2, 56 ] 
Then the intention not to act in accordance 
With the advice of the All-Knowing Physicians 
That can uproot every misery, 
Is extremely bewildered and worthy of scorn.   
 
Verses 54, 55 and 56 are summarised as follows: In  order to destroy the three mental poisons, we 
must rely on the supreme doctor, the Buddha. There is no better way to destroy these three 
mental poisons other than what is found in the teachings of the Buddha. Since this is the case, 
we must practise these teachings. If we do not pr actise these teachings, th en, as mentioned in the 
root text, it “is extremely bewildered and worthy of scor n.” Instead of relying on the very skilful 
doctor, the Buddha and his instructions, it would be  extremely foolish if we were to continue to 
accumulate the negativities that would become th e causes for us to go to the lower realms. One 
must make a commitment or mental promise to pr actise correctly the teachings of the Buddha. 
3B2B 2A1A 4B3A 2 Showing the need to purify by means of the analogy of an abyss 
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre       Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
F P M T  B a s i c  P r o g r a m                C h a p t e r  T w o  
 
 
112 [2, 57 ] 
If I need to be careful 
Near a small, ordinary precipice 
Then how much more so near  the one of long duration 
That drops for a thousand miles. 
 
We need to be careful when we walk next to an  ordinary precipice. If we were to fall over, we could  break our hands and legs. This being the ca se, then we need to be far more careful when 
we are near the precipice of  deep duration – the precipice of the lower realms. There is a 
description  in the Abidharmakhosa  of how far down hell is. It is  an ancient measurement using a 
yojana.  When we fall over that precipice,  we  will land in hell that lies 32,000 yojana  beneath the 
earth.  
 And when we fall in, we do not remain  there for just one or two days. Our rebirth in hell would be of an extremely long duration and we would have to endure a great deal  of suffering for that length of time. This being the case, obviously, we  must rely on the antidotes to our afflictions. 
3B2B 2A1A 4B3B  The reasonableness of making effort quickly 
1  One should make effort in applying the antidotes to negativities from this very day onward 
2  As there is absolutely no reason not to fear suffering, being lazy about cultivating the path is unreasonable 
3B2B 2A1A 4B3B 1 One should make effort in applying the antidotes to negativities from this 
very day onward 
[2, 58 ] 
It is inappropriate to enjoy myself 
Thinking that today alone I shall not die, 
For inevitably the time will come 
When I shall become nothing. 
 
We have covered  the reasons why we need to apply ourselves to  purifying our negativities. Since 
we have met  the supreme doctor, the Buddha, we should rely on him and practise his teachings. 
There are no better antidotes for our afflictions an d negativities other than the teachings of the 
Buddha. Based on these reasons, we should pu t effort into purifying our negativities.  
 But, we should  do this from this very moment on. We should not procrastinate, thinking of doing this a month later or next year. We must  no t give in to the laziness of procrastination. We 
should start purifying our negativities immedi ately because our life spans are unstable. We 
should not allow ourselves to be overwhelmed by  attachment to the happiness of this life and 
conduct our lives without paying attention or putting  effort into purifying our negativities. It is 
inappropriate to think,  “Today,  I shall not die.” 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre       Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
F P M T  B a s i c  P r o g r a m                C h a p t e r  T w o  
 
 
113 3B2B 2A1A 4B3B 2 As there is absolutely no reason not to fear suffering, being lazy about 
cultivating the path is unreasonable 
[2, 59 ] 
Who can grant me fearlessness? 
How can I be surely freed from this? 
If I shall inevitably become nothing, 
How can I relax and enjoy myself? 
 
There are some who say, “There is no need to be afraid of death. There is  no need to think of 
such things”. This is something that we can see for ourselves. We  see people who become afraid 
and terrified at the time of death. You hear abou t people being afraid of death. Although we may 
think that there is no need to fe ar death and there is no point thin king about it,  when we see it 
happening to other people, we should know that we ourselves could  end up going to the lower 
realms.   We would not find any holy beings who would  say, “You will not be afraid at the time of death.”  
How are  we  different from other living beings? Now we may think, ‘Nothing will happen to me at the time of death and I will not be afraid at the time of death.’ But when we see others terrified at their time of death and hear of people  fearing death,  how could it be possible that 
these things would not happen to us? Even the holy  beings would not say to us, “You will not be 
terrified or experience any fear at th e time of death.” We are all the same. 
 
If we want to be free of the fear of death, then we need to rely on the antidotes. We need to apply the antidotes to purify our ne gativities. What is the cause of fear at the time of death? It is 
the negativities that we have accumulated. When we  do not  rely on the an tidotes, then there is 
no way we can be free from fear at the time of death. Sitting around, being lazy and not wanting 
to purify the negativities accumulated – this is inappropriate and  incorre ct. We must now try to 
meditate on the path.  
3B2B 2A1A 4B4 The fourth power: The power of turning away from wrongdoing 
A Refraining from negativities from this  day onward by regretting negativities 
B Confessing negativities performed in the past C Requesting the attention [of holy beings] and pledging to turn away from wrongdoing 
[negativities] 
3B2B 2A1A 4B4A  Refraining from negativities from this day onward by regretting 
negativities 
1 Purifying pointless negativities 
2 Making effort day and night in the methods for being liberated     from negativities 
3B2B 2A1A 4B4A 1 Purifying pointless negativities 
A As material wealth is not reliable, it is unreasonable to be attached to it 
B It is unreasonable [inappropriate] to be attached to close friends and so forth 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre       Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
F P M T  B a s i c  P r o g r a m                C h a p t e r  T w o  
 
 
114 3B2B 2A1A 4B4A 1A As material wealth is not re liable, it is unreasonable to be attached to it 
[2, 60 ] 
What remains with me now 
From the terminated ex periences of the past? 
But through my great attachment to them 
I have been going against my spiritual masters’ advice 
 
Here is the advice on how to abandon our attachment  to the objects of desire . It is said that there 
is not a single object of desire that we have not enjoyed before. When there is a meeting of the 
object of desire and the consciousness, there is an experience of pleasure at that very instant. But 
that moment of pleasure does not last.  It di sintegrates immediately. Then our consciousness 
meets with another object.   Again, we experience  an instant of pleasure that does not last and 
disintegrates. It goes on like th is. There is not a single experience  of pleasure that lasts for more 
than an instant. After the first instant of pleasure, the experience of pleasure  starts to disintegrate 
in the very next instant.   Verse 60 is saying that these worldly pleasure s are pointless and without meaning. Now and in 
the future, all our experiences with objects of desi re would be like this: coming together of our 
consciousnesses and the objects, followed by the ex perience of an instant of pleasure and then, in 
the very next moment, the experience begins to disintegrate.   We can look at this in three ways  - past, present and future - with regards to our experiences with 
sense objects or objects of desire. In the past, we have already experienced many pleasures that 
came from enjoying sense objects but they have  disintegrated. What remains are the memories. 
In the present, we understand how our experience s of pleasure do not remain for more than an 
instant. They are in the nature of disintegrati on. Based on the experiences that we had in the 
past and in the present, we can understand that all our experiences of pl easure that are derived 
from enjoying sense objects in the future will also end up in the same way. By thinking in this way, we can understand that any pleasure that is derived from enjoying sense objects is pointless. 
It was pointless and meaningless in the past, is  meaningless in the present and they will  be 
meaningless in the future as well.  Reflecting along these lines will reduce our graspi ng or attachment to the sense pleasures. If we 
do not do this and continue our attachment to se nse pleasures, we will not refrain from creating 
negative actions. We put in a lot of work and effo rt in order to enjoy  such sensual pleasures but, 
along the way, we create a lot of negativities th at will cause us many problems at the time of 
death. By behaving in such a way, we are going ag ainst the advice of our gurus. We are also going 
against the advice of the Buddha. By going against their advice, we  will  not only suffer a loss in 
this life but also a loss in our future lives. 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre       Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
F P M T  B a s i c  P r o g r a m                C h a p t e r  T w o  
 
 
115 3B2B 2A1A 4B4A 1B It is unreasonable to be attached to close friends and so forth 
[2,61]  
Having departed from this life 
And from all my friends and relatives, 
If all alone I must go elsewhere 
What is the use of making friends and enemies? 
 
In this life, when we go shopping, we can bring our friends along. At the time of death, when we 
have to go, we cannot  bring anyone along. [ Geshela: At the time of de ath, when you call anyone, 
nobody will  want to go with  you!].  At the time of death, even the bodies we have in this life would 
be left behind. We have to leave our parents and our close ones behind. As said in the root text,  
“What is the use of making friends?”  By thinking of this, we will  reduce our attachment for our 
friends. At the time of death, our friends are of  no benefit to us and our enemies cannot harm us 
in any way. If this is the case and by reflecting on this, we should reduce our  anger or hatred for 
our enemies and we should reduce our attachment or desire for our friends or close ones.  As 
said in the text, nobody is of any benefit to us at the time of our death.  It is said by the great masters of the past, ‘The  king leaves behind his kingdom at the time of 
death, the beggar leaves behind his begging bowl an d walking stick at the time  of death. It is the 
same for everyone as they have to leave everything  behind and go on alone at the time of death.’ 
It is inappropriate, therefore, to be attached to objects of desires as well as our  friends and close ones.   We experience a lot of suffering, worry and stre ss and engage in a lot of negative actions to 
acquire objects of desire and to sustain our love d ones because of our st rong attachment to our 
friends and relatives  and our strong desire or atta chment to sense objects. At the time of death, 
we have to leave everything behind but the negati vities that we have accumulated in the process 
of acquiring objects of desire and sustaining our friends and relatives follow us to our next lives 
just as the  the shadow follows the body. Since we created these actions ourselves, we alone 
would have to experience the results of these ac tions. We should apply ourselves  day and night 
to the methods for being liberated from ne gativities as shown in the next verse . 
3B2B 2A1A 4B4A 2 Making effort day and night in the methods for being liberated from 
negativities 
[2, 62] 
“How can I be surely freed 
From unwholesomeness, the source of misery?” 
Continually night and day 
Should I only consider this. 
 
We have accumulated many negative actions for the sake of our friends and foes. But when it 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre       Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
F P M T  B a s i c  P r o g r a m                C h a p t e r  T w o  
 
 
116 comes to the time of death, our friends are of no benefit to us and the enemies can no longer 
harm us at the time of death. But we have accumulated so many negative actions in relation to 
them. We have engaged in non-virtue and  the te n negative actions. Since we are the ones who 
have accumulated those negative actions, we ar e the ones who would have to experience the 
results of those negative actions alone. We woul d have to experience the suffering. We should 
reflect on this day and night and put effort to purify the negativities. 
3B2B 2A1A 4B4B  Confessing negativities performed in the past 
1 What is it that one is confessing? 
2 The way to confess 
3B2B 2A1A 4B4B 1 What is it that one is confessing? 
[2, 63] 
Whatever has been done by me 
Through ignorance and unknowing, 
Be it the breaking of a vow 
Or a deed by nature wrong, 
 
There are many kinds of negative actions but they  can be classified into two categories: natural 
misdeeds and the proscribed misdeeds.  What is a natural misdeed?  A natural misdeed refers  to any negative action that is performed by 
anyone regardless of whether he/she possesses vo ws or not. An example of a natural misdeed 
would be the act of killing. It does not matter who does the killing. It does not matter whether 
the person holds any refuge vows or not. Anyone who kills commits a negative action. Killing is a 
natural misdeed.  Proscribed misdeeds refer to negative actions that are done by people who hold vows. An 
example of a proscribed misdeed is  destroying or cutting down a plant or eating after noon. These actions by nature are not negative but they  are negative actions for people who hold vows 
like the ordained person who is not supposed to eat after noon. If they do, they are committing a 
fault, misdeed and negative action.  These are the  two categories of misdeeds that will have to be confessed. 
3B2B 2A1A 4B4B 2 The way to confess 
How to go about confessing negativities? 
[2, 64] 
I humbly confess it all 
In the presence of the Protectors 
With folded hands, prostrating myself again and again, 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre       Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
F P M T  B a s i c  P r o g r a m                C h a p t e r  T w o  
 
 
117 My mind terrified by the misery (to come). 
 
In the presence of the buddhas who are in the nature of compassion, we confess. When one’s 
mind is terrified by the suffering that will come in  the future and,   with the ends of one’s hair 
standing on ends and with tears in one’s eyes, with very strong regret for the negativities 
accumulated in the past, one prostrates and conf esses all these negativities and requests for 
protection or refuge. 
3B2B 2A1A 4B4C  Requesting the attention [of holy beings] and pledging to turn away from 
wrongdoing 
[2, 65 ] 
I beseech all the Guides of the World 
To please accept my evils and wrongs. 
Since these are not good, 
In future I shall do them no more. 
 
One is relying here on the promise not to engage in negative actions again in the future, even at 
the cost of one’s life.   At the end of his commentary on this chapter, G yaltsab Je advised, ‘Those of us who are not 
knowledgeable in the divisions of karma, whatever  little knowledge we have on how to lessen our 
karma, we have the knowledge but we do not pr actise. Therefore, we ha ve already accumulated 
much negativity and since this is the case, we need to engage in th e practice of purification with 
the four opponent powers. By understanding how these negativities are obstacles to developing 
bodhicitta in our minds, with this in mind, we engage in the practice of purification. For 
someone whose mind is under the influence of prid e, jealousy and desire, such a person will not 
develop bodhicitta. Therefore, one must sincerel y confess all the negativities accumulated with 
one’s body, speech and mind in the presence of  all the buddhas.’  
3B2B 2A1B The chapter’s name 
This concludes chapter two: Confessing Negativities . 
 
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre       Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
F P M T  B a s i c  P r o g r a m                C h a p t e r  T w o  
 
 
118 Lesson 15 – chapter 3, verse 1-5 
 
As mentioned in the previous class,  it is said in the advice given by a high lama that the essence 
of all the scriptures of the Buddha is summarise d in the three principal aspects of the path: 
renunciation, bodhicitta and the correct view.   Since we have met the teachings at  this time, we need to place imprints of the teachings in our 
minds. When we have obtained a human rebirt h and  met the teachings of the Buddha, with 
such favourable conditions, even if we cannot ge nerate the realisations of the three principal 
aspects of the path in our minds, at least, we ca n place  stable imprints of these teachings in our 
mental continua.  There are many ways of placing imprints in ou r mental continua such as through hearing the 
teachings, reflection and meditation or familiaris ation. We should try to place such imprints in 
our mental continua through one of th ese means or through all of them.  
 How are these different imprints placed in our me ntal continua through these three activities – 
hearing, reflection and meditation?  The imprints that come from hearing have to come from the 
activity of hearing so we have to listen to the teachings on the three prin cipal aspects of the path. 
Without listening to these  teachings, we would not receive any imprints through hearing. In the 
same way, this applies to reflection and meditati on as well. The imprints of teachings that are 
placed in our  mental continua vary in strength  and power. The variation comes in  the way we 
pursue the activities of listening, reflection and meditation.   As mentioned by a high lama, we are very arroga nt in expecting the teachings to come of their 
own accord into our minds, without us putting in any effort to familiarise ourselves with them. It 
is the same here with the three principal aspe cts of the path: renunciation, bodhicitta and 
emptiness. They are the essence of all the scriptur es of the Buddha; but if we do not put in the 
effort to familiarise ourselves with these teachi ngs, to receive teachings and to try to secure 
imprints of these teachings from our own side, then, there is no way that we can place any 
imprints in our mental continua. We need to remember that  we have obtained this human 
rebirth now and we have some knowledge of what is to be abandoned and cultivated. At such a 
time, we need to put these imprints in our mind.  Keeping this in mind, we engage in the act of 
listening to the teachings.  
There is lot of discussion on death and impermanence in chapter two, Confessing Negativities . We 
need to reflect on death and impermanence over an d over again. We should realise that when it 
comes to placing the imprints of  the teachings in our mental co ntinua, we should not postpone 
it to tomorrow or  the day after tomorrow. We should do it from this very moment on. What is the fault of procrastinating, or postponing our practice of the Dharma? We might think, “I will
Amitabha Buddhist Centre       Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
F P M T  B a s i c  P r o g r a m              C h a p t e r  T h r e e  
 
 
119 do it tomorrow or the day after tomorrow.” What  is the problem with th at? The answer is that 
t h e  t i m e  o f  d e a t h  i s  u n c e r t a i n .  S o  i f  w e  w e r e  t o  p a s s  a w a y  b e f o r e  w e  w e r e  a b l e  t o  p l a c e  a n y  
imprints in our minds, then it would  be too late.  
 We have spent a lot of time discussing  imperm anence and death in chapter two and we need to 
reflect on these points over and over again. It is  not sufficient just to listen to these teachings. 
We need to reflect on them over and over agai n and we should meditate on these points. Being 
able to do a good meditation depends first on ha ving reflected well on one’s meditation topic. 
Before one can do a proper reflection on the te achings, first one must have listened to the 
teachings. With this in mind, wi th this as our motivation,  we are now listening to the teachings 
on the practices of the bodhisattvas.  
The Third Chapter: Thoroughly Embracing Bodhicitta 
 [Full Acceptance of the Awakening Mind] 
3B2B 2A2  The actual embracing of bodhicitta after having first gathered the accumulations: 
The conducive conditions such as rejoicing in virtue  
A Explaining the chapter’s material 
B The chapter’s name 
3B2B 2A2A Explaining the chapter’s material 
1 Preparation 
2 The actual  
3 Concluding actions 
3B2B 2A2A 1 Preparation 
A Rejoicing in virtue 
B Requesting [the teacher] to turn the wheel of dharma C Requesting him not to pass into nirvana 
D Dedicating virtue 
E Training in the mind that gives away body, material wealth and roots of virtue 
3B2B 2A2A 1A Rejo icing in virtue 
1 Rejoicing in the virtues of the causes for and effects of higher rebirths 
2 Rejoicing in the virtues of the causes for and effects of mere liberation 3 Rejoicing in the causes for and effects of unsurpassable enlightenment 
 
Befo re w e can  em brac e o r fully accept  bo dh icit t a, w e m us t  en gage in  s o m e o f t he prelim in ary 
practices that are summarised in the seven-limb practice. Of the seven limbs, we have already 
covered the first three: prostration, offerings and confession. Now we are at the limb of the 
practice of rejoicing.  What are the two things we need to do before we  can generate bodhicitta? We need to eliminate 
the obstacles to developing bodhic itta, which is done through the confession of negativities, and 
we need to gather favourable conditions for generating bodhicitta by  accumulating merit. 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre       Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
F P M T  B a s i c  P r o g r a m              C h a p t e r  T h r e e  
 
 
120  
From the perspective of causes, there are two caus es for developing bodhicitta in our minds: the 
substantial cause for developing bodhicitta an d the cooperative conditions for developing 
bodhicitta. What we have been discussing so  far falls under the category of cooperative 
conditions for developing bodhicitta; such as th e practices of accumulating merit and confessing 
negativities. When we talk about training the mi nd in developing compassion, these practices of 
mind training are the substantial cause for developing bodhicitta, or the main cause. 
 In order for us to understand the differenc e between substantial cause and cooperative 
conditions for developing bodhicitta, let us take the analogy of planting a seed in the ground. In 
order for the seed to grow, we need the cooperativ e conditions of water, fertilizer and heat. What 
is the main cause of the plant? It is the very seed  itself because it is the seed that will transform 
into the entity of the plant . The seed is the substantial cause or th e main cause of the plant.  The 
practice of rejoicing and so forth are  the coop erative conditions for developing bodhicitta.  
 It has already been said that the root of bodhic itta is great compassion. In one of the previous 
teachings, it was mentioned in the text that great compassion is th e seed of all the buddhas.  If 
that is the case, is it the mind of great comp assion that will transform into the entity of 
bodhicitta? If we say that the mind of great comp assion is the root of bodhicitta, the main cause 
or the substantial cause of bodhic itta, does that mind of great compassion change into the entity 
of bodhicitta? This is something we can discuss. What are some possible fallacies or faults in 
asserting this? 
3B2B 2A2A 1A1 Rejoicing in the virtues of the causes for and effects of higher rebirths 
[3,1] 
Gladly do I rejoice 
In the virtue that relieves the misery 
Of all those in unfortunate states 
And that places those with suffering in happiness. 
 
There are different kinds of rejoicing: rejoicing in  the persons of small capacity, rejoicing in the 
persons of medium capacity and rejoicin g in the persons of great capacity.  
 When we look at the practice of  rejoicing in the virtues of the person of small capacity, we are 
rejoicing in the virtue that would  cause this pe rson to obtain a higher rebirth as a human or  
god. When we rejoice in the virtue s of such a person, we rejoice in  the virtue of the causes that 
would lead to such a rebirth. We can also rejoice in the effects of these virtues, the attainment of 
higher rebirths.   Sometimes, there are people who seem to have ev erything going for them -  power, wealth, fame 
and all the good things in life. Sometimes, when we look at such people, we get jealous and we 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre       Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
F P M T  B a s i c  P r o g r a m              C h a p t e r  T h r e e  
 
 
121 have the  negative wish of wanting to compete wi th them. We need to change this attitude and 
o n e  o f  t h e  b e s t  w a y s  t o  d o  t h i s   i s  t o  r e j o i c e  i n  w h a t e v e r  t h e y  h a v e  a t t a i n e d .  W h a t e v e r  
enjoyments, wealth and  fame some people have come from  the virtues they have accumulated 
in the past. By reflecting on this, we rejoice si ncerely from the depths of our hearts.  This is 
rejoicing in the effects of people who have ob tained higher rebirths of humans and gods.  
 What about rejoicing in the virtues of the causes that will lead to higher rebirths? Sometimes, 
when people do good things and practise  genero sity, we can get jealous seeing them doing such 
virtuous actions. In order to stop this kind of je alousy and competitiveness, we rejoice  in the fact 
that they are creating causes for higher rebirths. I f  w e  w e r e   a b l e  t o  r e j o i c e  i n  t h e  v i r t u e  a n d  
happiness of others, then we would definitely  be ab le to remove manifest jealousy. It is said that 
the practice of rejoicing brings about great merit.  The practical benefit of rejoicing is to remove 
jealousy and competitiveness. 
3B2B 2A2A 1A2 Rejoici ng in the virtues of the causes for and effect of mere liberation 
[3, 2 ] 
I rejoice in that gathering of virtue 
That is the cause for (the Arhat’s) Awakening, 
I rejoice in the liberation of sentient beings 
From the miseries of cyclic existence. 
 
Verse 2 shows the practice of rejoicing for th ose who are practising to achieve individual 
liberation. We are also rejoicing in those who ha ve already achieved liberation, also called lesser 
nirvana.   “I rejoice in the liberation of sentient beings” – If we look at these words from the perspective of 
the result, that obviously refers to the state of nirvana, having become foe destroyers and arhats. 
In some commentaries,  we look at the word ‘l iberation’ from the perspective of those who are 
e n g a g i n g  i n  t h e  p r a c t i c e  t h a t  w i l l  l e a d  t o  t h e  g o a l  o f  l i b e r a t i o n .  I f  w e  l o o k  a t  i t  f r o m  t h e  perspective of the cause, or the types of person s who are moving towards the goal of liberation, 
then there are four types: stream-enterer, once -returner, never- returner and arhat or foe 
destroyer. We are rejoicing here in the people wh o have already attained the state of liberation 
and these are the hearers and solitary realisers.   Both hearers and solitary realisers are Hinayanists , but they differ in their motivation, behaviour, 
merit, and wisdom. Solitary realisers are su perior to hearers in all these respects. 
 
There are eight types of hearers, according to the level of delusions they have abandoned:  
1. Approachers to the state of a stream enterer, 
2. Abiders in the state of a stream enterer,  
3. Approachers to the state of a once returner,  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre       Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
F P M T  B a s i c  P r o g r a m              C h a p t e r  T h r e e  
 
 
122 4. Abiders in the state of a once returner,  
5. Approachers to the state of a never returner, 
6. Abiders in the state of a never returner,  
7. Approachers to the state of a foe destroyer, and  
8. Abiders in the state of a foe destroyer.  
 A stream enterer is on the path of seeing an d will never again be reborn in the three lower 
realms; a once returner will return to the desire realm only one more time; a never returner will never again return to the desire realm. A hearer is a Hinayana disciple who strives for nirvana on 
the basis of listening to teachings from a teacher,  while a solitary realiser is a Hinayana disciple 
who strives for nirvana in solitude, without relying on a teacher.  We rejoice in the effects -  what they have attain ed - and we also rejoice in the virtues that led 
them to such a state.  Next is the rejoicing in the person of great ca pacity. There are two effe cts:temporal effect and 
ultimate effect (final effect). 
3B2B 2A2A 1A3 Rejoicing in the causes for and effect of unsurpassable enlightenment 
[3, 3 ] 
I rejoice in the Enlightenment of the Saviours ∗ 
And also in the spiritual levels  of the Conqueror’s Children 
 
[3, 4 ] 
And with gladness I rejoice 
In the ocean of virtue from developing an Awakening Mind 
That wishes all beings to be happy, 
As well as in the deeds th at bring them benefit. 
 
“Saviours” refers to the buddhas. “I rejoice in th e enlightenment of the buddhas”  is rejoicing in 
the final effect. “Conqueror’s children” refers to the bodhisattvas. That  is rejoicing in the 
temporal effect. We are specifically rejoicing here in what the superior bodhisattvas have 
attained. Superior bodhisattvas are those bodhisattv as abiding in the first ground up to the tenth 
ground. We are rejoicing in the states that they have attained.  “Rejoicing in the causes for unsurpassable enligh tenment” – What are we rejoicing in here? We 
rejoice in the fact that these bodhisattvas have generated bodhicitta. From the time of generating 
bodhicitta, they enter into the pr actices of the six perfections. They train in the six perfections 
and, along the way, they perform limitless works and activities for the benefit of sentient beings. 
We rejoice in all these activities.       
Amitabha Buddhist Centre       Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
F P M T  B a s i c  P r o g r a m              C h a p t e r  T h r e e  
 
 
123 The generation of aspirational bodhicitta yields   immeasurable benefits and it goes without 
saying that there are many more benefits that come from generati ng engaged bodhicitta. This was 
already explained in Chapter 1 of this text. We should reflect on these benefits and rejoice in 
them.  The practice of rejoicing falls into the category  of practices for accumulating merit. We have the 
accumulation of merit and the purification of nega tivities. Of these two categories, the practice of 
rejoicing falls into the category of accumulating  merit. Various texts have explained the many 
benefits of  rejoicing. By  rejoicing, one subdue s pride. When we practise rejoicing, we will see 
there are many practical benefits. When we rejo ice in the virtues,  good things, possessions, 
qualities and the practices of others,  it serves to  weaken our negative emotions such as jealousy, 
pride and competitiveness.  Sometimes, when high lamas such as Kyabje Zopa Rinpoche visit us , everyone vies for Rinpoche’s 
time and attention. People become unhappy with and jealous of one anothe r, with thoughts such 
as, “You got the consultation with Rinpoche but I didn’t get the chance to see him.” It is a good 
time to practise rejoicing  in th e  virtue of others. When we do  this, we experience happiness for 
ourselves and other people are also happy with us. If everybody were to rejoice  in everybody else’s good fortunes, then there would not  be pr oblems like this and everyone would  feel happy. 
If not, jealousy and competitiveness would arise. Then it becomes messy!.   We should put this teaching about rejoicing into practical use. If we disc over that we fall into 
that group of people, we should try to reduce our negative emotions such as jealousy and competitiveness through rejoicing. If we were not acting in that way, we should rejoice that we 
have,  so far, not acted in those ways. 
3B2B 2A2A 1B Requesting [the teacher] to turn the wheel of dharma 
[3, 5 ] 
With folded hands I beseech 
The Buddhas of all directions 
To shine the lamp of Dharma 
For all bewildered in misery’s gloom 
 
There is a historical account of how Shakyamu ni Buddha was beseeched to teach the Dharma. 
Shakyamuni Buddha had sat unde r the bodhi tree and manifested the deed of achieving 
enlightenment. After he achieved enlightenment,  he did not teach and he did not say anything. 
He did not teach for 49 days. After the 49 d ays, the gods Indra and Brahma requested the 
Buddha to start teaching the Dharma. Indra o ffered a white conch shell to the Buddha and 
Brahma offered a thousand-spoked golden Dhar ma wheel to request the Buddha to teach the 
Dharma. In the same way, in vers e 5: “With folded hands I beseec h”, one requests the Buddha to 
teach the Dharma. With folded hands we beseech all the buddhas to shine the lamp of Dharma 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre       Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
F P M T  B a s i c  P r o g r a m              C h a p t e r  T h r e e  
 
 
124 for the benefit of sentient beings who are envelo ped in the darkness of ignorance, who do not 
know the essential points of what is to be practised, what is to be achieved and what is to be 
abandoned. 
 We can also practise requesting the Buddha to tu rn the wheel of Dharma by requesting the same 
of our spiritual masters, those with whom we have a Dharma connection.  We request them to 
turn the wheel of Dharma and, at the same time ,  we can also visualise holding in our hands a 
thousand-spoked golden Dharma wheel. When we make this requ est, we think that all the 
buddhas and gurus gladly accept our request.   Why is there a need to do this practice? Firstly, th is is to request the Buddha to turn the wheel of 
Dharma. If we were to do this, then in all our lives to come, we  would  not generate wrong views 
and we would  not come under the influence of  bad views. In addition, by requesting the 
buddhas to turn the wheel of Dharma, in all our lives to come, we would not be separated form 
the teachings of the Buddha.   
Lesson 16 – chapter 3, verse 5-12 
 I would like to offer another advice from Gung tang Rinpoche regarding how we should conduct 
our studies. Rinpoche said that, from the very onse t of our studies, if we aspire to be a scholarly 
expert on these topics immediately, that is errone ous and a mistake. It is also a mistake for us to 
forget whatever we have studied, i.e. we begin to forget everything we have studied after three 
days. If we conduct our studies wi th such an attitude, there is no  way we can succeed. He said we 
need to put in effort and our efforts should be constant like the flow of a river.   
Guntang Rinpoche gave this advice specifically for people who are engaged in the study of the 
vast and profound teachings of the Buddha, espe cially the great treatises of the philosophical 
teachings. When we study these gr eat treatises, we must put in continuous effort because these 
teachings are very deep and profound. If our effort s are erratic, there is no way for us to succeed 
in our studies.  Whatever we have learnt, we need to refresh our recall  of these teachings.  We should try to 
remember these teachings every now and then. If no t, we will learn something and then forget it 
three or four days later. This will not be helpful at all to our studies.  What we have studied so far is interrelated and there are connections in the subjects between  the earlier and later 
modules. We might be studying, but as soon as we receive new informatio n, we tend to forget 
what we have learnt earlier. Rinpoche said that  there is not much meaning and purpose in that, 
as one will not achieve anything. It is important to  keep reading,  thinking about and reflecting 
on the topics covered,  continuously. 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre       Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
F P M T  B a s i c  P r o g r a m              C h a p t e r  T h r e e  
 
 
125  
The best way to really learn is through discussion. If during the course of discussion, we are able 
to come to an established conclusion regarding a certain topic that comes from the use of logic 
and reasoning, it will remain in the mind for a very long time. I may give more time for discussion sessions in the future. In terms of th e information that we can get from our studies, 
25% comes from listening to the teacher, another 25% comes from self-study and the remaining 
50% comes from discussion. 
3B2B 2A2A 1B Requesting [the teacher] to turn the wheel  of Dharma 
[3, 5 ] 
With folded hands I beseech 
The Buddhas of all directions 
To shine the lamp of Dharma 
For all bewildered in misery’s gloom 
 
There is a historical account of how Shakyam uni Buddha, at the time when he achieved 
enlightenment, was requested to teach the Dh arma. The gods, Indra and Brahma both made 
offerings to request the Buddha to turn the wheel  of Dharma. Indra offered a white conch shell 
to the Buddha while Brahma offere d a thousand-spoked golden Dhar ma wheel. They said to the 
Buddha, ‘While you were training on the differe nt paths, you have endured many hardships for 
the sake of acquiring a single verse of the Dhar ma. For the sake of acquiring one verse of the 
Dharma, you have endured the hardship of having  1000 nails being pierced into your body and 
1000 candles  placed and lit on your body as   light offerings. Now you have achieved full 
enlightenment and you know everything. Why ar e you not teaching the Dharma?’  Indra and 
Brahma made repeated requests and beseeched th e Buddha to turn the wheel of Dharma for the 
benefit of his disciples.  In the same way, we should also put our hands to gether and make this request to all the buddhas 
and bodhisattvas and beseech them  to turn the wheel of Dharma. 
3B2B 2A2A 1C Requesting him not to pass into nirvana 
[3, 6 ] 
With folded hands I beseech 
The Conquerors who wish to pass away, 
To please remain for countless aeons 
And not to leave the world in darkness. 
 
When the Buddha was about to pass away into nirvana, a layperson named Chunda requested the Buddha not to pass away. As the result of his request, the Buddha extended his life for 
another three months. The Buddha extended his lifespan due to the request of this layperson. Similarly, we should put our hands together and beseech our gurus and buddhas of the ten 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre       Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
F P M T  B a s i c  P r o g r a m              C h a p t e r  T h r e e  
 
 
126 directions, who wish to show the aspect of passing  away into nirvana, to remain till the end of 
samsara for the benefit of their disciples, especi ally those who are blinde d by ignorance. At the 
end, we should think that they  have accepted our request. 
3B2B 2A2A 1D Dedicating virtue 
1 Dedicating in general 
2 Dedicating for th e sake of the ill 
3 Dedicating in order to alleviate hunger and thirst 
4 Dedicating [so that virtue acts] as the cause for all that one wishes 
5 Dedicating in general 
3B2B 2A2A 1D1 Dedicating in general 
[3,7] 
Thus by the virtue collected 
Through all that I have done, 
May the pain of every living creature 
Be completely cleared away. 
 
When we talk about dedication, there is a difference between dedicating and making aspirational prayers. There is a common locus between the two of them. All dedication are necessarily aspirational prayers, but this does not necessarily apply the other way round. Not all aspirational prayers are dedication. The difference between de dication and making aspirational prayers is 
posited on the basis of whether there is something to be dedicated or not. If there is something 
to be dedicated and if we dedicate it, then it beco mes the act of dedication and as well as  the act 
of making an aspirational prayer. But if there is nothing to be dedicated and we just generate the 
thought, ‘I will become a buddha  for the benefit of sentient be ings, ‘ then that  becomes an 
aspirational prayer and not a dedication.   In this context, we are dedicating the merit that we have accumulated through the earlier 
practices of making prostrations, making offering s, confessing negativities, rejoicing in virtue, 
beseeching the buddhas to turn the wheel of Dharma and requesti ng them not to pass away into 
nirvana. We have accumulated merit by doing th ese different practices . So there is something 
for us to dedicate.   We dedicate the virtues that we have accumulated from the earlier practices,  together with all the 
merit accumulated from the past, present and futu re. We dedicate them all, making the wish, 
‘May all the sufferings of the lower realms and the sufferings in cyclic existence of all sentient 
beings be completely cleared away.’ This is dedication in general - dedicating the merit for the purpose of eliminating the sufferings of all sentient beings.  
3B2B 2A2A 1D2 Dedicati ng for the sake of the ill 
[3, 8 ] 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre       Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
F P M T  B a s i c  P r o g r a m              C h a p t e r  T h r e e  
 
 
127 May I be the doctor and the medicine 
And may I be the nurse 
For all sick beings in the world 
Until everyone is healed. 
 
Here we are dedicating specifically for those wh o are sick.  In some other commentaries, it is 
mentioned that it is not enough to pray, ‘May I be the doctor.’ We should pray: ‘May I be a good doctor’ and also, not just an ordinary nurse, bu t one who is gentle and caring. For the medicine, 
we should pray, ‘May I be the powerful medicine  which will be effective for the patients.’  
 The practice here is just making a prayer, but, in  reality, when we see a sick person or someone 
who needs help, we should try to do something an d not  ignore that person. We should try to 
help as much we can when we encounter such people. In our Centre, we have a CARE group that takes care of those who are sick and a hospice group that take s care of those who are dying. 
As much as we are able, it is good to  volunteer to help in these activities. 
3B2B 2A2A 1D3 Dedicating in order to alleviate hunger and thirst                                                                              
 [3, 9] 
May a rain of food and drink descend 
To clear away the pain of thirst and hunger , 
And during the aeon of famine 
May I myself change into food and drink 
W h e n  p e o p l e  a r e  d e p r i v e d  o f  f o o d  a n d  d r i n k ,  w e  c a n  d e d i c a t e  i n  t h i s  w a y :  ‘ M a y  t h i s  m e r i t  
becomes the cause for me to become like the rain  of food and drink that descends and clears 
away the suffering of thirst and hunger.”  Verse 9 in the root text refers to the eon of fa mine. The eon of sickness and the eons of weapons 
are also predicted to happen  in the future. The eon of famine will happen when the lifespan of 
human beings will be about thirty years only. Duri ng this time, famines will occur for seven years, 
seven months and seven days and all the beings of  that time will be on the verge of death.  
 During the eon of sickness , the lifespan of human beings will drop to twenty years. During this 
time, there will be epidemics and contagious diseases will spread everywhere for seven years, seven months and seven days and a lot of people will die.   The eon of  weapons will happen during the time when human beings will have a lifespan of ten 
years. For seven days during this period, people will kill one another whenever they meet. 
Whatever  they pick up - be it a stone, a twig or tree branch - will turn into a weapon and they 
will start killing one another.  This in formation can be found in the text, the Treatises on the 
Bhumis composed by Arya Asanga. 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre       Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
F P M T  B a s i c  P r o g r a m              C h a p t e r  T h r e e  
 
 
128  
We should dedicate the merit now so that, in  the future, during the time of famine, as 
mentioned in the root text, one will become a ra in of food and drink to eliminate the suffering 
of those beings. We can become a doctor, nurse an d medicine for them when contagious diseases 
will affect human beings. We should dedicate our merit to be a cause for us to be medicine during the eon of sickness and to transform oursel ves into the entity of food and drink during 
the eon of famine. Due to the powe r of that merit that we have accumulated, during the eon of 
weapons, whatever is picked up, as a weapon, will be transformed into flowers.  The Buddha mentions  in one of the sutras that, in order not to be reborn during the eons of 
famine, sickness and weapons, we should do the following:  
• by offering medicine to the sangha, we will crea te the cause not to  be  reborn  in  the eon 
of sickness;  
• by offering food to the sangha, we will create  the cause not to  be reborn in the eon of 
famine;  
• and by meditating on love, we will create the cause not to be reborn in the eon of 
weapons.  
It is also mentioned in some other commentarie s that if we offer different weapons to the 
Buddha, then we will create a cause for no t being born in the eon of weapons.   
3B2B 2A2A 1D Dedicating [so that virtue acts] as the cause for all that one wishes 
[3,10 ] 
May I become an inexhaustible treasure 
For those who are poor and destitute; 
May I turn into all things they could need 
And may these be placed close beside them. 
 
The main point here is the practice of bodhicitta. What we are trying to do here is to generate 
bodhicitta. In order to do that, we first have to  accumulate merit and then dedicate the merit for 
the purpose of others. This merit will act as a cond ition for us to generate bodhicitta. In order to 
generate bodhicitta, we have to train our minds in  equanimity and in the practice of compassion 
and so forth.   Before we can proceed to train our minds in th e different practices, we need to generate 
bodhicitta. The training in  the dedication of merit precedes this. The practice of dedication 
becomes a  branch of mind training and also be comes the cause of success in such mind training 
practice. Due to these merits, we will be able  to generate equanimity, compassion, loving 
kindness and so forth. Once we generate these qualit ies, all these different realisations will act as 
a cause for the development of bodh icitta. For example, in verse 8 of  this chapter, “May I be the 
doctor, the medicine...”, we pray and dedicate that  we may also become natural medicine and so 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre       Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
F P M T  B a s i c  P r o g r a m              C h a p t e r  T h r e e  
 
 
129 forth. 
3B2B 2A2A 1E Training in the mind that gives away body, material wealth and roots of virtue 
before practicing the branch of the perfection of giving  
1 Training in the thought to give away body, material wealth and roots of virtue 
2 Aspiring for virtue to become a cause that does not go to waste 
3 Aspiring for virtue to become a cause for material resources, body, etc. 
3B2B 2A2A 1E1 Training in the thought to give away body, material wealth and roots of virtue 
A The way to give them away 
B The reason it is reasonable to give away in a definite manner C How to practice once one has given them away 
3B2B 2A2A 1E1A The way to give them away 
[3,11 ] 
Without any sense of loss 
I shall give up my body and enjoyments 
As well as all my virtues of the three times 
For the sake of benefiting all. 
 
We are giving away our bodies and enjoyments as well as our roots of virtue of the past, present 
and the future. We are giving away all these to fulf il  the temporal and ultimate goals of sentient 
beings. When we give them away, we do so with out any miserliness, expectation of reward and 
sense of loss. This practice of giving away our bo dies, our possessions and our roots of virtue is a 
method to train our minds in bodhicitta. In order to generate bodhicitta, we need to remove our 
self-cherishing attitude and we need to in crease the mind that cherishes others.  
 
Of all the different things that we own, we cherish our bodies the most followed by our 
possessions and our roots of virtue. So, first, we need to give up our bodies. Because of 
cherishing our bodies, we need to take care of them. Then we go about accumulating wealth and 
merit. In order to develop bodhicitta, we need to remove our self-grasping and self-cherishing 
attitude. When we are able to give away our bodies , wealth and virtue completely from our hearts 
without any sense of loss, then there will be no pr oblems in training in the perfection of giving. 
 
We have studied this topic in the la m rim module. It is mentioned in the Lam Rim Chen Mo that 
the absence or the abandonment of miserliness does  not constitute having achieved or perfected 
the generosity of giving. For example, the so litary realiser and the arhat have abandoned 
miserliness but they have not achi eved the  perfection of giving . The perfection of giving or 
generosity comes about only when there is a comp lete whole-hearted wish to give and dedicate 
everything.  One is verbalising here one’s intention to give up  one’s body, wealth and the roots of virtue of 
the past, present and  future fo r the sake of accomplishing th e purposes of others. We are 
verbalising this intention but it should not be  done just at the level of speech - we should also 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre       Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
F P M T  B a s i c  P r o g r a m              C h a p t e r  T h r e e  
 
 
130 reflect on this over and over again. If we are able to reflect on this repeatedly, from the depths of 
our hearts,  it will serve to weaken our self-grasping attitude. 
 
The text mentions that sometimes we may experience  different kinds of fear - the fear of losing 
our bodies, our wealth and possessions or our me rit. When this happens, we should remember: 
“I have already offered these (my body, wealth  and possessions and merit) to other sentient 
beings. There is actually nothing to hold on to and  there is nothing to cherish.” When we are 
able to reflect well in this way,  then it will help  to reduce anxieties and stress when meeting with 
such problems and fears.   We experience the fear of losing our bodies  be cause we cherish our bodies and have very strong 
attachment and  self-grasping. It is the same with our wealth, possessions, our friends and close 
ones.   We fear losing them because of our attachment an d strong self-grasping. The main point is that 
when we are able to give up all these - our bodies , wealth and roots of virtues - from our hearts,  
there is no longer any basis for the arising of su ch fears. In fact, our minds would be at peace 
when we had given all these things away. Should se lf-grasping arise again, we should meditate on 
this,  giving everything away from the depths of our hearts.   
This is basically the practi ce of those who engage in chod – literally the practice of ‘cutting,’ where 
the practitioners  visualise giving away their bodi es, flesh and blood  and possessions to all the  
flesh-eaters and the different classes of spirits,  as sources of sustenance. The main purpose of 
practicing ‘chod’ is to cut  self-grasping and self-cherishing.  It is said here that this practice  of giving up our bodies, wealth, enjoyments and roots of virtue is 
a method for training the mind and is the pr eliminary to developing bodhicitta. Without 
training the mind, it is impossible to develop bodhicitta. Without reducing or weakening self-
cherishing, there is no way to generate the thou ght of benefiting others, in other words, to 
generate bodhicitta.  When we say we have given up all these things, si ncerely from our hearts, for others, the question 
may arise: How are we going to use these things th at we still have? The answer is that we should 
utilise our bodies, wealth and possessions for the be nefit of others. We dedicate them to others 
and use them for their benefit. On ce we have dedicated them to ot hers, then we should use them 
sincerely and purely for others.   
A qualm related to this is mentioned in the Lam Rim Chen Mo,  in the section on the perfection 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre       Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
F P M T  B a s i c  P r o g r a m              C h a p t e r  T h r e e  
 
 
131 of generosity4: when you use something that you have given to and completely dedicated to 
others, wouldn’t that be an act of stealing? Wo uldn’t that person commit the act of deceit or 
stealing? 
  
                                              
4 Lam Rim Chen Mo   Vol 2,  page 119-20: 
If you use food, clothes, shelter and so on that you ha ve sincerely given away to all beings, and you do so 
with craving for your personal welfar e, forgetting the thought, “I will use them for others’ welfare,” then 
you commit a major infraction. When you have no craving but forget to apply the idea of focusing on all 
living beings, or if you use those resources for a pa rticular living being out of attachment, you commit a 
minor infraction.  
 
With regard to the material goods that  you have turned over to others, the Compendium of Trainings states 
that when you use them for your own welfare fully  cognizant of their being the property of others, you 
are stealing, and if the total value is enough, yo u commit a cardinal transgression of the vows of 
individual liberation. In response to  this, some say that since you have turned over your food, etc., to all 
living beings, it is impossible for the total value of  any one being's portion to be enough, so you cannot 
commit a cardinal transgression. Others say this is  not correct because you have turned over your 
belongings as a whole to each being individually. Others argue that even though you have mentally 
surrendered them to others, they do not take pers onal possession of them, so there is no cardinal 
transgression. 
 
The intended meaning behind the Compendium of Trainings  statement is that you incur a cardinal 
transgression (given that the total value requiremen t has been met) when you sincerely turn your food, 
etc., over to a human being, and this person knows it and takes possession, whereupon you, fully 
cognizant of their being another's pro perty, appropriate them for your own use. Therefore, the positions 
stated by the others are wrong. 
 
There is no fault in using some living beings’ resource s if you think, while using them, “I do this for their 
welfare.”  The Compendium of Trainings  states: 
There is no fault in using things if you think,  “I am taking care of my body which is owned 
by others with these resources that are owned by others.” Slaves have no material goods of 
their own with which to survive. 
 
You may think, “I incur a fault because, after I have turned over these belongings to living beings, I use 
them without their permission”, but there is no fault. The Compendium of Trainings  says: 
A servant who labors hard on a master’s beha lf might use the master ’s belongings without 
permission when the master’s mind is unclear  due to illness and so forth, but incurs no 
fault. 
 
Do not lack faith and think, “Mentally giving everything  away to living beings while not actually giving it 
is tantamount to a lie, therefor e, is without real substance.” 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre       Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
F P M T  B a s i c  P r o g r a m              C h a p t e r  T h r e e  
 
 
132 There are two other reasons mentioned here as to why it is appropriate to give away body, wealth, 
possessions and roots of virtue:  
3B2B 2A2A 1E1B The reason it is reasonable to give away in a definite manner 
1 Due to abandoning attachment to all and giving away [such things], one will attain nirvana 
2 As sentient beings are the supreme field, it is reasonable to give [such] away to them 
 
[3,12 ] 
By giving up all, sorrow is transcended 
And my mind will realize the sorrowless state. 
It is best that I (now) give everything to all beings 
In the same way as I shall (at death). 
3B2B 2A2A 1E1B 1 Due to abandoning attachment to all and giving away [such things], one 
will attain nirvana 
This is shown in the first and second line of verse 12: “By giving up all, sorrow is transcended 
and my mind will realize the sorrowless state.”   Once we have given away and dedicated everything to  others, we need to use  these things for the 
benefit of others. Whenever we enjoy food, clothes or our other possessions, we should conjoin our enjoyment with the attitude of benefiting others. In order to  sustain our bodies for the 
benefit of others,  we should think: ’I am going to  eat this or use this for the benefit of others.’ 
We reduce our attachment to the things mentione d here by mentally giving them away . We will 
attain nirvana once we reduce our attachment to them. By giving up attachment, we will achieve 
liberation.   Once we have this  mind that wishes to achiev e the sorrowless state of liberation,  we become  
Buddhists and take refuge with the purpose of ac hieving such liberation. The state of liberation 
that we want to achieve comes from giving up all the things that were mentioned earlier.  
3B2B 2A2A 1E1B 2 As sentient beings are the supreme field, it is reasonable to give [such] 
away to them 
The third and fourth lines of verse 12 show the se cond reason why it is appropriate to give away 
these things: “It is best that I (now) give everythi ng to all beings in the same way as I shall (at 
death).”  Giving away everything now to all sentient beings is  like leaving everything  behind at the time of 
death. Since this is the case, it is best to give them away before that happens. The same applies to our merits and roots of virtue. If we do not  dedi cate our roots of virtue, they might be destroyed 
by hatred.  If we do not dedicate our roots of virtue for the benefit of others, they  will be 
exhausted as soon as they ripen. Since giving away all things now is the same as leaving them 
behind at the time of death, we should dedicate all these merits for the benefit of sentient beings 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre       Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
F P M T  B a s i c  P r o g r a m              C h a p t e r  T h r e e  
 
 
133 now as they are the best and supreme field.  
 
The above are the two reasons why it is appropri ate to give away our bodies, our possessions and 
our roots of virtue to others.   
Lesson 17 – chapter 3, verse 13-32 
 Before we start this session, it is very important to generate the correct motivation for listening to 
the teachings. We should remember the reason that we are gathered here together is to engage in 
the activities of listening to, reflecting and medita ting on the teachings of the Buddha. It is very 
important to remind ourselves of these practices.  Sometimes, it is possible that our minds are not here, although we are physically present. When 
that is the case, then it is probably not going to  be of any benefit  attending this session.  We 
come to class with the intention of listening to the teachings. We should have this intention: 
while we are here, we should try our best to list e n  t o  wh a t  i s  b e i n g   s a i d .  W e  s h o u l d  r e m i n d 
ourselves, on the way to the class, of the reason why we are attending class; we should think, ‘I 
am going to go to class to listen to the teac hings because I want the teachings of the Buddha.’ 
This is the intention and is the reason why we come to class.  
 When we are in class, we should try to  transf orm our goal into reality. When we are here, we 
should try to listen, to the best of our abilities, and not let our minds get distracted or  fall asleep. 
It is possible that sometimes these things happen; we get distracted or feel sleepy because we are 
tired, and so forth. But it is important not to le t this happen all the time. If this happens all the 
time, then at the end of the five years, we will be sleeping for the five years.  
 
At the end of the class, if you were to meet  someone who asks you, “What have you learnt 
today?” Your answer should not be, “I don’t know , I can’t remember.” It is possible again that 
sometimes this happens because the body and mind  are tired. But it should not happen all the 
time. At least,  you should be able to say that  you have learnt something at the end of each 
session.   At this time, we can say that the conditions are ideal for study; eg. when you come to class, you 
have classmates who attend the class with you. While the conditions are here, you should try to 
make use of this opportunity and listen without being distracted because, in the future, it is 
possible that there will be no teacher, translator or  classmates. Then, even if you have the interest 
to study and  learn, because the conditions are not there, you will not be ab le to do so. Now,  you 
should make use of this opportunity and try not to be distracted.   
Amitabha Buddhist Centre       Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
F P M T  B a s i c  P r o g r a m              C h a p t e r  T h r e e  
 
 
134 In the last session, we completed  verse 12 of  ch apter three and looked at the reasons why it is 
appropriate to give away our bodies, wealth and our roots of virtue to sentient beings. As 
mentioned in the text, it is appr opriate for us to give away our bo dies, wealth and roots of virtue 
to sentient beings as,  by doing so, we will achieve nirvana. What  i s  t h i s   g o a l  o f   a c h i e v i n g  
nirvana? Nirvana is achieved by abandoning atta chment to these things (our bodies, possessions 
and roots of virtue). It is appropriate for us to give away our bodies, wealth and roots of virtue to 
sentient beings because sentient beings are the supr eme field. By giving these things  to sentient 
beings, we will achieve enlightenment. It is appr opriate,  because whether we give these things 
away or not, at the time of death,  we will have to leave all these things be hind.  Since that is the 
case, would it not  be better to give all these things away before that happened?   
 Here it is said that by giving away our bodies, we alth and roots of virtue to others, we will achieve 
nirvana and the state of full enlightenment. We must ask  how this happens; how does nirvana 
and enlightenment come about as the re sult of giving away these things?  
 Once we have given away our bodies, wealth and ro ots of virtue to sentient beings, what are we 
going to do? The text talks about  how to practi se once one has given away these things.  Three 
points are  covered in the following outline: 
3B2B 2A2A 1E1C  How to practice once one has given them away 
1 Discarding, from this day forward, the mind that [thinks] “My body is independent” 
2 Explaining the meaning of that extensively 
3 Applying that to appropriate activity ∗ 
3B2B 2A2A 1E1C 1 Discarding, from this day forward, the mind that [thinks] “My body is 
independent” 
Once we have given our bodies away to others, they  no longer  belong to us. So we should not 
think, “This is mine”, as we have already given them away.   This particular outline is about what we should do after we have given away our bodies, wealth and roots of virtue.  In the case of our bodies, on ce we have dedicated it to other sentient beings, 
what are we going to do and how should we think?  In essence, once we have given our bodies  
away, we should  also discard the thought that this body is mine, which is shown in verse 13: 
 
[3,13] 
Having given this body up 
For the pleasure of all living beings, 
By killing, abusing and beating it 
May they always do as they please. 
 
Having given up this body to sentient beings for the purpose of achieving the state of full 
enlightenment for all sentient beings, even if some one were to kill us, put us down,  abuse, scold 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre       Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
F P M T  B a s i c  P r o g r a m              C h a p t e r  T h r e e  
 
 
135 and beat us, we should think: “They can do anything  they want with my body, it is fine.” After 
we have dedicated our bodies to others, we give up thinking, “This body belongs to me,” or “This 
body is mine.” Once we have given up the thought, “This body is mine,” even if someone were to 
kill us, abuse or do something nasty to us, because we have given it to others, we do not have a  
sense of attachment to it. We will not generate anger when such things ha ppen. This is the main 
advice here. The next verse, verse 14  expa nds on the meaning of the previous verse. 
3B2B 2A2A 1E1C 2  Explaining the meaning of that extensively 
 [3,14] 
Although they may play with my body 
And make it a source of jest and blame, 
Because I have given it up to them 
What is the use of holding it dear? 
 
When the text says, “They may play with my body”:  this is not in the sense of fun or enjoyment . 
It means “play” in a very bad sense of the word - others can do anything they want to us in the physical sense or they may make our bodies  an  object  of jest and reproach. They may make 
nasty jokes about us. But regardless of what they do, we should never have the thought to oppose 
them and we should stop the idea  that “this bo dy is mine.” The commentaries that we are using 
say, “People can do anything to us.” They can do anything to our bodies, joking about or  
criticising them. As we have dedicated our bodies  to others, we are not go ing to oppose or stop 
them. In the root text, it says, “What is the use of  holding it dear?”  but,  in the commentary, the 
idea is that we do not stop or oppose these peop le from doing these things. Literally, it means:  
“Because I have given it up to them, what is  the point of stopping or opposing them?”  
3B2B 2A2A 1E1C 3 Applying that to appropriate activity 
[3,15] 
Therefore I shall let them do anything to it 
That does not cause them any harm, 
And when anyone encounters me 
May it never be meaningless for him 
 
This is shown in the first two li nes of verse 15: “Therefore I shall let them do anything to it 
that does not cause them any harm”.  “Therefore I shall let them do anything to it” – In  the short as well as in the long term, they can 
do anything they please to our bodies, good or  bad. Once we have de dicated our bodies  to 
sentient beings, if we are able to abandon the thought  that “This body is mine and it belongs to me,”  then,  we will be  able to do all the th ings that are mentioned here. Even if someone were 
to kill us, beat us up, abuse or doing anything to  our bodies, we would  no t get angry. We will no 
longer have  attachment to our bodies. 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre       Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
F P M T  B a s i c  P r o g r a m              C h a p t e r  T h r e e  
 
 
136   
All the faults, such as anger and attachment, come from the self-gra sping conception that  grasps 
at an “I” and grasps at things  as being “mine”. It is advisable to subdue our anger and 
attachment. This is something th at we can understand from ou r own experiences in life. The 
more we cherish our bodies or  the greater th e attachment we have for our bodies, the more 
suffering we will experience. Even if our bodies are harmed  only to a very small extent, because of our great attachment, grasping and cherishing  our bodies, we experience great suffering. Our 
suffering corresponds to the strength of the attachment for or grasping at the body.  
 It is the same  with our friends, loved ones an d relatives. When  we ha ve strong attachment  
towards them, even when a  small harm happens to  them, we suffer a lot and feel we are unable 
to bear it. This boils down to holding on to th ese two kinds of self-grasping attitudes – grasping 
at the  “I” and grasping at “mine,” such as “m y friend, my entourage.”  Because we have great 
attachment to our bodies, when we put on a littl e weight, we get very worried. If we have no 
attachment to our bodies, it does not matter how fat we may  become. It will  not  bother us. It is 
the same with pimples. Because we have great atta chment to our faces, one pimple causes us so 
much suffering. We may be  reluctant to go out ju st because of one big pimple. If we think that 
everyone will stare at our face because of the pimple, we will worry about this and  will not be able to go out. It all  depends on how we see things.  Here we are talking about the preliminary practices for training the mind and preparing the mind to develop bodhicitta. From our side, we ha ve to train our minds. We cannot stop people 
from doing whatever they want as it is beyond ou r control. Later, we will cover points concerning 
the practices of giving away the bo dy and so forth; as to when we can give our bodies away and 
when it is inappropriate to give our bodies.  
3B2B 2A2A 1E2 Aspiring for virtue to become a cause that does not go to waste 
A Aspiring for [virtue] to act solely as a cause for the benefit of others 
B Aspiring for [virtue] to act as a cause preventing such thoughts from going to waste 
C Aspiring for virtue to act as a cause preventing the action from going to waste 
3B2B 2A2A 1E2A  Aspiring for [virtue] to act solely as a cause for the benefit of others 
This is shown in the last two lines of verse 15: “And when anyone encounters me may it never be 
meaningless for them.” 
3B2B 2A2A 1E2B  Aspiring for [virtue] to ac t as a cause preventing such thoughts from going 
to waste 
[3,16] 
If in those who encounter me 
A faithful or an angry thought arises, 
May that eternally become the source 
For fulfilling all their wishes. 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre       Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
F P M T  B a s i c  P r o g r a m              C h a p t e r  T h r e e  
 
 
137 3B2B 2A2A 1E2C  Aspiring for virtue to act as a cause preventing the action from going to 
waste 
[3,17] 
May all who say bad things to me 
Or cause me any other harm 
And those who mock and insult me 
Have the fortune to fully awake. 
 
In essence, we are dedicating our virtues to beco me the causes for such things to happen to us 
and for them to never become meaningless. What ever connection others make with us, be it 
positive or negative, in the form of hearing about us, talking to us or  touching us, may all these 
become the causes for the accomplishment of their own temporal and ultimate goals. When 
people say nasty things in front of us or behind our backs, we pray for all these actions to become 
causes for them to achieve enlightenment.  It may sound very nice but that is  not the point. The point is for us  to be able to contemplate in 
that way. If we are able to think in this way,  when  so met hin g like t hat  really happen s - when  
someone says something nasty directly to us or be hind our backs - because of having such sincere 
and virtuous thoughts, we will not be affected or suffer and others will also not suffer. If we have 
this virtuous thought, sincerely from our hearts,  then,  even if we hear from someone else that 
someone is criticising us behind our backs, th ere will not be any suffering or problems.  
 
Otherwise, when someone criticises us or we he ar that somebody is criticising us behind our 
backs, we will feel very angry and agitated. We will keep reminding ourselves of those things that 
people have said. Doing this  over and over again will only serve  to perpetuate our anger. Then, 
we will start to think about how we can  respond effectively in the most negative way possible and 
what are some of the nastiest words that we can use to counter that pers on’s accusations. When 
this happens, there will be no peace fo r ourselves and no happiness for others. 
 The point is that when such  things happen, we should try, as much as possible, to forget that they have happened and not remind ourselves of th e unpleasant words that we have heard. Then 
we dedicate sincerely from our hearts,  ‘Whate ver connections others may  make with us, may 
those connections only become the causes for them  to achieve enlightenment.’ If we are able to 
reflect well on this point, it will bring great benefit. 
3B2B 2A2A 1E3 Aspiring for virtue to become a cause for material resources, etc. ∗  
A Aspiring for you yourself to act as a cause [providing] all the necessities of others 
B Aspiring for more extensive times and functions 
C Aspiring for no discontinuaty  in object and times ∗ 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre       Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
F P M T  B a s i c  P r o g r a m              C h a p t e r  T h r e e  
 
 
138 3B2B 2A2A 1E3A  Aspiring for you yourself to act as a cause [providing] all the necessities 
of others 
[3,18] 
May I be a protector for those without one, 
A guide for all travellers on the way; 
May I be a bridge, a boat and a ship 
For all who wish to cross (the water). 
 
[3,19] 
May I be an island for those who seek one 
And a lamp for those desiring light, 
May I be a bed for all who wish to rest 
And a slave for all who want a slave. 
 
[3,20] 
May I be a wishing jewel, a magic vase, 
Powerful mantras and great medicine, 
May I become a wish-fulfilling tree 
And a cow of plenty for the world.  
   
[In the last line of verse 20, “cow” refers to the precious cow in  the  mandala offering, not to an 
ordinary cow.] 
 Q: Where does the mind (which is consciousness) go when we aspire to become an object (which is physical) like a bridge?  A: First, we have a bridge that is emanated by Buddha. In this case, the bridge is not Buddha. Then we have  a  bridge that is an emanation of Buddha. In this case, the bridge is Buddha. We have to differentiate between the two - the brid ge that is emanated by Buddha and the bridge 
that is an emanation of Buddha. In  the latter instance, if  we main tain that the bridge is Buddha, 
then where the consciousness goes is not an issue.  
 We are aspiring for our virtues to become the caus es for whatever things sentient beings need. If 
they need wealth, may our virtues  become caus es for wealth. If they need a drink, may our 
virtues become causes for that. In short, whatever  t h e y  n e e d ,  w e  a s p i r e  t h a t   o u r  v i r t u e s  w i l l  
become the causes for all of th ose things to come about.   
3B2B 2A2A 1E3B  Aspiring for mo re extensive times and functions 
[3,21] 
Just like space 
And the great elements such as earth, 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre       Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
F P M T  B a s i c  P r o g r a m              C h a p t e r  T h r e e  
 
 
139 May I always support the life 
Of all the boundless creatures. 
3B2B 2A2A 1E3C  Aspiring for no discontinuation in object and times 
[3,22] 
And until they pass away from pain 
May I also be the source of life 
For all the realms of varied beings 
That reach unto the ends of space. 
 
We are not only dedicating in a very extensive way   but we are dedicating our virtues so that they 
will continue to bear fruit for a very long time . It shows the importance of making prayers. We 
s h o u l d  m a k e  v e r y  e x t e n s i v e  p r a y e r s  s o  t h a t ,  in the future, when we become a buddha or 
bodhisattva, we will be able to offer extensive bene fits to all sentient beings in accordance with 
our extensive prayers. It is said that there is a connection between the prayers that we make now 
and the benefit we will be able to offer to sent ient beings when we become a bodhisattva and a 
buddha. Due to the strength of the prayers that the buddhas made  while they were on the paths 
of training, after they  achieved enlightenmen t, due to the difference in the power of their 
prayers, there is also a difference in their functi ons and their work for sentient beings. When we 
say this,  a qualm may arise : are we saying that   the buddhas do not have the same qualities, i.e. 
some buddhas are more powerful or faster than others?  It does seem to suggest  that  different buddhas have different qualities.   We have completed  the preliminary section. Now, we go on to  the actual or main body of the 
chapter. This is the taking of the bodhisattva vows. 
3B2B 2A2A 2 The actual 
[3,23] 
Just as the previous Sugatas 
Gave birth to an Awakening Mind, 
And just as they successively dwelt 
In the Bodhisattva practices; 
 
[3,24] 
Likewise for the sake of all that lives 
Do I give birth to an Awakening Mind, 
And likewise shall I too 
Successively follow the practices. 
 
We are saying here, “Just as the buddhas of the pa st, such as  Shakyamuni  Buddha and so forth,  
generated bodhicitta and  trained in the practices of the bodhisattvas, likewise for the sake of all 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre       Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
F P M T  B a s i c  P r o g r a m              C h a p t e r  T h r e e  
 
 
140 sentient beings, may I also generate bodhicitta and train in the practices of the bodhisattvas (ie.  
the  practices of the  six perfections) as well as I am able.” This is the ritual for taking both the 
aspirational and engaged bodhis attva vows at the same time.  
 There is also the tradition of taking these two vows in a gradual way, in stages. First, we take the 
aspirational bodhisattva vows with its commitments . Then, we investigate and check to see if we 
have the ability to train in the six perfections. If  w e  f i n d  t h a t  w e  a r e  a b l e  t o  d o  s o ,  t h e n  w e  
proceed to take the engaged vows. Th is is taking the vows in stages. 
 Here, the two vows are taken simultaneously. In th is context, we are talking about someone who 
has the ability to practise the six pe rfections as mentioned in the text, Engaging in the Bodhisattva 
Deeds . But there is also a tradition of taking the vows in stages.  
 
The way of taking the bodhisattva vows has been already explained in the Lam Rim Chenmo . 
When it comes to taking the bo dhisattva vows, we can take it from or in the absence of a 
spiritual master. If a spiritual master is not pres ent, we can take the vows in the presence of the 
merit field. The taking of the bodh isattva vows has to be preceded by   going for refuge. If there is 
a master, in the presence of the master, with folded  hands, we first take refuge. Then we take the 
bodhisattva vows. We normally recite the words of the text three times  after the spiritual master. 
At the end of the third repetition, we have to think, “Now I have received the vows.” 
 If there is no one from whom one can take the vows, then we can take the vows in the presence 
of the merit field by visualising all the buddhas and bodhisattvas in front of us.  First, we go for 
refuge and then we recite the words for taking the bodhisattva vows. While we are reciting the 
words, we should think that we are actually ta king the vows from the buddhas and bodhisattvas 
and repeating the words after them. At the end of the third repetition, we also have to think, 
“Now I have received the bodhisattva vows.”   
As a beginner, it is best to take the vows from a  spiritual master. Sometimes people might 
wonder, “Since we can take the vows without a sp iritual master,  why do we need a spiritual 
master at all?” There is a difference in taking the vows from a spiritual master as it helps with  the 
generation of shame and embarrassment.   We go for refuge and then we take the bodhisattv a vows. It says in the words for taking the vows, 
“I will generate bodhicitta and successively follow  the practices of the six perfections in stages.” 
This implies doing things in stages  in a gradual way. So it is not as if we have to give away our 
bodies immediately once we receive the vows. Ther e are certain criteria for determining when it 
will be appropriate to give away our bodies, how to  check that we have the ability to give away 
our bodies and so forth. 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre       Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
F P M T  B a s i c  P r o g r a m              C h a p t e r  T h r e e  
 
 
141 3B2B 2A2A 3 Concluding actions 
A Cultivating joy oneself 
B Causing others to develop joy 
3B2B 2A2A 3A Cultivating joy oneself 
1 The accomplishment of one’s own welfare 
2 The accomplishment of others’ welfare 
3B2B 2A2A 3A1 The accomplishment of one’s own welfare 
A Cultivating joy by uplifting the mind 
B Having found that mind, cultivating conscientiousness 
C Cultivating joy by gaining the mind that is difficult to find 
3B2B 2A2A 3A1A Cultivating joy by uplifting the mind 
[3,25] 
In order to further increase it from now on, 
Those with discernment who have lucidly seized 
An Awakening Mind in this way, 
Should highly praise it in the following manner: 
 
[3,26] 
Today my life has (borne) fruit; 
(Having) well obtained this human existence, 
I’ve been born in the family of Buddha 
And now am one of the Buddha’s Sons. 
 
We have gone through the preliminary practices for developing bodhicitta and have taken the 
bodhisattva vows. After taking the bodhisattva vows, in order not to let the bodhicitta  
degenerate and in order to increase it, we cultiv ate joy by uplifting the mind. We cultivate joy by 
reflecting on how fortunate we are that we have  received the bodhisattva vows, we have been 
born into the family of the buddhas and we ha ve now become Buddha’s child. We generate joy 
in the fact that we are fortunate enough to be  able to generate bodhicitta and to take the 
bodhisattva vows.   When do we become a bodhisattva? Different texts say different things at different times. Here, it 
mentions we become a Buddha’s child or bodhisattv a after we take the bodhisattva vows. In this 
text, at the very beginning of this chapter, in verse 3, it says: “I rejoice in the Awakening of the 
buddhas and also in the spiritua l levels of the Conqueror’s chil dren.” This indicates that we 
become a bodhisattva after entering the first grou nd, while in other contexts it says that we 
become a bodhisattva once we have achiev ed the Mahayana path of accumulation. 
 Let us look at the very first verse of  this text - chapter one, verse 1: 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre       Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
F P M T  B a s i c  P r o g r a m              C h a p t e r  T h r e e  
 
 
142  
 [1,1] 
Respectfully I prostrate myself to the Sugatas 
Who are endowed with the Dharmakaya, 
As well as to their Noble Sons 
And to all who are worthy of veneration 
 
“Noble Sons” here refers to the superior bodhisa ttvas who are on the first ground and above. I 
think that the difference in positing bodhisattvas is made on the basis of  whether we are looking 
at them from the perspective of conventional or  ultimate bodhicitta. In  the context of taking 
bodhisattva vows for ordinary bein gs, I think it is talking about one becoming a bodhisattva after 
one has generated conventional bodhicitta. In th e context of the above verse, “noble children” 
refers to superior bodhisattvas, who are  posited as bodhisattvas from the perspective of having 
generated ultimate bodhicitta. We will see diffe rent things in different texts. Sometimes, 
bodhisattvas refers to ordinary bodhisattvas and sometimes, bodhisattvas refers specifically to 
superior bodhisattvas.  Please read the remaining verses of  this chapter, paying special a ttention to second subdivision of 
the next outline: 
3B2B 2A2A 3A2  The accomplishment of others’ welfare 
A The potential [power] to alleviate the suffering of sentient beings ∗ 
B The potential [power] to dispel the obscurations- the causes [of suffering] ∗ 
1 Dispelling afflictive obscurations 
2 Dispelling the obscurations to knowledge  
Then please check: how does bodhicitta enable on e to remove the obstructions to omniscience as 
indicated in the first two lines of verse 32? 
[3,32ab] 
It is the great sun that finally removes 
The misty ignorance of the world, 
 
While checking, consider the following: in the li ne “It is the great sun that finally removes”,  
“finally” indicates the removal of the obstructions  to omniscience and becoming a buddha. If we 
say that bodhicitta alone can remove the obstruct ions to omniscience, then in order to achieve 
enlightenment, the factor of method alone s eems to be enough. Why would we still need 
wisdom? But if we say that bodhicitta does no t help us to eliminate the obstructions to 
omniscience, we are going against what is said here in the commentary and the root text; it is 
stated very clearly in the commentary that bodhic itta has the power to dispel and eliminate both 
the obstructions to liberation and the obstructions to omniscience.  
  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre       Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
F P M T  B a s i c  P r o g r a m              C h a p t e r  T h r e e  
 
 
143 Lesson 18 – chapter 3, verse 33-34 (end) 
 
Gungtang Rinpoche advised that when we stud y the teachings of the Buddha, we must study 
texts that are unmistaken and free of error. With  such texts as the bases, we investigate and 
analyse the teachings. Whatever teachings or texts we may read, they must be valid, error-free and 
unmistaken. We should check whether what is mentioned in the texts accords with the great 
philosophical treatises of Buddhism.  When we simply rely indiscriminately on any text s that we come across, taking them to be true 
and if those texts do not accord with the intent  or meaning found in the valid texts and great 
treatises, then relying on such texts will only cause our wisdom to decline. When we study the 
teachings of the Buddha, we must base our studie s and rely on the error-free, completely valid 
and reliable great philosophical treatises and the valid commentaries. We are not saying here that 
we cannot read commentaries or texts that offer a more accessible explanation. But whatever we 
read, what is taught by those texts must accord with what is found in th e great treatises and the 
great texts.   Sometimes, we may find that certain texts are easier for us to understand without checking 
beforehand whether they are valid or not. What ever we study, texts we read, information we 
receive, we should be able to trace them all th e way back to the teaching s of the Buddha himself. 
Whatever we read should accord with the grea t commentaries composed by the great Indian and 
Tibetan masters of the past, the valid ones. We sh ould not rely on anything that comes along. 
This is advice on studying given by Guntang Rinpoche. In essence, when we need to study, we should rely on the valid texts.  We are studying in this particular module th e text composed by the great bodhisattva,  
Shantideva,  called Engaging in the Bodhisattva D eeds. Shantideva  is obviously a great master; a 
completely valid Indian master who composed th is text based on the teachings of the Buddha. 
He gathered all the important points from the various sutras regarding the practices of the 
bodhisattvas. He put all these main points in the r oot text itself. We are now  studying this text 
and using the commentary composed by Gyaltsab Je, who was one of the foremost disciples of 
Lama Tsong Khapa. In this case, both the author and commentator are valid.  
 As usual, we need to adjust our  motivation to  have the correct motivation for listening to the 
teachings. At the very beginning of  this text, in verse 2 of chapter one, Shantideva says: “There is 
nothing here that has not been explained before”:  
[1,2] 
There is nothing here that ha s not been explained before 
And I have no skill in  the art of rhetoric; 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre       Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
F P M T  B a s i c  P r o g r a m              C h a p t e r  T h r e e  
 
 
144 Therefore, lacking any intention to benefit others, 
I write this in order to acquaint it to my mind. 
 
He is not composing something of his own; his te xt is based on the teachings of the Buddha, on 
whatever teaching that Buddha has taught. He  is using that as the basis for his text. 
 In the last lesson, we looked at the main body  of chapter three,  which is taking both the 
aspirational and the engaging bodhisattva  vows. In  this particular text, these two vows are taken 
together at the same time. We started at the ou tline “concluding actions”, or the conclusion of 
this particular chapter. We are now looking at “c ultivating joy oneself.”  We are talking about  
the things that have to be done after taking the bodhisattva vows. 
3B2B 2A2A 3A Cultivating joy oneself 
1 The accomplishment of one’s own welfare 
2 The accomplishment of others’ welfare 
3B2B 2A2A 3A1 The accomplishment of one’s own welfare 
A Cultivating joy by uplifting the mind 
B Having found that mind, cultivating conscientiousness C Cultivating joy by gaining the mind that is difficult to find 
 
Last week we stopped at “cultivating joy by upliftin g the mind”. It is not sufficient just to take the 
bodhisattva vows. We must ensure that they do not degenerate. We should try to increase our 
practice of bodhicitta. For that reason, we cultivat e joy. We do that by ge nerating enthusiasm and 
uplifting the mind. We uplift the mind by contemplating verse 26:  
[3, 26 ] 
Today my life has (borne) fruit; 
(Having) well obtained this human existence, 
I’ve been born in the family of Buddha 
And now am one of the Buddha’s Children. 
 
If we are able to rejoice and to generate enthusia sm, then we are able to uplift the mind and this 
will make a difference to our prac tice of bodhicitta,  of keepin g those vows and strengthening our 
practice. 
3B2B 2A2A 3A1B  Having found that mind, cultivating conscientiousness 
[3, 27 ] 
Thus whatever actions I do from now on 
Must be in accord with the family. 
Never shall I disg race or pollute 
This noble and unsullied race. 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre       Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
F P M T  B a s i c  P r o g r a m              C h a p t e r  T h r e e  
 
 
145  
After taking the vows, we must cultivate cons cientiousness by contemplating “Thus whatever 
actions I do from now on, must be in accord with  the family.” The “family” here refers to the 
Mahayana lineage. We are saying to ourselves, “We must follow the example of the buddhas and 
bodhisattvas by  not disgracing or polluting th is Mahayana lineage. We will not disgrace or 
pollute this very noble race.” How do we do that? By ensuring that we do not come under the control of the self-cherishing thought,  of doing things for the benefit of oneself alone. We must 
ensure that  we are not stained by committing any of the 18 downfalls and the 46 faults of the 
bodhisattva vows. In essence, whatever action s we do should accord with this noble and 
unsullied race by not disgracing or polluting it. 
3B2B 2A2A 3A1C  Cultivating joy by ga ining the mind that is difficult to find 
[3, 28 ] 
Just like a blind man 
Discovering a jewel in a heap of rubbish, 
Likewise by some coincidence 
An Awakening Mind has been born within me. 
 
If a blind man were to find a jewel in a heap of  rubbish, that would be considered very amazing 
and unbelievable. In the very same way, we are under the control of the three mental poisons all 
the time. We are under the control of karma and our negative emotions.  Suddenly,  one day,  
we are able to generate this bodhicitta in our minds. We somehow managed to obtain the 
bodhisattva vows. This will also  be considered  amazing and marvellous.   If we managed to generate bodhicitta, we should rejo ice. This is because bodh icitta will enable us  
to eliminate all our sufferings and eliminate cycl ic existence and samsara.  Once we generate 
bodhicitta, we are able to eliminate  the suffer ing of samsara and nirvana and attain individual 
liberation. The generation of such a precious mind in the continuum of someone who was 
always under the influence of negative karma an d  emotions would be considered amazing and 
marvellous. We are looking here at the practice of  rejoicing at the generation of bodhicitta,  the 
altruistic intention to become enlightened  for the benefit of all sentient beings.   Even if we have not yet generate d bodhicitta in our own minds bu t we have already received the 
bodhisattva vows (either the aspirational or engage d vow), we can rejoice in the same way.  Even 
if we have not yet  received the bodhisattva vows but hold only a refuge or precept vow, this can 
still be the cause for rejoicing. This is due to  the power of the Buddha combined with our own 
virtue and merit. We have managed to take re fuge with some sort of faith in the Buddha, 
Dharma and Sangha and interest in wanting to le arn the teachings of the Buddha. That is also 
something very amazing and marvellous.   There are some people who have met the teachings of the Buddha for a relatively long time and 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre       Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
F P M T  B a s i c  P r o g r a m              C h a p t e r  T h r e e  
 
 
146 been practising but they  get discouraged along th e way.  People may get so  discouraged  that 
they want to give up. If this happens to us, we really need to use what we have learnt. At those 
times when we get discouraged or depressed, we n eed to uplift our minds by rejoicing. We need 
to praise ourselves.  Here,  we are learning how to cultivate joy af ter taking the bodhisattva vows and generating 
bodhicitta. But this can be applie d elsewhere as well. This is  no t confined to the teachings of 
bodhicitta. It can be applied to other aspects of the teachings. The main point is to learn how to 
cultivate joy.  
3B2B 2A2A 3A2 The accomplishment of others’ welfare 
A The potential [power] to alleviate the suffering of sentient beings 
B The potential [power] to dispel the obscurations- the causes [of suffering] C The potential [power] to accomplish all benefit and bliss 
3B2B 2A2A 3A2A  The potential [power] to alleviate the suffering of sentient beings 
1 Destroying the  lord of death ∗ 
2 Destroying poverty 
3 Destroying disease 
4 Destroying in general the sufferings of samsara ∗ 
5 Destroying specifically the sufferings of the lower realms ∗ 
 
[3,29] 
It is the supreme ambrosia 
That overcomes the sovereignty of death, 
It is the inexhaustible treasure 
That eliminates all poverty in the world. 
3B2B 2A2A 3A2A 1 Destroying the  lord of death 
This is indicated in the first two lines of verse 29: “It is the supreme ambr osia that overcomes the 
sovereignty of death”. Bodhicitta is the supreme el ixir or ambrosia that can overcome the lord of 
the death. The lord of death refers to the mara  of death because we have to die without any 
control or choice. Why is bodhicitta  the supreme elixir or ambrosia that can overcome the lord 
of death? This is because,  with bodhicitta, one will attain the state of full enlightenment which is 
free from aging and death. Due to the power of th e mind of bodhicitta, one will achieve the state 
of full enlightenment.   The Buddha is also called the Vict orious One. Why? This is beca use he has gained victory over 
the four maras. One of the four maras is the mara  of death. Once we have achieved the state of 
full enlightenment, then one is beyond death, one does not have to die nor does one age.  
3B2B 2A2A 3A2A 2 Destroying poverty 
Bodhicitta has the power to destroy poverty as well. This is indicated in the last two lines of verse 
29: “It is the inexhaustible treasure that eliminat es all poverty in the world.” After we generate 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre       Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
F P M T  B a s i c  P r o g r a m              C h a p t e r  T h r e e  
 
 
147 bodhicitta and progress along the path, we move from one ground to the next. Bodhisattvas who 
are on the eighth ground achieve the sky treasure which means that from that time onwards, they 
w i l l  e x p e r i e n c e  n o  p o v e r t y .  I n  f a c t ,  t h e y  a r e  a b le to eliminate the poverty of limitless sentient 
beings because of their realisations. This happ ens because of the power of bodhicitta. The sky 
treasury is also translated as the space treasure – it  refers to the fact that bodhisattvas will be able 
to provided whatever sentient beings n eed, be it  wealth or enjoyments.   
 Poverty also refers to real poverty like having no thing to eat and no place to sleep.  It is clearly 
mentioned in the commentary that when we talk about the sky treasury, we can provide sentient 
beings not only with the objects of enjoymen t that they need but also  with Dharma.  
 
[3,30] 
It is the supreme medicine 
That quells the world’s disease. 
It is the tree that shelters all beings 
Wandering and tired on the path of conditioned existence 
3B2B 2A2A 3A2A 3 Destroying disease 
This is explained in the first two lines in verse 30: “It is the supreme medicine that quells the 
world’s disease.” When we talk about disease, we are referring to the actual physical diseases and 
also the diseases of the mind. The bodhicitta is  the supreme medicine that eliminates all these 
diseases. How is bodhicitta able to eliminate natural diseases?  
 According to Tibetan medicine, all our illnesse s can be classified into one of these three 
categories: wind, bile and phlegm. The roots of these three diseases are the mental poisons. 
According to Tibetan medicine, our afflictions gi ve rise to these three kinds of diseases.  
Bodhicitta  can cut or destroy these three mental  poisons. Once we destroy the cause, we will 
have no effect. No cause,  therefore no disease.  When we destroy the th ree mental poisons, we 
can overcome the actual diseases of the body. That is why we say bodh icitta is the supreme 
medicine for all diseases.  
3B2B 2A2A 3A2A 4 Destroying in general the sufferings of samsara 
Bodhicitta also destroys the sufferings of samsara or  cyclic existence itself as shown in the last two 
lines of verse 30: “It is the tree that shelters all beings wandering and tired on the path of 
conditioned existence”. Bodhicitta is like the tr ee that shelters all beings who are wandering and 
tired on the path of conditioned existence (ie wandering in cyclic existence). It is mentioned in 
the treatises that bodhisattvas must be trained in  the paths of the hearer  and solitary realiser 
besides training in the Mahayana path. This is to benefit the people of that lineage. Bodhisattvas 
must train in that path to lead sentient bein gs to the state of liberation. According to the 
individual disposition or the fortun e of the trainees/disciples belonging  to the hearer or solitary 
realiser lineages and in order to benefit th em, bodhisattvas teach and help them to free 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre       Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
F P M T  B a s i c  P r o g r a m              C h a p t e r  T h r e e  
 
 
148 themselves temporarily  from suffering by placing th em in the state of liberation. It is bodhicitta 
that enables bodhisattvas to do this. It is due to  the power of bodhicitta that  bodhisattvas are 
able to help sentient beings free th emselves from cyclic existence.  
 
[3, 31] 
It is the universal bridge 
That leads to freedom from unhappy states of birth, 
It is the dawning moon of the mind 
That dispels the torment of  disturbing conceptions. 
3B2B 2A2A 3A2A 5 Destroying specifically the sufferings of the lower realms 
This is shown in the first two lines of verse 31: “It is the universal bridge that leads to freedom 
from unhappy states of birth.” Bodhisattvas are ab le to show sentient beings what are the things 
to be abandoned and what are the things to be cultivated. By showing them the teachings 
correctly, this helps sentient beings, in the short te rm, to gain higher rebirths and not to fall into 
the lower realms. Bodhisattvas are able to do this  because of bodhicitta. Bodhicitta is like the 
universal bridge that supports and leads sentient beings to freedom from the lower realms. This 
is because bodhisattvas are able to teach sentient  beings the method to avoid going to the lower 
realms. Bodhisattvas also teach sentient beings the method, in the short term, to achieve higher 
rebirths as human beings and gods. The path of ac hieving higher rebirths as humans and gods is 
the path shared with persons of all three differen t spiritual capacities. The universal bridge refers 
to the lives as human beings and gods. Since this is a good rebirth that comes from the power of 
bodhicitta, so bodhicitta is the universal bridge. 
3B2B 2A2A 3A2B  The potential [power] to dispel the obscurations - the causes [of suffering] 
1 Dispelling afflictive obscurations 
2 Dispelling the obscurations to knowledge 
 
Bodhicitta has the power to eliminate the tw o obscurations: afflictive obscurations and 
obscurations to knowledge. [Afflictive obscurations is also translated as ob structions to liberation. 
Obstructions to knowledge is also transl ated as obstructions to omniscience]. 
3B2B 2A2A 3A2B 1  Dispelling afflictive obscurations 
Bodhicitta has the power to elimin ate the afflictive obstructions. This is shown is the last two 
lines of verse 31: “It is the dawning moon of th e mind that dispels the torment of disturbing 
conceptions.” 
[3, 32] 
It is the great sun that finally removes 
The misty ignorance of the world, 
It is the quintessential butter 
From the churning of the milk of Dharma 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre       Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
F P M T  B a s i c  P r o g r a m              C h a p t e r  T h r e e  
 
 
149 3B2B 2A2A 3A2B 2  Dispelling the obscurations to knowledge 
Bodhicitta has the power to destroy the obstructio ns to knowledge and as  shown in the 1st  two 
lines of verse 32: “It is the great sun that finally removes the misty ignorance of the world”. It says 
here that bodhicitta can eliminate the afflictions or negative emotions. Not only that. Bodhicitta 
can even eliminate completely the imprints or the predisposition of those afflictions or negative 
emotions. How does this happen? When we say ‘dis pel’ here, it is dispelling from the root.   
  Answer by a student:  Bodhicitta is  analogous to having great strength and  wisdom is like a sharp 
axe. The obstructions to omniscience is like a  tree. If we have weak arms, we cannot  lift up the sharp axe. Only with powerful arms and a sharp a x e  w i l l  w e   b e  a b l e  t o  c h o p  d o w n  t h e  t r e e .  
Bodhicitta is the strength that ma kes one able to lift up the very sharp axe. Bodhic itta creates the 
merit accumulated  from practising the six perfecti ons.  However we still need wisdom (the axe) 
to be able to cut the tree down. 
 According to the root text, bodhicitta is the da wning moon of the mind that dispels the torment 
or pain that the afflictions or negative emotio ns inflict on our minds. Such mental pain is 
brought about by the manifest afflictions. When ange r, pride or jealousy manifests, it causes pain 
in our minds. When we generate bodhicitta, it is  likened to the moon that completely outshines 
all these manifest afflictions. A ll the torments associated with th e afflictions will be removed.  
 One of the practices for developing bodhicitta is to train our minds by giving our bodies, wealth 
and possessions and our roots of virtue to sentient beings. Once we are able to do that, then we 
will be able to generate bodhicitta. When we ar e able to develop bodhici tta, we will not have any 
miserliness, anger, attachment or desire. We are re ferring here to the afflictions in their manifest 
form which  bodhicitta will be able to remove.    But it is difficult to say whether bodhicitta alone can eliminate the afflictions from the root. If we 
really want to completely remove afflictions fr om the root, then there is one way - one has to 
achieve  the wisdom that realises emptiness or self lessness. All the valid texts agree on this point. 
All the tenet systems agree  that we need the wi sdom that realises emptiness or selflessness to 
eliminate the afflictions and to uproot th e imprints of these negative emotions. 
  When the root text refers to bo dhicitta as the dawning moon of  the mind that can dispel the 
torment of afflictions, we have to understand that this refers to the manifest afflictions. 
Bodhicitta can eliminate manifest afflictions.  But bodhicitta alone cannot eliminate those 
negative emotions from their root. We need to have  the wisdom that realises  selflessness. That is 
a must. What about the imprints of those negative  e m o t i o n s  t h a t  w e  c a l l  t h e  o b s t r u c t i o n s  t o  
omniscience or obstructions to knowledge? What  is it that prevents someone from attaining 
omniscience? How do we  eliminat e the imprints of these obstruct ions? The text says bodhicitta 
can achieve this. By depending on wisdom alone, one will not be able to eliminate the imprints 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre       Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
F P M T  B a s i c  P r o g r a m              C h a p t e r  T h r e e  
 
 
150 of those negative emotions.  
 
According to the highest tenet system, the Pr asangika-Madhyamika sc hool, the hearers and 
solitary realisers can achieve liberation through the wisdom that realises selflessness. Although 
the hearer arhats and solitary realiser pratyekabu ddhas are able to achieve liberation, they are not 
able to eliminate the imprints of their negative  emotions. Although they have abandoned their 
negative emotions from the root, they have not abandoned the root itself. Why? This is because 
they do not have the support of the vast accumu lation of merit that co mes from bodhicitta.  
 We have to be able to explain how bodhicitta ca n eliminate the obstructions to omniscience. We 
have to say that obstructions to  omniscience are removed by the wi sdom that realises selflessness 
that is  conjoined with the vast accumulation of  merit that comes from bodhicitta. We have to 
explain it in this way. The obstructions to omniscience are not abandoned on the first seven 
bodhisattva grounds. Once the bodhisattvas have  achieved the eighth ground, the bodhisattvas 
have abandoned all the afflictions or negative  afflictions from the root. The process of 
abandoning the obstructions to omniscience st arts from the eighth ground. On the eighth, 
nineth and tenth grounds, they require the accumu lation of vast amounts of merit in order to 
help them to  abandon completely the obstructions to omniscience.  
 Whether one is able to remove the obstructio ns to omniscience depends on whether one has 
bodhicitta or not. The bodhisattvas only start to abandon th e obstructions to omniscience from 
the 8th ground onwards but they have already ab andoned the afflictions. They have abandoned 
their afflictions through the wisdom that realises emptiness. The hearer and solitary realiser  also 
have the wisdom that realises emptiness. When th ey achieve liberation, they will have abandoned 
their afflictions from the root. But why is it that they cannot abandon the imprints of these 
afflictions, which the bodhisattva is able to do? This boils down to having bodhicitta. Bodhicitta 
is likened to the great sun. In the root text , “the great sun removes the misty ignorance.” 
3B2B 2A2A 3A2C  The potential [power]to accomplish all benefit and bliss 
1 Accomplishing all benefit 
2 Accomplishing all bliss 
3B2B 2A2A 3A2C 1 Accomplishing all benefit 
Bodhicitta has the power to accomplish all benefit as shown in last two lines of verse 32: “It is 
the quintessential butter from th e churning of the milk of Dh arma.” Bodhicitta is like 
quintessential butter -  the essence that we get fr om the churning of the milk of Dharma. When 
we listen to and reflect on the Dharma, the essenc e that we will extract from such listening and 
reflection would be bodhicitta. Bo dhicitta is said to be the esse nce of all the scriptures of the 
Buddha. Since bodhicitta is the essence of all the scriptures of  the Buddha,  bodhicitta can 
accomplish each and every single benefit. Since that  is the case, it is advisable to always reflect 
and meditate on bodhicitta all the time.  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre       Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
F P M T  B a s i c  P r o g r a m              C h a p t e r  T h r e e  
 
 
151 3B2B 2A2A 3A2C 2 A ccomplishing all bliss 
Bodhicitta has the power to accomplish all bli ss and happiness and this is shown in verse 33: 
 
[3, 33] 
For all those guests travelling on the path of conditioned existence 
Who wish to experience the bounties of happiness, 
This will satisfy them with joy 
And actually place them in supreme bliss. 
 
Bodhisattvas work for all the six types of suffering  sentient beings circling in cyclic existence - 
from the peak of cyclic existence down to the Avici hell  -  who wi sh to experience both temporal 
and ultimate happiness,  and place them in supreme bliss instead of sorrowless nirvana thus 
satisfying them with joy. It is bodhicitta  that enables bodhisattvas to do this.  
 In the text it says, “For all those guests travelling  on the path of samsara”. The guests here refer to 
us, sentient beings in samsara. Why is the word “guests” used here? It describes the condition 
that we are in, always hurrying  from one place to the next, without an end in sight as to the 
n u m b e r  o f  p l a c e s  t h a t  o n e  h a s  t o  g o  t o .  D e s p i t e  h a v i n g  g o n e  t o  m a n y  p l a c e s ,  w e  h a v e  n e v e r  arrived anywhere. We are constantly on the move in the sense that we are constantly changing. 
We are always moving towards death in each and every single moment. We think that we will be 
staying for a while in this life but the fact is  that, in each and every single moment, we are 
moving closer and closer to death. When we reach death, we do not stop there. We have to take another rebirth again. When we die, we immedi ately have to go on to another rebirth. The 
number of rebirths we have taken is limi tless. That is the meaning of “guests.” 
3B2B 2A2A 3B Causing others to develop joy 
[3, 34] 
Today in the presence of all the Protectors 
I invite the world to be guests 
At (a festival of) temporary and ultimate delight. 
May gods, anti-gods and all be joyful. 
 
The words,  “I invite” indicate that we are inviti ng the guests. Who is this “I”? It is the person 
who has generated bodhicitta. When  do we invite the guest? We invite the guests now. From 
today, we invite the guests in the presence of and witnessed by all the buddhas and bodhisattvas . 
Who are the guests? It is the limitless number of se ntient beings. We invite all the guests so that 
we can offer them the state of en lightenment. Until they achieve the state of enlightenment, we 
offer  them the temporal benefit of higher rebi rths as humans and gods . By inviting all these 
guests, we give them whatever they need -  both temporal and ultimate gifts. Then we report our 
activities to all the gods and demigods (those beings from the white side who are supporting 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre       Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
F P M T  B a s i c  P r o g r a m              C h a p t e r  T h r e e  
 
 
152 Dharma). When they hear of us doing this, all of them rejoice. We also ask them to protect us. 
This is the purpose of asking them to  protect those practising bodhicitta. 
 
We have completed  the third ch apter. The first three chapters cover the first two lines of the 
dedication prayer:  
May the precious bodhimind 
not yet born arise and grow. 
 
The commentary to the meaning of th ese two lines is now completed. 
 There is an advice from Gyaltsab Rinpoche at  the end of his commentary to this chapter:  
 
“First, one must reflect on the benefits of bodhicit ta. After reflecting on the benefits of bodhicitta, 
in order to eliminate the obstacles to the generati on of bodhicitta, one pu rifies or one confesses 
one’s negativities. In order to ga ther the favourable conditions fo r generating bodhicitta, one needs 
to accumulate merit. On this basis, one takes the bodhisattvas vows and one generates bodhicitta.”  
 
Rinpoche says that if we are able to accompli sh this, then we will have made our lives most 
meaningful. This is the best way. In conclusion , we should follow this advice: Listen, all the 
intelligent ones! The essence of al l the scriptures of the Buddha is  bodhicitta. Bodhicitta is the 
sole path travelled by bodhisattvas of the past. Pu t in effort in developing  the two bodhicittas; the 
first is aspirational bodhicitta, and then engaged bodhicitta.   The third line of the dedication prayer, “may that born have no decline”,  will be explained in the next three chapters. Chapter one explains the benefits of bodhicitta, chapter two confessing 
negativities and chapter three thoroughly embr acing bodhicitta – thes e are the methods for 
generating bodhicitta that has not yet been gene rated. Chapter four, conscientiousness,  chapter 
five, relying on vigilance, and chapter six, pati ence, present the methods to prevent bodhicitta 
from degenerating. “But increase forever more” refe rs to the methods to in crease bodhicitta that 
has been generated, presented in chapter se ven, joyous perseverance, chapter eight, 
concentration, and chapter nine, on wisdom. The la st chapter, chapter ten,  on dedication is a 
concluding prayer for dedications. 
3B2B 2A2B The chapter’s name 
The name of chapter three  is “Thoroughly embr acing bodhicitta” [or “Full Acceptance of the 
Awakening Mind”]. 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre       Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
F P M T  B a s i c  P r o g r a m               C h a p t e r  F o u r  
 
 
153 Lesson 19 – chapter 4, verse 1-10 
 
I would like to give you all an advice from a another text: 
 
 Just like an old person needs a walking stick to be able to walk properly, in order for us to 
understand the meaning of the teachi ngs, we need to rely on the wo rds. “Words” here  refers to the 
words of the texts, of the treatise s. It is important to memorize th eir contents, or the words of the 
text, in order to learn their mean ing. Otherwise we merely read the words, and our understanding 
and studies would never come to  a meaningful conclusion.  
 
What the author of this advice is trying to say is that in or der for one to really learn the 
teachings, first, one must have a really good gr asp of the words of the text that one would have 
already memorized. This advice was intended for those who were  studying in the monasteries. 
First, we must memorize the words of the text that we are studying. But just memorizing the 
words alone is not enough.  We may memorize the te xt and be able to recite it from memory but 
may not pay any attention to or reflect on the meaning of the words. This is exactly what 
happens when we perform pujas in the wrong way. If we sit at pujas, just reciting the prayers 
without reflecting on the meaning of the prayers,  we are no better than parrots. This is not the 
correct way to do pujas. If we teach a parrot to recite “Om mani padm e hum”, the parrot can 
recite “Om mani padme hum” 108 times. But that is about it.  When we do not reflect on the meaning of the words of the teachings that we have received, 
then we will not be able to cut any wrong or mi staken understanding. (Literally, we will not be 
able to cut any superimpositions). We really n eed to investigate those teachings in depth. In 
order to study the scriptures of the Buddha, first,  we must rely on the words. We must know the 
words of the text, but that alone is not sufficient.  We must also reflect on the meaning of those 
words. 
 This way of studying is not done here due to lack  of time. In the monasteries, they memorize all 
the root texts that they are studying and then read the commentaries. Here we do not have the 
time to memorize the words of the text. But when  different verses and stanzas are explained, at 
the very least, we should see whether we are ab le to understand the meaning of each of those 
stanzas. We have to check to see whether we are able to do that.  
The Fourth Chapter: Teaching Conscientiousness 
3B2B 2 The way to train in the conduct once one has developed the two bodhicittas 
A Embracing bodhicitta [Chapters Two and Three] 
B The way to train in the conduct of the perfections [Chapters Four to Ten] 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre       Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
F P M T  B a s i c  P r o g r a m               C h a p t e r  F o u r  
 
 
154 3B2B 2B The way to train in the conduct of the perfections 
1 The way to cultivate conscientiousness: The branch that prevents the deterioration of 
bodhicitta and [its associated] conduct  
2 The way to train in ethics: A specific explanation given with regards to mindfulness and 
alertness- the methods for purely guarding all virtuous dharmas [Chapter Five] 3 Explaining the way to train in the remaini ng four perfections [Chapters Six to Nine] 
4 Explaining, by way of the branch of dedication, the way to train in giving away body, material 
wealth, and the roots of virtue for the welfare of others [Chapter Ten] 
 
The outline: “2B The way to train in the conduct of the perfections” has four major sub-headings 
that  run into the later chapters . This chapter only covers the fi rst point “The way to cultivate 
conscientiousness: The branch that prevents the deterioration of bodhicitta and [its associated] 
conduct”. The second sub-heading is  covered in chapter five, and so on.  
3B2B 2B1  The way to cultivate conscientiousness: The branch that prevents the 
deterioration of bodhicitta and [its associated] conduct 
A Explaining the chapter’s material 
B The chapter’s name 
3B2B 2B1A Explaining the chapter’s material 
1 A brief presentation of the way to cultivate conscientiousness 
2 An extensive explanation 
3 Synopsis 
3B2B 2B1A 1 A brief presentation of the way to cultivate conscientiousness 
[4,1] 
Having firmly seized the Aw akening Mind in this way, 
A Conqueror’s son must never waver; 
Always should he exert himself 
To never stray from his practice. 
 
Conscientiousness is the opposite of non-conscien tiousness. Non-conscientiousness is one of the 
twenty secondary afflictions and is a negative emotio n. It is a mind that does not guard or protect 
itself against the afflictions and the faults that arise from such  afflic tions. It is the mind that does 
whatever it wants without considering the co nsequences. That is non-conscientiousness. 
The function of non-conscientiousne ss is to increase negativities an d to weaken positive actions.  
 Conscientiousness is a mental factor, which is a mi nd that is not under the influence of negative 
emotions or afflictions. While it abides in joyous  effort or joyous persev erance, it accomplishes 
virtue. It is the mind that protec ts from contaminated phenomena. 
 The opposite of conscientiousness is non-consci entiousness.  Non-conscientiousness is a mind 
that does not protect from afflictions and the faults of afflictions. It is basically a mind that gives 
in to afflictions. Conscientiousness is the basis fo r the excellent collection of all the good things 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre       Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
F P M T  B a s i c  P r o g r a m               C h a p t e r  F o u r  
 
 
155 of both samsara and nirvana. This is a brief explanation of conscientiousness. 
 
Verse 1 is a brief presentation of the way to cu ltivate conscientiousness. The essence is that 
having firmly seized both aspirational and en gaged bodhicitta - “having firmly seized the 
Awakening mind  in this way” - as explained in the previous chap ters, bodhisattvas should never 
stray from the practice of avoiding the 18 root downfalls and the 46 faults. Bodhisattvas should 
apply themselves to avoid committing any of these do wnfalls or faults; they should rely on joyous 
perseverance to do so without coming under the influence of laziness or procrastination.  After 
having firmly seized and thoroughly embraced bodhicitta, they  should rely on conscientiousness to keep the precepts.  “Firmly seized” refers to the time of taking the vows, when one has promised that one will never 
give up bodhicitta and one will never degenerate the practice even at the cost of one’s life. In the 
previous chapter, we looked at how the bodh isattva vows are taken. At that time, one has 
promised never to give up the practices, even at  the cost of one’s life. In that sense, one has 
thoroughly embraced and firmly seized bodhici tta in this way. After having taken the vows, 
bodhisattvas should always work at  keeping thei r vows and ensure that they do not degenerate.  
3B2B 2B1A 2 An extensive explanation 
A Cultivating conscientiousness with regards to bodhicitta 
B Cultivating conscientiousness with regards to the training 
3B2B 2B1A 2A Cultivating conscientiousness with regards to bodhicitta 
1 The reasons it is inappropriate to discard bodhicitta 
2 The disadvantages of discarding it 
3B2B 2B1A 2A1 The reasons why it is inappropriate to discard bodhicitta 
[4,2] 
In the case of reckless actions 
Or of deeds not well considered, 
Although a promise may have been made 
It is fit to reconsider whethe r I should do them or not. 
 
[4,3] 
But how can I ever withdraw 
From what has been examined by the great wisdom 
Of the Buddhas and their Sons, 
And even many times by me myself? 
 
“Reckless actions” refers to whatever actions we do: before we start any action, we do not 
consider the pros and cons of the action we inte nd to take. We do not think about or analyse the 
situation at all before we act. Even when we do  think about it, we do not thoroughly analyse the 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre       Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
F P M T  B a s i c  P r o g r a m               C h a p t e r  F o u r  
 
 
156 situation before we decide to go ahead with a cert ain action. We then make a mental  promise, ‘I 
will complete this action.’  Sometimes, we br eak our promises when we do not complete our 
actions. In an ordinary situation,  this may still be all right.  
 But if we are talking about bodhicitta, it is no t appropriate and is not all right. In terms of 
ordinary actions, it may be all right to break or go against our promises.  But this is not the case 
with regards to bodhicitta. We should never give up bodhicitta because the benefits of bodhicitta 
have already been examined by those who po ssess great wisdom,  by all the buddhas and 
bodhisattvas, who  have seen all the wonder ful benefits of bodhicitta. The buddhas and 
bodhisattvas, who do not have even the slight est of faults and who possess great wisdom – 
referring to the great correct wisdom - have exam ined the benefits of bodhicitta in detail.  
 The last line of verse 3 says, “a nd even many times by me myself ”. We have also examined the 
benefits of bodhicitta many times. We should re member the very beginning of the text when we 
looked at many different benefits of bodhic itta. We have thought about bodhicitta, have 
reflected on and have seen its benefits.  Having  seen those benefits, we made the promise and 
took up the bodhisattva vows. If, after this whole pr ocess, we decide not to follow or  to give up 
our training and our bodhicitta, this is inapprop riate and incorrect. In fa ct, we should tighten 
and discipline the mind and focus on what we should  do in our training.   Conscientiousness is the mind that focuses on vi rtue after having seen both the faults and the 
advantages of certain actions. Conscientiousness fo cuses the mind on a virtuous course of action.  
 There are, therefore,  two reason s why it is inappropriate to give  up bodhicitta. The two reasons 
are: first, bodhicitta and its benefits have b een thoroughly examined by all the buddhas and 
bodhisattvas, who  have seen it to be a wonder ful thing; and second, we took the vows on the 
basis of clearly understanding the benefits of bodhicitta, we took the bodhisattva vows on the 
basis of having this clear understanding, therefore, it is inappropriate for us  to give up bodhicitta 
and our training now.   Because of these two reasons, we should rely on conscientiousness to make sure that our 
bodhicitta does not deteriorate or degenerate. If we do not have conscientiousness but, instead, 
have the opposite of conscientiousness,  which is non-conscientiousness, then the mind will be 
stained by the faults of the different transgre ssions of the bodhisattva vows. When we have 
conscientiousness, we will be prot ected against such  infractions.  
 Q. What is the difference between di scrimination and conscientiousness? 
 Discrimination is a mental factor that en ables the mind to apprehend an object.  
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre       Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
F P M T  B a s i c  P r o g r a m               C h a p t e r  F o u r  
 
 
157 Q. Between discrimination and conscientiousness, which is the mental factor that enables us to 
know what is virtue and what is non–virtue ?  
 
It is the mental factor of disc rimination that discriminates betw een virtue and non-virtue.  After 
having discriminated between what is virtue and  non-virtue, then conscientiousness focuses the 
mind on virtue and protects the mind from non-virtue.   The difference between verses 2 and  3: verse 2 re fers to actions other then giving up bodhicitta, 
such as ordinary worldly activities. We often do  n o t  c o n s i d e r  t h e  p r o s  a n d  c o n s  o f  a n  a c t i o n  
before we do it.   Even if we do think about the pros and cons, we may not analyse the situation 
thoroughly. In the case of ordi nary actions, after thinking ab out them thoroughly and then 
making the promise that, “I’m going to do this,” even if we do not follow through with or forget 
our promise, it may  still be  all right to brea k the promise. But this  is not the case with  
bodhicitta.   There are three faults or disadvan tages of giving up bodhicitta: 
3B2B 2B1A 2A2 The  disadvantages of discarding [bodhicitta] 
A The disadvantage of going to the lower realms 
B One ceases to work for the sake of others  
C Attainment of the grounds is postponed ∗    
3B2B 2B1A 2A2A The disadvantage of going to the lower realms 
1 The reasons one migrates to the lower realms 
2 Stating the proof for that 
3 Abandoning contradictions 
3B2B 2B1A 2A2A 1 The reasons one migrates to the lower realms 
[4,4] 
If having made such a promise 
I do not put it into action, 
Then by deceiving every living being 
What kind of rebirth shall I take? 
 
Why will we go to the lower realms if we break our promise by giving up bodhicitta? What are the promises we have made? In the presence of all sentient beings, we have invited them as guests 
and promised to liberate them from the suffering s of both samsara and nirvana. We also made 
the promise to bring all sentient beings to the st ate of full enlightenment. Having made such big 
promises, when it comes to the practice, if we do not  strive to live up to our promises and put 
them into action, then, we will  have deceived a ll the buddhas and all the sentient beings. We go 
to the lower realms because of committing this very  heavy negative action of deceiving them all. 
It is important to reflect on this particular faul t and rely on conscientiousness to protect and stop 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre       Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
F P M T  B a s i c  P r o g r a m               C h a p t e r  F o u r  
 
 
158 the mind from committing  this fault of giving up bodhicitta. 
3B2B 2B1A 2A2A 2 Stating the proof for that 
 [4,5] 
If it has been taught (by the Buddha) 
That he who does not give away 
The smallest thing he once intended to give 
Will take rebirth as a hungry ghost;  
 
[4, 6 ] 
Then if I should deceive all beings 
After having sincerely invited them 
To the unsurpassable bliss, 
Shall I take a happy rebirth? 
 
The source for this proof is in the sutra titled The Close Placement of Mindfulness  by Buddha 
himself. It is taught,  in this  s u t r a ,  t h a t  w h e n  w e  d o  n o t  g i ve away something that we have 
thought of giving away (ie we al ready had  the intention of giving ), then we would  create the 
cause to be reborn as hungry ghosts. When we do not give away something that we have promised to give away, then that creates the cause for us to be reborn in the hells. If we were to 
make the promise of benefiting and liberating all sentient beings and yet do nothing about it or 
we  go against and   break that promise,  would we ever get a good rebirth?  If we have promised to accomplish the welfare and happiness of all se ntient beings, then, if we don’t do anything 
about it, go against the promise and give up the inte ntion to do so, we definitely go to the hells.  
3B2B 2B1A 2A2A 3 Abandoning contradictions 
[4, 7 ] 
Only the Omniscient can discern 
The manner of the action of those 
Who give up the Awaken ing Mind but are freed; 
It is beyond the scope of (ordinary) thought 
 
It has earlier been mentioned that,  if those who took the bodhisattva vows and made  the  
promise to benefit all sentient beings were to  break the vows and give up bodhicitta, they would 
definitely go to the hells. Having said that, there seems to be a contradiction in this  verse. Why? 
This is because there is an account of Shariputra  becoming an arhat  despite his having given up 
bodhicitta.   In one of his past lives, he took rebirth as a king named  Daiyu. In that rebirth, he developed 
bodhicitta, offered reverential service to 10,000 buddhas and worked for the benefit of sentient 
beings. One day, he met an emanation of mara, wh o appeared in the aspect of a  Brahmin. This 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre       Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
F P M T  B a s i c  P r o g r a m               C h a p t e r  F o u r  
 
 
159 mara asked Shariputra for his right hand, which Sh ariputra, being a bodhisattva, duly cut off and 
gave  to the mara. As Shariputra had  cut off his right hand, he had to give his hand to the mara 
using his remaining left hand. The mara was disple ased and said “How can you do this in such a 
disrespectful way,  by giving me something with your left hand?” This mara took Shariputra’s 
right hand and threw it away. Shariputra became very discouraged after this incident and thought 
that there was no way that he could make sentient beings happy. So he gave up bodhicitta, fell to the lesser Hinayana path and achieved liberation in stead. He did not go to the lower realms but 
achieved liberation instead.   Why did Shariputra not go to the lower realms? The answer is given in the last line of verse 7: “it 
is beyond the scope of (ordinary)  thought”. This is because the subtle details of karma are the 
sole objects of knowledge of the buddhas alone an d are beyond the understanding of us ordinary 
beings. One commentary states  exactly the same po int but  goes a bit further: It is beyond the 
scope of ordinary thought, so do  not bother to even try to thin k why and how this can happen. If 
we try to figure this out, we will get a headac he and go crazy, as this is something only the 
buddhas can understand! When we look at all ph enomena in existence or objects of knowledge, 
they can be categorized into three: manifest phenomena, slightly obscured phenomena, and 
extremely obscured phenomena.   Extremely obscured phenomena include these very su btle details of karma. We can only hope to 
understand this class of extrem ely obscured phenomena by depend ing on the scriptural authority 
of the buddhas. It is beyond our direct experience  and there is no way that we can prove it with 
any logic and reasoning.  To reiterate: manifest phenomena refers to the class of phenomena which we can directly 
experience. We can understand these objects without relying on any reasons since we can 
experience them directly. 
2. Slightly obscured, or slightly hidden phenom ena refers to those things that we can only 
understand by initially depending on logic and reasoning, or inference. 
3. Extremely obscured or very hidden phenomen a refers to those things that we can only 
understand, believe or have conviction in by depending  on the scriptures of the Buddha. 
3B2B 2B1A 2A2B  One ceases to work for the sake of others 
1 As the deterioration of bodhicitta involves a seri ous [lit. heavy] downfall, the welfare of others 
deteriorates 2 It is equivalent to obstructing the virtue of another bodhisattva [and thus] one migrates to the 
lower realms ∗ 
3 The reasons for that 
3B2B 2B1A 2A2B  1 As the deterioration of bodhicitta involves a serious [lit. heavy] downfall, 
the welfare of others deteriorates 
[4,8] 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre       Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
F P M T  B a s i c  P r o g r a m               C h a p t e r  F o u r  
 
 
160 This, for a Bodhisattva, 
Is the heaviest of downfalls, 
For should it ever happen, 
The welfare of all will be weakened 
 
Giving up bodhicitta is the heaviest of the many different root downfalls of the bodhisattva vows.  
If we give up bodhicitta, then the welfare of ot hers will deteriorate as well. Why? Bodhicitta, the 
mind of the altruistic intention, is the basis for helping others. Therefore, if we give up 
bodhicitta, the welfare of ot hers will deteriorate.  
 Imagine a bodhisattva who possesses both pratim oksha vow and bodhisattva vows. When  that 
bodhisattva gives up bodhicitta, th at negative action is much heavier than committing a defeat of 
the pratimoksha vow. Commi tting a defeat of pratimoksha vows is  a very serious negative action. 
But the act of giving up bodhici tta is a much heavier negative action.  When   we give up 
bodhicitta, it  stops the be nefit of others and the welfare of others deteriorates. 
3B2B 2B1A 2A2B 2 It is equivalent to obstructing the virtue of another bodhisattva [and thus] 
one migrates to the lower realms 
This is equivalent to stopping or degenera ting one’s work for the benefit of others. 
 
[4,9] 
And should others for even a single moment 
Hinder or obstruct th eir wholesome (deeds) 
By weakening the welfare of all 
There will be no end to their rebirth in lower states. 
 
If someone were to obstruct or create obstacles to another bodhisattva’s practice of virtue, that 
obstruction, by hindering or creating problems for that bodhisattva’s virtuous activities,  would weaken that bodhisattva’s ability to benefit sentie nt beings.  By doing this, one creates the cause 
to take many rebirths in the lower realms.   Bodhisattvas are always continuously working for the benefit of others. When we obstruct their 
activities, we are creating obstacles to the welfar e and happiness of all sentient beings. When that 
happens, we accumulate negativities. Because of those negativities, we will take rebirth in the lower realms. 
3B2B 2B1A 2A2B 3 The reasons for that 
Since we do not know who is and wh o is not a bodhisattva, it  is advisable to be extremely careful 
not to stop the virtuous activities of others. If  the person happens to be a bodhisattva, then we 
will be in trouble. What is the reason  for that? This is shown in verse 10: 
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre       Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
F P M T  B a s i c  P r o g r a m               C h a p t e r  F o u r  
 
 
161  
[4,10] 
For if my being is impaired 
By destroying the joy of even one sentient being, 
Then what need is there to mention 
Destroying the joy of sentient beings, vast as space? 
 
If we were to destroy the happiness of just one sentient being, we would  get into trouble and 
suffer. There is no need then to talk about the suffering that we will have to endure if we destroy the happiness of all sentient beings as vast as space.   In some other commentaries, the reasons why we go  to the lower realms when  we obstruct the 
virtue of another bodhisattva are explained in tw o ways: reasoning employing scriptural authority  
reasoning employing  logic  Verse 10 establishes  the reason using  logic. Dest roying the happiness of just one sentient being 
will cause us not to be reborn in the higher real ms. It goes without saying  then that there will be 
much more suffering if we destroy the happiness of all sentient beings. Why is it such a negative 
action to obstruct the activities of a bodhis attva? Because, by causing obstacles to the 
bodhisattva’s practice of virtue, we are actually  causing obstacles to th e cause of a buddha; the 
cause of enlightenment. By obstructing the works of a bodhisattva, we are creating obstacles to 
the cause of happiness of all sentient beings, the enlightenment of all sentient beings.   
  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre       Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
F P M T  B a s i c  P r o g r a m               C h a p t e r  F o u r  
 
 
162 Lesson 20 – chapter 4, verse 10-17 
 
Buddha said in the King of Concentrations Sutra :  
 
I have explained this very good teaching.  
Yet if you, having heard it, do not practise correctly,  
Then just like a sick person hold ing on to a bag of medicine,  
Your illness cannot be cured.  
 
This verse from the sutra can be applied to us be cause we listen to and study the teachings but we 
find it difficult to reflect on their meaning and to make them useful; we are unable to put them 
into practice. That is why we do not find ou r minds improving or ourselves becoming more 
good-hearted. We may listen to many teaching s but we do not necessarily reflect on their 
meaning. Because of that, we do not see any improvement in ourselves.  
 Instead, we experience mental unhappiness and su ffering. In fact, sometimes, it seems that we 
are experiencing even more suffering than before . This is the fault of not reflecting on the 
meaning of the teachings that we have heard. We  are just like the patient who carries a bag of 
medicine around without taking any. If we do no t take the medicine, there is no way that we can 
recover from our sicknesses. We need to reflect on the meaning of the te achings that we have 
heard in order to remove our problems and the extensive suffering that we have endured for a very long time.   When we do not engage in the activities of list ening, reflecting and familiarising our minds with 
those teachings over a long period of time, we are not going to be able to recover or free ourselves from our problems because our sufferings have been there for very long time.  We need to understand that the patient carrying the ba g of medicine, mentioned by the Buddha in this 
sutra, is actually referring to us. We need to put down the bag of medicine that we have been 
carrying on our backs, open the ba g and start taking the medicine. It  is not enough to just hear 
the teachings. We must start reflecting on them.  
We are now studying the text, Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds. It contains many inconceivable 
precepts, advice and teachings. What we are doing is  listening to and learning  what is in this text. 
It may be difficult to put the teachings into practi se immediately but, at the very least, we should 
reflect on the meaning of the word s that are found in the text; we should not just leave it at the 
level of listening or looking at the words. We have  to try to reflect on the words themselves, what 
is in the text.   Before class, we do certain prayers such as ma king the mandala offering. That is the time we 
should put into practise the many different ways of making offerings and the visualisations that 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre       Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
F P M T  B a s i c  P r o g r a m               C h a p t e r  F o u r  
 
 
163 we have learnt. When we are offering the mandal a, we should try to visualise those extensive 
offerings explained in the text. We visualise and then offer them to all the buddhas and 
bodhisattvas. When we are able to do that, we will accumulate an inconceivable amount of merit 
within a short period of time.  We need to put into practice what we have lear nt. After that, we recite the verse of going for 
refuge and generating bodhicitta. We have ta lked about the meaning of refuge and how we 
should go for refuge. We have also talked about the way we should develop the altruistic 
intention of bodhicitta. At the very least then, wh ile reciting that verse, we should be able to 
bring forth some sort of feeling for the verse by reflecting on what we have learnt and try to 
generate the appropriate attitudes.  It is important to reflect, as much as we can, to the best of our abilities, on what we have learnt and the meaning of whatever prayers we may be reci ting. Why do we remain as we are; we do not 
change and improve? It boils down to the fact th at we did not reflect on what we have heard.  
 All of us have to try our very be st to reflect on the meaning of th e words of the teachings that we 
have heard and try to improve our own minds be cause improving the state of our minds is an 
individual responsibility. Kyabje Zopa Rinpoche’s holy wish for the centre is to produce good-hearted human beings. Rinpoche’s vision for setting  up the centre is not just to produce people 
who have some intellectual understanding of the teachings. His purpose of setting up the centre 
is to provide an opportunity to develop good-hea rted people and good human beings. That is his 
real wish. We should all try our very best to make this happen. It is not easy . It is difficult but we 
just have to try our best.  
3B2B 2B1A 2A2 The  disadvantages of discarding [bodhicitta] 
A The disadvantage of going to the lower realms 
B One ceases to work for the sake of others  
C Attainment of the grounds is postponed ∗    
3B2B 2B1A 2A2B  Attainment of  the grounds is postponed    
[4,11] 
Thus those who have the force of an Awakening Mind 
As well as the force of falling (from it) 
Stay revolving within cyclic existence 
And for a long time are hindered fr om reaching the Bodhisattva levels. 
 
We have already seen some of the faults of giving  up bodhicitta: one will go to the lower realms 
and be reborn in the hells and one’s work for othe rs will degenerate. There are those who say, ‘If 
I degenerate or break my bodhisattva vows, it is OK as I can confess it and retake the vows again.’ 
It is true that we can retake the vows and genera te bodhicitta again but attaining the bodhisattva 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre       Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
F P M T  B a s i c  P r o g r a m               C h a p t e r  F o u r  
 
 
164 grounds will be postponed. This is because we crea te the cause to go to the lower realms when we 
give up bodhicitta. When we generate bodhicitta  again, we create the cause to gain a good 
rebirth. So we are still stuck in sa msara, going back to square one.  
 When we give up bodhicitta, the attainment of the first ground is postponed. When attainment 
of the first ground is postponed, then obviously the attainment of enlightenment is postponed.  
Eg. you  try to move an object closer to you bu t at the same time, there is someone trying to 
move that same object closer to himself. So the object will move to and fro and after an hour, the 
object basically remains in the same position.    In another commentary it is mentioned that when  we commit a root downfall of the bodhisattva 
vows we can purify it by confessing the negativi ty, retaking the vows and generating bodhicitta 
again. Because of that purification practice, one may not be born in the lower realms but, 
nevertheless, the attainment of th e bodhisattvas ground is postpo ned. Why? This is because the 
occurrence of the root downfall will act as an obstacle for developing new qualities. 
 Why is it that, despite purifying the negativities that come with committing the root downfall, it 
becomes difficult to acquire new qualities? This is something for you to think about:  if we purify 
the negativities of having committed the root downfall through a complete purification by 
applying the four opponent powers, how is it that one’s attainment of new qualities will be 
postponed?  We have been looking at the practices of cultivat ing conscientiousness with regards to bodhicitta. 
Once we have developed bodhicitta, we take the vows. We have to try not to let the vows 
degenerate. In order to do this, we need to rely on conscientiousness.   
S o  f a r ,  w e  h a v e  l o o k e d  a t  t h e  f a u l t s  o r  d i s a d v antages of giving up bo dhicitta. There are three 
main faults mentioned in the text. If we give up bodhicitta: we create the cause to go to the lower 
realms, our work for others degenerates; and our attainment of the bodhisattva grounds is 
postponed. The point is to focus the mind to be conscientious about keeping the vows, not losing or letting them degenerate and not adopti ng a careless attitude towards them. We should 
reflect on these different faults. We should remind ourselves that these are the faults if we let our 
bodhicitta degenerate or lose ou r vows. By remembering these faults, we should focus our minds, 
apply joyous perseverance and make the effort to  keep the vows. What we have been discussing 
so far are the ways to stop bodhicitta from degenerating.  How do we stop bodhicitta from degenerating? Fi rst, we reflect on the faults of giving up 
bodhicitta. By reflecting on the faults, we focus our minds and make the decision that “I will not 
let my bodhicitta degenerate.” 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre       Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
F P M T  B a s i c  P r o g r a m               C h a p t e r  F o u r  
 
 
165 3B2B 2B1A 2B Cultivating conscientiousness with regards to the training 
1 Being conscientious about abandoning wrongdoing 
2 Being conscientious about cultivating virtue  
3 Being conscientious about abandoning afflictions 
3B2B 2B1A 2B1 Being conscientious about abandoning wrongdoing 
A If negativities and downfalls are not abandoned, one must continue [to take rebirth] in the 
lower realms 
B The Buddhas and their children act with equanimity ∗ 
C The difficulty of obtaining the leisures and endowments 
D There is no opportunity to practise virtue if one has taken rebirth in the lower realms 
E The reason it is difficult to obtain the leisures and endowments 
3B2B 2B1A 2B1A  If negativities and downfa lls are not abandoned, one must continue [to 
take rebirth] in the lower realms 
[4,12] 
Therefore just as I have promised 
Shall I respectfully accord my actions. 
If from now on I make no effort 
I shall descend from lower to lower states. 
 
B y  r e f l e c t i n g  o n  t h e  f a u l t s  o f  g i v i n g  u p  b o dhicitta, we will engage in the training of 
conscientiousness, in the same way we have promis ed to follow the trainings of the bodhisattvas 
during our taking of the bodhisattva vows. From th en on, if we do not put in any effort, because 
of the fault of committing a root downfall, we wi ll descend to lower and lower states and take 
rebirth in the lower realms.  Now we are talking about cultivating conscientiousn ess with regards to the training so that our 
vows will not be stained and we will not commit a downfall. If we were to commit a downfall, we 
should remember that we would have to take re birth in the lower realms. It says in verse 12, 
“Therefore just as I have promised, I shall re spectfully accord my actions.” So one acts 
respectfully, with conscientiousness, with regards to the training.  We took the vows respectfully 
– no one forced us to do it. In the same way,  keeping the vows and engaging in the trainings 
should be done with a respectful attitude.  
3B2B 2B1A 2B1B  The Buddhas and their children act with equanimity   
[4,13] 
Although for the benefit of every creature 
Countless Buddhas have passed by, 
Yet I was not an object of their care 
Because of my own mistakes. 
  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre       Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
F P M T  B a s i c  P r o g r a m               C h a p t e r  F o u r  
 
 
166 [4,14] 
And if I continue to act like this, 
Again and again shall I undergo 
(Suffering) in unhappy realms, sickness, bondage, 
Laceration and the shedding of blood. 
 
We do not put effort in protecting ourselves fr om the root downfalls of the bodhisattva vows and 
in creating virtue, thinking, ‘It is OK if I canno t engage in virtue and protect myself from this 
root downfall, because my gurus and the buddhas and bodhisattvas will help me. My gurus and the buddhas and bodhisattvas will pluck me out of the lower realms, send me off to a good 
rebirth and place me on the path.’  Countless buddhas have come and gone for the benefit of all sentient beings. Somehow, we did 
not come under their care. Although countless bu ddhas have passed, “I was not an object of 
their care.” Why?  As mentioned in the root text - “Because of my own mistakes” –this is because 
of the fault of having accumulated negativities. Th is verse is not saying that the buddhas have no 
power. The buddhas have power, but there must also be conditions from our side. Though the 
buddhas have power, due to our own faults, we did not come under their care.  
In the eighth chapter of his Ornament for Clear Realisations (Abhisamayalamkara) , Maitreya Buddha 
said that just as dead seeds will not grow even if all the conditions,  such as rainfall, fertiliser, soil, 
warmth and so forth are present, similarly,  beca use of our own faults and mistakes, we have not 
come under the care of the buddhas. The buddhas  have complete power but, in order for that 
p o w e r  t o  b e  e f f e c t i v e ,  w e  m u s t  b e  r e a d y  f r o m  our own sides. Because of our own faults, this 
power does not have any effect. In this case, th erefore, it is not the fault of the buddhas.  
 The unsuitable seed mentioned above is an analog y. We should apply that  analogy to what we 
are studying here; if we are not conscientious about our vows, do not guard them, break them or commit a root downfall, then it is our own fault. Because of creating such faults and negativities, 
the buddhas are unable to help and protect us.   If we talk about the seed from the perspective of our buddha nature, of course, all sentient beings 
have buddha nature. When we talk about the dege neration of the seed, it refers to our buddha 
nature being bound or chained by our negativities.  We have to remove these faults ourselves.  
 Sometimes, we go to the other extreme: “If I possess all the potential and power to become a 
buddha, then I do not need the buddhas. What do  I need the buddhas for?” If we are thinking 
like that, we are implying that our buddha nature is solid and inherently existent because it does 
not need to rely on any other factors.   
Amitabha Buddhist Centre       Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
F P M T  B a s i c  P r o g r a m               C h a p t e r  F o u r  
 
 
167 The hearers and the solitary realisers arise from the buddhas and th e buddhas arise from 
bodhicitta. Whatever goals we may have, be it to ac hieve the level of a hearer, solitary realiser or 
buddha, we all need to rely on the teaching s of the Buddha. We ac hieve enlightenment by 
depending on the teachings or scriptures of the Buddha. We will not be able to achieve 
enlightenment without depending on the advice and the teachings of th e Buddha. We need all 
these conditions before we can achieve enli ghtenment. We will not be able to achieve 
enlightenment on our own, without de pending on these other factors.  
 Using again the analogy of the seed, even if the seed possessed the potential to transform into a 
plant, the seed alone would not be able to do this without depending on other conditions such 
as fertilisers, warmth, water and so forth. In the same way, although we may have the buddha 
nature or the potential to become a buddha,  that alone will not help us to achieve 
enlightenment.  The main advice here is that we need to strive conscientiously not to be stained by faults in the first place. When we are stained by the faults, then the buddhas wi ll not be able to protect us. 
Some people might think, “Never mind. Even if I am not protecting my vows or am careless now, 
I  w i l l  n o t  b e  c a r e l e s s  t h e  n e x t  t i m e .  I t  i s  O K  i f  I  c r e a t e  n e g a t i v i t i e s  n o w .  E v e n  i f  I  a m  n o t  protected now, I will be protected in the future.” Thinking in such a way is a mistake. As long we do not stop creating negativities, adopting a careless and reckless attitude, doing whatever we want, we will be stained by downfalls and not become objects of protection by the buddhas. In fact, the day when we will receive such protection  will be postponed.  Because of creating these 
negativities again and again, we will be reborn  and undergo suffering in the lower realms. While 
there, we will have to experience all the problems  - sicknesses, bondage, being cut and beaten up 
and tortured.   
The buddhas and bodhisattvas always act with equa nimity. It is not that they do not protect us 
but if we commit faults, then they cannot help us . The point is to refrain from being stained by 
the faults by relying on conscientiousness. 
3B2B 2B1A 2B1C  The difficulty of obtaining a human life of leisures and endowments  
1 If bodhicitta deteriorates, it becomes difficult to obtain leisures and endowments that possess 
the four wheels - conditions  [that facilitate practice] 
2 Even though they have been obtained, one should make effort because they quickly perish 
3B2B 2B1A 2B1C 1 If bodhicitta deteriorates, it  becomes difficult to obtain a human life of 
leisures and endowments that possess the four  wheels- conditions [tha t facilitate practice] 
[4,15] 
If the arising of a Tathagata, 
Faith, the attainment of a human body 
And my being fit to cultivate virtue are scarce, 
When will they be won again? 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre       Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
F P M T  B a s i c  P r o g r a m               C h a p t e r  F o u r  
 
 
168  
Verse 15 talks about the ten opportunities posse ssed by a human life of leisure and endowments: 
the five endowments that relate to others and  the five endowments that  relate to ourselves. 
 “The arising of a Tathagata” or the coming of the Buddha to any world is very rare. The other 
four opportunities related to others are also im plied:  (1) the Buddha ta ught the Dharma, (2) the 
Dharma abides, (3) there are people engaging in the teaching, practice and study of the Dharma 
and (4) there are people who support us in our Dharma practice.  The “attainment of a human body” refers to the fi ve opportunities related to oneself which are – 
(1) one is a human being, (2) one is born in a ce ntral place, (3) one is born with complete sense 
faculties, (4) one has not committed any of the five heinous crimes or the five uninterrupted karmas and (5) one has faith in the teachings.  The eight leisures are implied, thus completing th e 18 characteristics of a human life of leisure 
and opportunity. Having obtained this kind of rebirt h, if we do not use it to cultivate virtue now, 
when will we get such a rebirth again in the futu re? If the attainment of a human life of leisure 
and opportunity is so difficult, then it is even more difficult, on the basis of attaining such a 
human life, to be able to generate bodhicitta an d to engage in the trainings. When will this 
chance of generating bodhicitta and engagi ng in the trainings, ever happen again? 
 “The leisures and endowments that  possess the four wheels - conditio ns [that facilitate practice]” 
The four wheels or conditions referred to here are:  
1. to be born in a conducive environment with  harmonious friends who assist us in the 
practice of virtue;  
2. t o  b e  a b l e  t o  r e l y  o n  h o l y  b e i n g s  w i t h  s p e c i f i c  r e f e r e n c e  t o  t h e  f a c t   t h a t  w e  h a v e  t h e  
opportunity to meet and rely on Mahayana gurus;  
3. as a result of virtuous prayers made in the pa st, to engage in virtue enthusiastically with 
one’s body, speech and mind ; 
4. to have good and favourable conditions for th e practice of the Mahayana teachings. This 
comes about as the result of having accu mulated or performed virtue in the past. 
 These four wheels are the four Mahayana sphere s mentioned in the dedication prayer of the 
Guru Puja practice: 
By the force of this merit in all my lives 
May I never be parted from the Mahayana’s four spheres 
And may I reach the end of my journey along the paths of  
Renunciation, bodhicitta, the pure view, and the two stages 
 
(From the FPMT Prayer Book , page 205,  LC 117.) 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre       Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
F P M T  B a s i c  P r o g r a m               C h a p t e r  F o u r  
 
 
169 Thus it is very important for us to recognise that the eight leisur es and ten opportunities are very 
difficult to find and we need to check whether we posses all these 18 char acteristics. If we do 
have most of them, we should practise the Dharma as what we have obtained is very rare indeed. 
But if we do not make use of our present existence to the fullest for practising Dharma, it will be 
extremely difficult to gain such a beneficially endowed form again. 
3B2B 2B1A 2B1C 2 Even though they have been obtained, one should make effort because 
they quickly perish 
Even if we have already obtained this human life of leisure and opportunity, we should still make 
an effort as it will perish very quickly. 
[4,16] 
Although today I am healthy, 
Well-nourished and unafflicted, 
Life is momentary and deceptive: 
The body is like an object on loan for but a minute. 
 
At the present moment, we may be healthy, with no major sicknesses, well- clothed and well fed 
and have no enemies who create problems for us  (“unafflicited” means unharmed by enemies). 
Although this may be our present situation,  our life spans are unstable, momentary and 
deceptive. What does “deceptive” refer to? “Deceptive” refers to the nature of our life spans. 
Although our life spans seem very stable, in real ity, they are not so. Ther e is a disparity between 
appearance and reality because our life spans are disintegrating in each and every single moment. 
They are being continuously exhausted. 
 Our bodies are like objects on loan for a very sh ort time. Our bodies do not belong to us. When 
the time comes, the owner, the Lo rd of Death, will take our bodies from us. We have to return 
and give up our bodies and die. We have now ob tained a human life of leisure and opportunity 
where there are no obstacles and all the favourab le conditions are gather ed together. At this 
time, our life spans appear to be stable. In real ity, however, our life spans and our bodies are 
disintegrating in each and every single moment. Because of that, we must make the effort from 
now on to abandon our negativities. 
3B2B 2B1A 2B1D  There is no opportunity to practice virtue if one has taken rebirth in the 
lower realms 
1 There is no opportunity to practice virtue  if one is reborn in the lower realms 
2 If one does not make the effort when one has obtained a higher rebirth, once one is in the lower realms, one will be ignorant with regards to what is to be abandoned and what is to be 
cultivated ∗ 
3 It is extremely difficult to be liberated from the lower realms [once one has taken rebirth there] 
3B2B 2B1A 2B1D 1 There is no opportunity to practice virtue if one is reborn in the lower 
realms 
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre       Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
F P M T  B a s i c  P r o g r a m               C h a p t e r  F o u r  
 
 
170 [4,17] 
And with behaviour such as this 
I shall not win a human body again, 
And if this human form is not attained 
There will be solely evil and no virtue. 
 
It is incorrect to think, “I will always get a good rebirth and when  I get such a good rebirth again 
in the future, then I will practise.” Why is it incorrect to think in such a way? Because if we 
continue our present behaviour of committing negati ve actions and not cultivating virtue, we will 
not get a human rebirth again. Once we are in  the lower realms, we will commit negativities 
continuously and have no chance to create virtue . That being the case, we will always remain in 
the lower realms.  We should apply this to ourselves - we may think,  “Never mind if I mess up this life. It’s OK. I 
will do better in the next life when I get another rebirth.” If we mess up this life, we will also 
mess up the next life. We will then go to the lowe r realms and once we are there, it will difficult 
to get out. We are all like this. We do not do anything when all the favourable conditions are 
present and we just spend our lives in an empty way.    It is clear that once we are in the lower realms, ther e is no opportunity to prac tise virtue. If that is 
the case, how will we get a good rebirth again? This  is advice for us, to motivate ourselves in our 
Dharma practice and to start the prac tice of abandoning negativities.  
 In this context, we are referring to being consci entious about the training. First, we should be 
conscientious about abandoning negativities. Havi ng obtained this human life of leisure and 
opportunity, we should be conscientious about abandoning negativities.  
 
If we do not reflect on what we have covered earlier, we will be come unconscientious, adopting a 
‘can’t-be-bothered’ attitude. With such an a ttitude, we will be stained by many faults, 
transgressions and negativities. Once that happens, we will go to the lower realms. We will have to experience unimaginable sufferings once we are there.  We can avoid this situation if we contemplate the points we have discussed so far. When we end 
up in the lower realms, it will be very difficult to get a good rebirth again because we will be committing negativities continuously and there wi ll be no chance for virtue. We do not even 
have to talk about the hell realms. Look at the animals around us. They are so foolish and completely blinded by ignorance. Even when we tr y to teach them to do so me virtue, they cannot 
do it. Therefore, since we have obtained this hu man life of leisure and opportunity, we should 
try as much as we can to abandon ne gativities and to cultivate virtue. 
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre       Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
F P M T  B a s i c  P r o g r a m               C h a p t e r  F o u r  
 
 
171  
Lesson 21 – chapter 4, verse 18-27 
 
The great Indian master, Chandragomin,  said that  if someone is very sick and is down with a 
serious disease, like leprosy, but does not take proper medicine continuously over a period of time – only doing so when he feels like it - then, that person will never recover from his illness. This is an analogy for the situat ion that we are in. We have been under the influence and control 
of the three mental poisons for a very long time. We have been under the control of ignorance.  
 In order to free ourselves, we have to familiarise ourselves with and meditate on the antidotes continuously for a very long time. If we only medi tate sometimes, we will never be able to free 
ourselves from those afflictions. When we talk abou t removing the afflictions, we need to train in 
the path that is complete. It does not mean doin g any virtue that we like and then hoping or 
expecting the afflictions to just weaken or disappe a r .  I t  d o e s  n o t  w o r k  l i k e  t h a t .   W e  h a v e  t o  
meditate on the complete path.   We do engage in virtuous practices, but some times we feel that, despite doing all sorts of 
practices, we are not getting anywhere. We ar e not improving. This is how we may feel 
sometimes. Actually, things are getting better but we should not expect to see instant results. 
Sometimes, when we engage in certain practices, we  expect to see results in  a day, a month, a year 
or even a couple of years. It does not work like that. We may not be able to see very tangible results for quite a while.   Our afflictions are like the very heavy sicknesses of a patient. We have been harbouring these 
afflictions, the three mental poisons, in our mi nds for a very long time.  In order to heal 
ourselves of these afflictions, we need to medita te and rely on the antidotes continuously for a 
long period of time. If we rely on the antidotes every now and then, as and when we feel like it, 
then we are not going to reap much benefit from them.  When it comes to Dharma practice or studies, we  should not be lazy. Sometimes we think, “I am 
getting old, I am not intelligent enough to unde rstand this, I do not have enough time” and so 
forth, and we put ourselves down. When we think like this, we are actually stopping ourselves from taking advantage of the opportunity for Dh arma studies and practice. Because of thinking 
in such a way, we do not study an d practise. Then we become lazy.  
 We should not stop ourselves from having a fair share of Dharma practice or study. All of us are different; some are predisposed towards ange r, others are predisposed towards mental 
distractions. Some people might think, “I am the angry sort and there is no hope for me. It is 
impossible for me to meditate on compassion. Forg et about it.”  When people think in such a 
way, they stop giving themselves  an opportunity to improve.  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre       Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
F P M T  B a s i c  P r o g r a m               C h a p t e r  F o u r  
 
 
172 Some people might think, “My mind is so distracted . I have so many distractions, thinking of this 
and that. There is no way I can meditate. There is no way I can develop concentration.” When 
they think in such a way, they stop themselv es from being able to do anything about it. 
 The point here is not to create obstacles for ou r own Dharma practice. We should open the door 
to our own Dharma practice and study. We have already talked about a human life of leisure and 
opportunity. This is something on which we shou ld reflect. We have the ability to study and 
practise the teachings and all the g ood conditions are gathered together to enable us to do so. By 
reflecting in such a way, we should encourag e ourselves and persuade our mind to practise 
Dharma, to open the door to Dharma practice.  
3B2B 2B1A 2B1D  There is no opportunity to practice virtue if one has taken rebirth in the 
lower realms 
1 There is no opportunity to practise virtue  if one is reborn in the lower realms 
2 If one does not make effort when when one has obtained a higher rebirth, once one is in the 
lower realms, one will be ignorant with regards to what is to be abandoned and what is to be 
cultivated ∗ 
3 It is extremely difficult to be liberated from the lower realms [once one has taken rebirth there] 
 
The first outline was covered in the previous lesson on verse 17. 
3B2B 2B1A 2B1D 2 If one does not make effort when when one has obtained a higher rebirth, 
once one is in the lower realms, one will be ignorant with regards to what is to be abandoned and 
what is to be cultivated 
[4,18] 
If when I have the chance to live a wholesome life 
My actions are not wholesome, 
Then what shall I be able to do 
When confused by the misery of the lower realms? 
 
We are fortunate now to have obtained this good rebirth. At such a time, if we do not practise 
some virtue, in the future, when we take rebirth in  the lower realms, as the result of the ripening 
of negativities, we will be tormented by various sufferings and we will be confused and ignorant as to what is to be abandoned and what is to be practised.  
 Now, when we have the opportunity, we should practise virtue. We need to remind ourselves t h a t ,  a t  t h i s  t i m e  w h e n  w e  h a v e  a  h u m a n  l i f e  o f  l e i s u r e  a n d  o p p o r t u n i t y ,  w e  s h o u l d  s t r i v e  t o  
engage in virtue and not be lazy or slothful. When  we are feeling lazy and slothful and have a lot 
of distractions in life, that is the time we shou ld remind ourselves of this, using this verse.  
3B2B 2B1A 2B1D 3 It is extremely  difficult to be liberated from the lower realms [once one has 
taken rebirth there] 
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre       Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
F P M T  B a s i c  P r o g r a m               C h a p t e r  F o u r  
 
 
173 [4,19] 
And if I commit no wholesome deeds (there), 
But readily amass much evil, 
Then for a hundred million aeons 
I shall not even hear the words “a happy life.” 
  
It will be difficult to free ourselves from the lowe r realms once we are there.  Why? The reason is 
given in verse 19. As we are unable to accumulate any virtue there, while at the same time readily 
amassing much negativity, for hundreds of mill i o n s  o f  e o n s ,  w e  w i l l  h a v e  t o  t a k e  r e b i r t h  
continuously in the lower realms. We will not be  able to obtain a happy rebirth. Putting aside 
getting a good rebirth, we will not even hear the words “good rebirth.”   If we accept past and future lives, that effects will follow after causes and that the results of our 
actions will follow us into our future lives, thinking about this verse will generate fear in our minds. The point though is not ju st to be frightened and then do nothing about our fears. This 
is not beneficial. Instead, when we are fright ened, we should think about obtaining a good 
rebirth and reflect on what are the causes that wo uld bring about such a good rebirth. The causes 
of a good rebirth are the practices of virtue. The co nclusion then is to practise as much virtue as 
we can and to abandon, as far as we able, even the slightest non-virtue.  
3B2B 2B1A 2B1E  The reason why it is difficu lt to obtain the leisures and endowments 
[4,20] 
For these very reasons, the Buddha has said 
That hard as it is for a turtle to insert its neck 
Into a yoke adrift upon the vast ocean, 
It is extremely hard to attain the human state 
 
“For these very reasons,” in the first line of vers e 20 refers to the reasons mentioned in the earlier 
verse – why it is difficult to get out of the lower realms once we are born there.   The analogy entails imagining the whole planet be coming an ocean and a buoy floating around 
on its surface, moved around by the wind. Beneat h the ocean, there is a blind turtle that comes 
to the surface of the ocean once every hundred year s to take a breath of air. What are the chances 
of this turtle poking its head th rough the centre of the buoy? It is said that it is even more 
difficult than this to attain a human life of le isure and opportunity.  This is establishing the 
difficulty of obtaining a human life of le isure and opportunity through an analogy. 
 
In the Lam Rim Chenmo , in the section on “A Human Life  of Leisure and Opportunity”, we 
talked about the establishing of a human life of  leisure and opportunity through causes, entity 
and analogy. Here it is done through analogy. Th is analogy helps us to understand the difficulty 
of obtaining a human life of leisure and opportun ity. We should reflect and check to see whether 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre       Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
F P M T  B a s i c  P r o g r a m               C h a p t e r  F o u r  
 
 
174 it is really difficult to obtain a human life of le isure and opportunity. In this analogy, the ocean is 
likened to cyclic existence, covering everything from the top, the peak of samsara down to the 
very bottom, the Avici hell. 
 The teachings of the Buddha are very rare. The Bu ddha’s teachings do not exist all the time. We 
can divide the existence of the world system into  different stages called the eon of darkness and 
the eon of illumination. It is said that the eon of illumination is very short.  
 The vast ocean is the realm of cyclic existence. Wh ere we take rebirth in cyclic existence is not up 
to us; we have no choice whatsoever. We are th rown from one rebirth to another according to 
our karma and afflictions. Think ab out this. The eon of darkness is said to last for a very long 
time and the eon of illumination, a very shor t time. The occurrence of the Buddha and his 
teachings are also very rare. When we look at our own lives, how much virtue is there in what we 
do? When we honestly look and compare the virtue  and non-virtue that we have accumulated, we 
have accumulated much more non-virt ue. If that is the case, obviousl y, it is going to be difficult 
to obtain another good rebirth. If this is so for oneself, then it must be so for others as well.  
 Some people might think that it is not difficult to get a good rebirth as there are so many human beings around. What we are discussing here is whether it is difficult to obtain a human life of leisure and opportunity. We can infer this from looking at our own lives. If you happen to be 
someone who is always engaging in virtue, then obtaining a human life of leisure and 
opportunity would not be difficult  for you. If we are under th e control of the three mental 
poisons constantly, then obtaining a human life of leisure and opportunity in the future would 
be difficult.  If we are unable to   practise virtue now and end up in the lower realms, as mentioned earlier, we will not get another good rebirth for hundreds of millions of eons. Once 
we find ourselves in the lower realms, it will be  almost impossible to get out. It will be almost 
impossible to get another human life of  leisure and opportunity again.   
 All the points that we have been talking so far falls under the outline of being conscientious to 
abandon negativities. 
3B2B 2B1A 2B2 Being conscientious about cultivating virtue 
A As negativities accumulated in the past are limit less, it would be reasonable to make effort in 
abandoning them B The reasons the karma [that leads one to take rebirth in] the lower realms is not exhausted by 
merely experiencing suffering in the lower realms one time 
C The reasons it would be reasonable to make effort in the antidotes to negativity  
3B2B 2B1A 2B2A  As negativities accumulated in the past are limitless, it would be 
reasonable to make effort in abandoning them 
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre       Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
F P M T  B a s i c  P r o g r a m               C h a p t e r  F o u r  
 
 
175 [4,21] 
If even by the evil of one instant 
An aeon may be spent in the deepest hell, 
Then because of the evil I have gathered since beginningless time, 
What need to mention my not going to a happy realm? 
 
The Buddha taught that even an instant of ange r towards a bodhisattva would cause one to take 
rebirth in hell for an eon. It goes without saying that we will have to spend a very long time in the lower realms due to the results of the immeas urable negativities that we have accumulated 
since time without beginning.  Reflecting on th is, we come to understanding why we need to 
cultivate virtue and to purify the negativities accumulated in the past by applying the four 
opponent powers.  
3B2B 2B1A 2B2B  The reasons why the karma [that leads one to take rebirth in] the lower 
realms is not exhausted by merely experiencing suffering in the lower realms one time 
[4,22] 
But having experienced merely  that (rebirth in hell) 
I shall still not be liberated; 
For while it is being experienced 
Other evil will be extensively produced. 
 
Even if we undergo the sufferings of the lower real ms and the suffering is exhausted, we will not 
be liberated from the lower realms . Why? This is because while we  are experiencing the sufferings 
of the lower realms, we accumulate a fresh lot of  negativities. Once we are in the lower realms, 
any virtue that we do will be very weak. At  the same time, negativities are accumulated 
continuously.   Therefore, it is important to strive to stop ours elves from going to the lower realms in the very 
first place. At the very least, after having obtain ed this human life of leisure and opportunity, we 
should stop ourselves form going to the lower re alms, because once we go there, as explained 
before, it is almost impossible to get out. Wh e n  w e  h a v e  t h i s  h u m a n  l i f e  o f  l e i s u r e  a n d  
opportunity, met the teachings and all the good co nditions are assembled together, the very least 
we can do is to close the door to the lower realms.   When we have been studying th e Dharma for some time, we may sometimes wish to listen to 
new teachings. Shantideva’s Engagi ng in the Bodhisattva Deeds is a text for practice. For students 
who have heard these teachings before, this is th e time to reflect and meditate on these points, 
especially for the senior students. (Geshe-la: Senior students should do senior things!) 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre       Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
F P M T  B a s i c  P r o g r a m               C h a p t e r  F o u r  
 
 
176 3B2B 2B1A 2B2C  The reasons why it would be reasonable to make effort in applying the 
antidotes to negativity ∗ 
1 One deceives oneself if one does not make effort in virtue once one has obtained leisures and 
endowments ∗ 
2 One will experience suffering in this life ∗ 
3 One will be tormented with the suffering of the lower realms in the future ∗ 
4 The reasons why it would be reasonable to abandon negativities and make effort in virtue 
3B2B 2B1A 2B2C  1 One deceives oneself if one does not make effort in virtue once one has 
obtained the leisures and endowments 
[4,23] 
So if, when having found leisure such as this, 
I do not attune myself to what is wholesome, 
There could be no greater deception 
And there could be no greater folly. 
 
This time, we have obtained this human life of leisure and opportunity, which is difficult to find 
and, once found, is able to fulfil the great purposes. We have met the teachings and the Mahayana virtuous friends. At such a time, if we do not use this opportunity to accomplish 
virtue but, instead, we spend our lives distracted  by the eight worldly dharmas, then our entire 
lives will be empty. If this happens, we have de ceived ourselves and there is no greater deception 
than this. There is no greater ignorance with rega rds to what is to be abandoned and what is to 
be cultivated. The point is that we have to be conscientious with regards to what is to be 
abandoned and what is to be cultivated. We should use this human life of leisure and 
opportunity to practise the holy Dharma. 
3B2B 2B1A 2B2C  2 One will  exp erience suffering in this life 
[4,24] 
And if, having understood this, 
I still foolishly continue to be slothful, 
When the hour of death arrives 
Tremendous grief will rear its head. 
 
“And if, having understood this,” in the first line of verse 24 refers to understanding   what has 
been said in the preceding verse. With such unde rstanding, if we still continue foolishly to be 
slothful, attracted to sense objects and continuous ly distracted, coming under the control of the 
eight worldly dharmas, then, at the time of death, there will be tremendous regret, grief, suffering 
and fear. Reflecting on this, we realise we need  to put great effort into cultivating virtue. 
3B2B 2B1A 2B2C  3 One will be tormented with th e suffering of the lower realms in the future 
[4,25] 
Then if my body blaz es for a long time 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre       Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
F P M T  B a s i c  P r o g r a m               C h a p t e r  F o u r  
 
 
177 In the unbearable flames of hell, 
Inevitably my mind will be tormented 
By the fires of unendurable remorse 
 
Instead of practising virtue, we engage in non-virt ue or negativities all the time. In the future, we 
will be born in the unbearable hells where we have to stay for a long time. Our bodies will be roasted in the unbearable flames of hell and ment al suffering will torment our minds. Therefore, 
it is important to strive not to be st ained by any downfalls or negativities.  
 One can also apply this particular outline to the cultivation of conscientiousness with regards to 
bodhicitta and the trainings of th e bodhisattvas. If we do not want  to be tormented by suffering 
in hell, then we should strive to ensure that we  are not stained with the faults that come from 
degeneration of one’s bodhicitta.  One can also apply the previous point stated in  verse 24. We are now training in developing 
bodhicitta and the practices of the bodhisattvas. If  our bodhicitta or our training in the deeds of 
the bodhisattva degenerates, then, at the time of  death, we will experience tremendous grief, 
regret and so forth. 
3B2B 2B1A 2B2C  4 Why it would be reasonable to abandon negativities and make effort in 
virtue 
A To be led again to the hell realms after having wasted a human life of leisure and opportunity 
would be utter stupidity [lit. is equivalent to not having a mind] B It is reasonable to think of [such behaviour] as the cause of delusion  
3B2B 2B1A 2B2C  4A To be led again to the hell realms after having wasted a human life of 
leisure and opportunity would be utter stupidity  [lit. is equivalent to not having a mind] 
[4,26] 
Having found by some coincidence 
This beneficial state that  is so hard to find, 
If now while able to discriminate 
I once again am led into the hells, 
 
[4,27ab] 
Then as though I were  hypnotized by a spell 
I shall reduce this mind to nothing. 
 
W e  h a v e  f o u n d ,  b y  s o m e  c o i n c i d e n c e ,  t h i s  b e n e f i c i a l  s t a t e  o f  a  h u m a n  l i f e  o f  l e i s u r e  a n d  opportunity that is difficult to find but once foun d, is able to fulfil the great purposes. We have 
found this beneficial state as th e result of the great mass of meri t that we have accumulated in 
the past. On top of that, we now possess the wisdom that is able to discriminate between what is 
right and what is wrong. If, in spite of all this, we  are led again into the hell s, then this is similar 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre       Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
F P M T  B a s i c  P r o g r a m               C h a p t e r  F o u r  
 
 
178 to being hypnotised by a spell. When one is hypn otised, one does not know what one is doing. If 
that happens to us, it is like not having a mind . If we had a mind, we would be alert and awake, 
and would not do such a stupid thing – as stated in  the root text,  “I sha ll reduce this mind to 
nothing.”  (In the Lam Rim Chenmo , this is translated as,  “I will  have simply lost my wits.”)   
3B2B 2B1A 2B2C  4B It is reasonable to think of [such behaviour] as the cause of delusion  
This outline refers to the thir d and fourth lines of verse 27: 
 
[4,27cd] 
Even I do not know what is  causing me confusion; 
What is there dwelling inside me? 
 
Here one is investigating and asking oneself, ‘What is it that is causing me  this confusion? I do 
not know what is causing this.  What is there dwel ling inside me? It is no t because I do not have 
a mind nor am I under the influence of a spell. Then what is it? There is something that is 
definitely causing me this confusio n and I do not know what it is.’ 
 This is something for one to think about: one may have the desire to live an ethical way of life, to 
meditate, to practise the teachings, to achieve li beration and so forth, yet one is prevented from 
doing so. What is it that is stopping one from be ing able to do these things? There is definitely 
something but one does not know what it is.   In the past, we did not know what was causing us this confusion. Now, we still do not know what 
is causing us this confusion. Therefore, it is im portant to reflect on this over and over again to 
see what is causing us this confusion.    The points we have mentioned so far come under the outline “Being conscientious about 
cultivating virtue.” The next sect ion is: c) Being careful to abandon afflictions. Earlier, we were 
wondering what   is causing us this confusion.  I t  i s  t h e  n e g a t i v e  e m o t i o n s  o r  a f f l i c t i o n s .  
Therefore, we will continue with the next sect ion that deals with being conscientious with 
regards to abandoning the afflictions.   
Amitabha Buddhist Centre       Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
F P M T  B a s i c  P r o g r a m               C h a p t e r  F o u r  
 
 
179 Lesson 22 – chapter 4, verse 28-33 
 
The great Indian master, Chandragomin, said th at if the roots of a fruit tree are always 
submerged in mud filled with sour water, then the fruits produced by the fruit tree will be sour 
and not sweet. If we want to change that tree in to one bearing sweet fruits, we cannot feed the 
tree with just one or two drops of sweet solution.   Similarly, we have been unde r the control of the three ment al poisons since time without 
beginning. Since that is the case, hoping for a big change in our mi nds by doing just small virtues 
everyday is unrealistic. Like the analogy of the fruit tree, we perform some small virtuous daily 
practice and, at the same time, expect to see fa ntastic results and a huge decrease in suffering. 
This will not happen.   In order for us to attain the fruit of a state beyond sorrow, a state th at does not possess any 
suffering, we need to remove the three mental po isons from the root. We need to uproot all the 
afflictions within our minds. Attaining the state beyond sorrow will not happen immediately by 
d o i n g  s o m e  s m a l l  p r a c t i c e .  T h i s  i s  l i k e  e x p e c t i n g  a  h a r v e s t  o f  s w e e t  f r u i t  b y  a d d i n g  j u s t  a  f e w  drops of sweetener.  The point here is that if we want to remove th e three mental poisons from our minds, we need 
to rely on continuous effort for a long period  of time. Removing the negative emotions or 
afflictions from our minds is very difficult. Someti mes we feel that this is almost an impossible 
task, as if the negative emotions have entered the very nature of our minds, have become part of 
us and that we are inherently afflicted with th em. It seems almost impo ssible to separate these 
negative emotions from our minds.   
It is natural for us to think in such a way because it is true that the negative emotions have been 
with us since time without beginning. We are no t talking about having th ese negative emotions 
for one or even a couple of lifetimes. We have  become accustomed to and familiar with them. 
We have the feeling that they are always there an d that we will never be able to do anything 
about it.   Although this may be the way we feel and how things may appear to us, if we analyse the 
situation more critically, we will find that this is  not the case. If we apply the relevant antidotes, 
we will definitely be able to separate our minds from these negative emotions.   When we think about it, we can s ee how difficult it is for us to counter the negative emotions in 
our minds. Look at our lives. What are we doin g everyday? Are we actively doing something to 
weaken the negative emotions or are we actually  strengthening the negati ve emotions? When we 
really think about this, we see that, not only do we not try to eliminate or weaken those negative 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre       Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
F P M T  B a s i c  P r o g r a m               C h a p t e r  F o u r  
 
 
180 emotions, but, in fact, those negative emotions are getting stronger by the day because of meeting 
with all the different conditions for generating them (such as meeting the objects of negative 
emotions).  
 In order to destroy our mental afflictions, the only  way is to put effort co ntinuously in weakening 
and destroying them.  If we do not apply such co ntinuous effort, then there is no hope and the 
n e g a t i v e  e m o t i o n s  w i l l  n e v e r  b e  w e a k e n e d  o r  d e s t r o y e d .  T h i s  l e a d s  u s  t o  t h e  n e x t  o u t l i n e  –  cultivating conscientiousness with re gards to abandoning afflictions. 
 In order for us to be able to destroy the afflic tions in our minds, we must first understand the 
faults of the negative emotions; how they distur b our mental peace and so forth. The afflictions 
or negative emotions we are talking here is no t something different from what we have learnt 
earlier.  When we studied the presentation of th e mind and its mental factors, we went through 
all the different negative emotions.   What is an affliction or negative emotion? An affl iction is that which, when it arises in the mind, 
disturbs the peace of the mind. When we divide  up the negative emotions, there are six root 
afflictions and twenty secondary afflictions that  are the very things that disturb our mental peace 
when they arise in our minds.   The terms “affliction”, “negative emotion” or “del usion” mean the same th ing. “Affliction” is the 
closest translation to the Tibetan word because its very nature is to harm, disturb or “afflict” our 
minds. 
3B2B 2B1A 2B3 Being conscientious about abandoning the afflictions 
A Reflecting on the disadvantages of the afflictions 
B It is inappropriate to feel weary of the hardships involved in abandoning the afflictions 
C Cultivating joy for the very fact that it is possible [to abandon the afflictions] for, if effort is 
made, they will be abandoned 
3B2B 2B1A 2B3A  Reflecting on the disadvantages of the afflictions 
1 Reflecting on the way the afflictions act to harm oneself 
2 To cultivate tolerance for [ie. patience towards] the afflictions is inappropriate 3 Developing strength of mind in order to destroy them 
3B2B 2B1A 2B3A 1 Reflecting on the way the afflictions act to harm oneself 
A The way they rob us of independence [of mind and actions] 
B The way they bring us inestimable (immeasurable) suffering 
C The time period in which they cause harm is unlimited 
D The reasons why it is inappropri ate to befriend the afflictions 
3B2B 2B1A 2B3A 1A The way they rob us of independence [of mind and actions] 
We say that afflictions are bad and they disturb ou r mental peace.  We need to understand what 
the faults or disadvantages of the afflictions are. Following the abov e outline, one of the faults of 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre       Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
F P M T  B a s i c  P r o g r a m               C h a p t e r  F o u r  
 
 
181 the afflictions is that they harm  us in many different ways; th ey rob us of our independence, 
bringing us immeasurable sufferings and harming us for a a very long time. They will probably 
continue to do so as  “the time period in  which they cause us harm is unlimited.”  
 
[4,28] 
Although enemies such as hatred and craving 
Have neither any arms nor legs, 
And are neither courageous nor wise, 
How have I been used like a slave by them? 
 
What causes us to go round and round in the cycle of death and rebirth in samsara? The negative 
emotions are the parents of our cyclic existence. In one of the previous verses, we were asked to 
reflect on what it was that caused us so much co nfusion. The conclusion th en was that it was the 
negative emotions that were ca using us so much confusion.  
 We have hatred and attachment /desire. Hatred and desire have their roots in ignorance. 
Ignorance, hatred and attachment are the three mental poisons. These three negative emotions 
are called the enemies. These enemies, which are th e afflictions themselves, do not have any form 
(“arms or legs”), nor do they wear any armour. They do not hold any weapons in their hands. 
They are neither heroic nor courageous nor wise.   In the commentary, there is another connotation to the word “courageous” .  The afflictions are 
not hard working and do not possess joyous persev erance. In fact, afflicti ons are concomitant (or 
share similarities) with laziness.  What is the entity  of laziness? Laziness is a state of mind that is 
not enthusiastic about virtue whatsoever. Since th e afflictions bear similarities with laziness, 
therefore, the afflictions are not hard working (l iterally, they do not possess joyous perseverance 
or effort from their own side.) Therefore,  the afflictions are also not courageous.  
 As mentioned in this verse of th e root text, the afflictions are al so not wise. We are not talking 
about intelligence here but the factor of wisdom . The afflictions are not wise because they bear 
similarities with ignorance. What  is ignorance? Ignorance is a mi nd that is unclear with regards 
to its object. Since the afflictions bear similariti es with  ignorance, therefore, the afflictions 
themselves are not wise.   Although the afflictions have neither form nor carry weapons, are neither courageous nor wise, 
yet they are able to bring everyone into their fo ld, starting from the lamas and their students and 
the rich and the powerful. The afflictions have the power to bring everyo ne under their control 
and transform them into slaves. We are like slaves, completely under the control of the 
afflictions.  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre       Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
F P M T  B a s i c  P r o g r a m               C h a p t e r  F o u r  
 
 
182 Because of attachment and desire, we crave for reputation, fame, respect, money, wealth and 
possessions. Because of hatred, we do stupid things  and do not even have any fear of losing our 
lives. We readily obey whatever our negative emotions tell us to do. Following our negative 
emotions in this way, we end up experiencing so much suffering. When hatred arises in our 
minds, we come under the control of hatred. We become unhappy and suffer. When our minds 
come under the control of attachment, we follow  our attachment at the end of which there is 
suffering again.  The point is that the afflictions deprive us of our independence. This is why afflictions are bad 
and harmful.  Once we lose our independence, ie , we are under the control of others, obviously, 
there will be problems and suffering. When we re flect on this, it becomes very clear and obvious 
how this is the case - we are always under the co ntrol and influence of the afflictions. When we 
seriously look at ourselves, we can see that everyt hing we do with our bodies, speech and minds is 
in accordance with each and every single advice  and order of our negative emotions. Because of 
this, there is suffering. This is why we  say that negative emotions are bad. 
3B2B 2B1A 2B3A 1B The way they bring us inestimable suffering 
Another reason why the afflictions are bad is because they bring us not only suffering but 
immeasurable suffering. This is shown in the next three verses:   
[4,29] 
For while they dwell within my mind 
At their pleasure they cause me harm, 
Yet I patiently endure them without any anger; 
But this is an inappropriate and shameful time for patience. 
 
[4,30] 
Should even all the gods and anti-gods 
Rise up against me as my enemies, 
They could not lead nor place me in 
The roaring fires of deepest hell. 
 
[4,31] 
But the mighty foe, these disturbing conceptions, 
In a  moment can cast me amidst (those flames) 
Which when met will cause not even the ashes 
Of the king of mountains to remain 
 
It is not that the negative emotions are abiding in some other place. Th ey abide within our own 
minds. The negative emotions are like guests stayi ng in the hotel of our minds. These guests, who 
are our enemies, stay  in our minds. When a guest checks into a hotel, the guest is treated very 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre       Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
F P M T  B a s i c  P r o g r a m               C h a p t e r  F o u r  
 
 
183 well and offered all kinds of services and help.  
 
This is what we do with the afflictions also. They  stay in our minds. We offer them respect, help 
and services, always listening to what they have to say, following their instructions. But no matter 
how well we treat the afflictions, all they do is  ha rm us, not only in this life, but also in all our 
future lives to come. It is inappropriate to be pa tient with these guests, the afflictions, because, 
despite doing all we can for them, in return, we receive only harm. 
 Practising patience with our enemies, the negati ve emotions, is somethin g that is scorned and 
causes even the buddhas and bodhisattvas to critic ise us, saying,  “This is wrong. You should not 
do this.”   We should reflect on how the afflictions really  harm us. Even if all the gods and demigods 
became our enemies, there is no way that they will  be able to bring us to the hells. The most they 
can do is probably destroy our possessions and take our lives.   The negative emotions are much stronger than these external enemies Our negative emotions 
can throw us into the fires of hell . The fires of hell are so hot th at they can completely burn up 
the king of mountains, Mount Meru, without leaving even ashes behind.  With reference to the second line of verse 31,  “I n a moment can cast me into fires of hell, ” in 
some commentaries, “an instant” refers to the ne g a t i v e  k a r m a  t h a t  w e  c r e a t e  i n  r e l a t i o n  t o  a  
bodhisattva. Even if the action is only done for an instant, the karma is so powerful that it can 
throw us into the hells. This is the reason why our negative emotions can bring us immeasurable 
suffering because they can bring us to the different  kinds of hells. This is why it is said that 
afflictions can bring us immeasurable sufferin g. We must put effort into conquering and 
destroying this enemy, the negative emotions.  
3B2B 2B1A 2B3A 1C The time period in  which they cause harm is unlimited 
The next fault of the afflictions is  that they can harm us for a ve ry long time. In fact, the time 
period in which they can ca use harm is unlimited.  
 
[4,32] 
All other enemies are incapable 
Of remaining for such a length of time 
As can my disturbing conceptions, 
The enduring enemy with neither beginning nor end. 
 
Earlier on, we reflected on how the afflictions br ing us immeasurable harm. Here,  we reflect on 
the span of time in which they have been causin g us such harm. What time period are we talking 
about here? It is from time without beginning up to the very present moment. The afflictions 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre       Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
F P M T  B a s i c  P r o g r a m               C h a p t e r  F o u r  
 
 
184 h a v e  b e e n  h a r m i n g  u s  f r o m  b e g in n i n g l e s s  t im e  u p  t o  t h i s  v e r y  p r e s e n t  m o m e n t .  I f  w e  d o  n ot  
destroy the negative emotions, then we will have to endure immeasurable suffering in the future.  
 
Our external enemies are not like that.  They m ay harm us by stealing our possessions or saying 
something nasty to us, but the duration of such ha rm is very short compar ed to the harm caused 
by our afflictions . Even though our external enem ies are able to cause us a lot of harm, they are 
unable to do so continuously beca use it is only matter of time befo re they will have to  pass away.  
 The afflictions or negative emotio ns cause not only immeasurable harm but also harm for a very 
long period of time ie. from time without beginning  up to now. In order to defeat or to remove 
these negative emotions, it is pointless  to a pply antidotes or to do some practice only  
occasionally. In order to remove the afflictions fo r once and for all, we need constant powerful 
application of the antidotes,  continuously,  over a long period of time.  
3B2B 2B1A 2B3A 1D The reasons why it is  inappropriate to befriend the afflictions 
[4,33] 
If I agreeably honour and entrust myself (to others) 
They will bring me benefit and happiness, 
But if I entrust myself to these disturbing conceptions 
In future they will bring only misery and harm. 
 
In this world,  when we talk ab out the external enemies, it is possible that they can become our 
friends and bring us happiness and benefits, if we are nice to them (eg. offer them things, give 
them food or gifts and so forth). But if we do this  with our negative emotions, if we rely on and entrust ourselves to them and make friends with them, it only serves to increase the power of 
these negative emotions.  In return, they will cause us a lot of harm. Therefore, it is inappropriate 
to befriend the afflictions. Why? Because  th e more we rely on and make friends with the 
afflictions, the more they harm us. Therefore,  we do not want to ma ke friends with them. 
 The supreme antidote to the afflictions is to appl y the antidotes with effort. The best thing to do 
is to rely on joyous perseverance  and apply the antidotes to destro y the afflictions. We should not 
befriend the afflictions.  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre       Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
F P M T  B a s i c  P r o g r a m               C h a p t e r  F o u r  
 
 
185 Lesson 23 – chapter 4, verse 34-42 
 
When we recite the prayer for going for refuge to  the Three Jewels and generating the altruistic 
intention, we should have these two attitudes as  our motivation for list ening to the teachings. 
 We have been talking about the fa ults of the negative emotions or afflictions. Here is another 
piece of advice from Guntang Rinpoche. In his text, he said that all the sufferings found in samsara, or this cycle of death and rebirth, come from negative emotions, especially the affliction 
of self-grasping. He said that all the sufferings that we do not want are the result of negative 
emotions. Therefore, if we want to be rid of suffering and the negative emotions, we have to 
uproot and destroy the afflictions completely. He went on to say, “O child, you who are seeking 
liberation should strive and put effort into practising and engaging in the methods that enable you to do that.”   The only antidote that  enables us to completely  uproot and destroy all the negative emotions is 
the wisdom that realises selflessness. This wisdom  realising selflessness is something which is very 
difficult to explain, to understand, to reflect on and to analyse. Rinpoche said that, until we gain 
the realisation of  profound emptiness, we will ha ve to meditate on the first four aspects of the 
first Noble Truth. We have to reflect on coarse impermanence, followed by how things are in the 
nature of suffering and then reflect on emptin ess and selflessness. Impermanence, suffering,  
emptiness and  selflessness are the four aspects of the first noble truth. Each truth has four 
aspects, so altogether there are sixteen aspects.    Guntang Rinpoche said  that before we can real ise subtle selflessness, which is the meaning of 
emptiness, we have to realise coarse selflessness,  coarse impermanence and so forth. We have to 
first realise coarse impermanence. Guntang Rinpoc he continued: “We can see with our own eyes 
that, when it comes to the time of death, th ere is no difference between the young and old. 
When  the conditions for death come together, it does not make any difference whether you are 
young or old, you have to go on to the next life . Although this is something we all see with our 
own eyes, when people suddenly die, our minds ar e  not affected. Our minds are still very hard 
and solid. We firmly believe that we will live fo rever and that we will not die soon. So the very 
first thing we have to do is to overcome these mistaken conceptions. Until we can generate the 
thought, ‘I,  too, will definitely  die one day,’ there is no way we can generate the  path or any  
realisations in our minds. If we are unable to generate the realisation or experience from the 
heart that we are definitely going to die and th at the time of death is uncertain, then our 
Dharma practice will remain on ly at the level of words.” 
 When we are able to reflect continuously on  death and impermanence and  generate this 
understanding and feeling in our minds that we wi ll definitely die one day but the time of death 
i s  u n c e r t a i n ,  t h e n  w e  w i l l  d e f i n i t e l y  b e  a b l e  t o  p e r s u a d e  t h e  m i n d s  t o  e n g a g e  i n  w h o l e s o m e  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre       Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
F P M T  B a s i c  P r o g r a m               C h a p t e r  F o u r  
 
 
186 activities, to move our minds in the direction of virtue. Whatever practices we are talking about, 
whether we are cultivating consci entiousness or trying to defeat our negative emotions, if we 
meditate and reflect on death and impermanence, we will definitely be able to do these practices.  
 We might be interested in the profound teac hings on emptiness or the  generation and 
completion stages of tantra. However, if we do not  train our minds gradually in the proper way, 
if we do not  take care of the preliminary practices like this important practice of reflecting on 
death and impermanence, then we will never get an ywhere and always be stuck in the same place. 
When we do not produce the experience of de ath and impermanence in our own minds, then 
we can forget about the subsequent realisatio ns of the path, as they will not happen.  
 W h e n  w e  t a l k  a b o u t  r e f l e c t i n g  o n  d e a t h  a n d  i m p e r m a n e n c e ,  i t  i s  n o t  so  m uc h  o f  s e e i n g  h o w people are dying. That is not the point. We should  use such experiences of seeing people dying as 
an example for ourselves. The main thing is to re flect  on how we will definitely die one day and 
how this is the very nature of  our individual existence.  
 When  we are able to reflect on death and imperm anence, we will be able to start on the path 
and to generate the higher experiences of the la ter stages of the path. When we meditate on 
death and impermanence, we will be able to persua de our minds in the direction of virtue and to 
engage in virtue. When we do not meditate or  reflect on death and impermanence, then even 
when we engage in virtue, that virtue will not be perfect and pure, as  it will always be mixed with the negative emotions. Then even the virtue we do, will not become Dharma and will only 
become one of the eight worldly dharmas.   This advice is very important and very beneficial for the mind. In general, all the advice given by 
Guntang Rinpoche is very useful. In particular, we should keep in our minds this advice with 
regards to reflecting on death and impermanence an d try to follow this advice  as much as we 
can. That is important.  We have been looking at the practice of cultivat ing conscientiousness with regards to abandoning 
the negative emotions or afflictions. The first th ing to do is to reflect on the faults of the 
afflictions. What are these faults? The negati ve emotions will rob and deprive us of any 
independence and bring us immeasurable suffering for a very long period of time. The negative 
emotions are very bad and harmful. The more we associate ourselves with, engage in or follow after the negative emotions, the stronger they be come. The stronger they become, the more harm 
they cause us. This point was discussed in the last lesson on the root text. 
 The negative emotions are unlike  external en emies. Sometimes we can pacify the external 
enemies by giving them gifts and nice things and it is possible for us to make friends with our 
external enemies. However, this is not the case  with our negative emotions; the more we make 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre       Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
F P M T  B a s i c  P r o g r a m               C h a p t e r  F o u r  
 
 
187 friends with them, the more suffering they give us. The root text advises us never to associate 
with or befriend the afflictions.  
3B2B 2B1A 2B3A 2 To cultivate tolerance for [ie. patience towards] the afflictions is 
unreasonable  
A Reflecting on the way they act to harm the mind 
B Reflecting on the way they act to harm the body 
3B2B 2B1A 2B3A 2A Reflecting on the way they act to harm the mind 
 [4,34] 
While in cyclic existence how can I be joyful and unafraid 
If in my heart I readily prepare a place 
For this incessant enemy of long duration, 
The sole cause for the increa se of all that harms me? 
 
The negative emotions have been in our minds fo r a very long time. The moment they arise in 
our minds, without any reason, they become our enemies and harm us in many ways. It is the 
very nature of the negative emotio ns or afflictions; as soon as they arise in our minds, they harm 
us - they transform into the entity  of an enemy. Why are the negati ve emotions like that? There is 
no other reason except that it is the very nature  or entity of the negative emotions; the negative 
emotions by entity are something that harm us. Like fire,  as soon there is fire, there is heat that 
can burn; there is no other reason except the fact th at it is the very nature  or entity of fire to 
generate heat and burn.   Do you remember the four principles of buddhist analysis? The first principle is the principle of 
nature. As soon as a negative emotion arises in our minds, it disturbs the very calmness or peace of the mind. There is no reason for this, it is it s function, its nature, the way its exists. We have 
already talked about the entity and the defining  characteristic of the negative emotions. And 
what do we do? We always keep them in our he arts and minds, preparing a place for them to 
hide and take refuge in our minds. If we do that while we are still in samsara, how can we ever be 
happy and unafraid?   When the negative emotions orde r us to do something and  we readily follow those orders 
completely, then we will receive the greatest harm . When the negative emotions give us an order 
and we follow it half-heartedly, then we will ge t middling harm. When the negative emotions give 
us an order and  we follow it only to a small extent, correspondingly,  we will get little harm. However, if we refuse to follow the orders of our negative emotions, we will  not be harmed at all. 
What we are saying here is that as long as th e negative emotions are abiding within our minds, 
w e  w i l l  n e v e r  e x p e r i e n c e  a n y  h a p p i n e s s .  W h y ?  I t  i s  t h e  v e r y  n a t u r e  o r  e n t i t y  o f  o u r  n e g a t i v e  emotions to cause us harm and to  disturb the mental peace of our minds. If that is the case, how 
can we ever be happy as long as the negative emotions are there?  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre       Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
F P M T  B a s i c  P r o g r a m               C h a p t e r  F o u r  
 
 
188  
T h e  c o n c l u s i o n  t h e n  i s  t h a t  w e  m u s t  r e l y  o n  j o y o u s  p e r s e v e r a n c e  t o  d e f e a t  o u r  e n e m i e s ,  t h e  
negative emotions. As mentioned before, if we do not  follow the advice, orders or wishes of our 
negative emotions, we will not be harmed. We shou ld just give our negative emotions a slap in 
the  face! 
[4,35] 
And now shall I ever have happiness 
If in a net of attachment within my mind 
There dwell the guardians of the prison of cyclic existence, 
These (disturbing conceptions) that become  
my butchers and to rmentors in hell? 
3B2B 2B1A 2B3A 2B Reflecting on the way they act to harm the body 
“Cyclic existence” here refers to the three realms , which is likened to a prison in which we are 
stuck. Who is guarding or preventing us from getti ng out of this prison of  cyclic existence? The 
guardians are our negative emotions. Who or what  are responsible for leading us to the hells? 
What throw us into the hells? They are the negative emotions.   When we are born in the hells, there is an a ppearance of the hell guardians who torture and 
butcher us. This appearance of the hell guardians is also the result of the negative emotions. The 
negative emotions prevent us from getting out of cyclic existence, are responsible for leading us 
to hell and cause us to see the appearance of the guardians of hell.   If the negative emotions can cause all these harms,  what is it that prevents us from abandoning 
or giving up the negative emotions? As mentione d in the verse 35, it is “a net of attachment 
within our mind”. This  “net of  attachment,” which re fers to the whole range of superstitious 
conceptual thoughts, binds or stops us from aban doning the negative emotions. (Another way of 
translating this word in Tibetan is “a net of incorrect conceptual thou ghts.”) So long as our 
minds are so bound ,  we will never have any happiness of the body and mind. 
3B2B 2B1A 2B3A 3 Developing strength of mind in order to destroy them/the negative 
emotions. 
[4,36] 
Therefore as long as this enemy is not sl ain with certainty before my very eyes, 
I shall never give up exerting  myself (towards that end). 
Having become angry at someone who caused only slight and short-lived harm, 
Self-important people will not sleep  until their (enemy) is overcome 
. 
The word “therefore” refers to what was discusse d earlier; negative emotions are the source and 
cause of all our unwanted experiences. “Therefo re as long as this enemy is not slain with 
certainty before my very eyes” means that we want  to see, for ourselves, with our own eyes, that 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre       Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
F P M T  B a s i c  P r o g r a m               C h a p t e r  F o u r  
 
 
189 we have  completely uprooted the negative emotio ns. Until we are able to completely uproot or 
destroy the negative emotions, for as  long as it takes, it is appr opriate to continuously apply the 
antidotes to the negative emotions.  
 Why do we have to continuously apply the antido tes to our negative emotions, without stopping 
for even a moment, until we are able to uproot them completely? The reason is this: in this 
world, for even very small matters eg. we are an gry at someone who says something nasty to or 
harms us in some way, we will bear a grudge in  our minds. Due to this resentment, we may  
decide to destroy this person. We put in a lot of  effort and try all sort of ways and means to 
ensure we can achieve that goal.   If we can put in so much effort for such a sma ll worldly matter, then su rely, when it comes to 
defeating the negative emotions, which are the cause of all our suffering and problems, we 
should not stop for even a moment in  our application of the antidotes.  
 We are using an analogy to establish the appropri ateness of continuously applying the antidotes. 
In the analogy of getting angry at this person wh o caused us harm, this person is not inherently 
our enemy all the time, ie., this person is no t by nature our enemy and does not become our 
enemy from the minute he or she is born. It is not the very nature of that person to be our 
enemy forever. Yet we put in so much effort to do something nasty to overcome, kill or to harm 
the person in return. If we put in so much e ffort for someone who is not by nature our enemy 
from the very beginning, then when it comes to  dealing with our real enemy, the negative 
emotions, which have always been our enem y, we should not put in less effort.  
  “Self-important people “ here refers to people who are very proud and who think very highly of 
their own power and status and so forth. When they are harmed in the tiniest way,  upon 
hearing just one or two unpleasant words, they will immediately do something to bully those who 
are weaker or subordinate to them.    The conclusion is that by reflec ting on the reasons we have discussed so far, we develop the 
joyous perseverance to overcome our negative em otions. Now we have completed the section  on 
the faults of the afflictions. 
3B2B 2B1A 2B3B  It is inappropriate to feel weary of the hardships involved in abandoning 
the afflictions 
1 Taking up arms capable of destroying the afflictions and not feeling weary about the hardships 
that come along with that 
2 The benefits of joyous effort in destroying the afflictions 
3 It is reasonable to be diligent in the practice of destroying the afflictions 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre       Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
F P M T  B a s i c  P r o g r a m               C h a p t e r  F o u r  
 
 
190 3B2B 2B1A 2B3B 1 Taking up arms capable of destroying the afflictions and not feeling weary 
about the hardships that come along with that 
Wearing the armour that is capable of destroying  the afflictions and not feeling weary about the 
hardships that come along with that 
[4,37] 
And if while engaged in a violent battle, 
Vigorously desiring to conquer those whose disturbing  conceptions (negative emot ions) will naturally bring 
them suffering at death, 
Men disregard the pain of bein g pierced by spears and arrows 
And will not withdraw until the day is won; 
 
[4,38] 
Then what need to mentio n that I should not be faint-hearted and slothful, 
Even if I am caused many hundreds of sufferings 
When now I strive to definitely overcome my natural enemies, 
(These disturbing conceptions) which are the constant sour ce of my misery? 
 
Talking about the  external enemy, and not the nega tive emotions, what is the very nature of our 
external enemy ? He or she is also someone like  us who possesses negative emotions. Even if we 
d o  n o t  d o  a n y t h i n g  t o  d e f e a t  t h a t  p e r s o n ,  s o o n e r  o r  l a t e r  h e  o r  s h e  w i l l  d i e .  T h i s  i s  t h e  v e r y  nature of our external enemy. When that person  dies, he or she will have to experience the 
suffering of death that  is the result of having been  under the control of the negative emotions. 
B y  r e f l e c t i n g  i n  s u c h  a  w a y ,  i n s t e a d  o f  g e n e r a ting anger or hatred towards that person, we 
generate compassion instead. When we are able to reflect in this way, we benefit and others 
benefit also.   There are some people who are so bent on defeat ing their enemies that, in the process of doing 
so, they will bear all kinds of hardships,  such as the pain of being pierced by spears and arrows. 
They will not stop or give up until they have won.  If that is the case for an ordinary person, then it goes without saying that we should apply joyo us perseverance in defeating our real enemy, the 
negative emotions.   This enemy, as soon as it arises in our mind, harms us. This is the very nature of our negative emotions. In the process of fighting our negative emotions, we will meet  all kinds of suffering –  hunger and thirst and the  different kinds of suffe ring that come along with fighting the negative 
emotions. We should not be slothful, faint-hearte d and give up, but contin ue to try to overcome 
the negative emotions. The essence is that if ordinary people can put up with so much pain and 
disregard whatever sufferings that come along in their quest to defeat their ordinary enemies,  
when it comes to defeating our enemy, the negative  emotions,  whose sole function is to cause us 
harm, we should not be slothful and faint-hear ted in our effort to overcome this enemy. 
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre       Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
F P M T  B a s i c  P r o g r a m               C h a p t e r  F o u r  
 
 
191 3B2B 2B1A 2B3B 2 The benefits of joyous effort in destroying the afflictions 
A It would be reasonable to bear [ie. be patient with] hardships, [as such efforts] which are the 
cause for the excellences [that fulfil] one’s own welfare  
B It would be reasonable to bear hardships [as such efforts] which are the cause for the 
excellences [that fulfil ] the welfare of others C The reasons it is necessary to work to bring to completion the pledges one has made in the 
past 
3B2B 2B1A 2B3B 2A It would be reasonable to bear [ie. be patient with] hardships, [as such 
efforts] are the cause for the excellences [that fulfil] one’s own welfare  
[4,39] 
If even scars inflicted by meaningless enemies 
Are worn upon the body like ornaments, 
Then why is suffering a cause of harm to me 
Who impeccably strive to fulfil the great purpose? 
 
Sometimes, people get into meaningless squabbles or fights for no reasons. During the fight, 
someone may  be wounded and scarred.  This person  treats the scar as the ornament of a hero,  
like what gangsters do.   If such ordinary scars are worn upon the body like prized ornaments by people, why is it not 
appropriate for us to bear with the hardships and sufferings that come in our quest to fulfil the 
great purpose of attaining the state of complete , perfect enlightenment for the benefit of all 
sentient beings?   We are talking here about the patience of volunt arily accepting the different kinds of suffering 
that come in the course of our quest for enlighte nment that help us to purify our negative karma 
and obscurations. The essence here is that, if we  treasure the scars that are inflicted by our 
enemies and wear them on our bodies as orna ments, then, likewise, we should wear as 
ornaments the sufferings that come al ong in our quest for enlightenment 
3B2B 2B1A 2B3B 2B It would be reasonable to bear hardships [as such efforts] are the cause 
for the excellences [that fulfil ] the welfare of others 
[4,40] 
If fishermen, hunters and farmers, 
Thinking merely of their own livelihood, 
Endure the sufferings of heat and cold, 
Why am I not patient for the sake of the world’s joy? 
 
The word “hunters” here in Tibetan generically refe rs to butchers or people  who take the lives of 
others. Fishermen, hunters and farmers put in a lot of hard work and bear with many difficulties, 
day and night, to support their livelihood. Th ese people can put up with and disregard the 
suffering that comes along with their work in order  to just support themselv es. If that is the case, 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre       Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
F P M T  B a s i c  P r o g r a m               C h a p t e r  F o u r  
 
 
192 why are we not patient when it comes to accomplishing the welfare and happiness of all sentient 
beings? If people work so hard simply for the happiness of this life, why is it inappropriate to 
work hard and bear hardships to accomplish th e happiness of our future lives to come?   
We have been discussing the reasons why it is a ppropriate for us to bear hardships to accomplish 
one’s own welfare and the welfare of others. Regard less of whose welfare we are referring to,  we 
are primarily talking about benefiting others be cause even when we talk about accomplishing 
one’s own purposes, we are talking about a ccomplishing the state of full and complete 
enlightenment for the benefit of others . The ma in point here is this: ‘Why should we not 
disregard the sufferings and hardships that come along in our quest for enlightenment?’ 
3B2B 2B1A 2B3B 2C The reasons why it is necessary to work to bring to completion the 
pledges one has made in the past 
[4,41] 
When I promised to libe rate all those beings 
Dwelling in the ten directions as far as the ends of space 
From their disturbing conceptions, 
I myself was not yet freed from mine. 
 
[4,42ab]  
Thus unaware of even my own capacity, 
Was it not somewhat crazy to have spoken like that? 
 
So far we have been talking about how harmful the negative emotions are and why we should 
overcome them.  A qualm may arise:   Qualm: If we put effort into destroying our negative emotions and if we succeed,  we will achieve our own individual liberation and fall into the extreme of peace. 
Answer: It is true that we have not freed oursel ves from our negative emotions but we have made 
a promise to free all the limitless beings equal to the extent of  space. In order to achieve that 
goal of liberating all sentient beings, we  must overcome our own afflictions.   When we generated bodhicitta, we made a promis e to liberate all sentient beings from their 
negative emotions. If we do not do this, we will not be able to fulfil the welfare and happiness of 
others and we will also not be able to fulfil our own  welfare and happiness. We will not be able to fulfil the purposes of others and our own purposes because we are not free from our own negative emotions. If that is the case, we would ha ve been crazy to make  the  earlier promise.   
 Because we are now bound in cyclic existence, we are unable to completely fulfil the purposes of 
other sentient beings. Therefore it is appropriate for us to apply joyous perseverance to abandon 
and overcome our own afflictions. If we do not subdue our own mind and abandon our negative emotions, we will not be able to completely fulf il  the purposes of other sentient beings.   
Amitabha Buddhist Centre       Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
F P M T  B a s i c  P r o g r a m               C h a p t e r  F o u r  
 
 
193  
We can see that there is an extensive discussion  about negative emotions in this particular 
chapter and  how to be conscientious with regard s to abandoning the negative emotions. It also 
talks about the different ways of looking at the faults  of negative emotions. It is good to read this 
again on your own and to reflect on these points.   
Lesson 24 – chapter 4, verse 43-48 (end) 
 As mentioned before, it is important to have  the correct motivation for whatever we do. 
Whether or not our practices will bear fruit in  the future depend on the root, which is the 
motivation. So, it is important for us to spend some time cultivating the proper motivation for 
participating in this session.    Setting a proper motivation when we go through th e prayers or make prostrations is our personal 
responsibility. We must not forget the importance of setting a proper motivation especially since 
we do these practices regularly. After a while, we pay less attention to them and perform them 
mechanically. When we get the chance to practise  Dharma after a long time, we are more serious 
and put in a lot of effort. When we do somethin g regularly, we tend to become more ‘loose’.  
 We have recited the prayer of taking refuge and generating bodhicitta,  “Sang gye chö dang tsog 
kyi chog nam la”. Since  we know the meaning of the prayer, it is important to spend some time 
reflecting on the meaning and generating the motivation because the motivation determines 
whether our  activities  become Dharma or no t. We might be practising Dharma but whether 
that practice becomes Dharma or not remains to be seen. It depends on the motivation. It is 
important to have this good ha bit of setting the motivation. 
 
 
Here is another advice from Guntang Rinpoche. He said, ‘If we want to make our whole day 
meaningful, then the advice here is always to check the mind.’  
 If we are interested in making our whole lives meaningful, day and night,  the thing to do is 
always to check our minds. But if we are not in terested in this and want to make our lives 
meaningless, then it is OK for us to just sit ar ound and engage in senseless talk. The advice here 
is basically that: it is up to us whether we want to  have a fruitful or an empty life - it is completely 
in our hands, and we always need to check and l ook at the state of our own minds to see whether 
our the minds  are heading towards  virtue or under the influence of afflictions.  
 Upon checking, if we discover that our  mind s are in a negative state and heading  in the 
direction of non-virtue and under the control of  afflictions, then we need to reduce the 
afflictions. If we discover that our minds are operating in a virtuous  state, we need to familiarise 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre       Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
F P M T  B a s i c  P r o g r a m               C h a p t e r  F o u r  
 
 
194 with, meditate on  and try to increase those posi tive emotions. If we spend our lives in such a 
way,  always checking the state of our minds, th en our lives will become meaningful and fruitful. 
 
3B2B 2B1A 2B3B 3 It is reasonable to be diligent in th e practice of destroying the afflictions 
A One should make effort in the antidotes to the afflictions 
B One should make effort so that one does not come under the power of the afflictions at any time 
3B2B 2B1A 2B3B 3A One should make effo rt in the antidotes to the afflictions 
[4,42cd]  
Yet as this is so I must never withdraw 
From vanquishing my di sturbing conceptions. 
 
[4, 43 ] 
And to do this will be my sole obsession: 
Holding a strong grudge I sh all meet them in battle! 
But disturbing conceptions such as these 
Destroy disturbing conceptions and (for the time being) are not to be (abandoned). 
 
“As this is so” is stating the reasons that establ ish why it is appropriate for us to destroy the 
negative emotions. Therefore, it says,  “Yet as this is so I must never withdraw,/From 
vanquishing my disturbing conceptions.”  One is generating the determination and making a 
promise not to turn back from making the effo rt to destroy the disturbing conceptions, the 
negative emotions. We are generating irreversible joyous perseverance.  
 “To do this will be my sole obsession” -  We are going to overcome and destroy our negative 
emotions, holding a strong grudge against them because we see their  faults.  Obsessed  with 
destroying the negative emotions, we meet them  in battle and destroy them. Holding a grudge 
against the negative emotions,  which are the obje cts to be abandoned, one focuses on applying 
the antidotes to the afflictions.   On the one hand,  one is focussed on  and ob sessed with one’s goal,  which is to apply the 
antidotes. On the other hand,  one holds a grud ge against the negative emotions. Because one 
has seen their faults, one is determined to ab andon these negative emotions. One generates the 
attitude to cultivate the antidotes to  overcome these negative emotions.  
 Qualm: Having seen the faults of the negative emotions,  which are the objects of abandonment, 
we are supposed to hold a strong grudge and  ge nerate resentment toward s them.  However, this 
resentment is, in itself, a negative emotion. We are obsessed with abandoning the negative emotions and cultivating the antidotes to them. But is this obsession not  a  derivative of 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre       Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
F P M T  B a s i c  P r o g r a m               C h a p t e r  F o u r  
 
 
195 attachment, thereby making it  an affliction? Bu t afflictions are to be abandoned, aren’t they? 
Answer: “Yet disturbing conceptions such as thes e, Destroy disturbing co nceptions and (for the 
time being) are not to be (abandoned)”. The answe r to this qualm lies  in these two lines.   
 Although such resentment (towards the negative  emotions) and obsession (with giving up the 
negative emotions by cultivating the antidotes) appe ar to be negative emotions, in fact,  they are 
the factors of antidote for abandoning the negative emotions.   
Alternative translation – Lam Rim Chenmo, Vol. 1, page 348: 
We should be obsessed with these afflictions, 
Resenting them, we do battle, 
While making an exception for only those afflictions, 
That are destroyers of other afflictions. 
 
 “While making an exception for only those afflicti ons, that are destroyers of other afflictions” - 
Obsession with wanting to abandon the afflicti ons and having resentment towards negative 
emotions appear to be afflictions but they are actu ally destroyers of other afflictions. Since they 
destroy afflictions, they are exceptions and are no t included in the category  of afflictions to be 
abandoned.  
 
With regards to “for the time being (are not to be abandoned)”, the root text does not mention a 
time frame.  Neither does the Lamrim Chenmo  in which  it is translated as “an exception.” In 
Tibetan, the literal meaning is  “They are not in c l u d e d  i n  t h e  c a t e g o r y  o f  a n  o b j e c t  t o  b e  
abandoned.” The actual root text says,  “These tw o are not included as objects to be abandoned.”  
 In some other commentaries, there is a mention of a time period: “For the time being,  they are 
not to be abandoned.  But they have to be abandoned later on.” But in this commentary by 
Gyaltsab Je that we are using, there is no mention of the time frame. He only mentions 
specifically that these two are not the objects of abandonment. 
 With regards to this resentment towards negative  emotions, we should check  whether this is a 
fully qualified resentment or not. Resentment towa rds negative emotions is basically a mind that 
looks at the faults of negative emotions. By do ing so, it prevents our mindfulness and vigilance 
from degenerating. Such a mind is called resen tment which is probably not the negative emotion 
of resentment. When explained  in such a way, then obviously such resentment towards negative 
emotions is not an object to be abandoned.  
 Question: What about anger direct ed at our own afflictions ?  
Answer: The resentment we have towards negati ve emotions, although it is given the name 
“resentment,”  is not a fully qualified resentment. It may look like a negative emotion but it is 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre       Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
F P M T  B a s i c  P r o g r a m               C h a p t e r  F o u r  
 
 
196 not. But when we say that we have anger toward s our negative emotions, then this is wrong. 
Anger is necessarily an object of abandonment because it is an affliction. Resentment is 
necessarily an object of abandonment because it is a derivative of anger. But the resentment 
mentioned here is not a fully qualified resentment.    The point here is that the obsessi on with the antidotes against th e afflictions and the resentment 
towards the afflictions, appear to be afflictions but they are not afflictions.  The obsession with 
the antidotes appears to be a derivative of attach ment but it is not a fully qualified attachment. 
The resentment towards negative emotions appears to  be a derivative of anger but it is not a fully 
qualified resentment.  According to Gyaltsab Je, these two are not objects of abandonment. But in some other commentaries, it is said,  “For the time being th ey are useful,  but ultimately, we will have to 
abandon them. “  Gyaltsab Je said,  “Resentment here is not an  object of abandonment because  resentment 
towards the negative emotions is basically a mind that sees the fa ults of negative emotions. Since 
it is a  mind that sees the faults of negative em otions, it is the factor of antidote to negative 
emotions. Since it is the factor of  antidote to the negative emotions, it is not an object to be 
abandoned.”  There are two factors; the factor of abandonmen t and the factor of antidote.. This resentment 
towards the negative emotions belo ngs to the factor of antidote.  
3B2B 2B1A 2B3B 3B One should make effort so that one does not come under the power of the 
afflictions at any time 
[4,44] 
It would be better fo r me to be burned, 
To have my head cut off and to be killed, 
Rather than ever bowing down 
To those ever present di sturbing conceptions. 
 
We may think, ‘It is sometimes so difficult to try to do anything with our negative emotions. 
Since there are so many problems and difficulties with trying to fight the negative emotions, I 
might as well follow after them.’ There are people who think like this;’ Why bother with all this? 
We should just make merry and be happy. Everything will be all right.’  I f  y o u  a r e  s o m e o n e  w h o  d o e s  n o t  a c c e p t  p a s t  a n d  f u t u r e  l i v e s  a n d  s o  f o r t h ,  t h e n  i t  i s  f i n e  t o  spend your  whole life like that. But to think in  such a way is a mistake if we accept and have 
faith in past and future lives, black and whit e karma and are able to establish them through 
reasoning. It does not matter much if we are burn t or somebody cuts our heads off and kills us. It 
will be far worse if we follow after the negati ve emotions as mentioned in the root text.  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre       Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
F P M T  B a s i c  P r o g r a m               C h a p t e r  F o u r  
 
 
197  
W h y ?  W h e n   w e  g i v e  i n  t o  t h e  n e g a t i v e  e m o t i o n s ,  w e  w i l l  e n d  u p  i n  t h e  l o w e r  r e a l m s  a n d  
experience immeasurable suffering. Also,  giving in  to the negative emotions will create very big 
obstacles to  the fulfilment of our long term goals.  It says here  that following after the negative 
emotions is worse than losing our lives although our lives are considered very precious. Giving up 
our lives is nothing compared to giving in to th e negative emotions as the consequences are far 
worse. It is not enough just to say this. We have to understand why this  is so and reflect on these 
reasons. 
3B2B 2B1A 2B3C  Cultivating joy for the very fact that it is possible [to abandon the 
afflictions], for, if effort is made, they will be abandoned 
1 If the afflictions in your own continuum are completely uprooted, there is no place supportive 
of them [in your mind] 
2 As the cause [of the afflictions] arises from error,  if one applies diligence, one will be able to 
abandon them 3 If they are completely uprooted, there is absolutely no place that supports their existence and 
[thus] it is reasonable [to say] that they [can be] abandoned 
3B2B 2B1A 2B3C 1 If the afflictions in your own continuum are completely uprooted, there is 
no place supportive of them [in your mind] 
[4,45] 
Common enemies when ex pelled from one country 
Simply retire and settle down in another, 
Though when their strength is recovered they then return. 
But the way of this enemy, my disturbing co nceptions, is not similar in this respect. 
 
When you kick out or chase away  common enemies, after a while,  they may  come back. But the 
negative emotions are not like that. When  we apply the antidotes and are able to uproot them, 
they will be completely destroyed. They will no t migrate to another place, recover and return to 
harm or attack us again. It is not possible for affl ictions to function in su ch a way, to come back 
into our minds once we have completely uprooted  them. In fact, once they are uprooted, they 
become non-existent.   The ordinary enemies that we have in this life  only harm us in this life. Our enemies, the 
afflictions, have been harming us since time wi thout beginning. They have caused us a lot of 
problems and harm. But if we can completely uproot  the real enemies, the afflictions, they can  
never return. This is not so for  ordinary enemies - even if we defeat them in  battle, they may run 
away to hide somewhere and return one day to attack us again.   The point is we must uproot the afflictions and destroy them completely. When  we can do that, 
we will also defeat all other enemies.   
Amitabha Buddhist Centre       Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
F P M T  B a s i c  P r o g r a m               C h a p t e r  F o u r  
 
 
198 3B2B 2B1A 2B3C 2 As the cause [of the afflictions] arise from error, if one applies diligence, 
one will be able to abandon them 
[4,46] 
Deluded, disturbing conceptions!  Wh en forsaken by the eye of wisdom 
And dispelled from my mind, where will you go? 
Where will you dwell in order to be able to inju re me again? 
But, weak-minded, I have been reduced to making no effort. 
 
The root of all afflictions is basically an erroneou s or mistaken mind. If we apply an antidote to 
this erroneous mind, then we will be able to re move all the afflictions. In verse 46, “Deluded, 
disturbing conceptions!” is literally translated as “Afflictions, afflictions!”. In some commentaries, 
the first “afflictions” refers to the erroneous cause that gave rise to the a fflictions,  which is the 
mistaken mind itself while the second “afflictions”  refers to the affliction s that arose from that 
erroneous cause. The second “afflictions” is an  expression of putting down the afflictions 
themselves  When the eye of wisdom forsakes the seeds of a fflictions, they are dispelled from our minds. 
They will have nowhere to go. They  will not abide anywhere and th ey have no ability to return 
and harm us again like ordinary enemies.  Desp ite this, our minds remain very weak and we do 
nothing to counter our afflictions - “We have  been reduced to making no effort.”  
 
Afflictions harm us because of these two reasons: we do not have the  eye of wisdom and we do 
not make any effort to destroy the affl ictions. We are, therefore, harmed.  
 So far, we have been talking about the differ ent ways to abandon the afflictions. In some 
commentaries, it is said that we can rely on ultimate means or conventional means to do so. Verse 46 is talking about abandoning the affliction s from the perspective of the ultimate means.  
The different methods of getting rid of afflic tions that we have discussed earlier are the 
conventional means.  
3B2B 2B1A 2B3C 3 If they are completely uprooted, there is absolutely no place that supports 
their existence and [thus] it is reasonable [to say] that they [can be] abandoned 
[4,47] 
If these disturbing conceptions do not exist within the objects,  the sense or gans, between the two nor 
elsewhere, 
Then where do they exist and how do they harm the world? 
They are like an illusion – thus I should dispel the fear within my heart and striv e resolutely for wisdom. 
For no real reason, why should  I suffer so much in hell? 
 
Some say that the afflictions arise from causes, wh ich means that they are inherently existent ie. 
they exist from their own side. That being the case, th ey can never be abandoned. According to 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre       Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
F P M T  B a s i c  P r o g r a m               C h a p t e r  F o u r  
 
 
199 the lower tenets, phenomena produced from causes  are inherently and truly existent. The first 
two schools, the Great Exposition  School (Vaibhasika) and the Su tra School (Sautrantika) assert 
this. Even the Mind Only School  (Cittamatrin) asserts that.  
 We are trying to refute the assertions of these th ree lower tenet systems by saying this is not the 
case - the afflictions can be abandoned.   How do we establish that the afflictions can be abandoned? Afflictions can be abandoned 
because they are not inherently existent. Since they are not inherently existent, they can be 
abandoned.   First,  we have to establish that afflictions do not exist inherently within  objects like forms and 
so forth. Why? If afflictions did inherently exis t within the object, then one would incur the fault 
of suggesting that the foe-destroyers or the arha ts would generate  affl ictions when they came 
across objects like forms. If afflictions existed in herently within an object, then we have to say 
that whoever sees the object will necessarily genera te afflictions like attachment or anger, for the 
very  reason that those afflictions exist  inherently  within the objects. The afflictions, therefore,  
do not exist within the object. We will not fi nd them on the object. It is not there.  
 We will also not find the afflictions existing inhe rently within the sense or gans. If we say that the 
afflictions abide inherently within the sense organs, this incurs the fallacy or   fault of saying that 
the afflictions will manifest even in a person who has realised emptiness directly because that 
person also possesses the five sense organs.  Another fault of saying that the afflictions abide inherently within the sense organs is that it 
necessarily follows that whatever we hear, see or do with our sense organs will cause us to 
generate the afflictions, si nce they abide inherently within the sense organs.  
 The afflictions do not exist inhere ntly within the objects. Afflictions also do not exist inherently 
within the sense organs. They do not exist inhe rently somewhere in between the objects and the 
sense organs  or elsewhere. “Elsewhere” means ot her than these three opti ons. The afflictions do 
not inherently exist elsewhere. Since afflictions do  not exist inherently within the objects, in the 
sense organs, between these two nor anywhe re else, then where do they exist? 
  This verse is saying that since afflictions do not exist inherently, therefore,  they can be 
completely uprooted and destroyed. Once they are destroyed, they will not be able to abide 
inherently in some other place an d return to harm us again.  
 Although afflictions do not inherently exist, they do exist conventionally.  Like an illusion,  they 
appear to exist inherently. Since the afflictions do not inherently exist,  therefore they can be 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre       Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
F P M T  B a s i c  P r o g r a m               C h a p t e r  F o u r  
 
 
200 completely uprooted and destroyed. Since they can be completely destroyed, there is no need to 
be afraid of not being able to destroy them.  
 
When we cultivate the antidote, the wisdom that directly realises em ptiness, then we will be able 
to completely uproot all the afflictions. If the afflictions can be abandoned, there is no reason 
why we should follow after  them  and  suffer so much.    The point here  is for us to stop following after the afflictions like anger or attachment when they 
manifest. When afflictions like desire and attachme nt manifest in our minds, that is the time we 
should investigate to see where the desire or a ttachment is existing. Is it existing somewhere 
within or on the object, in the sense organs, somewhere between the two, or somewhere else?  
 Sometimes,  when desire or attachment arises, we f eel as if it is existing  somewhere on or within 
the object. But if we investigate, we find that th is  is not so. If desire or attachment exists 
somewhere within the object, whoever sees the ob ject will necessarily generate desire for or 
attachment to it. If the object is inherently desi rable, then even the buddhas should feel this way 
since they can  see things much clearer than we ca n. We have to assert  that afflictions do not 
exist inherently within the sense organs. If they  did, then even the buddhas would have such 
afflictions. When  we are able to reflect well on how desire, for example, does not exist on or 
within the objects, it will be  benefici al as it will weaken our afflictions.  
  Question: Do afflictions exist inherent ly in the mental continuum or not? 
Answer: If afflictions existed inherently within th e mind, then it is the same as saying that the 
afflictions have entered into the very nature of the mind and  we cannot separate the afflictions 
from the mind. If that is the case, then there is no buddhahood and no liberation. 
3B2B 2B1A 3  Synopsis 
[4,48] 
Therefore having thought about this well, 
I should try to put these prec epts into practice just as they have been explained. 
If the doctor’s instructions are ignored, 
How will a patient in need of a cu re be healed by his medicines? 
3B2B 2B1B  The chapter’s name 
The chapter’s name is Teaching Conscientiousness 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
FPMT Basic Program                   Chapter Five  
 
 
201 Lesson 25 – chapter 5, verse 1-15 
 
Here is some advice from Lama Atisha. He said, “If we can subdue our minds, then no external 
enemy can harm us. But if our minds waver, with the external enemy acting as the  condition, 
our internal enemy will burn our minds. Therefor e, defeat and destroy this internal enemy.” 
When  our minds are in the nature of love and compassion, no external enemy can harm us. If 
our minds  waver,  due to the three mental pois ons, our minds will suffer and our  mental peace 
is destroyed. This mental peace is destroyed not by  the external enemy, whic h  acts only  as the 
condition but by the negative emotions  or the three mental poisons.   
 We have already talked about the negative emotions or afflictions. The very nature of afflictions, 
when they arise, is to disturb and destroy our mental peace. Our real enemies are the internal 
enemies, the afflictions, which are the real troubl e-makers. We should put effort into destroying 
them.   When we talk about protecting the mind, we are told to rely on mindfulness and introspection 
(which is translated as “guarding alertness” in th e root text. We will use  the term “introspection” 
or “vigilance”). Mindfulness is important as it helps to guard the mind. We need both 
mindfulness and introspection to protect and guard the mind.   What are their functions? Mindfulness protects the mind by not forgetting what is to be 
abandoned and what is to be cultivated. Introspectio n is the mind that is li ke a spy, checking to 
see if the mind is up to virtue or non-virtue.    It is important to check and protect the mind. Wh en we do not protect the mind, we will not be 
able to prevent ourselves from being stained by downfalls and faults. Chapter 5 talks mainly 
about ethics. It is important to protect and guard our minds because only we know our own 
minds. Nobody else does. It is said that we are our own masters because only we know what is going on in our own minds. We need to check to see whether our minds are in a virtuous or 
non-virtuous state. By checking the state of our minds, we can pr otect and guard our three doors. 
  
The Fifth Chapter: Guarding Alertness 
3B2B 2  The way to train in the conduct once one has developed the two bodhicittas 
A Embracing bodhicitta [Chapters Two and Three] 
B The way to train in the conduct of the perfections [Chapters Four to Ten] 
3B2B 2B The way to train in the conduct of the perfections 
1 The way to cultivate conscientiousness: The branch that prevents the deterioration of 
bodhicitta and [its associated] conduct [Chapter Four] 
2 The way to train in ethics: A specific explanation given with regards to mindfulness and 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
FPMT Basic Program                   Chapter Five  
 
 
202 alertness- the methods for purely guarding all virtuous dharmas  
3 Explaining the way to train in the remaini ng four perfections [Chapters Six to Nine] 
4 Explaining, by way of the branch of dedication, the way to train in giving away body, material 
wealth, and the roots of virtue for the welfare of others [Chapter Ten] 
3B2B 2B2  The way to train in ethics: A specific explanation given with regards to 
mindfulness and alertness - the methods for purely guarding all virtuous Dharmas 
A  A general presentation  
B The subject of the branches  
3B2B 2B2A A general presentation  
1 The reasons it is necessary to train in the trainings once bodhicitta has been developed 
2 Teaching that buddhahood will not be accompli shed by practicing only method or wisdom 
3 Explaining the stages of training in the trainings 
3B2B 2B2A 1 The reasons it is necessary to train in the trainings once bodhicitta has been 
developed 
A The cause of the six perfections 
B Nature 
C Divisions 
D Meaning of the names 
E Effects   
This chapter is covered in two majo r parts. First, we have the genera l presentation or literally, the 
general meaning of the path. We n eed not  go into this because we  have already covered the basic 
presentation of the path in the lamrim module. We will move on to the subject of the branches 
(literally, the meaning of the branches).  
3B2B 2B2B The subject of the branches 
1 Explaining the chapter’s material 
2 The chapter’s name 
3B2B 2B2B 1 Explaining the chapter’s material 
A An extensive explanation of the way to practice 
B The conclusion, as it is necessary to put into  practice the meaning without [leaving it on the 
level of] mere words 
3B2B 2B2B 1A An extensive explanation of the way to practice 
1 The method for guarding the trainings: guarding the mind 
2 The method for guarding the mind: guarding mindfulness and alertness 
3 The way to train in the conduct of guarding the mind by means of mindfulness and alertness 4 The branch or method of excellent trainings 
3B2B 2B2B 1A1 The method for guarding the trainings: guarding the mind 
A By guarding the mind, one comes to guard all 
B The reasons for that 
C Making effort in guarding the mind 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
FPMT Basic Program                   Chapter Five  
 
 
203 3B2B 2B2B 1A1A  By guarding the mind, one comes to guard all 
1 A brief presentation on the necessity of guarding the mind 
2 The shortcomings of allowing the mind to degenerate 
3 The benefits of guarding the mind 
3B2B 2B2B 1A1A 1 A brief presentation on the necessity of guarding the mind 
[5,1] 
Those who wish to guard their practice 
Should very attentively guard their minds, 
For those who do not guard their minds 
Will be unable to guard their practice. 
 
“Those who wish to guard their pr actice” refers to those who wish to guard their training in the 
six perfections. Those who wish to guard their practice of th e six perfections should very 
attentively guard their minds without letting thei r minds come under the control of distractions, 
without letting their minds go after all sorts of erroneous and mistaken objects. Why do we need 
to do this?  This is because if we do not protect our minds in th e ways mentioned, then we will 
not be able to guard our practice.  Why do we need to guard and protect our minds with mindfulness and introspection? When we 
do not protect our minds with mindfulness and in trospection, then our minds will engage in 
erroneous and mistaken objects and  be stained by many faults. When that happens, then we will 
not be able to protect our training in the six pe rfections. In short, wh en we do not guard our 
minds  with mindfulness and introspection, then we will not be able to protect and guard our training. 
3B2B 2B2B 1A1A 2 The shortcomings of allowing the mind to degenerate 
[5,2] 
In this (world) unsubdued and crazed elephants 
Are incapable of causing such harms 
As the miseries of the deepest hell 
Which can be caused by the unleashed elephant of my mind. 
 
“Unsubdued and crazed elephants” is an analog y for the state of our mi nds. When we do not 
control these crazy elephants that are our mind s, letting them do whatever they wish and 
following whatever objects they desire, we will  engage in all sorts of negative actions and 
accumulate negativities that will lead us into the hells. Nothing in this world, except our own 
crazy minds,  can do that to us.    Let us say that there is a crazy elephant running around the place. It can harm us by destroying 
houses and buildings and hurting people along th e way. But this is all it can do. This crazy 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
FPMT Basic Program                   Chapter Five  
 
 
204 elephant cannot lead us to the hells. Our unsu bdued mind, on the other hand,  can do much 
g r e a t e r  h a r m  a s  i t  c a n  l e a d  u s  t o  t h e  h e l l s .  W h en  we allow the mind to degenerate by not 
guarding it, this is what will happen. We will be  led to a lot of suffering including the sufferings 
of the lower realms and the hells. Therefore, the conclusion is that  it is important to guard and 
protect the mind.  Towards the end of the last module, we discussed the methods of  cultivat ing meditative serenity 
(or calm abiding) by developing the nine mental  states. There was a drawing showing an elephant 
moving along the path. (Please refer to the appe ndix). That elephant represents our minds. 
Notice that there is an elephant at the very be ginning of developing the nine mental states and 
there is a person who is guiding the elephant with a rope and hook. The rope represents the 
mental factor of mindfulness and the hook repr esents the mental factor of introspection or 
vigilance. We subdue our minds through em ploying both mindfulness and vigilance.  
3B2B 2B2B 1A1A 3 The benefits of guarding the mind 
A A brief presentation 
B An extensive explanation 
3B2B 2B2B 1A1A 3A A brief presentation 
[5,3] 
However, if the elephant of my mind is firmly bound 
On all sides by the rope of mindfulness, 
All fears will cease to exist 
And all virtues will come into my hand. 
 
When  we bind our three doors of body, speech and mind with the rope of mindfulness and tie 
them to a virtuous object of observation, we will be freed of the fears of this life and all future lives. All the qualities of the pa th and the qualities of the realis ations of a person of small, 
medium and great capacity -  in short, all virtues and excellences -  will come to us.   What do we mean by tying up our three doors with mindfulness and introspection? What are we tying them  to? It means the capability of the mind to keep focused on virtue. We can 
understand this with the simple analogy of the crazy and unsubdued elephant. If we are able to 
tie the elephant with an iron chai n to a very strong pillar, there is no way the elephant can harm 
us and we need  not be afraid since we know that it can no longer hurt us. In the same way, we need to tie up our minds and keep them focussed very strongly and in a very stable way on a virtuous object. 
3B2B 2B2B 1A1A 3B An extensive explanation 
[5,4] 
Tigers, lions, elephants, bears, 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
FPMT Basic Program                   Chapter Five  
 
 
205 Snakes and all forms of enemies, 
The guardians of the hell worlds, 
Evil spirits and cannibals, 
 
[5,5] 
Will all be bound 
By binding my mind alone, 
And will all be subdued 
By subduing my mind alone. 
 
When we focus our minds peacefully on a virtuous ob ject, we will be freed of  all fears such as the  
fear of tigers, lions, elephants, bears, snakes and all forms of enemies,  including human beings. 
When we protect and guard our minds well, we will be freed from all  fears.   In our future lives,  we will not meet with the hell guardians and so forth. (The text refers to “evil spirits” but literally it should be “curses” or “black magic”). We will not be harmed by them or by c a n n i b a l s  a n d  s o  f o r t h .  W h e n   w e  a r e  a b l e  to protect our minds with mindfulness and 
introspection, we will be able to stop our minds from engaging in non-virtue. It is said that this is similar to  stopping all kinds of harms.  
3B2B 2B2B 1A1B  The reasons for that 
1 Wrongdoing depends upon the mind 
2 Qualities depend upon the mind 
3B2B 2B2B 1A1B 1 Wrongdoing depends upon the mind 
A Scripture 
B Reasoning 
C Synopsis  
These are the  reasons for the outline: “By guarding  mind, one comes to guard all”. 
3B2B 2B2B 1A1B 1A Scripture 
 [5,6] 
The Perfect Teacher himself has shown 
That in this way all fears 
As well as all boundless miseries 
Originate from the mind. 
 
Our fears and sufferings originate from the mind . All the fears and sufferings in this and our 
future lives come from the mind, specifically from  the negative mind. Why? This is said by our 
Teacher, Guru Shakyamuni Buddha, who has real ised how things actually exist. In the Sutra of 
Close Placement of Mindfulness  the Buddha said,  “We are our own enemies; there are no enemies 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
FPMT Basic Program                   Chapter Five  
 
 
206 other than our minds.” Our minds are our greatest  enemies. We have no enemies other than our 
minds. 
 
The Buddha said in the sutra called The Cloud of Jewels  that if we are able to control the mind, 
then we will gain control over everything.  What accumulates virtue and non-virtue? It is the mind. All virtues and non-virtues are karmas 
that are made by the mind. We say that all fears and sufferings come from the mind, because all fears and sufferings are the results of negative ka rmas performed by the negative mind. We have 
now established this point thro ugh scriptural authority.  
3B2B 2B2B 1A1B 1B Reasoning 
In verse 7 and the first two lines of verse 8,  we are establishing through reason how all 
wrongdoings come from or depend on the mind.  
[5,7] 
Who intentionally created 
All the weapons for those in hell? 
Who created the burning iron ground? 
From where did all the women (in hell) ensue? 
 
[5,8ab]  
The Mighty One has said that all such things 
Are (the working of) a negative mind, 
 
All the hells of sentient beings are the products of their  negative minds. If  this were not so, then 
who created all the sufferings that are found in the hells such as the burning iron ground, the 
terrifying weapons, fires and so forth? No one crea ted  them since we do not assert the existence 
of a creator god. All these are the products of  our own minds. Other than one’s own mind, one 
cannot posit any other agent or creator who is re sponsible for everything found in the hells.  
 “From where did all the women (in hell) ensue?” The burning iron ground and all the fires are 
the result of anger. The appearance of women in the hells is the result of engaging in sexual 
misconduct under the power of desire and attach ment - we are not saying that only women are 
born in hell; because of having created the negative karma, one suffers in hell experiencing beatings, being burnt and so forth. Then, even whil e we are being burnt, when we hear the voices 
of  our loved ones, our objects of attachment, shouti ng or crying out to us, we, still controlled by 
our attachment, run after the sound of these voices . But we are unable to find them. At the same 
time,  we are attacked by all sorts of creatures,  such as vultures, who pluck out our eyes and kill 
us. The last chapter on dedication in the root te xt describes extensively these kinds of sufferings. 
This verse is saying that all the things that you fi nd in hell  are the results of your negative karma 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
FPMT Basic Program                   Chapter Five  
 
 
207 [in this case speaking of women since the audience Shantideva recited this text to consisted of 
monks]. 
 
Here, we are trying to establish, through reasonin g, why  these experiences of suffering that are 
found in hell, happen. As Buddhists, we say that they are not the work  of a creator god because we refute the existence of a creator god throug h logic and reasoning. Having refuted that, we 
have to account for what are the causes of these different kinds of experiences. These experiences 
do not come about without  reason or  cause. De finitely they are the results of certain causes. 
 So what are these causes? When we analyse  in de tail, the conclusion is that they are caused by 
one’s negative mind. We have established, throug h reasoning,  that all these experiences are the 
working of a negative mind, as said in verse 8, “T he Subduer has said that all such things are the 
working of a negative mind.” 
3B2B 2B2B 1A1B 1C Synopsis 
This is shown in the last  two lines of verse 8: 
 
[5,8cd] 
Hence within the three world spheres 
There is nothing to fear  other than my mind. 
 
All the fears that are found in the three worlds  are the results of the mistaken mind; nothing 
else. The “three worlds” refers to the desire realm, the form realm and the formless realm. 
3B2B 2B2B 1A1B 2 Qualities depend upon the mind 
A Giving relies upon the mind 
B Ethics relies upon the mind 
C Patience relies upon the mind D Joyous effort relies upon the mind 
E Concentration relies upon the mind 
F Wisdom relies upon the mind  
The six perfections depend on the mind. We are talking about qualities here but actually all 
qualities, virtues and all the things we want depe nd on the mind, and all the things that we do 
not want also depend on the mind.  
3B2B 2B2B 1A1B 2A Giving relies upon the mind 
1 Completing the perfection of giving does not depend upon eliminating [all types of] poverty 
amongst all migrators 
2 It is brought to completion by familiarizi ng oneself with the atti tude of generosity 
3B2B 2B2B 1A1B 2A1 Completing the perfection of giving does not depend upon eliminating [all 
types of] poverty amongst all migrators 
[5,9] 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
FPMT Basic Program                   Chapter Five  
 
 
208 If the perfection of generosity 
Were the alleviation of the world’s poverty, 
Then since beings are still starving now 
In what manner did the previous Buddhas perfect it? 
 
The entity of generosity is the mind of giving. When we say we have increased the practice of 
generosity, we are actually increasing the mind that wants to give. We gradually increase this 
mind over time till it transforms into th e entity of the perfection of giving.  
 When we give to others, we not only give our bo dies, possessions and our roots of virtue, but also 
the results that come from such giving to the r e c i p i e n t s  o f  o u r  g i v i n g .  W e  d o  n o t  h o p e  f o r  
anything in return. We give  to everyone regardless of whether they are high or low, rich or poor. When we give, we do not give with the sense of reluctance that prevents us from giving. It is the mind that gives without miserliness and attachment . We strive to increase that mental attitude. 
 Even when we give a lot, as long as it is tainted by  miserliness, it does not become giving at all. When it is tainted or influenced by miserliness, it will never be come  the perfection of giving. 
Giving does not depend so much on what is given. It depends on the mental attitude behind the giving. Practising generosity or achieving the perf ection of generosity is done with the mind. We 
say that giving actually depends on the mind and not the object.  
 If we take the other position and say, ‘No, giving  depends on what we give. It does not have so 
much to do with the mind.’ Then we have to say that the criteria for perfecting generosity will be 
the elimination of all poverty in this world. If that is the case, then the buddhas have not yet 
achieved this perfection.   
But the buddhas have definitely achieved the perfection of generosity. The perfection of 
generosity is achieved by bringing to fulfilment this  mind of giving, bringing it to its fullest state.  
 
3B2B 2B2B 1A1B 2A 2 It (generosity) is brought to completion by familiarizing oneself with the 
attitude of generosity 
[5,10] 
The perfection of generosity is said to be 
The thought to give all beings everything, 
Together with the fruit of such a thought; 
Hence it is simply a state of mind. 
 
Verse 10 is self-explanatory.  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
FPMT Basic Program                   Chapter Five  
 
 
209 3B2B 2B2B 1A1B 2B Ethics  depends  upon the mind 
1 It is invalid [to say] that completing the perfec tion of ethics depends upon the exhaustion of all 
sentient beings who kill 
2 It is brought to completion by familiarizing oneself with the intention to abandon [killing] 
3B2B 2B2B 1A1B 2B1 It is inva lid [to say] that completing the perfection of ethics depends upon 
the exhaustion of all senti ent beings who kill   
This is shown in the firs t two lines of verse 11: 
 
[5,11] 
Nowhere has the killing 
Of fish and other creatures been eradicated; 
For the attainment of (merely) the thought to forsake (such things) 
Is explained as the perfection of moral discipline. 
 
The perfection of ethics does not refer to being actually able to stop all acts of harming and 
k i l l i n g .  I t  d o e s  n o t  m e a n  t h a t  w e  w i l l  b e  a b l e  to place all beings, who are in danger of being 
harmed, in a safe place where they  will never be harmed in any way.  That is not the perfection of 
ethics. For example,  there are so many fish in the ocean, where are we go ing to put them all?  
3B2B 2B2B 1A1B 2B 2 It is brought to completion by familiarizing oneself with the intention to 
abandon [killing] 
Ethics is brought to completion by familiarisin g oneself with the intent ion to abandon harming 
as in the last two lines of verse 11: “For the a ttainment of (merely) the thought to forsake (such 
things) is explained as the perfection of moral disc ipline.” The practice of  moral discipline  is a 
mind that abandons negative actions like ki lling, stealing and so forth. The complete 
familiarisation with such thoughts to abandon th ese actions is explained as the perfection of 
moral discipline or ethics. The mind of non-vi olence, of not harming others, that abandons 
actions that harm others and so forth is ethics. One must differentiate between ethics and simply 
not engaging in negative actions. There is a very  big difference. Simply not engaging in negative 
actions is not ethics. Ethics is  a mind that abandons harm. 
3B2B 2B2B 1A1B 2C Patience relies upon the mind 
1 The meaning 
2 The analogy 
3 Applying the analogy to the meaning 
3B2B 2B2B 1A1B 2C1 The Meaning 
[5,12] 
Unruly beings are as (unlimited) as space; 
They cannot possibly all be overcome, 
But if I overcome thoughts of anger alone 
This will be equivalent to vanquishing all foes 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
FPMT Basic Program                   Chapter Five  
 
 
210  
P a t i e n c e  i s  a  m i n d  o f  n o n - a n g e r .  W h e n  w e  m e e t  w i t h  s u f f e r i n g ,  h a r m  o r  d i f f i c u l t i e s ,  i t  i s  t h e  
mind of non-anger, not getting upset about such  things. The perfection of patience does not 
depend on the exhaustion of our enemies because sentient beings are as limitless as space and  wherever you go, there will be enemies. As pointe d out in the root text, “If I overcome thoughts 
of anger alone, this will be equivalent to vanquishing all foes.” Patience is again a quality of the mind.  
3B2B 2B2B 1A1B 2C2 The Analogy 
[5,13] 
Where would I possibly find enough leather 
With which to cover the surface of the earth? 
Yet (wearing) leather just on  the soles of my shoes 
Is equivalent to covering the earth with it. 
 
This is  analogous to what was stated earlier: “If I overcome thoughts of an ger alone, this will be 
equivalent to vanquishing all foes.” If we want  to protect our feet from thorns, we cannot 
possibly cover the whole world with leather in orde r to stop our feet from being pricked.  Not 
o n l y  w i l l  w e  n o t  b e  a b l e  t o  d o  t h i s ,  c h a n c e s  a r e  w e  p r o b a b l y  w i l l  n o t  b e  a b l e  t o  f i n d  e n o u g h  leather to cover the whole earth. Coveri ng the soles of one’s shoes is enough. 
3B2B 2B2B 1A1B 2C3 Applying the analogy to the meaning 
[5,14] 
Likewise it is not possible for me 
To restrain the external course of things; 
But should I restrain this mind of mine 
What would be the need  to restrain all else? 
 
[5,15] 
Although the development of merely  a clear state of concentration 
Can result in (taking birth in) Brahma’s realm, 
Physical and vocal actions cannot so result 
When (accompanied) by weak (mental) conduct. 
3B2B 2B2B 1A1B 2D Joyous effort  relies upon the mind  
Joyous effort or joyous perseverance (using th e translation we became familiar with from the 
Lamrim Chenmo ) is a mind that is enthusiastic abou t virtue. When this mind of joyous 
perseverance is brought to  its highest capacity, it is called the perfection of joyous perseverance.  
 Here,  “a clear state of concentrat ion,” refers to a state of concentration that is not influenced or 
affected by either laxity or excitement. When we ac hieve calm abiding, that  acts as a cause for us 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
FPMT Basic Program                   Chapter Five  
 
 
211 to take rebirth in the realm of Brahma or the firs t concentration. But when  we engage in actions 
with our bodies and speech which are  accompanie d by weak mental conduc t , ie. the mind does 
not possess much strength, such actions  will not bring about such a result.  
 So, with joyous perseverance, we can even develop qualities like calm abiding, on which  basis we 
can achieve the first concentration. Physical and verbal actions that are not accompanied by such 
a powerful state of mind will not enable us to ta ke rebirth in Brahma’s realm or to actualise the 
first concentration.  Here we are talking about the importance of the mind again. In order for us to achieve such 
rebirth in Brahma’s realm, to actualise the firs t concentration and so forth, the mind becomes 
very important, specifically the mind that is en thusiastic about virtue. Wi thout this strong mind 
that is enthusiastic about virtue , we will not be able to achieve such qualities such as taking 
rebirth or actualising first concentration and so forth.   Concentration and wisdom will be covered in the next lesson.   
Lesson 26 – chapter 5, verse 16-25 
 
[5,8] 
The Mighty One has said that all such things 
Are (the working of) an evil mind, 
Hence within the three world spheres 
There is nothing to fear  other than my mind 
 
Verse 8 talks about how all the fears of cyclic ex istence and the three realms arise from the mind. 
All the happiness that we are looking for and the su ffering that we want to avoid, when they are 
related to any of these three real ms, they originate from the mind. The text also mentioned that 
all qualities depend on the mind; they come from the mind.  This is the intent of all the scri ptures. If you check them, they all say with one voice that there is 
a need to discipline the mind. It is something that  we can understand at the individual level. At 
times when afflictions such as anger, attachment , ignorance, pride, jealousy, etc. arise in the 
mind, we will experience suffering and unhappi ness. On the other hand, if a person has less 
discursive thoughts and the three mental pois ons occur less frequently, or the person has a 
concentrated mind or the thought of always benefi ting others, then normally we would find that 
such a person would have fewer problems and be much happier.  For example, when one’s desire and attachment are strong and one is looking for, trying to 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
FPMT Basic Program                   Chapter Five  
 
 
212 achieve or get something, but fails to get the obje ct or to achieve whatever goal that one has set 
out to do, one’s suffering will be correspondingly stronger. We can investig ate to see whether this 
is true or not. 
 At those times when we have a lot of discursive thoughts or  the three mental poisons are 
manifesting strongly in our minds, we experience more suffering and unhappiness. At times when the discursive thoughts or the mental poisons are not so strong in our minds, we 
experience more peace. By reflecting along thes e lines, we will understa nd what we have been 
talking about here: all  fears and worries originat e from the mind. Therefore, we should protect 
the mind against non-virtue and guide the mind to wards virtue (to stop the mind from following 
after discursive thoughts).   The point here is that we should protect or guard our minds, with mindfulness and introspection, against non-virtue that leads us to  suffering. We do this because we want to avoid 
suffering and to attain happiness. Although we look for happiness, we ru n away from the causes 
of happiness. Although we wish to avoid suffering , we run after the causes of suffering. This is 
wrong.   Shantideva  said that everything originates fr om the mind, and therefore, it is important to 
protect or guard the mind against non-virtue and to focus the mind on a virtuous object. We are 
under the control of our minds that, in turn, are controlled by negative emotions that disturb 
the very peace and calmness of the mind when they  arise in the mind. Therefore, we experience 
unhappiness and suffering.  We need to control our minds and let our minds come under the control of virtue. When this happens, we experience happiness.   So far, we have been discussing how qualities, like the six perfections, depend on the mind. We 
have completed the perfection of joyous perseveran ce. Next, we will look at  how the perfection of 
concentration also depends on the mind.  
3B2B 2B2B 1A1B 2E Concentration relies on the mind  
 [5,16] 
The knower of reality has said 
That even if recitation and physical hardships 
Are practiced for long periods of time, 
They will be meaningless if the mind is distracted elsewhere. 
 
Concentration is the mind that is able to stay or  focus on an object, selected and imputed by the 
mind. Concentration is developed with the mind an d not with the physical senses, eg.  the eye. 
When the chosen object arises in  the mind,  there is an appearance of the object in the mind. 
One then focuses on that object.   
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
FPMT Basic Program                   Chapter Five  
 
 
213 As it says in verse 16, even if we endure a lot of  physical hardships to achi eve a particular goal, we 
will not succeed if we are  distracted. This applie s to our practices such as doing our daily prayers, 
reciting mantras or even doing nyungnes. No matter how much hardship we endure with our 
bodies and speech and  how much effort we ex ert, we will not achieve any great purpose or 
benefit if our minds are distracted, while we are engaging in these practices.   When we do our prayers, we need to try to do th em  while concentrating on a virtuous object. It 
is the same with reciting mantras or doing Ny ung-nas. The practice of the teachings of the 
Buddha is not done primarily with the body or sp eech but with the mind. Th erefore, the mind is 
of paramount importance. The  Buddha himself said:  
O monks, when practiced with a mind distracte d to desire-objects, ph ysical hardships and 
recitations will bear no results.  
Another quotation from the Middling Perfection of Wisdom Sutra  states, “One’s goal will not be 
achieved if one attempts or practises with a distra cted mind.” If one’s goal  is not achieved, then 
one can forget about achieving the goals of others.  When we do worldly activities with  concentrated  minds, we will probably achieve better results. 
If that is the case for worldly activities, it is mo re so for spiritual practice. Doing practice with a 
concentrated mind is important. If we do not  do our practices with a concentrated mind, we will 
probably not achieve any significant result.   That is why people stay as they are. They may have been practising for ten, twenty, thirty, forty, or 
fifty years, and yet they do not achieve any sign ificant results or change . There are people who 
complain that they have done  these daily prac tices  and recited these mantras for a long time, 
but they do not see any significant results and thei r minds have not changed. This is exactly what 
we have been talking about here. This is the resu lt of doing practices with a distracted mind. If 
these practices were done with a concentrated mind, one would probably be able to see some 
changes or results. Whenever we are doing our practi ces, be it daily prayers or mantra recitations, 
it is important to do those practices with concentration and without any distraction.  
 We need to develop the mind that is able to st ay focused on the practice so that it will become 
the perfection of concentration one day. The same  applies to listening to the teachings. It is 
important to listen to the teaching without an y distractions. When the teachings are going on, 
we should try to understand what is being said, l ook at what is mentioned in the text and try to 
see the meaning behind the explanat ion given. When we are able to listen in such a way, we will 
be able to plant the imprints of those teachings very strongly in our minds and we will really 
learn along the way. Otherwise, nothing  will happe n. Again it boils down to doing such activities 
with concentration. 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
FPMT Basic Program                   Chapter Five  
 
 
214 3B2B 2B2B 1A1B 2F Wisdom relies on the mind  
[5,17] 
Even those who wish to find happiness and overcome misery 
Will wander with no aim nor meaning 
If they do not comprehend the secret of the mind 
The paramount significance of Dharma. 
 
Wisdom is the mind that can differentiate betw een what is right and what is wrong. “The 
paramount significance of Dharma” (ie. the main teachings or the cream of the teachings) refers 
to the meaning of emptiness or self lessness. It is called the “secre t of the mind” because it should 
not be taught to those who are unsuitable vessels . One of the root downfalls of the bodhisattva 
vows is teaching emptiness to those who are no t ready or untrained. Without comprehending 
this  secret of the mind (the meaning of  selflessn ess), there is no way we will be able to achieve 
the sorrowless state or nirvana. When we do not un derstand this secret of the mind, even if we 
want to cut the root of samsara, there is no way we will be able to do so.  We will continue to circle in cyclic existence.   The point here is that we need to  develop the wisdom that realises selflessness or emptiness. If we 
do not realise this, we will not be able to cut the r oot of samsara and we will continue to circle in  
cyclic existence. Therefore, it  is important to develop this wisdom. The development of this 
wisdom also depends on the mind.   This is how all the six perfections depend on the mind. 
3B2B 2B2B 1A1 The method for guarding the trainings: guarding the mind 
A By guarding the mind, one comes to guard all 
B The reasons for that 
C Making effort in guarding the mind 
3B2B 2B2B 1A1C  Making effort in guarding the mind 
1 Brief Presentation 
2 Extensive Explanation 
3B2B 2B2B 1A1C 1 Brief Presentation 
[5,18] 
This being so, 
I shall hold and guard my mind well. 
Without the discipline of guarding the mind, 
What use are many other disciplines? 
 
“This being so” refers to what we have been talkin g about here. If it is the case that abandoning 
all faults and acquiring all good qualities depend on the mind, then  “I shall hold and guard my 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
FPMT Basic Program                   Chapter Five  
 
 
215 mind well.” We should guard the mind by not forg etting what is to be abandoned and what is to 
be practised.  We need introspection to check wh at we are up to with our bodies and minds. We 
guard our minds with such introspection. 
 Without this discipline of guarding the mind, ev en if one has many other kinds of disciplines, 
such as doing daily prayers, etc., they are of no use. Doing daily prayers, keeping vows and so 
forth are necessary conditions fo r supporting the practice of deve loping and  guarding the mind. 
We need to make that happen. If that does not happen, then no matter how much we engage in  these practices and endure hardships with our bodies and minds, no matter how many prayers 
we  do in a day, or how extensive our daily pr actice may be, they do not bring about any great 
benefit.  When we talk about daily recitations (the Tibeta n word for ‘commitments’ means just that - to 
do certain recitations everyday), the whole point of doing daily recitations, be it mantras or 
sadhanas, is for us to transform or change our  minds. When we talk about reciting sadhanas and 
self-generation practices (ie visualising ourselves as the deity), these practices are not meant for 
exercising the mouth.   The point here is to meditate and reflect on the meaning of de ity yoga. The deity yoga is a 
method for us to change and subdue our  minds. It  is the same with reciting mantras -  we should 
reflect on the meaning of the mant ras that we are reciting. When we do this, there will be great 
benefit. When we do not reflect on the meanin g, we do not  get anywhere because our daily 
recitations remain at the level of recitation. Unti l we reflect on the meaning, the mind will never 
change. The whole point of doing all these daily re citations and prayers is for these practices to  
fulfil and serve the purpose of changing the mind.   
Verse 18 points out, “Without the discipline of guarding the mind, what use are many other 
disciplines?” When we remain at the level of dail y recitations, then it  becomes just that. When 
there are too many daily prayers to recite, then it  becomes a problem, as there is too much to do. 
Nothing will happen if we are just reciting wi thout any reflection. Lama Atisha said, “You 
Tibetans practise a hundred deities and achieve none. We Indians practise one deity and achieve 
everything.” The point here is that if we want to  practise, we can just re ly on one deity and keep 
it at that.   Whatever virtue we do with our bodies  and speec h, we should try  our be st to make sure that 
those practices will contribute t o  c h a n g i n g  o u r  m i n d s .  E v e n  i f  w e  r e c i t e  j u s t  o n e  “ O m  M a n i  
Padme Hum,” but that single recitation brings some  sort of positive change to our minds, then 
that is far better than someone reciting tens  of thousands of “Om Mani Padme Hum” with 
nothing happening  to the mind.  We should try our best to ensure that whatever practices we do  
contribute to changing our minds for the better. If  that does not  happen, then it becomes empty 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
FPMT Basic Program                   Chapter Five  
 
 
216 no matter how long we spend - years, or thousa nds of years or whole lifetimes –  doing the 
practices.  
 
This is the reason why people do not change even though they remain  Buddhists their whole 
lives.  Instead of changing for the better, anger, attachment, prid e or jealousy grows by the year 
despite doing all these practices. It boils down to the fact that the practice s  they have been doing 
did not become the cause for them to change their minds for the better.  
 We can use another example: When we wish to show our respect for another person,  sincerely 
from our hearts, it will also be beneficial for our minds. But when our feelings towards others are not sincere, then, whatever we may do outwardly - using pleasant words or acting in a nice 
manner towards them - is of no use.  
3B2B 2B2B 1A1C 2 Extensive Explanation 
A The way to guard the mind 
B The reasons it is necessary to guard it 
C The benefits of guarding it D Devoting oneself to mindfulness in order to guard the mind 
3B2B 2B2B 1A1C 2A The way to guard the mind 
[5,19] 
Just as I would be attentive and careful of a wound 
When amidst a bustling uncontrolled crowd, 
So I should always guard the wound of my mind 
When dwelling among harmful people. 
 
When we have a wound, we will be careful to av oid  a situation where someone may touch it and 
cause us pain. In the same way, we should gu ard the wound of our minds “when dwelling among 
harmful people.” When we  see an object or person  who can be a catalyst for the arising of anger, 
we have to protect our minds. As mentioned in th e text, when we see obje cts of attachment, such 
as women, we have to be careful to guard the mind and rely on mindfulness.   When we find ourselves in situations where we are surrounded by objects that will cause us to 
develop anger or desire and attachment, it is im portant to guard the mind from and not let the 
mind run after those objects, by depending on mi ndfulness and conscientiousness. We should be 
conscientious in guarding our minds just as we would protect the wounds that we have on our 
bodies.  
 Here, we are looking at the way to guard the mi nd by using the analogy of having a wound. 
When we have a wound and we have to go to cr owded places, we would be careful in protecting 
the wound and making sure that nothing comes in contact with it. If someone touches the 
wound, we know that we may get an infection, or at the very least, it will definitely hurt. As we 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
FPMT Basic Program                   Chapter Five  
 
 
217 do not want to experience these unpleasant feel ings, we protect ourselves and make sure we go 
forth in a proper way.  
 
It is the same with guarding the mind. When we  are dwelling amongst harmful people, when we 
find ourselves in a potentially harmful situation where we are surrounded by objects of aversion or attachment and desire, we need to be carefu l and guard the mind. If we let our minds follow 
the afflictions and run after these objects, we wi ll experience greater suffering and  our hopes for 
a good rebirth, liberation and enlightenment will all be gone.  
3B2B 2B2B 1A1C 2B The reasons it is necessary to guard it 
[5,20] 
And if I am careful of a wound 
Through fear of it being slightly hurt, 
Then why do I not guard the wound of my mind 
Through fear of being crushe d by the mountains of hell? 
 
When we are careful of our wounds due to the  fe ar of them being hurt in the slightest way, why 
do we not guard the wounds of our minds through fear of being crushed by the mountains of 
hell?  If we want to avoid this, it is appropriat e to guard our minds by relying on mindfulness and 
vigilance. We guard the mind by reflec ting on the faults of not doing do. 
3B2B 2B2B 1A1C 2C The benefits of guarding it 
[5,21] 
Should I behave in such a way as this, 
Then whether among harmful people 
Or even in the midst of women, 
The steady effort to control  myself will not decline. 
 
“If we behave in such a way” means, if we guard the mind by relying on mindfulness and 
introspection as explained, even if we place ours elves in situations where we meet with harmful 
people or with objects of anger or attachment, et c. such conditions will not create any obstacles 
to our keeping our vows or maintaining our practices and so forth. “Even in the midst of women” refers to one’s object of attachment; if you are a man and your objects of attachment are 
women, this applies to you; if you are a woma n and your objects of attachment are men, it 
becomes, for you,  “even in th e midst of men”. We maintain mindfulness and introspection in 
such situations. Then our ability to keep our vo ws and maintain our practice will not be harmed. 
 Here we are talking about people who have  already developed strong mindfulness and 
introspection. When we have developed strong mi ndfulness and introspection, even if we find 
ourselves in unfavourable situations, such  extern al  conditions will not cause much problem or 
no problem at all. In the case of beginners, who ar e not familiar with the pr actice, until they gain 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
FPMT Basic Program                   Chapter Five  
 
 
218 some stability, it is best to avoid the object. Th e benefit of guarding the mind is that, when the 
mind is well guarded,  external conditions will not act as obstacles. 
3B2B 2B2B 1A1C 2D Devoting oneself to mindfulness in order to guard the mind  
[5,22] 
It is better to be without wealth, 
Honour, body and livelihood, 
And it is better to let other virtues deteriorate, 
Rather than ever to let (the virtues of) the mind decline. 
 
(In Tibetan, there is a sense in this outline that one is devoting oneself to mindfulness voluntarily because one now sees the point.)  
This verse says that even if we are not accorded  respect or service, or we are deprived of our 
reputation and the necessities for survival, or we lose  our lives, that is still better  than to let the 
practice of guarding the mind decline.  Even  if the  practices with our bodies and speech 
deteriorate, those are also better than to let the practice of guarding the mind decline.  
 It is more important never to let the practice of  guarding one’s precepts or training decline or 
degenerate, even at the cost of one’s life. Losing one’s life is insignificant when compared to the 
importance of letting the practice of guarding th e mind deteriorate. In Gyaltsab Je’s commentary 
on this verse, he affixes bodhicitta  to the last line:“It is better to  let other virtues  deteriorate than 
to let bodhicitta decline.” He is talking about how important it is not to let one’s bodhicitta 
decline. Gyaltsab Je talks about bo dhicitta rather than just the mi nd because, here, we are talking 
about the methods to prevent bo dhicitta from degenerating.  
 What this verse is saying, in essence,  is that ou r practice of virtues that are done with our bodies 
and speech may decline, but it is  most important not to let the virtue of the mind decline.  
3B2B 2B2B 1A An extensive explanation of the way to practice 
1 The method for guarding the trainings: guarding the mind 
2 The method for guarding the mind: guarding mindfulness and alertness 
3 The way to train in the conduct of guarding the mind by means of mindfulness and alertness 4 The branch or method of excellent trainings 
3B2B 2B2B 1A2 The method for guarding the mind: guarding mindfulness and alertness  
A Brief Presentation 
B Extensive Explanation 
3B2B 2B2B 1A2A  Brief Presentation 
[5,23] 
O you who wish to guard your minds, 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
FPMT Basic Program                   Chapter Five  
 
 
219 I beseech you with folded hands: 
Always exert yourselves to guard 
Mindfulness and alertness.  
 
When one’s mindfulness and introspection deteriorat e and decline, then one will not be able to 
guard the mind. Therefore, “O you who wish to guard your minds, I beseech you with folded 
hands”. We need to rely on the mindfulness of no t forgetting to place the mind on the virtuous 
object and not forgetting the virtuous object. We also need to rely on vigilance that checks and 
sees what one is up to with one’s body, speech  and mind. We rely on mindfulness and vigilance 
to guard the mind in such a way.   Shantideva is telling us - “I beseech you with fold ed hands” - not to let the practice of guarding 
the mind deteriorate even at the cost of our lives,  by employing mindfulness and vigilance.  He is 
beseeching us with folded hands not because we are the objects of faith for him but because this 
is an extremely important point here - we n eed to protect our minds with mindfulness and 
vigilance or alertness.  
3B2B 2B2B 1A2B  Extensive Explanation 
1 The disadvantages of lacking alertness 
2 Guarding mindfulness as a method of guarding alertness  
3B2B 2B2B 1A2B 1 The disadvantages  of lacking alertness 
A If one is separated from mindfulness and alertness, any action one performs has little force 
B Wisdom will not become pure 
C Ethics will not become pure D Virtues accumulated in the past will be destroyed 
E The accomplishment of virtues not previously performed will be hindered  
3B2B 2B2B 1A2B 1A If one is separated fr om mindfulness and alertness, any action one 
performs has little force  
[5,24] 
People who are disturbed by sickness 
Have no strength to do anything (useful), 
Likewise those whose minds are disturbed by confusion 
Have no strength to do anything (wholesome). 
 
When people, who are usually very intelligent and capable, are tormented by serious illnesses, 
they may not be able to speak or  carry out their usual activities such as their jobs. In the same 
way, when those, who are usually considered very intelligent and of clear minds, etc. are somehow distracted due to lack of mindfulness an d vigilance, they become confused as to what 
should be adopted and what should be abandoned.   Because of this, whatever virtuous action 
undertaken by that mind will have  very little force behind it.   
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
FPMT Basic Program                   Chapter Five  
 
 
220 The point of this verse is that we need to guar d the mind with mindfulness and vigilance. If we 
do not  do that, then even when we do engage in any virtue, that virtue will be very weak.  
3B2B 2B2B 1A2B 1B Wis dom will not become pure 
[5,25] 
Whatever has been learnt, co ntemplated and meditated upon 
By those whose minds lack alertness,  
Just like water in a leaking vase, 
Will not be retained in their memory. 
 
If our minds lack vigilance, knowledge that we have acquired through study, contemplation or meditation on the teachings will not be retained in  our memory, just like water in a leaking vase. 
We are trying to establish the reason why wisdom  will not become pure or be developed. When 
there is lack of vigilance, whatever we are trying to do or learn will prob ably not be retained in 
our minds.  When that happens, then our wi sdom will probably not develop as well.  
 I think the connection here is that when our vigi lance deteriorates or declines, our memory will 
also decline; if our memory declines, then our wisdom will also decline or deteriorate.   Wisdom develops from mindfulness. Mindfulne ss is not forgetting the virtuous object. If 
mindfulness deteriorates, wisdom deteriorat es. Wisdom arises and develops from the 
development of memory. In this commentary, it  is said, “If vigilance deteriorates, one’s 
mindfulness or memory will deteriorate. When that happens, one’s wisdom will also deteriorate.” The text mentions  the necessity of  relying on mindfulness also, in addition to 
v i g i l a n c e .   E v e n  i f  w e  h a v e  v i g i l a n c e ,  w e  w i l l  n o t  b e  a b l e  t o  r e t a i n  t h e  o b j e c t  o r  w h a t e v e r  knowledge we have gained without mindfulness.  Therefore, mindfulness is also important. 
  
Lesson 27 – chapter 5, verse 26-34 
 Here is more advice from Guntang Rinpoche. Rinp oche advised that it is important to practise 
contentment and to be satisfied with what we have . Contentment is also applicable  to studying 
the teachings of the Buddha. We are all different.   We were born from different parents, have 
different genes, brains, levels of intelligence and so forth. We should not expect to have the same results as others.   
We should study according to our own level, to  take our share of the pie and be happy and 
content with what we have achieved through our studies.  At times when we do not understand 
what we are studying, it is possible that there are some students who may feel disappointed or 
discouraged. When that happens, one needs to reflect on contentment – to be happy with 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
FPMT Basic Program                   Chapter Five  
 
 
221 whatever one has achieved.  
 
It is the same with material wealth and possession s. Everyone is different; some people are just 
lucky, with more money while others are not so well off. It is im portant to think about 
contentment again in that situation. All these differe nces in levels of intelligence, wealth,  etc. are 
the results of different karmas. People might put th emselves down by thinking that they are really 
bad and hopeless and that they cannot do anythi ng. This happens to a lot of people. It is 
completely pointless to do that. When one is already facing problems, there is no need for 
additional stress or problems by putting oneself down, thinking, “I am st upid” and so forth. One 
should think, “I have already achieved what I want, ” and be happy and satisfied with that.  
 We all have different levels of intelligence, wisdom, etc. When we already consider ourselves  less intelligent than others, it is pointless; on top of  that, to put ourselves down further by thinking,  
“I am very stupid. I can’t do this and that.” One does not achieve anything - what can we do 
about the situation? We have to accept ourselve s for who we are. As we are born different, we 
have to accept what we are born with and be happy and satisfied with that.  
 This is  a city centre. We  are all busy people  with our own life styles and work commitments. 
After a whole day at  work, we still have to come all the way here, twice a week, to study. But it is 
only twice a week for two hours per session, un like in the monasterie s, where the monks can 
study full-time. That is their job. When we co mpare ourselves to what the monks can do at the 
monasteries, obviously,  we will be much furt her behind. But we should not put ourselves down 
b e c a u s e  o f  t h a t .  I n  f a c t ,  w e  s h o u l d  p r a i s e  o u r s e l v e s .  W e  h a v e  t o  r e c o g n i s e  a n d  a c c e p t  t h e  limitations that come with being a city centre. At the same time, when we compare ourselves to 
other centres around us,  in terms of studies and so  forth, we are doing so much better. So this is 
the cause for praising ourselves. We should be content with what we have already achieved.  
 
Sometimes, there are people who put their own ce ntre down; this is completely pointless and 
there is no benefit whatsoever. We have to reco gnise the strong points and qualities that this 
particular centre possesses. By focusing on that and seeing the good characteristics of the centre, 
we should be happy and praise, rather than pu t down, our own centre. What is the point of 
putting down your own centre and harming your fe llow students and members? We need to hold 
in high regard the teacher of the centre, the tr anslator, the staff and the people who have the 
responsibility for running the centre. We are ta lking about respecting people from the same 
centre. It would be rather odd if we, on the on e hand, hold in high regard people, who are not 
from the same organization while, at the same time, disrespecting people from our own family.  
 It will be  good to do this (ie.  respecting ea ch other), not with the th ought of engaging in the 
eight worldly dharmas or  the affa irs of this life. This  will be   the wrong motivation. The point 
here is that by holding each other in high regard, it only serves to benefit the centre and we can 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
FPMT Basic Program                   Chapter Five  
 
 
222 move forward and improve. If we are not happy wi th the teacher or transl ator we have and so 
forth, there is no way to move ahead. 
 
The advice of Guntang Rinpoche is that we need  to practise contentment and be satisfied with 
whatever we have. If we are able to do that, then happiness, peace and bliss will come. It is good to practise contentment, especially here where we are all studying together. Sometimes we get 
discouraged when we see other students unde rstanding certain things that we do not  
understand. This is from my ow n experience when I was studying . Sometimes,  when I saw other 
people understanding certain things that I did not understand, I had a feeling of 
discouragement. The point here is no t to let that happen to ourselves. 
 Now we are looking at the faults of lacking alertness or introspection.  
3B2B 2B2B 1A2B 1 The disadvantages  of lacking alertness 
A If one is separated from mindfulness and alertness, any action one performs has little force 
B Wisdom will not become pure 
C Ethics will not become pure D Virtues accumulated in the past will be destroyed 
E The accomplishment of virtues not previously performed will be hindered  
3B2B 2B2B 1A2B 1C Et hics will not become pure 
[5,26] 
Even those who have much learning, 
Faith and willing perseverance 
Will become defiled by a (moral) fall 
Due to the mistake of lacking alertness. 
 
What kind of person are we talking about in this  particular verse?  We are referring to someone 
learned who knows very well what are the things to be abandoned and what are the things to be cultivated. We are talking about someone who has th e faith of conviction in the law of cause and 
effect (karma) and who has a lot of joyous persever ance in cultivating the practices in accordance 
with the law of karma.  But sometimes, when such  a person forgets to be alert and vigilant, even 
he/she can  commit a root downfall and go agains t the training of ethics, because of coming 
under the power of desire  and attachment. This is due to the mistake of lacking alertness or 
succumbing to non-alertness. (In Tibetan, alertn ess and introspection means the same thing; the 
opposite of alertness is non-alertness or non-introspection). Due to the power of non-
introspection when it arises in the mind, one becomes stained by such a downfall and commits 
mistakes in one’s practice of morality. When they  lack introspection or alertness, even people 
who have wisdom, faith and joyo us perseverance will commit downfalls or mistakes in their 
practice of morality.  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
FPMT Basic Program                   Chapter Five  
 
 
223 3B2B 2B2B 1A2B 1D Virt ues accumulated in the past will be destroyed 
[5,27] 
The thieves of unalertness 
In following upon the decline of mindfulness, 
Will steal even the merits I have firmly gathered 
(So that) I shall then proceed to lower realms. 
 
“The thieves of unalertness” - In Tibetan, the lite ral meaning is “due to a lack of alertness, then 
the thieves….” The “thieves” here refer to the ne gative emotions like desire, attachment, pride, 
anger etc. In Tibetan, “thieves” literally means “thieves and robbers”. So the thieves and robbers, 
which are our negative emotions, come and steal our merits and virtues.   
What protects us from these thieves and robbers? It is mindfulness. What is it that allows the 
thieves and robbers to do their jobs? It is the de cline of mindfulness. When mindfulness of what 
is to be abandoned and what is to be cultivat ed weakens or declines, it allows the thieves and 
robbers to come and steal the  merits and virtues that we have accumulated in the past. We  lose 
everything.  Thieves and robbers normally carry  weapons, etc. to harm us or take our lives and so forth. When these thieves, that  are our negative emotions, come, due to the decline of our 
mindfulness, they snatch away our good rebi rths and throw us into the lower realms.  
 Due to the lack of alertness following upon the decline of mindfulness, the thieves  come and 
steal our merits. The text talks about the connection between alertness and mindfulness; if one degenerates, the other will do likewise. If our al ertness deteriorates, then our mindfulness will 
also decline. There is this relationship betwee n alertness and mindfulness -  one complements or 
helps the other. In this case, if alertness deteri orates, then that will lead to one’s mindfulness 
deteriorating as well. Mindfulness is like a gu ard or watchman who prevents the thieves from 
coming in.  
3B2B 2B2B 1A2B 1E The accomplishment of virtues not previously performed will be hindered 
[5,28] 
This host of thieves who are my own disturbing conceptions 
Will search for a good opportunity; 
Having found it they will steal my virtue 
And destroy (the attainment of) life in a happy realm. 
 
Before thieves or robbers carry out their jobs, they will check to see whether they will be 
successful or not. They will check out the place or  the person and they will strike at a  suitable 
time. The host of thieves and robbers mentioned in this verse are our a fflictions ie our three 
mental poisons (ignorance, attachment and anger). Our afflictions are like the external thieves, 
waiting for a very good opportunity to attack ou r minds. Upon finding this opportunity, they 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
FPMT Basic Program                   Chapter Five  
 
 
224 snatch our virtues from us and destroy the atta inment of our good rebirths. When we are not 
alert and do not cultivate introspection, this host  of thieves and robbers will find a chance to 
attack us, which they will not be able to do if we are vigilant.  When they manage to successfully 
attack us, due to our lack of alertness, it will  be an obstacle and make it very difficult for us to engage in any virtuous practices  We have finished with the faults of lacking alertness.  
3B2B 2B2B 1A2B  Extensive Explanation 
1 The disadvantages of lacking alertness 
2 Guarding mindfulness as a method of guarding alertness  
3B2B 2B2B 1A2B 2 Guarding mindfulness as a method of guarding alertness 
A Brief presentation 
B Extensive explanation 
3B2B 2B2B 1A2B 2A Brief presentation 
[5,29] 
Therefore I shall never let mindfulness depart 
From the doorway of my mind. 
If it goes, I should recall th e misery of the lower realms 
And firmly re-establish it there. 
 
“Therefore” here means, as a result of  the  fi ve faults of lacking aler tness  mentioned above. 
“From the doorway of my mind” – According to th e root text of Shantideva, it is “from the 
dwelling of my mind”. But whether it is the d oor, window or dwelling of the mind, the point 
here is that we put a guard there, ie mindfulne ss, who will not let the mind engage in erroneous 
objects and to prevent the  thieves and robbers from coming into the mind.  
 The essence here is to practise mindfulness -  to  be mindful not to let the mind wander off and 
be distracted by all sorts of objects associated with the six consciousnesses,  under the power of 
the three mental poisons. When, along the way,  mindfulness deteriorates and the mind is 
following the object, we need to pull the mi nd back and re-establish mindfulness again. 
 When  the mind is distracted by some obje ct, how do we re-establish mindfulness?  
B y  r e f l e c t i n g  o n  h o w  w e  w i l l  h a v e  t o  e n d u r e  t h e different kinds of sufferings, especially the 
sufferings of the lower realms, if our minds are di stracted and come under the power of the three 
mental poisons.   Next we come to the extensive explanation. We  are talking about how guarding mindfulness is 
also the method for guarding alertness, i. e. we protect one to protect the other. 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
FPMT Basic Program                   Chapter Five  
 
 
225 3B2B 2B2B 1A2B 2B Extensive explanation 
1 The external condition: relying on the virtuous spiritual teacher 
2 The internal condition: having correct mental attention ∗ 
3 The way alertness is developed through mindfulness 
3B2B 2B2B 1A2B 2B1  The external condition: relying on the virtuous spiritual teacher 
[5,30] 
Through staying in the company of spiritual masters, 
Through the instructions of  abbots and through fear, 
Mindfulness will easily be generated 
In fortunate people who practice with respect. 
 
We are talking about guarding mindfulness as a method for guarding alertness. The external 
condition for doing that is to rely on one’s teache r or guru and the company of virtuous friends.  
We rely on a teacher who can show us correctly th e things to be abandoned and the things to be 
cultivated. From the side of the students, they  need to put  these instructions that they have 
received into practice, exactly as taught, with mindfulness and vigilance. When the student goes 
against the stipulated training, he/she should generate shame and embarrassment. (Shame is in 
consideration of oneself while embarrassment emphasises the consideration for others). 
  The fortunate person, who has the following three conditions, will easily generate mindfulness: 
being fortunate to be always in the company of a spiritual master (or under the care of the guru); 
endowed with fear of breaking the vows because of  the sufferings of the lower realms and having 
respect for the vows or the training.   
3B2B 2B2B 1A2B 2B2  The internal condition: having correct mental attention 
[5,31] 
“I am ever dwelling in the presence 
Of all the Buddhas and Bodhisattvas 
Who are always endowed 
With unobstructed vision.” 
 
[5,32ab]   
By thinking in this way 
I shall mindfully develop a sens e of shame, respect and fear. 
 
We need to be mindful of the fact that the buddh as are omniscient and are able to see all objects 
of knowledge (ie every single thing that exists) in an unobstructed way. Since there is nothing 
that the buddhas do not know, they know ev erything about us. We are cultivating the 
mindfulness that, in fact, we are always in the presence of the buddhas. We need to remember 
that there is nowhere to hide as the buddhas are always there looking at us. By remembering this, 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
FPMT Basic Program                   Chapter Five  
 
 
226 we need to develop a sense of shame – which is a virtuous mental factor – when  we go against 
our training and precepts, respect for the training and precepts and fear. 
 
In essence, we need to cultivate the mindfulness th at we are always dwelling in the presence of all 
the buddhas who see everything with their unobst ructed wisdom. When  we find ourselves on 
the brink of doing something negative, we should  remind ourselves, “This is something that I 
should not  do as all the buddhas can see this,” and restrain ourselves from negativities. This is 
the way to cultivate mindfulness. Cultivating mi ndfulness in such a way helps us to cultivate 
vigilance and alertness.   This is the internal condition - having  correct me ntal attention. There is great benefit if we are 
able to reflect on this continuously. When we remember this all the time, we will have no 
problems keeping our vows, observing pure morality  and engaging in our training and so forth. 
Going against the training or vows in the presen ce of all the buddhas with their omniscient 
minds is like stealing something in front of the person who can see what we are doing.  
3B2B 2B2B 1A2B 2B3 The way alertness is developed through mindfulness 
A The way mindfulness arises 
B The way alertness arises from that 
3B2B 2B2B 1A2B 2B3A The way mindfulness arises 
[5,32cd]   
Also through doing this, 
Recollection of the Buddha  will repeatedly occur. 
 
“Through doing this” refers to  the method of cultivating mindfulness mentioned earlier. 
Developing mindfulness in this way  will also en able the person to remember the Buddha all the 
time. The root text should be read accord ing to the commentary: “Through doing this, 
recollection of the Buddha will also repeatedly o ccur.”  ”Also” here implies that when we are 
mindful of the Buddha, then by the way, we wi ll also remember the Dharma and the Sangha. 
3B2B 2B2B 1A2B 2B3B The way alertness arises from that 
[5,33] 
When mindfulness is set with the purpose 
Of guarding the do orway of the mind, 
Then alertness will come about 
And even that which had gone will return. 
 
When we place mindfulness (of what is to be ab andoned and what is to be cultivated) at the 
doorway of our  minds to protect it from the en try of negative emotions, vigilance will naturally 
arise in our minds with regards to what we are doing with our bodies, speech and minds.  Even 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
FPMT Basic Program                   Chapter Five  
 
 
227 when vigilance is suddenly lost, it  will be easily generated again due to our strong mindfulness. 
The text is saying that vigilance arises from mind fulness – when we have this kind of mindfulness 
placed at the doorway of our  minds, then in trospection/vigilance will naturally arise in our 
minds. Even when vigilance is lost, it will   return again due to mindfulness.  S o  f a r  w e  h a v e  b e e n  l o o k i n g  a t  t h e  r e l a t i o n ship between mindfulness and alertness. If 
introspection declines, then mindfulness will also  decline. If there is mindfulness, one will 
naturally generate introspection. Even if introspection deteriorates , it will arise again. Basically 
one affects the other. 
3B2B 2B2B 1A An extensive explanation of the way to practice 
1 The method for guarding the trainings: guarding the mind 
2 The method for guarding the mind: guarding mindfulness and alertness 3 The way to train in the conduct of guarding the mind by means of mindfulness and alertness 
4 The branch or method of excellent trainings 
3B2B 2B2B 1A3 The way to train in the conduct of guarding the mind by means of mindfulness 
and alertness 
A The way to train in the ethics of  refraining from negative actions ∗ 
B The way to train in the ethics of gathering virtuous dharmas 
C The way to train in the ethics of working for the benefit of sentient beings 
3B2B 2B2B 1A3A  The way to train in the ethics of refraining from negative actions ∗ 
1  Making effort to purify all conduct of the three doors 
2 Guarding against all deterioration 
3B2B 2B2B 1A3A 1 Making effort to purify all conduct of the three doors 
A Examining the conduct of body and speech 
B Examining the conduct of the mind 
C Explaining the contexts for permitted and prohibited actions 
3B2B 2B2B 1A3A 1A Examining the conduct of body and speech 
1 Examining one’s motivation before acting with the body 
2 Advice related to actions like looking etc ∗ 
3 Application to other behaviours 
4 Examining the posture 
3B2B 2B2B 1A3A 1A1 Examining one’s motivation before acting with the body 
[5,34] 
When, just as I am about (to act), 
I see that my mind is tainted (with defilement), 
At such a time I should remain 
Unmoveable, like a piece of wood. 
 
“When, just as I am about to do something” : we are advised to cu ltivate mindfulness and 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
FPMT Basic Program                   Chapter Five  
 
 
228 vigilance all the time. With that in mind, before  doing anything with our bodies, we need to 
check the state of our minds to s ee what is going on in our mind s at that time; what kind of 
thoughts are arising. Upon analysis, if  we find  that our minds are in a negative state and there 
are negative thoughts arising, we should remi nd ourselves that if we followed after these 
thoughts, we would  be harmed in this life and in our future lives.    At these times, when we know that our minds ar e not in a positive state and there are negative 
emotions/thoughts, we need to avoid doing anything with our bodies and speech. We should 
not allow our minds to follow such   thoughts.  As mentioned in th e root text, we need to remain 
firm and stable like a piece of wood. This applie s to everything we do with our bodies and speech 
- whether we are doing our prayers, meditation or prostrations. The point here is to examine our 
minds before engaging in these practices, ie to examine our motivation; to see whether our 
minds are  following the negative emotions or not. If the mind is in a  negative state and negative 
thoughts are arising, we should not engage in th ese actions with body and speech. First, we need 
to stop following after the negative thoughts an d try to replace them with virtuous ones. Only 
when the virtuous thoughts and motivation come should we proceed with the intended physical 
and verbal actions. It is only when we do these actions of body and speech with a correct, positive 
and virtuous state of mind that  such actions become virtue. 
  
Lesson 28 – chapter 5, verse 35-44 
 Here is another piece of advice from Guntang Rinpoche. He said that we always  cherish 
ourselves and it is this evil mind of self-cheri shing that leads us to misfortune and  downfall. 
When we are able to overcome this very stubborn mind, that is as hard as wood, enlightenment will not be very far away. We are always under the control of our evil and negative minds – the 
three mental poisons which only cause us misfortu ne and lead to our downfall. What we want is 
happiness. Instead, the negative emotions  bring only problems and suffering.  
 The essence of this advice is that when we are able to subdue and overcome our stubborn minds, 
then we will be able to achieve enlightenment.  Whatever virtues we do with our bodies and 
speech, it must ultimately lead to subduing our minds. When we engage in virtues with our bodies and speech but they do not contribute to  subduing our minds, then there is no way we 
will achieve enlightenment regardless of what we do. Whatever virtues we engage in - be it our 
daily prayers or  recitations, making prostrations and so forth - must lead to subduing this very stubborn negative mind of ours.   We have discussed this in the previous lesson. This happens to people who are unable to use 
whatever virtuous physical and verbal actions they do as methods to subdue the stubborn 
negative mind. They say that they have been practising for such a long time, for 10, 20, 30 years, 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
FPMT Basic Program                   Chapter Five  
 
 
229 but they do not see any progress. This is the fault of not transfor ming their virtuous actions of 
body and speech into methods that will help them to subdue their negative minds. It boils down 
to this failure to transform their minds.  
 In the last lesson, we looked at the need to exam ine the conduct of our bodily and verbal actions. 
Eg, we were advised to check our motivation befo re doing anything with our bodies. Only if the 
motivation were a virtuous one should we proceed  with the action. When we discover that our 
minds are not in a very positive state, we were  advised to remain firm and unmovable,  like a piece of wood, and not follow thro ugh with the intended  action.  
3B2B 2B2B 1A3A 1A Examining the conduct of body and speech 
1 Examining one’s motivation before acting with the body 
2 Advice related to actions like looking etc ∗ 
3 Application to other behaviours 
4 Examining the posture 
3B2B 2B2B 1A3A 1A1 Examining one’s motivation before acting with the body 
A A general presentation of where to direct one’s gaze 
B How to act when fatigued C How to act when in the presence of other beings 
D How to act when resting 
 
We are at “Examining one’s motivation before ac ting with body”. Here, we are talking about the 
different ways to conduct ourselves physically. The whole point of doing this is to train our 
minds. 
3B2B 2B2B 1A3A 1A1A A general presentation of where to direct one’s gaze 
[5,35] 
Never should I look around 
Distractedly for no purpose: 
With a resolute mind 
I should always keep my eyes cast downwards. 
 
This advice here is primarily aimed at people who have already been training their minds. The 
point of adopting such behaviour is to prevent the mind from becoming distracted.   What is the reason for saying that we should not “look around distractedly for no purpose”? When we look around and see things, our  mind s will be distracted and deteriorate.  “Cast 
downwards” refers to looking in front of us an d not far ahead. “Resolute mind”  refers to the 
mind that is focused on virtue. With this ki nd of mind, we move while keeping our eyes 
downcast, looking in front of us. We should not be looking here and there distractedly for,  inevitably, our eyes will see different objects. Wh en we see an unpleasant object, our minds may 
give rise to anger. When we come into contact wi th a pleasant, attractive or desirable object, the 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
FPMT Basic Program                   Chapter Five  
 
 
230 mind may  generate desire, and so forth. When we look around, we may  meet with different 
objects that  contribute to the genera tion of the three mental poisons.  
3B2B 2B2B 1A3A 1A1B How to act when fatigued 
This covers the first  two lines of verse 36: 
 
[5,36ab]   
But in order to relax the gaze 
For a short while I should look around, 
 
We conduct ourselves in accordance with what was taught in the previous verse, i.e., while 
focusing the mind on virtue, we look in front of us, with eyes cast slightly downwards,  when we 
move around. When training the mind in such a way, both the mind and the eyes may get tired. 
T o  r e l a x  o r  r e s t  t h e  g a z e ,  i t  i s  p e r m i s s i b l e  t o  s t o p  a n d  l o o k  a r o u n d  b u t  w e  n e e d  t o  a p p l y  
mindfulness and vigilance at the same time. With  mindfulness and vigilance and without letting 
the mind become distracted, we can, for a shor t while, turn our heads and look around. The 
point is to train the mind. When we do not kn ow how to train the mind and we continue to 
keep our eyes downcast all the time,  we may go crazy! We need to rest.  
3B2B 2B2B 1A3A 1A1C How to act when in the presence of other beings 
This is shown is last two lines of vers e 36 and the first two lines of verse 37: 
 
[5,36cd ]   
And if someone appears in my field of vision 
I should look at him and say, “Welcome.” 
 
[5,37ab]  
To check if there is any danger on the path 
I should look again and again in the four directions. 
 
While conducting ourselves in th e manner taught in the text, when  the mind and eyes get tired, 
we are allowed to rest for a while. What should  we do when we see someone coming towards us 
when we are relaxing our  gaze? We should no t pretend not to see that person. We should 
acknowledge that person with respect and with greetings appropriate to the time, situation and 
the customs of the place that we are in; we should  say something nice such as,  “Welcome”, etc.  
 “To check if there is any danger on the path” – Th is does not mean that all paths are dangerous;  
i t  r e f e r s  t o  w h e n  o n e  h a p p e n s  t o  b e  i n  a  d a n g e r o u s  p l a c e .  I n  o r d e r  t o  a v o i d  m e e t i n g  a n  undesirable situation, we should look around. Wh en we are only looking in front of us, we will 
not be able to see if there is danger lurking arou nd. We should look slowly in the four directions. 
Without losing one’s mindfulness and vigilance, one looks slowly and carefully in each of the 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
FPMT Basic Program                   Chapter Five  
 
 
231 four directions to check if there is any danger. 
 
When we see someone coming into our line of vision, we should acknowledge the presence of 
the person by saying something pleasant and a ppropriate and acting respectfully. This is the 
bodhisattvas’ training. If we do not do this, there is a danger of causing the other person to lose 
faith in or to become angry at us. This is not a good thing to do as a trainee in the bodhisattva 
deeds.   Sometimes, in the course of doing our meditati ons or prayers, someone may appear in front of 
us. Instead of acknowledging that person, we may ge t upset thinking of this person as an obstacle 
to our meditation practice. This is not benefi cial, as we will not achieve much. Instead, we 
should acknowledge the presence of the other pe rson by saying something nice. Then, our minds 
will be peaceful. At the same time, we will also contribute to the happine ss of the other party.  
 The point is to examine our  motivation before  engaging in any actions with our bodies and 
speech. We try to ensure that we  perfor m these actions with a  pure motivation. 
3B2B 2B2B 1A3A 1A1D How to act when resting 
[5,37cd]  
To rest, I should turn my head around 
And then look behind me. 
 
[5,38ab]  
Having examined both ahead and behind 
I should proceed to either come or go. 
 
Note:  According to the Tibetan version, the last two lines of verse 37 and the first two  lines of 
verse 38 are a single verse  
3B2B 2B2B 1A3A 1A2 Advice related to actions like looking etc 
When we get tired while moving around, we can rest by looking in the four directions as 
mentioned; looking behind and in front of us to  see if there is any da nger and so forth. By 
examining what is before and be hind us, we should then proceed to our own place or wherever 
we wish to go.  
3B2B 2B2B 1A3A 1A3 Application to other behaviours 
[5,38cd]  
Being aware of the necessity (f or such mindful alertness) 
I should behave like this in all situations. 
 
The advice given so far can be applied to other modes of conduct . When we talk about the four 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
FPMT Basic Program                   Chapter Five  
 
 
232 conducts, they are: eating, lying down, standi ng or sitting, and moving to another place. 
Whatever we do, we have to know  very clearly what we are about to do. We need to engage in 
these actions with mindfulness and vigilance.  
3B2B 2B2B 1A3A 1A4 Examining posture  
“Posture” here refers to a sense of how one is k eeping still while sitting down or staying at a  
place and what one is doing with the body.  
[5,39] 
(Once) having prepared for an  action with the thought, 
“My body will remain in such a way,” 
Then periodically I should look to see 
How the body is being maintained. 
 
We can apply this verse to a retreat situation. Du ring a retreat, at the beginning of the session, 
when we are sitting down, we can generate the de termination that, “Now I am going to sit in the 
seven-fold Vairochana posture and remain in that  position for this session.” Every now and then, 
we should check with our mindfulness and vigilanc e to see whether we are sitting in the desired 
posture or not. We need  to check to see whethe r there are any faults in our physical posture or 
not.   
3B2B 2B2B 1A3A 1B Examining the conduct of the mind 
1 Focusing the mind on a virtuous object ∗ 
2 Examining whether or not the mind is one-pointed in virtue 
3B2B 2B2B 1A3A 1B1 Focusing the mind on a virtuous object 
[5,40] 
With the utmost effort I should check 
To see that the crazed elephant of my mind 
Is not wandering off but is bound 
To the great pillar of thinking about Dharma. 
 
We have discussed earlier the need to stop the mind from following after the negative emotions, 
such as anger or attachment. Instead, we should  keep the mind on a virtuous object. Our minds 
are likened to  crazy elephants. When  we do not tie up the crazy elephant, it will cause a lot of 
damage. In the same way, when we let our unsubdued minds run loose and let them  follow  the 
negative emotions, they  will cause us a lot of harm and we will be led to rebirths in the hells or as hungry ghosts and so forth. The point is to  stop the mind from following after negative 
emotions like ignorance, anger and attachment. Rather than letting our minds follow after the 
negative emotions, we should focus our minds sing le-pointedly on the activities of  listening, 
reflection and meditation on the teachings. “The great pillar of thinking  about Dharma,” refers 
to these activities.  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
FPMT Basic Program                   Chapter Five  
 
 
233  
In order to do that, we need to have a mind as po werful, strong and stable as a pillar. We need to 
h a v e   v e r y  s t a b l e  m i n d s   t h a t  d o  n o t  f o l l o w  t h e   n e g a t i v e  e m o t i o n s  a n d   f o c u s  o n  v i r t u e .  W e  
should not let the mind become distracted but focu s it on objects of virtue and protect it with 
mindfulness and vigilance. 
3B2B 2B2B 1A3A 1B2 Examining whether or not the mind is one-pointed in virtue 
[5,41] 
Those who strive by all means for concentration 
Should not wander off even for a moment; 
By thinking, “How is my mind behaving?”, 
They should closely analyse their mind. 
 
For those who are striving to achi eve concentration, their minds sh ould not wander off, even for 
a moment. When the mind wanders off, one should  bring the mind back again to focus on the 
object of virtue. The essence here is to have the mind abide on the object of virtue and, at the  same  time,  check with our mindfulness and vigilance whether the mind is distracted by 
something else. When we discover th at the mind is distracted in th is way, then immediately, with 
mindfulness and vigilance, we should hook the mi nd back and concentrate   again on the chosen 
object of virtue.  
3B2B 2B2B 1A3A 1C Explaining the contex ts for permitted and prohibited actions 
[5,42] 
However, if I am unable to do this 
When afraid or involved in cele brations, then I should relax. 
Likewise it has been taught that at times of giving 
One may be neutral to (certain aspects of) moral discipline. 
 
[5,43] 
I should undertake whatever deed I have intended to do 
And think of doing nothing other than it. 
With my mind applied to that task, 
I should set about for the ti me being to accomplish it. 
 
[5,44] 
By acting in this wa y all will be done well, 
But (by acting) otherwise neither (action) will be done. 
Likewise there will be no increase in  the proximate dist urbing conceptions 
That come from a lack of alertness. 
 
When  we are unable to keep our minds focused single-pointedly on a  virtuous object, we may 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
FPMT Basic Program                   Chapter Five  
 
 
234 relax a bit, while still maintaining mindfulne ss and vigilance, under one of the following 
situations: when we are in a situation where we meet with enemies or an imals that endanger our 
lives, when we are in a religious celebration; or  at times when one can accomplish great purpose 
or great benefit for others.    At times when one is training in the very exte nsive practice of giving, one may be neutral to 
certain aspects of moral discipline as stated in the Aksayamatipariprccha Sutra : “'At times of giving, 
moral discipline may be condensed; that is to say, left in a neutral state.” 
 We have covered the way we should  behave with our bodies and so  forth. Basically, we are not 
supposed to move our bodies and hands around. Bu t, for example, when one is engaged in the 
training of extensive giving, it is permitte d to use our hands to pass things around.  
 When one is training in the giving of fearlessne ss (protecting sentient beings from fear), it is 
permissible to do things like telling lies, with  the purpose of saving the lives of others. For 
example, when someone wants to kill a chicken an d asks you “Where is the chicken?” you may  
reply,  “I didn’t see it” even though you did.    In such situations, when one is in  training in such  practices, one must put aside certain aspects 
of moral discipline. One has to make a choice betw een the practice of giving and the practice of 
certain aspects of morality. One may not be able  to choose both as show n in the example given 
above. When one is primarily training in the practi ce of giving,  such as giving material goods or 
fearlessness, and if there is a good reason, one ca n put aside certain practices of moral discipline.  
 In general, these aspects of moral discipline,  like lying and so forth,  are not permitted. But,  in 
certain situations,  like the ones we have just mentioned, lying and so forth are permitted. One 
commentary also suggests that,  in those contex ts,  such misdeeds would also not incur any 
negativity .   Actions like killing and lying, in general, are natural misdeeds. A natural misdeed refers to any 
deed that is wrong or negative by nature. In this text, it says that,  in certain situations, engaging 
in actions such as lying is permitted. If that  is the case, how is such permission granted? 
 The commentary is explaining what is said in the root text: “It has been taught that at times of 
giving, one may be neutral to certain aspects of moral discipline.” In one commentary, the author 
gave  an example of a situation when one is prim arily training in the practice of giving that 
involved the  giving of fearlessness ie  saving others from fear. When  we are asked whether we 
have seen a particular sentient being that someone is trying to kill, in that situation,  we can say, “No, we have not seen it, ” (even if we have).  This is lying. 
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
FPMT Basic Program                   Chapter Five  
 
 
235 Here,  in the text, we are talking about choosing between giving and certain aspects of moral 
discipline. We cannot have both sometimes. We have to choose one. When  we choose one, then 
it would imply that the other is permitted. Su ch negative actions are permitted in certain 
contexts. But we have to define how the permissi on is granted because actions such as stealing, 
killing, lying and so forth are natural misdeeds. There are some misdeeds that  are proscribed 
misdeeds. But actions, such as killing and stealing, are negative by nature.   Q: Could you give us an example of killing that is permitted?  A: One example is when the Buddha, who was a ship captain in one of his past lives as a sentient 
being, killed a  potential murderer in order to save 500 people on  the ship. When we say killing is permissible, I think that it is only an acti on that is permitted for people who have real 
bodhicitta. People who have bodh icitta never think about themselv es. All they do is to think 
about others. Permission is only granted to such people. Apart from that, killing is not permitted. 
When we have no bodhicitta, it means that we have self-interest. As long as we do any negative action that is tainted by even an atom of se lf-interest, then that is not allowed at all. 
  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
FPMT Basic Program                   Chapter Five  
 
 
236 Lesson 29 – chapter 5, verse 42- 58 
 
Here is another advice from Guntang Rinpoche. Th is advice is related to how we should conduct 
our Dharma studies. Rinpoche said, “Sometimes , we put a lot of effort into studying and 
listening to many teachings. But,  at the same time, we lose whatever we have studied and learnt 
due to forgetting whatever we have heard and stud ied. This is like accumu lating a lot of wealth 
from working very hard in one’s business or daily life but having that wealth stolen by thieves 
and robbers at the end of the day.”   Even when one puts a lot of effort into studying an d listening, if one loses, at the end of the day, 
whatever one has learnt or studied to the thieves of forgetfulness, then everything becomes empty 
and  pointless. This is likened to someone stayi ng in a place where there are lots of precious 
things, such as jewels, etc. One may be in such a place and own such thin gs. But, at the end of 
the day, when one lets thieves take away all the we alth and jewels, one is back to square one with 
empty hands. There is not much meaning in pu tting so much effort in studying and then 
forgetting everything at the end of the day.  How do we stop ourselves from ending up in such a situation? The only way to stop that from happening is to continually familiarise ourselves with what we have learnt and with whatever 
kn o wledge we hav e gai n ed by relyin g o n  st able  mindfulness and alertness/vigilance. When we 
listen to the teachings, we should try to gain  more knowledge of the Buddhadharma. While we 
are accumulating such information and knowledge, or increasing our database, at the same time, 
we must make sure that our databases are no t stolen by the thieves of forgetfulness.  
 This particular advice is actually directed at those who are studying the more in-depth teachings 
of the Buddha, such as the Five Great Treatises - the philosophical teachings and so forth. When 
one engages in studies of these topics, there wo uld be no benefit and nothing can be achieved 
when one forgets what one has studied before as  one proceeds from one topic to the next.  The 
o n ly way  t o  st o p t hat  fro m  hap p en in g is t o  fa miliarise oneself with the teachings; not just to 
leave it at the level of listening. We can listen. Bu t when we leave it at the level of listening, we 
will forget everything after a few months.   While we are listening or studying, at the same time, we should  familiarise ourselves with the 
teachings by thinking about the me aning of the teachings and trying to see what the text said,  ‘Is 
t h a t  t r u e  o r  n o t ?  I s  t h a t  f e a s i b l e ?  I s  t h a t  g o o d  o r  b a d ? ’   W e  s h o u l d  a p p r o a c h  o u r  s t u d i e s  b y  reflecting on what we have heard. This is how we familiarise ourselves with the topics. The more 
we familiarise ourselves with the topics, the less likely we will forget them because when we 
approach our studies in this way, the information tends to stay in our minds. Please try your best 
to make that happen to yourself; to familiaris e yourself with whatever you have learnt by 
reflecting and thinking about those topics. 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
FPMT Basic Program                   Chapter Five  
 
 
237 3B2B 2B2B 1A3A 1C Explaining the contex ts for permitted and prohibited actions 
[5,42] 
However, if I am unable to do this 
When afraid or involved in cele brations, then I should relax. 
Likewise it has been taught that at times of giving 
One may be neutral to (certain aspects of) moral discipline. 
 
[5,43] 
I should undertake whatever deed I have intended to do 
And think of doing nothing other than it. 
With my mind applied to that task, 
I should set about for the ti me being to accomplish it. 
 
[5,44] 
By acting in this wa y all will be done well, 
But (by acting) otherwise neither (action) will be done. 
Likewise there will be no increase in  the proximate dist urbing conceptions 
That come from a lack of alertness. 
 
Verse 42 talks about someone who is primarily trai ning in the practice of generosity. At that 
time, it is permissible to remain neutral to certai n aspects of ethics. When we talk about training 
in the path, there is a gradual way of engaging in the different practices; they are arranged 
according to order. The practice of generosity co mes before ethics. In that case, someone who is 
primarily training in the practice of generosity  may remain neutral to certain aspects of moral 
discipline. This is the context that we are talking about.   Once we have made up our minds to train in the practice of eg. generosity,  we should remain 
firm and carry out the practice to completion. Wh en  one has decided that this is going to be 
one’s primary practice for the time being, focusi ng on that, one should bring that practice to 
completion without straying away from it. When one has made a promise to practise generosity 
and then, halfway through, decide s to switch to ethics, one will achieve neither. One’s generosity 
will not be perfected and one’s ethics will probab ly not go far as well. One should try to have a 
stable and good practice of generosity. Once that  has been achieved, one sh ould then move on to 
the next practice, which is ethics.  If we do that, all the practices will  be brought to completion.  
 
It is therefore implied in the advice that it is important to follow the orde r of the stages of the 
path; there is a specific order. One has to train one’s mind in the preliminary practices, before 
moving to the next topic, ac cording to the order. When on e does this, one will bring to 
completion all the different practices of  the different stages of the path.  
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
FPMT Basic Program                   Chapter Five  
 
 
238 An analogy of walking is used here. When  we want to walk, we need to move step by step; first, 
we lift up one leg, and when it touches the ground, we lift up the other leg. If we try to move in 
any fashion other than the usual w ay of walking, there is a danger that we could fall. It is the 
same here with training the mind  in the path; we should train in  the earlier stages of the path 
before we move on to the later stages.   This ignorance, with regards to the order of the pr oper stages of training the mind in the path, is 
the secondary affliction  called non-introspection (non-vigilance/non-alertne ss). In this context, 
non-introspection would be ignorance about the prop er stages of training the mind in the path. 
When we understand the proper stages of  trai ning the mind in the path, then the secondary 
affliction of non-introspection will not increase. This explains the last two lines of verse 44: 
“Likewise, there will be no increase in the pr oximate disturbing concep tions/That come from a 
lack of alertness.)   The point here is to have a good understanding of  the proper stages of the path; of the ways of 
training the mind. This is a gradual process and the order must be correct. When we have a very good understanding of this, then the secondary affliction of non-intros pection, which is the 
ignorance of the proper stages of the path, will not increase.   The point here is to first ascertain the proper stag es of training in the pa th; we must follow the 
proper way of transforming the mind according to the actual stages. On the basis of having 
ascertained the proper stages of the path, we should then train our mi nds according to that 
ascertainment; ensuring that we finish our training in the first topic before we move on to the 
n e x t  o n e  a n d  s o  f o r t h .  W h e n  w e  d o  n o t  d o  t h i s ,  w e  w i l l  p r o b a b l y  n o t  a c h i e v e  m u c h .  T h i s  i s  applicable to our practices -  in the beginning , nothing is stable; people sometimes look for 
initiations or lamas, doing different kinds of  daily prayers without developing a stable 
relationship or practice with a single teacher. Th en, they move on to the next teacher, the next 
deity or the next practice. At the end of the day, nothing is  achieved.  
3B2B 2B2B 1A3A 2 Guarding against all deterioration 
A Guarding against deterioration in the training of the body 
B Guarding against deterioration in the training of the mind 
3B2B 2B2B 1A3A 2A Guarding against deterioration in the training of the body 
1 Not allowing oneself to fall under the sway of distraction 
2 Abandoning pointless activities 3 Examining the motivational thought when acting 
3B2B 2B2B 1A3A 2A1 Not allowing oneself to fall under the sway of distraction 
[5,45] 
If I happen to be present 
While a senseless conversation is taking place 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
FPMT Basic Program                   Chapter Five  
 
 
239 Or if I happen to see some  kind of spectacular show, 
I should abandon attachment towards it. 
 
The point here is not to fall under the sway of dist raction to meaningless activities like engaging 
in senseless speech, singing, dancing or any activity that is a distraction. We have to understand that we are talking about the practice of avoiding  distractions in the context of engaging in the 
bodhisattva deeds and training. The whole point of not following after these activities is to stop 
attachment or desire. When  there is a need to engage in these activities for the benefit of others or for the purpose of pleasing someone or of su bduing the other person’s mind, it is important 
to make sure that, while engaging in these acti vities, the mind does not come under the control 
of attachment to them. 
3B2B 2B2B 1A3A 2A2 Abandoning pointless activities 
[5,46] 
If for no reason I start digging the earth, 
Picking at the grass or draw ing patterns on the ground, 
Then by recalling the advice of the Buddhas, 
I should immediately stop out of fear. 
 
Actions such as digging the earth, destroying pl ants, drawing patterns on the ground and so forth 
are actions that are prohibited in the vinaya for fully ordained monks but  are not prohibited by 
the Buddha for laypersons.   Just as a fully ordained monk,  who is a bodhisa ttva, must abandon these prohibited actions, in 
the same way, a layperson, who is a bodhisattva,  should also abandon these meaningless actions. 
How should a lay bodhisattva do this? “By reca lling the advice of the buddhas, I should 
immediately stop out of fear.” A l ay bodhisattva should also stop such  actions, as it is the advice 
given by the Buddha in the bodhisattva pita ka. The Buddha  clearl y mentioned in those 
scriptures that bodhisattvas should abandon any ac tion which is not beneficial to sentient beings. 
By recalling this advice, even lay bodhisattv as should not do these meaningless things. 
3B2B 2B2B 1A3A 2A3 Examining the motivational thought when acting 
A Presenting 
B Explaining 
C Synopsis 
3B2B 2B2B 1A3A 2A3A Presenting 
[5,47] 
Whenever I have the desire 
To move my body or to say something, 
First of all I should examine my mind 
And then, with steadiness, act in the proper way. 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
FPMT Basic Program                   Chapter Five  
 
 
240  
Before we do or say anything, first, we should ch eck whether there is going to be any faults in the 
intended action. After  examining the intended acti on and having ensured  that there will be no 
faults in that action, one should act with stea diness in the proper way. The point here is to 
examine one’s motivation before acti ng with one’s body or speech.  
3B2B 2B2B 1A3A 2A3B Explaining 
1 How to act when one wishes for afflictions to arise 
2 How to act when excitement and so forth arise 3 How to act when [you are the recipient of] gain and honor 
4 How to act when thinking of others’ welfare 
5 How to act when you wish for fury and discouragement etc. to arise 
3B2B 2B2B 1A3A 2A3B1  How to act when one wishes for afflictions to arise 
[5,48] 
Whenever there is attachment in my mind 
And whenever there is the desire to be angry, 
I should not do anythi ng nor say anything, 
But remain like a piece of wood. 
 
At times when we know that there is attachment/desire or anger in our  minds, we should not 
do or say anything. 
3B2B 2B2B 1A3A 2A3B2  How to act when excitement and so forth arise 
[5,49] 
Whenever I have distracted thoughts, th e wish to verbally belittle others, 
Feelings of self-importance or self-satisfaction; 
When I have the intention to describe the faults of others, 
Pretension and the thought to deceive others; 
[5,50] 
Whenever I am eager for praise 
Or have the desire to blame others; 
Whenever I have the wish to speak harshly and cause dispute; 
At (all) such times I should remain like a piece of wood. 
 
3B2B 2B2B 1A3A 2A3B3  How to act when [you are the recipient of] gain and honour 
[5,51] 
Whenever I desire material gain, honour or fame; 
Whenever I seek attendants or a circle of friends, 
And when in my mind I wish to be served; 
At (all) these times I should remain like a piece of wood. 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
FPMT Basic Program                   Chapter Five  
 
 
241 3B2B 2B2B 1A3A 2A3B4  How to act when thinking of others’ welfare 
[5,52] 
Whenever I have the wish to decrea se or to stop working for others 
And the desire to pursue my welfare alone, 
If (motivated by such thoughts),  a wish to say something occurs, 
At these times I should remain like a piece of wood. 
3B2B 2B2B 1A3A 2A3B5  How to act when you wish for fury and discouragement etc. to arise 
[5,53] 
Whenever I have impatience, laziness, cowardice, 
Shamelessness or the desire to talk nonsense; 
If thoughts of partiality arise, 
At these times too I should re main like a piece of wood. 
3B2B 2B2B 1A3A 2A3C  Synopsis 
[5,54] 
Having in this way examined his mind for disturbing conceptions 
And for thought that striv e for meaningless things, 
The courageous (Bodhisattva) should hold his mind steady 
Through (the application of) re medial forces (of antidote) 
 
Verses 48 to 53 are talking about basically the sa me point which is summarised in verse 54. The 
essence of the summary is that we  should check our  motivation be fore we engage in any actions; 
we should not engage in any acti ons that are motivated by afflicti ons, which will harm others or 
are meaningless.   
3B2B 2B2B 1A3A 2B Guarding against deterioration in the training of mind 
1 Guarding by means of the individual antidote 
2 The common antidotes 
3 The way to apply oneself to cultivating the antidote 
3B2B 2B2B 1A3A 2B1 Guarding by means of the individual antidote 
[5,55] 
Being very resolute and faithful, 
Steady, respectful, polite, 
With a sense of shame, apprehensive and peaceful, 
I should strive to make others happy. 
 
[5,56] 
I should not be disheart ened by all the whims 
Of the childish who are in discord with one another; 
I should know them to arise in thei r minds due to disturbing conceptions 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
FPMT Basic Program                   Chapter Five  
 
 
242 And therefore be kind (towards them). 
 
How do we guard against the deterioration of trai ning the mind? First, we have to ascertain the 
method to guard the mind against deterior ation. We have to remove any mistaken 
understanding or doubt pertaining to the partic ular training. That is the meaning of being 
resolute; it refers to coming to an ascertainmen t of what needs to be done in the context of 
guarding against the deterioratio n of one’s mental training.  
 On the basis of having ascertained  the proper training, we then generate faith toward that 
training. One needs to be steady and firm in applying oneself to that training, without giving up. Even at times when one may experience deterior ation in one’s livelihood or health, one must 
remain firm. In order to achieve whatever one ha s set out to do with this training, one should 
have enthusiasm, delight and respect for the cour se of action that one has chosen. One should 
be polite towards all sentient beings, such as speaking in a polite manner.   Shame is a virtuous mental factor. Shamelessne ss/non-shame is non-virtue. Eg. if one were to 
engage in the  negative action of killing or steali ng without feeling  any sh ame at all, that action 
would become heavier. When  there is a sense of shame in one’s mind, that  is actually virtuous. 
Shame is in consideration for oneself when  one pers onally feels,  “This is really bad.  I should 
not  do this.”  If,  before one is about to engage in a negative action like killing or stealing and  one suddenly thinks, “This is not good because if I do this, it will harm others and cause 
problems for them, ” that kind of thought is called embarrassment as one is considering others 
and is referred to as apprehension in the verse.   The word “peaceful” here should be translated as pacified as it refers to restraining one’s sense doors well ; basically see no evil, hear no evil an d think no evil. It is im portant to restrain one’s 
visual, auditory and mental  faculties because if we do not restrain them, it is likely that one will 
follow after the three mental poisons. We need to  abide in the conduct that pacifies these sense 
doors.  One should engage in actions to make others ha ppy and to benefit them, with all these different 
attitudes.  Here we are talking about engaging in  the bodhisattva practices to work for the benefit 
of others and to make others happy. It is important to conduct ourselves properly and be  well-behaved. The point here is not to cause others to  create negativities through a lack of faith ie. 
generating the opposite of faith.  While one is abiding in a peaceful manner in su ch peaceful conduct, with the intention to 
benefit others, we may be liked or praised by so me. But there may also be  times when we may be 
criticised or put down by others. When that happens, the point is not to get discouraged.  
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
FPMT Basic Program                   Chapter Five  
 
 
243 The text mentions, “The childish ones who are in  discord with one another…. due to disturbing 
conceptions.” In that case, one should not be di sheartened or discouraged when one is put down 
and so forth for if one becomes discouraged and di sheartened, that will act as  obstacles harming 
one’s bodhicitta.  How should  bodhisattvas th ink when they are put down by others,  while 
engaging in work for them? The bodhisattvas would realise that sentient beings have  many 
different predispositions and aspirations and the reason why these sentient beings  are getting 
upset or angry is because they are coming under th e power of their own afflictions. Since this is 
the case, bodhisattvas would set aside any feelings  of anger on their part but would, instead, 
cherish and love even more and be even kinder to wards such sentient beings. This is the advice.  
 This applies to us, the childish ones with our afflictions.  When  we meet with such sentient 
beings, we should remind ourselves of this. Th e point here is to remember to differentiate 
between the person and that person’s afflictions and  not to mix them up. 
3B2B 2B2B 1A3A 2B2 The common antidotes 
[5,57] 
In doing that which by nature is not unwholesome 
Both for the sake of myself  and other sentient beings 
I should always hold my mind fast, 
(Acting) like an apparition, with no sense of self. 
 
“In doing that which by nature is not unwholes ome” refers to not doing anything that is a 
misdeed by nature or prohibited. Instead, we enga ge in virtuous actions, for the sake of either 
oneself, ensuring that one’s own purpose does not deteriorate,  or for the benefit of others. The 
commentary says that while doing this,  the acti on has to be complemented with the wisdom 
realising emptiness that  sees   that things are like illusions. By realising how things are like 
illusions – “like an apparition” -  one then engage s in these actions without being conceited ie.   
without any sense of pride.   Bodhisattvas, while working for the benefit of othe rs, should abandon the conception of “I” or  
“mine”. Bodhisattvas, when engaging in actions to  benefit themselves and others, should realise  
how things are like illusions; how things are empt y. With  that understa nding, they engage in 
these actions without being conceited or proud.  When the  bodhisattva engages in these actions 
without remembering that  things are empty or li ke illusions, this bodhisattva would have the 
conception of “I” or “mine”. This bodhisattva would think,  “I did th is, I did that.” This 
conception of “I” or grasping at “I” is non-virt ue. When  the bodhisattva understands how things 
are empty or like illusions, then the bodhisattv a will not generate pride or be conceited about 
what has been achieved because there is no conception of this “I”. 
3B2B 2B2B 1A3A 2B3 The way to apply oneself to cultivating the antidote 
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
FPMT Basic Program                   Chapter Five  
 
 
244 [5,58] 
By thinking again and again 
That after a long time I ha ve won the greatest leisure, 
Likewise I should hold my mind 
As utterly unshakeable as the king of mountains. 
 
One reflects here that we have been circling in samsara for a very long time in inopportune states 
i e .  w e  h a v e  b e e n  t a k i n g  s o  m a n y  r e b i r t h s  t h a t  do not provide us with the leisure to practise. 
Having practised virtues such as patience and ethi cs, now, at this time, we have won this human 
life of leisure and opportunity. One thinks, “I should take the essence out of this, to make 
whatever I have obtained meaningf ul.” By reflecting on the difficu lty of obtaining this human life 
of leisure and opportunity and on the great purpos es that can be achieved upon obtaining such a 
rebirth, one strives to engage in the training of all the precepts that have been explained so far, 
and to be as firm as Mount Meru. On the basis of generating this thought,  thinking, “I am going 
to use this human life of leisure and opport unity that I have obtained to do something 
meaningful”, one strives to engage in the training and keep the vows and so forth. 
 Verses 34 to 58 cover  the way to train in the ethics of refraining from negative actions. 
  
Lesson 30 – chapter 5, verse 59-70 
Here is another piece of advice from Guntang Rinp oche. He said that, at such a degenerate time 
like ours, when our minds are so weak and we have  so little merit, we need to rely on and make 
special request to the deities an d Dharma protectors. At the same  time, we need to accumulate 
merit by doing practices such as making prostrat ions, offerings, mandala offerings and so forth. 
We also need to purify our minds from obscurations by relying on the four opponent powers. 
These are the necessary supporting conditions for us  to be able to continue and to have success 
in our study of the great treatises, like the diffe rent teachings of the Buddha. Basically, we need 
to rely on the merit field.   Having intelligence alone does not necessarily me an that one will complete one’s study. Having 
favourable conditions alone would also not necessa rily guarantee the completion of one’s studies. 
We need to rely on favourable conditions like accumulating merits and purifying the mind from 
obscurations. We also need to make reques ts to the deities and Dharma protectors. 
 In the course of one’s studies or practices, one will meet with all kinds of external and internal 
obstacles in the form of sicknesses and so forth. Th erefore, it is important to make single pointed 
request to the merit field. The main point here is that the main thing that will see one through 
one’s studies is one’s determination and enthusia sm for studying.  Without such enthusiasm and 
determination, one may come to class but, in the course of study, one may slowly lose interest. 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
FPMT Basic Program                   Chapter Five  
 
 
245 Also, without such enthusiasm and determination, it is not much use even if one were to make 
prayers. It is important to have enthusiasm and de termination. On top of that, we need to make 
prayers, which is the support ing condition for success. 
3B2B 2B2B 1A3B  The way to train in the ethics of gathering virtuous dharmas 
1 Abandoning attachment to the body: the cause for not training in ethics  
2 One should be knowledgeable about accomplishing virtue 
3B2B 2B2B 1A3B 1 Abandoning attachment to the body: the cause for not training in ethics  
A An example of how it is unreasonable to be attached to the body 
B Cultivating a sense of the body’s lack of cleanliness 
C Reflecting on how the body is without essence 
D The reasons it is unreasonable to be attached to the body E As it quickly perishes, it is reasonable to utilize it for virtue 
3B2B 2B2B 1A3B 1A An example of how it is unreasonable to be attached to the body 
[5,59] 
If, mind, you are not made unhappy 
When this body is dragged and tossed about 
By vultures greedy for flesh, 
Then why are you so concerned about it now? 
 
[5,60] 
Holding this body as “mine”, 
Why, mind, do you guard it so? 
Since you and it are separate, 
What use can it be to you? 
 
T h i s  i s  t h e  a d v i c e  f o r  g i v i n g  u p  t h e  c h e r i s h i n g  o f  a n d  a t t a c h m e n t  t o  o n e ’ s  b o d y .  W e  m u s t  
understand that the advice here is how to abandon attachment to the body when such 
attachment arises. It does not mean that we shou ld not take care of our bodies. That is not the 
point. We need to rely on and take care of our bodies. The next couple of verses will talk about that.   Imagine vultures pecking away at and tearing apart one’s body, limbs, eyes and so forth when one 
passes away and one’s body is give n to the vultures. At that time when the body and mind are 
separated, there would not be a conception of th e body belonging to oneself or the feeling of,  
“This is mine, this is my body.” At that time, wh en the vultures tear apart and eat our bodies, we 
would not be unhappy about it. This analogy is used to help us unders tand the main point, 
which is to abandon attachment to the body.   The question is: what is the point of catering to  the needs of the body and doing so many things 
to protect the body when this is all done under the influence of attachment? It is inappropriate 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
FPMT Basic Program                   Chapter Five  
 
 
246 to protect one’s body out of attachment/desire as  only suffering will follow and undesired things 
will come. Since this is the case, there is no reason to be attached to our bodies. 
 
Another reason why it is inappropriate to be a ttached to the body is because the mind and the 
body are different and separate. These bodies of ours are the products of our parents’ eggs and sperm. The body is by nature ma tter. Its entity and nature are radically different from our minds. 
At the time of death, we have to leave behind  our bodies as our bodies abandon our minds and 
vice versa, leaving each other behind and going th eir separate ways. Since this is the case, what 
purpose would there be in protecting/guarding this  body?  These are some of the points one can 
reflect on when attachment to the body arises in the mind. 
3B2B 2B2B 1A3B 1B Cultivating a sense of the body’s lack of cleanliness 
[5,61] 
Why, confused mind, 
Do you not hold onto a clean, wooden form? 
Just what is the point of guarding 
This putrid, dirt-filled machine? 
 
Verse 61 refers to the “confused mind.”  There is this mind that thinks, “It is OK to protect and 
take care of the body out of attachment because this  body is the base or boat for the mind; ie this 
is where the mind resides.” When people think in  such a way, one can s ay to them, “Why don’t 
you hold onto something which is cleaner like a pi ece of wood?”  What th ey are saying here is 
that the mind is dwelling on the body and the bo dy is the base. The ques tion then is why does 
the mind not hold onto something that is cleane r than these dirt-filled machines, our bodies.   
The point here is to reflect on th e nature of the body - its uncleanl iness. It is, by nature, unclean 
like a machine that produces filth.  We have nine orifices in our bodies. Whichever orifice we choose to look at, whatever comes out 
of this orifice is only filth and dirt. Even when  we eat very pleasant, nice and clean food, what 
comes out of the body, at the end of day, is not clea n. His Holiness said that this body of ours is 
like a toilet and is a machine that produces filth and dirt.  
 Our bodies only give us problems: when some harm comes to them, we get upset or worried; 
when the body is in a good stat e, attachment for it arises. We stop attachment to the body by 
reflecting on how the body is by nature unclean.  
There are four close placements of mindfulness. (These are among the 37 aspects of the path to 
enlightenment): close placement of mindfulness of the body, the feelings, the mind and of 
phenomena. The close placement of mindfulness of the body is the reflection of how our bodies 
are, by nature, unclean. By doing so, one reduce s attachment to them. One reflects on how the 
body is by nature unclean, how our bodies are ma chines that produce filth,  and what is the point 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
FPMT Basic Program                   Chapter Five  
 
 
247 then of being attached to them . When we understand that, we make a mental promise to stop 
attachment to our bodies.  
 
Another way of explaining this verse is that the “confused mind” can refer to the mind that 
grasps at the self when, in fact, there is no self . Why do you grasp at something that is, by nature, 
unclean as “I” or “me”? Is it not better to hold on to something that is cleaner like a piece of 
wood?  
3B2B 2B2B 1A3B 1C Reflecting on how the body is without essence 
1 If one were to divide the body into parts and examine them, one would find nothing that is in 
the slightest a reliable essence 2 It is unreasonable to be attached to something that has no essence 
3B2B 2B2B 1A3B 1C1 If one were to divide the body into parts and examine them, one would find 
nothing that is in the slightest a reliable essence 
[5,62] 
First of all, mentally separate 
The layers of skin (from the flesh) 
And then with the scalpel of discrimination 
Separate the flesh from the skeletal frame. 
 
[5,63] 
And, having split open even the bones, 
Look right down into the marrow. 
While examining this, ask yourself, 
"Where is its essence?" 
 
Some people may think, “The body is unclean an d is a filth-making machine. Nevertheless, I am 
still going to protect and be attached to this body  because there is essence in or some meaning to 
this body.” It is inappropriate to think in such  a way. When we think that the body has essence 
and some meaning to it, we have to check with ou r wisdom to see whether this is the case. With 
our wisdom, we first peel off the skin from our bo dies and see what appears. This is one way of 
doing this reflection or meditation. When attachme nt arises for the body, we should look at the 
object of attachment and check what is th is thing that is producing the attachment? 
 In this example, using our wisdom, in our minds,  we peel off the whole layer of skin from the 
body and check if we are attached to our bodies then. When we mentally separate the layers of 
skin from the body and look at the final product, we will only see flesh and fat. Forget about 
attachment. We will be disgusted at what we see.  Then there is also the accompanying stench. 
We will probably be quite frightened  to see our bodies in that way.  
 Then, we separate the flesh from the skeletal fram e and look at that separately. There will be no 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
FPMT Basic Program                   Chapter Five  
 
 
248 base for our attachment. We can go  even further. We can split op en the bones. At the end, we 
get the bone marrow that is not something that is  clean or appealing. When we investigate the 
nature of our bodies with our wisdom in this way, by looking at all the different parts that make 
up the body, the conclusion then is that we wi ll not be able to find anything that has any 
meaning or essence at all.   These different kinds of reflection are done to stop one’s attachment for one’s body. When there 
is strong attachment to the body, we should refl ect in such a way; use our wisdom to check and 
look at the nature of our own bodies. By analys ing the body in such a way, one will not find 
anything that one can point to as being meaningful  or having any essence at the end of the day. 
3B2B 2B2B 1A3B 1C2 It is unreasonable to be attached to something that has no essence 
[5,64] 
If, even when searching with such effort 
You can apprehend no essence, 
Then why with so much attachment 
Are you still guarding this body now? 
 
No matter how much one checks and analyses with  one’s wisdom the state of the body, when, at 
the end of the day, one still cannot find any e ssence or meaning in the body, the question is: 
“Why with so much attachment are you still guarding  this body now?” This verse is saying that it 
is inappropriate to protect this body out of attachment. 
3B2B 2B2B 1A3B 1D The reasons why it is unreasonable to be attached to the body 
[5,65] 
What use is this body to you 
If its dirty insides are unfit for you to eat, 
If its blood is not fit to drink 
And if its intestines are not fit to be sucked 
 
[5,66ab] 
At second best, it is only fit to be guarded 
In order to feed the vultures and jackals. 
 
Some people may say that it is appropriate or reas onable to protect this body because the body is 
a necessity for us. But thinking in such a way is in appropriate. It is inappropriate to be attached 
to one’s body even though it is a necessity fo r us. Verse 65 is a conversation with one’s own 
mind, saying, “What use is this body to you (ie. the mind) if its dirty insides are unfit for you to 
eat, if its blood is not fit to drink and if its intest ines are not fit to be suck ed. ” If that is the case, 
how is the body something so important to you that you must definitely have it?  
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
FPMT Basic Program                   Chapter Five  
 
 
249 The point here is that there is no reason to be so protective of the body. What do we get out of 
protecting this body at the end of the day? As said in verse 66, “At se cond best, it is only fit to be 
guarded in order to feed the vultures and jackals.”  We do not have such a practice in Singapore 
so in our case the whole point of guarding this bo dy is for us to put it into a coffin and bury it 
underground for years to rot. When we really th ink about this, what do we get for continuously 
protecting and guarding this body out of attach ment? The end result is only to have the body 
placed in a box so small that we wi ll not be able to move at all.  
 We have to think about the conclusion that we arri ve at, ie., what is achieved at the end of the 
day. The point here is why do we suffer so much to  protect this body when, at the end of the day, 
this is what we get? 
3B2B 2B2B 1A3B 1E As  it quickly perishes, it is reaso nable to utilise it for virtue 
1 It is reasonable to utilise the perishable body for virtue as death will soon be upon us  
2 An example of how it is unreasonable to carry on with craving while not doing a single thing 
3 Causing one to accomplish one’s aims and desires by providing it one with incentives  
4 It is reasonable to accomplish the welfare of all sentient beings with that in the back of one’s 
mind 
3B2B 2B2B 1A3B 1E1  It is reasonable to utilise the perishable body for virtue as death 
will soon be upon us 
[5,66cd] 
(Truly) this body of a human being 
Should only be employed (i n the practice of virtue). 
 
[5,67] 
Yet should you instead guar d it (with attachment), 
Then what will you be able to do 
When it is stolen by the unsympathetic Lord of Death 
And given to the dogs and birds? 
 
No matter how much we look at the outside and in side of the body, the conclusion is that the 
body has no meaning in and of itself; there is no essence there. The point then is to make 
something useful out of this body. Like the king who owns everything in the kingdo m, the mind is the owner and the body is its 
slave. We need to use these slaves of ours, ou r bodies, and employ them for virtue. Of all the 
different kinds of slaves that we can possibly have , ie. the bodies of the six kinds of rebirth that 
we can take, the slave of a huma n body with a human life of le isure and opportunity is  the 
supreme base for engaging in virtuous activities. There is no other kind of slave that is better 
than this. The essence here is that we need to employ our bodies for virtue. 
 It is pointless to be attached to this body.  With  this mind of attachment, we sustain the body by 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
FPMT Basic Program                   Chapter Five  
 
 
250 giving it good clothes, make up, jewellery, etc; at the end of the day when it is time to die, it will 
be taken away by the Lord of Death, and this body  becomes food for vultur es, birds, dogs and so 
forth. When that happens, what can one do then? At the time of  death, the mind has no power 
whatsoever to retain this body. Even if the mind has no wish to separate from the body, when it 
is time, the body and mind go their own separate ways without any choice. It is only appropriate 
to guard and take care of our bodies if we are able to use it to engage in virtue.  
3B2B 2B2B 1A3B 1E2 An example of how it is unreasonable to carry on with craving while not 
doing a single thing 
[5,68] 
If servants are not given clothing and so forth 
When they are unable to be employed, 
Then why do you exhaust yourself  looking after the flesh alone 
When, even though caring for the body, it goes elsewhere? 
 
It is all right to sustain the body if we use it to engage in virtue. Otherwise it is not appropriate to 
sustain it by giving it food, clothing, jewellery and so forth. When we ha ve servants, we are not 
going to give them anything if they just sit arou nd, idle and do nothing. If we are unable to use 
these slaves, our bodies, to engage in virtue, ther e is no reason why we should make ourselves so 
tired, day and night, working just for the sake of  taking care of our bodies. There will be no 
reason to sustain them.   
The whole point of having slaves is to use them  to accomplish one’s purposes. When we talk 
about accomplishing one’s purposes from the Budd hist perspective, we are talking about using 
the slaves (bodies) of ours to achieve the state of liberation and enlightenment. We need to be 
able to use these slaves of ours to engage in listening to and reflecting and meditating on the 
teachings; basically, to use them for virtue.  
3B2B 2B2B 1A3B 1E3  Causing one to accompli sh one’s aims and desires by providing it 
one with incentives. 
[5,69] 
Now having paid my body its wages, 
I shall engage it in making my life meaningful. 
However, if my body is of no benefit, 
Then I shall not give it anything. 
 
In order to use the body to engage in Dharma practice, we can give it what it needs - giving it 
wages, presents and so forth - without going to th e extreme of giving it too much in an excessive 
way nor giving it too little. It is a problem when we  give it too much food or clothes, or if we do 
not give it enough food or clothes.   
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
FPMT Basic Program                   Chapter Five  
 
 
251 We give the body its wages, food, clothing and so forth in order to be able to use it to engage in 
Dharma practice - in the activities of listening, reflecting and meditating. When the body is of no 
benefit to us as we are unable to use it to practi se Dharma and so forth, then we shall not give it 
anything. What this verse is saying is that, when the body does what we want, such as practising 
Dharma an d so forth, we can give it its wages, etc.; if it does not do this, then do not give it anything.  Q: We may be able to practise now. But how shou ld we treat our bodies wh en they no longer do 
as much in our old age?  A: In this world, when our slaves grow old, ideally, we should take care of them instead of casting them aside. In the same way, when we do Dharma pr actice, it is still all ri ght to take care of the 
body when we get old and cannot do anything, because of what we have done in the past. In the earlier part of our lives, if we have used our bodies to engage in  virtue and practice, when we are 
o l d ,  w e  c a n  t h i n k ,   “ I  h a v e  a l r e a d y  u s e d  t h i s  b o d y  o f  m i n e  t o  r e a l l y  p r a c t i s e .  I  h a v e  d o n e  something worthwhile and good.” That is a good reason for us to continue to take care of the body when we are old.  
3B2B 2B2B 1A3B 1E4 It is reasonable to accomplish the welfare of all sentient beings with that in 
the back of one’s mind 
[5,70] 
I should conceive of my body as a boat, 
A mere support for coming and going, 
And in order to benefit all others 
Transform it into a wish-fulfilling body, 
 
We should think of this body of ours as a boat; a boat that we use to go up and down. This body 
of ours is the mere support for activities of comi ng and going. “Going” here  refers to going to the 
state of liberation and enlightenment. “Coming”  here refers to working for the benefit of 
sentient beings. By thinking of the body in such a way, we should give it what it needs to protect the body without going to either extremes. We do so  in order to use it to benefit others. By first 
generating bodhicitta, on that ba se, we then develop the thought to  engage in the practice of the 
six perfections in order to transform our bodies into  wish-fulfilling bodies, ie .,  in order for us to 
achieve the state of full enlightenment; to become someone who is able to fulfil all the wishes of 
others by whatever connections other sentient bein gs may make with us,  such as seeing, coming 
into contact with us and so forth. We develo p the wish that our bodies become like wish 
fulfilling bodies that are able to fulfil the wishes of all sentient beings. Basically it is to think of achieving the state of full enlightenment so  that one can be of benefit to others. 
  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
FPMT Basic Program                   Chapter Five  
 
 
252 Lesson 31 chapter 5, verse 71-82 
 
We have completed looking at how the body is, by nature, very unclean and dirty. In one of the  
sutras the Buddha says that the body is by nature  unclean and arises from impure causes. So, this 
body becomes the source of suffering, such as old age and death and, at the very end, becomes 
food for vultures and  worms.   We put so much effort into sustaining our bodies but no matter how well we are able to look after them, when the time of de ath comes the Lord of Death will take them away from us against 
our wishes. Our bodies are actually appropriated , contaminated physical  aggregates. When the 
great practitioners examine the body, they only s ee it as something to be criticised.  When we 
foolish people look at our bodies, we see them  as something very pleasant, as objects of 
attachment. We put in so much effort to sustain them. But we should not use the body to engage 
in meaningless activities because we sometimes ac cumulate so much negative karma in order to 
sustain the body. That is useless activity.   How should we sustain our bodies? Do you rememb er the analogies of giving the servants wages 
when the servants work, or conceiving of the bo dy as a boat for going and coming? We should 
sustain our bodies with the motivation of using them to engage in virtue.   Guntang Rinpoche said the same thing in his collec tion of advice. He said that the body is like 
an autumn flower. With each passing day, this body deteriorates a little like an autumn flower. Therefore, there is no point in be ing attached to the body and it’s a mistake to sustain it out of 
attachment, as we will create negativities and so fo rth. No one is saying  we should not take care 
of or sustain our bodies but we should not do so out of attachment.  We need to sustain the 
body and we should know how to sustain the body . We should ensure that our bodies  become 
supporting  conditions  for us to en gage in virtue. This is how we should take care of our bodies.   
3B2B 2B2B 1A3B  The way to train in the ethics of gathering virtuous dharmas 
1 Abandoning attachment to the body: the cause for not training in ethics  
2 One should be knowledgeable about accomplishing virtue 
3B2B 2B2B 1A3B 2 One should be knowledgeable about accomplishing virtue 
A Performing ordinary activities beautifully 
B Being knowledgeable in the way of befriending others without incurring misdeeds 
C Being knowledgeable about performing actions of the three doors ∗ 
3B2B 2B2B 1A3B 2A Performing ordinary activities beautifully 
1 How to act when encountering others 
2 How to act with regards to discarding and adopting basic necessities 3 Acting at all times with noble demeanour       
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
FPMT Basic Program                   Chapter Five  
 
 
253 3B2B 2B2B 1A3B 2A1  How to act when encountering others 
[5,71] 
Now, while there is freedom to act, 
I should always present a smiling face 
And cease to frown and look angry; 
I should be a friend and counsel of the world 
 
Our bodies and speech are controlled by our minds.  First, we should make sure that our minds 
are under the influence of virtue. While the mind is in a virtuous state, we should look at others 
with smiling faces and not with wi th unfriendly looks. When we meet others we should act in an 
honest way without deceit or pretension.  
3B2B 2B2B 1A3B 2A2  How to act with regards to discarding and adopting basic 
necessities 
[5,72ab]   
I should desist from inconsiderately and noisily 
Moving around chairs and so forth, 
 
When we move around things such as chairs, cushions, etc, we should not do this  noisily but should be careful to take and put things down wi thout creating a racket. We need to do this as 
there may be a danger of harming or disturbing others. For example, there may be people around 
us  who are meditating. When we move things around noisily, we may disturb them.   The advice here is about how we should handle encounters with people and  how to move things around. It is not difficult and readily applicable, so we should put it into practice. Here  in a dharma centre we should know how to adopt pr oper manners when we see people and how to 
speak to them in the correct way. When people  a r e  m e d i t a t i n g  o r  d o i n g  a  p u j a ,  o r  w h e n  a  
t e a c h i n g  i s  t a k i n g  p l a c e ,  w e  s h o u l d  k n o w  h o w  to carry out activities such as moving things 
around.   
3B2B 2B2B 1A3B 2A3  Acting at all times with noble demeanour 
[5,72cd]   
As well as from violently opening doors; 
I should always delight in humility. 
 
[5, 73 ] 
The stork, the cat and the thief, 
By moving silently and carefully, 
Accomplish what they desire to do; 
A Bodhisattva, too, should al ways behave in this way. 
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
FPMT Basic Program                   Chapter Five  
 
 
254 Activities such as opening doors should be done in a gentle way since it is possible to slam doors 
very hard,  as referred to in “v iolently opening doors”.  We shou ld not close or slam doors in a 
very noisy way, in a manner that others may cons ider uncouth or ill bred. If someone happens to 
be trying to practise concentration in the room, opening or closing the door violently is not very 
helpful to that person. When a few people are sharin g the same premises it is important  to  close 
and open doors carefully to avoid  disturbing others . The essence here is not to act roughly but to  
behave in a disciplined and restrained manner.   Verse 73 talks about how when the stork, cat and thief go about their daily business, looking for 
food and so forth, they carry out such activities very quietly and carefully. If such beings behave like this just for the sake of accomplishing th eir own purposes, it goes without saying that a 
bodhisattva, who wishes to accomplish the welfar e of others, should act conscientiously and in a 
very peaceful and disciplined way too. There is no  way bodhisattvas will be able to accomplish the 
welfare of others if they act in a rough and violent way. 
3B2B 2B2B 1A3B 2B Being knowledgeable in the way of befriending others without incurring 
misdeeds 
1 How to speak beneficially 
2 How to speak truthfully 
3 How to act when you see someone doing virtue ∗ 
4 How to act when remarking on another’s qualities 5 The benefits of acting in a way that others enjoy 
3B2B 2B2B 1A3B 2B1  How to speak beneficially 
[5,74 ] 
With respect, I should gratefully accept 
Unsought-after words that are of benefit, 
And that wisely advise and admonish me. 
At all times, I should be the pupil of everyone 
 
How should we relate verse 74 to the outlin e [of Gyaltsab Je’s commentary]? Let us place 
ourselves in a situation where we are trying to encourage or persuade others to  do something 
good. In this situation, when we are not asking them for advice or to help us, a person may say 
something that is beneficial for us. When such un sought advice is received, we should not look 
down on the advice or generate pride, but instead we should see ourselves as students who are willing to put into practice the beneficial advice that has been given.   
3B2B 2B2B 1A3B 2B2  How to speak truthfully 
[5,75ab]      
I should say, "Well said," to all those 
Who speak (Dharma) well, 
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
FPMT Basic Program                   Chapter Five  
 
 
255 When someone tells us something that is true, we should acknowledge and respond accordingly 
t h a t  w h a t  h e / s h e  s a i d  i s  c o r r e c t .  W e  s h o u l d  r e j o i c e  i n  t h a t  p e r s o n ’ s  t r u t h f u l  w o r d s  a n d ,  w i t h  
respect, we reply, “You said that well”. We shou ld give an answer that is congruent with what has 
been said to us by the other party. We should not say something that is not related to what the 
other party has said.  
3B2B 2B2B 1A3B 2B3  How to act when you see someone doing virtue ∗ 
[5,75cd] 
And if I see someone doing good, 
I should praise them and be well pleased. 
 
When we see others engaging in virtue, such as making offerings to the Three Jewels, practising 
generosity, etc, instead of putting these people do wn out of jealousy, we should praise them. We 
should be happy about and rejoice in what they ar e doing. When we do th at, both parties benefit 
and everyone is happy. 
3B2B 2B2B 1A3B 2B4  How to act when remarking on another’s qualities 
This can refer to either how we  should act when someone is talking about someone else’s good 
qualities or how we should act when someone is talking about one’s own good qualities.  
  
[5,76] 
I should discreetly talk about the good qualities (of others) 
And repeat those (that others) recount. 
If my own good qualit ies are spoken about, 
I should just know and be aware that I have them. 
 
“I should discreetly talk about the good qualit ies (of others)”, refers to oneself praising the 
qualities of others. Here “discreetly” depends on the context; sometimes, even when we wish to 
say something good about the other person, the other person may misconstrue our words as sarcasm. We should then discreetly  talk about their good qualities to others. In such a situation, 
rather than talking about the good qualities of th a t  p e r s o n  d i r e c t l y  t o  h i m  o r  h e r ,  w e  c a n  g o  
through a third party.   “Repeat those (that others) recount” refers to  someone talking about the good qualities of 
someone whom we do not like and telling us: “S o-and-so has these good qualities.” Instead of 
responding, “No, that cannot be”, we should agree and say, “Yes, it is true.”  How should one act when one overhears that ones elf is the object of conversation? Someone has 
seen us doing something good or has been told  t h a t  w e  h a v e  d o n e  s o mething good and that 
person decides to praise us. First, we should not be proud when someone talks about our good qualities. Instead, we should analyse and check to see whether what the person has said is true or 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
FPMT Basic Program                   Chapter Five  
 
 
256 not; whether we actually have those good qualitie s or not. If we do posse ss the  good qualities 
mentioned, we should acknowledge them. We shou ld also acknowledge that the person who is 
praising us has good qualities too and that the person is saying the correct thing.  
 The point here is not to get puffed up or become proud when our qualities are talked about.  At 
the same time, we should see the person who is  saying those things as someone who is very 
qualified, i.e. we should train in pure perception. 
3B2B 2B2B 1A3B 2B5  The benefits of acting in a way that others enjoy 
[5,77] 
All deeds (of others) are the source of a joy 
That would be rare even if it  could be bought with money. 
Therefore, I should be happy in finding this joy 
In the good things that are done by others. 
 
[5,78] 
(Through doing this) I shall su ffer no losses in this life 
And in future lives shall find great happiness, 
But the fault (of disliking their good qualit ies) will make me unhappy and miserable, 
And in future lives I shall find great suffering. 
 
This refers to all the activiti es of the bodhisattva’s body, sp eech and mind. Anything that the 
bodhisattva does makes others ha ppy. Such a thing is so rare an d cannot be bought with money. 
We focus on the qualities of those who are in or  out of samsara and rejoice in them. We rejoice 
in the happiness of others, whether they are stud ying, reflecting, meditating or anything that 
happens to beings that are in or out of sams ara. We ourselves will experience the joy and 
happiness that comes from rejoicing.   By doing this, even in this life we will not su ffer a decline in our resources or possessions. In 
future lives, due to not acting with jealousy and so forth, we will be able to obtain the happiness 
of a higher rebirth. When we get jealous, angr y or generate a sense of competitiveness in a 
negative way instead of rejoicing upon seeing th e good things of others, (be it their wealth, 
possessions or good qualities), our minds will be unha ppy in this life and we will be reborn in the 
lower realms in future lives. We should rejoice in  the good qualities of others instead of feeling  
jealous. When we rejoice we only profit; when we get jealous we lose out. 
3B2B 2B2B 1A3B 2C Being knowledgeable about performing actions of the three doors ∗ 
1 How to act when speaking 
2 How to act when viewing 
3 Connecting oneself solely with virtuous karma 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
FPMT Basic Program                   Chapter Five  
 
 
257 3B2B 2B2B 1A3B 2C1 How to act when speaking 
[5,79] 
When talking, I should speak from  my heart on what is relevant, 
Making the meaning clear and the speech pleasing. 
I should not speak out of desire or hatred, 
But in gentle tones and in moderation. 
 
When we are conversing with someone and we need to respond, we should speak what is 
relevant from the heart and make sure that the head and tail of our conversation meet up; we 
should  say something that is connected to wh at was asked. When the head and tail of our 
conversation do not match up,  people will sooner  or later sense that we are lying through our  
teeth! 
 
“Making the meaning clear” refers to leaving no  doubt in the mind of the other person about 
what we are saying. “Speech pleasing” means speec h that is pleasant and makes the other party 
happy. We should not say things out of desire for one’s own side or faction. We should also not 
talk about our hatred for others.  When we need to speak, we should speak in gentle tones and in moderation. To speak “in 
moderation” means not to speak in excess. When  we say too much the other party may not be 
happy; on the other hand, when we say too little by giving monosyllabic answers, it may also 
disturb the other party. We need to speak in  gentle tones and not in a harsh manner.  
 All the different advice given here is very good an d we should try to put it  into practice. We are 
not acting completely in the manner that has b een described so far - so there is room for 
improvement.  
3B2B 2B2B 1A3B 2C2  How to act when viewing  
[5,80] 
When beholding someone with my eyes, 
Thinking, “I shall fully awaken 
Through depending upon this being,” 
I should look at that person with love and an open heart. 
 
Whomever we meet, be it a person higher, lowe r, better or worse than ourselves, we should 
remember that that person is the base upon wh ich we generate bodhicitta. That person becomes 
an object for our practice of the  six perfections.  I n  s h o r t ,  t h a t  p e r s o n  i s  t h e  c a u s e  f o r  u s  t o  
achieve the state of full enlightenment.   Whomever we see, we should be able to see that  person as the cause for our own enlightenment, 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
FPMT Basic Program                   Chapter Five  
 
 
258 as the teacher, as the cause for increasing our prac tice of bodhicitta and so forth. We should look 
at the person not with anger but with love like that of the mother for her child and with pure 
motivation. This is the advice for how to look at sentient beings. 
3B2B 2B2B 1A3B 2C3 Connecting oneself solely with virtuous karma 
A Giving to the special fields for giving 
B Virtuous karma occurs through its own power C Entering into higher and higher virtues and having examined whether there is a purpose, 
acting upon it 
3B2B 2B2B 1A3B 2C3A Giving to the special fields for giving 
[5,81] 
Always being motivated by great aspiration, 
Or being motivated by the remedial forces 
If I work in the fields of excellence, benefit and misery, 
Great virtues will come about. 
 
“Always being motivated”: “Always” here refers to the distinction of time - that one continuously 
engages in that action. The distinction of the in tention here is indicated by the words “great 
aspiration,” which refers to performing those actions with compassion and so forth. “Being 
motivated by the remedial forces”:  this is the distinction of the antidotes (“remedial forces” is 
another translation for antidotes). Using generosi ty as an example: when one practises giving, 
one’s act of giving should become an antidote ag ainst one’s miserliness. So, when one gives, one 
gives without miserliness. When we  give others what we are attach ed to, then that act of giving 
will act as an antidote to help weaken our miserliness.   “If I work in the fields of excellence, benefit and misery”. This is referring to the three fields; the 
field of excellence or the field of qualities refers to the Three Jewels; the field of benefit refers to 
one’s parents; and the field of misery refers to destitute, suffering sentient beings. These three 
fields (or three different objects) are the supreme fields for the practice of generosity. When we 
make offerings to the Three Jewels, or give to our parents or destitute sentient beings, great virtue 
will come about. Conversely, if we were to do negative actions in relation to the Three Jewels, 
our parents or poor, suffering sentient beings, we would incur great negativities. 
3B2B 2B2B 1A3B 2C3B Virtuous karma occurs through its own power 
[5,82] 
Endowed with wisdom and faith,   
I should undertake all that I (intend to) do. 
I (need) not depend upon anyone else 
In any actions that I undertake. 
 
Whenever we engage in virtue, we should do of our own accord. We should not do something 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
FPMT Basic Program                   Chapter Five  
 
 
259 virtuous because somebody is pushing us or asking  us to do it. Whatever virtue we intend to 
perform, we should be extremely knowledgeable an d be skilled in accomplishing what we intend 
to accomplish. We need to perform virtue with a faith of conviction and engage in the actions 
voluntarily. 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
FPMT Basic Program                   Chapter Five  
 
 
260 Lesson 32 – chapter 5, verse 83-95 
Here is another advice from Guntang Rinpoche. He said that once we are able to find firm and 
stable faith, then joyous perseverance for virtue would naturally arise, without any effort. If our  
faith is unstable, like a hopping  rabbit - someti mes strong, sometimes not there at all – then our 
act of prostrations, for example, will merely cont ribute to the whipping up of dust from the 
ground. Likewise with our spiritual masters, we n eed to have a strong and stable faith in them.  
 We also need to have a strong and stable faith of  conviction in the need to analyse and to study 
the teachings of the Buddha, the Fi ve Great Treatises. When we have this very stable faith that 
sees the importance of engaging in studies, it will enable us to complete our studies.  Once we have that kind of faith, no matter how busy we  may be, we will always set  aside time for our 
studies.    We will not get anywhere if our faith towards in  studies is like that of the hopping rabbit -  
sometimes studying, other times, not feeling like st udying.  Because of that, we will never be able 
to accomplish nor complete our studies. When  we  are able to make the decision, from the very 
depths of our hearts thinking, “This is something th at is very good for me and I must do it,” then 
naturally we will put effort into pursuing our studie s. This is because when we think about it, we  
see for ourselves the need to study and the purpos e of studying all these subjects. It all boils 
down to whether we are able to generate in ou r own minds this determination from the heart; 
this will determine whether the effort will spontaneously arise or not.  
 Our faith should not be like the hopping rabbit. At the beginning of each module, we feel, “I must study as this is very important.” As the course progresses, so does one’s boredom. When 
that happens, nothing much will be  accomplished. The point here is  that effort must be applied 
continuously. {Geshela said, “So don’t become like the rabbit!”}  
 
We must keep this in mind. This is not to say that one will not encounter any difficulties in the 
course of one’s study. It is not easy. But when we have this determination from the depths of our hearts thinking, “This is someth ing I must do in this life and I should not miss out on this 
opportunity,” we will put aside time, and effort  will come. Without this determination from 
one’s own side from the depths of our hearts, no  matter how perfectly all the most favourable 
conditions come together for one to stud y, everything will be very difficult. 
3B2B 2B2B 1A3B 2C3  Connecting oneself solely with virtuous karma 
A Giving to the special fields for giving 
B Virtuous karma occurs through its own power C Entering into higher and higher virtues and having examined whether there is a purpose, 
acting upon it 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
FPMT Basic Program                   Chapter Five  
 
 
261 3B2B 2B2B 1A3B 2C3C Entering into higher and higher virtues and having examined whether 
there is a purpose, acting upon it 
[5,83] 
The perfections such as generosity 
Are progressively more exalted 
But for a little (morality) I sh ould not forsake a great (gift). 
Principally I should consider what will be of the most benefit for others. 
 
When we talk about the six perfections, each perf ection is superior to the preceding perfection. 
E.g. in terms of generosity and ethics, the perfecti on of ethics is more exalted than the perfection 
of generosity. When we compare the perfection of ethics to th e perfection of patience, the 
perfection of patience is more exalted or superi or to the perfection of ethics and so forth.  
 Generally, when we compare the pe rfection of generosity and ethics , the perfection of ethics is 
considered superior and more exalted. If we have  to choose between the two, we should  choose 
the one that is more exalted  and  significant.  When  we are placed in a situation where we 
cannot practice both perfections at the same time, which one should we choose? We should 
choose the superior perfection.  When we have to choose between one’s own purp oses or the purposes of others, again, we 
should choose the greater purpose, i.e. the benefit of others, even if that leads to the 
deterioration of  one’s own purposes. Generally , one should choose the more significant or 
important options when one is presented with such a situation. What has been said here appears  
to contradict what was said earlier in verse 42:  “At times of giving one may be neutral to certain 
aspects of ethics (moral discipline).” 
[5,42] 
But if I am unable to do this 
When afraid or involved in cele brations, then I should relax. 
Likewise it has been taught that at times of giving 
One may be neutral to (certain aspects of) moral discipline. 
 
In specific instances such as the one mentioned in verse 42 it is different.  The example cited in 
verse 42 is in the context of someone training progressively in stages. When we compare the 
trainings in the perfections of generosity and ethi cs, the perfection of generosity is the coarser 
training. The training in the perfection of ethics is more subtle, i.e. more advanced and difficult. 
In that case, someone who is training progressively  on the path first trains in something that is 
easier to handle - in this case the perfection of  generosity. This person can manage the perfection 
of generosity but may not be train in the perfecti on of ethics, which is more subtle and difficult, 
at that time. In the context of such a person pr acticing the perfection of generosity, he/she may 
remain neutral to certain aspects of ethics.   
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
FPMT Basic Program                   Chapter Five  
 
 
262 There  is another possible scenario: when  a person  is engaging in the practice of generosity for 
the purposes of accomplishing the welfare of ma ny people, that person may remain neutral to 
certain aspects of moral discipline. This is beca use, in that context, the practice of moral 
discipline is for oneself.    Another exception might be this scenario: Someone  is engaging in the practice of meditative 
concentration. Suddenly, one day, a large group of   people from a very far distant place comes  
just to receive Dharma teachings from that person. Although the practice of meditative 
concentration is considered much more exalted an d superior to giving Dharma, in that context, 
because of the greater purpose of benefiting so many people who have travelled a great distance, 
the person should arise from his/her meditative concentration and  give the teachings. If that 
person does not teach when he/she  possesses the ability to do so, then that person will incur a 
root downfall - not giving  Dharma upon reques t is one of the bodhisattva root downfalls.  
 In general, when one has to choose between the  two, one should  choose the more exalted, 
significant or important practice. But there are exceptions to the rule as mentioned. 
3B2B 2B2B 1A3 The way to train in the conduct of guarding the mind by means of mindfulness 
and alertness 
A The way to train in the ethics of  refraining from negative actions ∗ 
B The way to train in the ethics of gathering virtuous dharmas 
C The way to train in the ethics of working for the benefit of sentient beings 
3B2B 2B2B 1A3C  The way to train in the ethics of working for the benefit of sentient beings 
1 Devoting oneself to the welfare of others 
2 Conduct that gathers others without sullying (polluting) oneself with wrongdoing 
3 Looking after the minds of senti ent beings and training in the conduct that is unsullied by 
wrongdoing 
3B2B 2B2B 1A3C 1 Devoting oneself to the welfare of others 
[5,84] 
When this is well understood, 
I should always strive for the welfare of others. 
The Far-Seeing Merciful Ones have allowed (a Bodhisattva) 
To do some actions that (f or others) were forbidden. 
 
When one has understood well the trainings in the earlier two ethics i.e: the ethics of refraining 
from negative actions and the ethics of gatherin g virtuous dharma, on that basis one then moves 
on to the ethics of working for the benefit of sentient beings. One should always strive and put effort into accomplishing this practice.  Someone may wonder, “In terms of engaging in th e ethics of working for the benefit of others, 
one has to do a lot of different things to accompli sh that purpose. In that process, won’t there  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
FPMT Basic Program                   Chapter Five  
 
 
263 be  a possible danger that one could commit negativities or faults along the way?” 
 
The Far-Seeing Merciful Ones, th e buddhas, are the ones who, with  their omniscient minds, can 
see what is more beneficial in the long run and wh at actions will lead to less harm in the long 
run. Such buddhas have allowed bo dhisattvas who have completely no self-interest whatsoever to 
engage in the actions which are usually considered negative i.e.  the three negative actions of the 
body and the four negative actions of  speech. Such negative actions are forbidden for those who 
are of the hearers’ and the solitary realisers’ li neages. But, in the case of the bodhisattvas, who 
have completely no self-interest, the buddhas have  given permission for them to engage in these 
seven different kinds of actions when a great purpose can be served.   In the scriptures for the hearers and the solitary realisers, the Buddha very clearly forbade these 
negative actions of the body and speech, prim arily because these actions would  usually be 
tainted with self-interest (i.e. for one’s own  purpose). But when we look into the Mahayana scriptures, the Buddha has made exceptions when there is a need or great purpose for doing so. 
For example, the Buddha made an exception fo r a bodhisattva to lie when done solely and 
completely for the benefit of others. When a bodh isattva, whose only interest is the welfare of 
others, would not lie when there was a need to do  so, then, would s/he incur a fault or misdeed?  
 This is an area of discussion. There are some gr eat scholars who assert that they would incur a 
misdeed if they did not lie when there was a need . But there are other scholars who say that they 
wouldn’t. The great Shantarakshita  is the proponent of this latter view. (We should probably  
adhere to that.) Taking lying as an example, it is  also mentioned that if a  bodhisattva lied solely 
for the benefit of others, that bodhisattva would actually speed up his accumulation of the two 
collections. How would this work?   
3B2B 2B2B 1A3C 2 Conduct that gathers others without sullying (polluting) oneself with 
wrongdoing 
A Gathering through material generosity 
B Gathering through dharma 
3B2B 2B2B 1A3C 2A Gathering through material generosity 
1 The difference between giving and not giving food and clothing 
2 Not causing harm to the body for the sake of minor and/or difficult actions 
3 Explaining the time and need for practicing the giving of body 
3B2B 2B2B 1A3C 2A1  The difference between giving and not giving food and clothing 
[5,85] 
I should divide my food amongst those who have fallen to lower realms, 
Those without protection, and practitioners, 
And eat merely what is  sufficient for myself. 
Except for the three robes I may give away all. 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
FPMT Basic Program                   Chapter Five  
 
 
264 Verse 85 refers to the traditional custom of orda ined persons going out to receive alms. They are 
not supposed to eat everything that has been offered.  They have to divide what they get into four 
portions of which they have to give: one portion to those who have fallen to  the lower realms eg.  
animals; one portion to those without protection , which refers to beggars, destitute and poor 
people; and one portion to fellow practitioners. Wh en one is in retreat, then one gives this to 
fellow retreatants (the neighbours on one’s left and right). They then ea t the remaining portion. 
 Before eating the remaining portion, one sh ould offer the food. With proper, virtuous 
motivation, one should eat in moderation, ne ither too much nor too little and  adopt an 
appropriate diet in the sense of a correct amount  of food. One should not eat too much because 
then one’s body becomes heavy and the mind is pr one to sleepiness, which would be an obstacle 
for virtue. If one eats too little, the body does not get enough nutrients,  which again becomes an 
obstacle. This is the advice for someone who want s to practise and is interested in gathering 
virtue.   There are different thoughts that one should atte mpt to cultivate while eating. Before one eats, 
one generates the motivation that one is eating for the sake of the person who has offered the 
food; to accomplish the purposes and wishes of the benefactor. When one is eating, one mentally 
makes offerings to the living beings living in on e’s body. We think, “By gi ving you food now, in 
the future,  when I become a buddha, may I give  you the Dharma”. We need to set a proper 
motivation for eating which is not mixed with any of the three mental poisons.  
 One eats with the thought, “This is  for  the purpose of sustaining th e body so that I can use it for 
the practice of the Dharma. For th is reason, I’m going to eat”. Sinc e we eat three, four or five 
times a day, it is important to set the proper motivation,  thinking that one is making this 
o f f e r i n g  t o  a l l  t h e  b e i n g s  l i v i n g  i n  o n e ’ s  b o d y  w i t h  a  w i s h  t o  g i v e  t h e m  D h a r m a  w h e n  o n e  
becomes enlightened. Then one eats  with the thought of the food as  the source of sustenance for 
the body so that one can use it to practise the Dharma. 
 There is also a practice of eating yoga, done wi th the visualisation of holding on to the divine 
pride of oneself as a deity, on which basis one eats  the food. But we do not  have to discuss that 
here.   For the ordained, one may give away everything el se except the three robes. When one has more 
than one set of robes, one should  give them away. When one only has a single set of robes, even 
if someone asks for the robes, one should not  give them away. If one gave away the robes, it 
would create an obstacle to continuing to live a celibate life. Likewise, when putting on clothes 
one should have the correct virtuous motivation. Putting on clothes should not be done out of 
attachment and so forth. One shou ld think that one puts on clothes to sustain the body, which is  
an important condition in one’s pursuit of Dhar ma practice. The whole point of the ordained 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
FPMT Basic Program                   Chapter Five  
 
 
265 wearing robes is as a reminder of the vows that they hold.  
3B2B 2B2B 1A3C CA2  Not causing harm to the body for the sake of minor and/or difficult 
actions 
[5,86] 
This body which is being us ed for the sacred Dharma 
Should not be harmed for only slight benefit. 
By behaving in this way 
The wishes of all beings will be quickly fulfilled. 
 
Our bodies,  which we use for practising the Dhar ma, should not be harmed for a small purpose. 
This advice is for a beginner bodhisattva. “T his body which is being used for the sacred 
Dharma”: In the case of a bodhis attva who is a beginner, this bo dhisattva should not put his/her 
body in harm’s way  for a small purpose. In fa ct, that bodhisattva should protect the body.  
 The bodhisattva should use the human life of leis ure and opportunity that he has obtained as a 
base for engaging in practices such as the practice  of the three higher trainings and so forth. The 
bodhisattva should use the body as a means to attain the state of full enlightenment so that 
he/she can benefit all sentient beings.   Do you remember we talked about how the body, by nature, is unpleasant and dirty and is the 
source of all our sufferings? Although we must view  the body in this way, nevertheless we need to 
protect it. When  a bodhisattva who holds the vo ws and possesses such a body  protects the body 
carefully, it will enable the bodhisattva to accu mulate virtue for a long period of time.  
 When such a bodhisattva is able to sustain the body  for a long time, he will be able to accomplish 
more virtues and to accumulate more merits. On th e other hand, it is said that it is much better 
for a person who is always using the body to engage  in negative actions to have a very short life. 
Of course, the body has to be sustained with food, clothes and so forth. But the whole point of sustaining the body is to use it to practise th e Dharma. When we use th e body to practise the 
Dharma, of course, the more we sustain the body, the more virtue we will be able to practise.  
3B2B 2B2B 1A3C 2A3 Explaining the time and need for practicing the giving of body 
[5,87] 
Those who lack the pure intention of compassion 
Should not give their body away. 
Instead, both in this and future lives, 
They should give it to the cause of fulfilling the great purpose.  
 
“Those who lack the pure intention of compassi on”: One should not give away one’s body, limbs 
and so forth until one has achieved the first bo dhisattva ground called Very Joyful. Until that 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
FPMT Basic Program                   Chapter Five  
 
 
266 time, giving away one’s body or limbs does not necessarily  bring about some sort of benefit. It is 
also possible that giving away  one’s body and li mbs before the attainment of the first ground 
may become an obstacle for oneself. Of course , for someone who has achieved the first ground, 
giving away the body will not become an obstacle for the practice of virtue . In that case, it is 
acceptable to give the body away. 
3B2B 2B2B 1A3C 2B Gathering through dharma 
1 Physical postures (which are) inappropriate for a listener to assume when the dharma is being 
explained 2 Examining the features of the vessel’s thoughts  
3 One should not treat [a person] who esteems th e extensive like [one who feels an affinity 
towards] the inferior 
3B2B 2B2B 1A3C 2B1  Physical postures (which are) inappropriate for a listener to 
assume when the dharma is being explained 
[5,88] 
The Dharma should not be explai ned to those who lack respect, 
To those who, like sick men, wear cloth around their heads, 
To those holding umbrella s, sticks or weapons, 
To those with covered heads, 
 
Physical and mental respect is necessary in the context of listening to Dharma teachings. The 
Dharma should not be explained to those who lack mental respect an d who do not express 
respect in a physical way.   The reason for coming to Dharma teachings is to benefit and subdue the mind. When one lacks 
physical and mental respect for the teachings an d for the teacher, the teachings will not be so 
beneficial nor have any significant impact on the mind. At the most, it is akin to listening to a 
nice story.   The whole point of having respect for the teachings is to benefit the mind. I think it is something 
that we can tell from our own experience. When we listen to someone we do not have faith in or 
respect for, the teachings are unlikely to make an  impact upon the mind. But it is different when 
we listen to teachings by someone we deeply re s p e c t  a n d  i n  w h o m  w e  h a v e  g r e a t  f a i t h .  T h e   
teachings then  benefit the mind. I think this is th e main reason why this is set as the rule, “The 
Dharma should not be explaine d to those who lack respect.” 
 With regards to not teaching th e Dharma to those who may not be  appropriately dressed, I guess 
it depends on the timing, place and so forth. I t  s a y s  h e r e  t h a t  t h e  Dharma should not be 
explained to those who  “wear cloth around their heads, to those holding umbrellas, sticks or 
weapons, to those with covered heads.”  We me ntioned this before with regards to attending 
Dharma teachings. A respectful physical  posture is also very important.  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
FPMT Basic Program                   Chapter Five  
 
 
267  
Our  way of dressing should be deemed approp riate and respectful, in accordance with local 
customs. We make an exception for the sick; they may cover thei r heads and bring whatever they 
need with them to the teachings.  
3B2B 2B2B 1A3C 2B2 Examining the features of the vessel’s thoughts  
[5,89] 
Nor to a woman unaccompanied by a man. 
The vast and profound should not be taught to lesser beings, 
(Although) I should always pay equal respect 
To the Dharmas of the lesser and higher beings. 
 
The vast and profound aspects of the path sh ould not be taught to someone who is more 
inclined towards the lesser vehicle. In the context of an ordained person, a monk should not give 
teachings to a woman who is unaccompanied by a man and   a nun should not give teachings to 
a man who is unaccompanied by a woman.   One should also not differentiate between the lesse r vehicle  and Mahayana teachings saying that 
one is superior to the other. This should no t be done because one would incur the negative 
karma of abandoning the Dharma. One should unde rstand how the  teachings of both the lesser 
and great vehicles are causes for achieving enligh tenment. By seeing this, one pays equal respect 
towards these teachings and puts them into practice . Just as you give a child food to fill up the 
child’s stomach, you do the same for an adult.  While the food given may be different, both a 
child and an adult need to eat to fill up their st omachs. In the same way, whether it is the lesser 
vehicle or Mahayana teachings, both are the causes  for enlightenment. One pays respect to both 
of them. 
3B2B 2B2B 1A3C 2B3 One should not treat [a person] who esteems the extensive like [one who 
feels an affinity towards] the inferior 
[5,90] 
I should not communicate th e Dharma of a lesser being 
To one who is a vessel for the vast Dharma. 
I must not forsake the (Bod hisattva’s) way of life, 
Nor mislead others by means of sutras or mantras. 
 
We “should not communicate the Dharma of a lesser being to on e who is a vessel for the vast 
Dharma” i.e.  to someone of sharp faculties, who is predisposed toward s the Mahayana. If we 
give that person teachings of the individual libera tion vehicle and, as a result, that person decides 
to enter the Hinayana path, then one will  incur a bodhisattva root downfall.  
 One should not say to a suitable vessel, “Oh, you only need to recite this sutra or mantra. You 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
FPMT Basic Program                   Chapter Five  
 
 
268 don’t have to do anything else more profound  than that”. That is incorrect. One has to 
understand that the teachings of the Buddha are made up of definitive and interpretive 
scriptures (i.e. scriptures that require interpreta tion). One should give the appropriate advice or 
teachings to someone on the basis of knowing th e differences between the two. One should be 
able to offer correct and  specific advice that the recipient can handle. 
3B2B 2B2B 1A3C 3  Looking after the minds of sentient beings and training in the conduct that 
is unsullied by wrongdoing 
A An extensive explanation 
B Synopsis 
3B2B 2B2B 1A3C 3A An extensive explanation 
1 Abandoning the faulty physical conduct and lack of faith in others 
2 The way to act when the path and so forth are being taught  
3 The way to lie down 
3B2B 2B2B 1A3C 3A1 Abandoning faulty physical conduct [to prevent] lack of faith in others ∗ 
[5,91] 
When I spit or throw away the sti ck for (cleaning) my teeth, 
I should cover it up (with earth). 
Also it is shameful to urinate and so forth 
In water or on land used by others. 
 
[5,92] 
When eating I should not fill my mouth, 
Eat noisily or with my mouth wide open. 
I should not sit with my legs outstretched 
Nor rub my hands together. 
 
[5,93] 
I should not sit alone in vehicles, upon beds 
Nor in the same room with the women of others. 
(In brief), having observed or inquired about what is proper, 
I should not do anything that would be disliked by the people of the world. 
 
The behaviour mentioned in verse 91 probably does not apply here [in Singapore], such as 
spitting or peeing in water or on land used by others. The advice here is to behave properly and decently. When eating, one should not fill up one’s  mouth like a hamster! Some people fill their 
mouths with food and gobble it down very noisil y. Such behaviour is considered uncouth and ill-
mannered. Then there are others who, seeing th e food coming and even before it reaches the 
table, open their mouths ready to eat.  This is also not proper behaviour. 
  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
FPMT Basic Program                   Chapter Five  
 
 
269 When amongst others, one should not sit with one’s  legs outstretched. In some cases, people may 
consider this disrespectful. These verses are talkin g about poor behaviour in general. The last line 
of verse 92 may be referring to how we should wa sh our hands but I am not really sure what it 
means.   Verse 93 is related to ordained persons. It says here, “I should not sit alone in vehicles” – the 
original text refers to horses since cars did not exist back then. An ordain ed person should not sit 
on horses with members of the opposite sex. S/he  should not sit on a bed in the same room with 
a woman. It is also mentioned in the texts that even for a lay bodhisattva, one should not engage 
in such actions with members of the opposite se x who are not one’s relatives. One avoids these 
actions in order not to cause others to lose fait h in oneself. When one does not know what the 
proper behaviour may be, one should check local customs to see what is considered appropriate 
and inappropriate. Then one acts accordingly.  
3B2B 2B2B 1A3C 3A2 The way to act when indicating the way and so forth  
[5,94] 
I should not give directions with one finger, 
But instead indicate the way 
Respectfully with my right arm 
With all my fingers fully outstretched. 
 
[5,95] 
Nor should I wildly wa ve my arms about, 
But should make my point 
With slight gestures and a snap of fingers. 
Otherwise I shall lose control. 
 
When one is asked for directions, one should in dicate them in a respectful manner; the point 
here is to abandon doing so in a disrespectful way. We are advised no t to give directions with just 
one finger; instead, we should give directions re spectfully with the right arm with all the fingers 
fully outstretched. When one gives directions with just one finger or without all the fingers fully 
outstretched, it may not be so respectful.   Also, if we have to move things around and so forth, we should not do so while wildly waving 
our arms about.   
When one is calling another person, one should not shout and clap loudly. When  one has to 
attract the attention of another person, one does so with small gestures, a slight movement  of 
the arm, a snap of the fingers or with a soft voice. 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
FPMT Basic Program                   Chapter Five  
 
 
270 Lesson 33 – chapter 5, verse 96-109 (end) 
 
It is important to have the proper and correct motivation for listening to the teachings.  We 
should listen to the teachings with enthusiasm and joy, reflecting on how fortunate we are to 
have the opportunity to actually lear n about the deeds of the bodhisattvas. 
 Reflect on this : For most of our samsaric existenc es, we have been circling in the lower realms.  
This time, however, we have achieved a human rebirth. Not only that. We have even met the 
Mahayana teachings and, on top of that, we ha ve the opportunity now to study this very 
wonderful, perfect text by the bodhisattva Sh antideva, that talks about the deeds of the 
bodhisattvas. Whether we understand  everything in the text or not,  we should rejoice at the mere 
fact that we have this opportunity to just look at it. So reflect in  this way, be happy and rejoice. 
  Listening to the teachings should be done with a sense of joy or enthusiasm from one’s own side 
and not  out of a feeling of obligation, thinking  that there was no choice but to do this or 
thinking, “Since other people are going for class, I should go too.” This is not beneficial at all. 
Remember the advice given earlier in this chapter:  When we engage in virtue, that virtue should 
come from our own side and we should not depend on others  as that wo uld be meaningless. We 
should be able to decide for ourselves.   When we know how to reflect and how to think, then we should be able to uplift our minds to make ourselves happy. When we know how to think, just listening to teachings alone is, in itself, 
a joy. We can be happy about that. On top of that, if we can reflect or medi tate on the teachings, 
then there is even more reason  to be happy and to rejoice. 
 We should try not to waste  our human rebirth. Remember the advice in chapter one, that said 
when we misuse our human lives and let them  go to waste, then there is  nothing more foolish 
than this, there’s nothing more deceptive; it is the worst kind of self-deception. 
 There many different advice given throughout th e text. We should remind ourselves of them. 
From our side, when we find ourselves wasting ou r lives, not making them meaningful, then we 
must really remind ourselves of the advice gi ven. When you check and you find you are not 
letting your human rebirth go to waste, then that  is fine. But otherwise, you have to remember 
the advice.  We should remind ourselves of the advice given,  by depending on mindfulness and alertness. By 
doing so, we encourage or persuade our minds to en gage in virtue and to continue in our studies, 
to continue to listen, reflect and meditate.  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
FPMT Basic Program                   Chapter Five  
 
 
271 3B2B 2B2B 1A3C 3  Looking after the minds of sentient beings and training in the conduct that 
is unsullied by wrongdoing 
A An extensive explanation 
B Synopsis 
3B2B 2B2B 1A3C 3A An extensive explanation 
1 Abandoning the faulty physical conduct and lack of faith in others 
2 The way to act when the path and so forth are being taught  
3 The way to lie down 
3B2B 2B2B 1A3C 3A13  The way to lie down 
[5,96] 
Just as the Buddha lay down to pass away 
So should I lie in the desired direction (when going to sleep), 
And first of all with alertness 
Make the firm decision to quickly rise again. 
 
This v erse says t hat  we sho uld go  t o bed an d lie down in the same way that the Buddha laid 
down when he showed the aspect of passing away into parinirvana. One of the reasons for lying 
down in this position is to help us remember  the Buddha and to recall the qualities of the 
Buddha’s holy body, speech and mind. The main thing is really not the posture. The point is that 
the posture serves to remind us of the Buddha  and the qualities of hi s body, speech and mind. 
While thinking of the Buddha, we should try to fall asleep. It is also said in the text that, when one sleeps in this position, then one is less likely to have bad dreams. One would probably have good dreams and one’s sleep woul d not be too heavy or thick. 
 These are some of the benefits of adopting this posture of lying down. One should go to sleep while maintaining one’s mindfulness and vigilance and making the firm decision, “I will wake up quickly again from this sleep.” Generate that thought first.  
 We need to sleep,  as the body needs sleep  to be able to sustain itself.  The whole point of 
sustaining the body is to use it for virtue.   If one were to have a lifespan of eighty years, probably half of that is spent in sleeping ie. forty years. Generally, we spend half our lives sleeping , so that is quite a si gnificant portion of our 
lives. You will recall that sleep is a changeable me ntal factor because it can either become a virtue 
or non-virtue depending on one’s  motivation be fore going to sleep. Therefore, since we spend 
half our lives sleeping, it is  very important to make sure that our sleep is transformed into the entity of virtue.   
Sometimes we do not think about these things. Sometimes we think,  “Oh, maybe I have the 
karma to live for eighty years. That seems quite a long time.” Depending on how you look at it, 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
FPMT Basic Program                   Chapter Five  
 
 
272 yes, it is true, eighty years is quite a long time. But when you look at it from another viewpoint 
and realise that half of that is spent sleeping, then actually there is not much time to do what   
we need or want to do - just forty years. The othe r forty years are spent sleep ing so it is wasted. So 
when we look at it in this way, we actually  only have forty years to do something.  Of the forty years we have left, how much of  that is  set aside for Dharma  practice? We should know. It 
becomes very obvious that there is  not much time for Dharma practi ce. By thinking in this  way, 
we can persuade or move our minds in the direction of virtue and persuade our minds to engage in practice.   Of the remaining time we have, there are twenty -four hours in a day, right? At the most, how 
many hours do you set aside for prayers, daily recitations and  meditation? Two hours? Three hours? Two or three hours,  out of  twenty-fou r hours. And, out of the two or three hours we 
may spend doing our daily prayers (that is, if we do two or three hours of daily practice), how 
much of it can we say is really virtue? How much  of it was done without a distracted mind? Think 
about it and investigate. We would be lucky if  we can even find one or two minutes of practice 
done with full concentration, isn’t it? In one of th e advice given in this text, Shantideva said that 
any recitations done with a distracted mind is me aningless. They will produce no effect.  When  
we  think about this, we know this is  true.  Although we have this human life now, how much  virtue are we actually doing?. Although we 
still want to experience happiness, most of the ti me we are running after the causes of suffering. 
Of course, we want to have another human rebirth, another human life of leisure and 
opportunity, but are we actually creating any caus es towards the attainment of such a rebirth?  
 So I think the point here is, it is not enough just  to listen to or learn the teachings. We should 
reflect on the meaning of the teachings we have heard. Think about the teachings from all sorts 
of different angles; the point is to bring about change.  
Earlier on, in this session, I mentioned it is en ough just to be satisfied with having this 
opportunity to listen to the teachings. But now I am saying that if you think about it, then just 
listening is not  enough.  It depends on your own situation, where you are an d what you are doing. You have to be able to 
apply the teachings, you should be able to know how and what to think at the appropriate times. 
  The essence here, when we talk about verse 96, is to attempt to transform our sleep into the 
entity of virtue. We spend so much time sleeping, so we must make our sleep virtuous. We should adopt the same posture as the Buddha  when he laid down and passed away into 
p a r i n i r v a n a .  B y  d o i n g  t h a t ,  w e  r e m i n d  o u r s e l v e s  o f  t h e  B u d d h a .   W h e n   w e  f a l l  a s l e e p  w h i l e  thinking of the Buddha, then the entire duration of  our sleep will be virtuous. Or we can go to sleep  thinking,  “I’m going to sleep in order to be able to continue to engage in virtue.” When 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
FPMT Basic Program                   Chapter Five  
 
 
273 we  fall asleep with such thoughts,  the entire  sleep will also be transformed into virtue. 
3B2B 2B2B 1A3C 3B Synopsis 
[5,97] 
(Although I am unable  to practise all) 
The limitless varieties of Bodhisattva conduct, 
I should certainly practise as mu ch as (has been  mentioned here) 
Of this conduct that trains the mind. 
 
It is true that, although there are limitless ways of practising the  bo dhisattvas’ training in the  six  
perfections, even if we are unable to train in all of them, at the beginning, we should train in 
those practices that we are capable of doing. So start with those first.  
 
It is also said here, in the text, that for a bodh isattva who is just starting out on the path, even 
though they are unable to train in all the limitl ess practices of the bodhisattvas’ conduct, they 
should certainly start with the practices that ar e mentioned here in this text by Shantideva.  
3B2B 2B2B 1A4 The branch or method of excellent trainings 
A An extensive explanation 
B Conclusion 
3B2B 2B2B 1A4A  An extensive explanation 
1 The cause for purifying the trainings ∗ 
2 The basis of the trainings 
3 The specifics 4 The basis one hears and reflects upon 
3B2B 2B2B 1A4A 1 The cause for purifying the trainings 
[5,98] 
Three times by day and three times by night 
I should recite the Sutra of the Three Heaps ; 
For by relying upon the Buddhas and the Awakening Mind 
My remaining downfalls will be purified. 
 
What should one do when one is stained by a bodhisattva root downfall  while attempting to 
practise the trainings? One must confess and reta ke the bodhisattva vow again to revive the vow. 
When one incurs a bodhisattva root downfall, th en the bodhisattva vow de generates. When that 
happens, then one must purify and retake the vow.  When we commit a bodhisattva root downfall or any of the forty-six faults (these are usually 
translated as ‘secondary transgressions’ but, litera lly, it means ‘faults’), what are we to do? We 
should confess having incurred those downfalls or faults by reciting The Sutra of the Three Heaps  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
FPMT Basic Program                   Chapter Five  
 
 
274 (confession to the thirty-five bu ddhas). We should do this prac tice three times in the day and 
three times at night. We should also try  to accumulate a vast collection of merit. 
 
‘By relying upon the buddhas and the awakening mi nd’  refers to going for refuge to the Three 
Jewels and generating the altruisti c intention. This is the power of  the support or basis. Basically, 
one engages in the purification practice by applyi ng the four opponent powers of which going for 
refuge is one. Whenever we create negative karma,  we create negative karma either in relation to 
the buddhas or to sentient beings. Going for refuge  purifies the karma that is created in relation 
to the buddhas.  The negativities that we create,  in  relation to sentient beings, can be purified by 
developing great compassion and bodhicitta for them.   
3B2B 2B2B 1A4A 2 The basis of the trainings 
[5,99] 
Whatever I am doing in any situation, 
Whether for myself or fo r the benefit of others, 
I should strive to put into practice 
Whatever has been taught for that situation. 
 
[5,100] 
There is no such thing as something 
That is not learned by a Conqueror’s Son, 
Thus if I am skilled in living in this way 
Nothing will be non-meritorious. 
 
Whatever we do, be it for ourselves or for others, the training that we engage in with our bodies, 
speech and mind should not be tainted by any faults.   The bodhisattvas, in order to accomplish the welf are of all sentient beings, train in everything. 
They strive to realise all objects of knowledg e, all existents. There is  nothing that the 
bodhisattvas do which is not beneficial or merito rious. There is nothing th at the bodhisattvas do 
not do or do not train in because the bodhisattvas  seek only to accomplish the welfare of others. 
Another way of saying this is that whatever th ey do will never become non-meritorious. Since 
that is the case, we should never lose fait h in the activities of  a bodhisattva.  
 The point is not to lose faith in the activities of a bodhisattva, for if we do, then we  create 
negativities for ourselves. As explained earlier, a t  t h e  e n d  o f  C h a p t e r  1 ,  w h e n   w e  g e n e r a t e  a  
moment of anger towards a bodhisattva,  we will  suffer. We have to realise that a bodhisattva 
engages in the practice of limitl ess precepts or trainings for the benefit of others. This is  the 
reason not to lose faith.  Also, when a bodhisattva  does something that does  not  accord with our minds, we should still 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
FPMT Basic Program                   Chapter Five  
 
 
275 try not to lose faith. When negative thoughts aris e in relation to such actions, we should attempt 
to stop them. Remember how the bodhisattvas are permitted to engage in actions of the body  
and speech that are usually considered negative. We  have the three negativi ties of the body and 
four of speech. The bodhisattvas are permitted to  engage in these negative actions because the 
bodhisattvas act solely for the benefit of others. So, in certain cases, the bodhisattvas are allowed 
to do these things. The main point is to stop  generating any non-faith in the bodhisattvas. 
3B2B 2B2B 1A4A 3 The specifics 
A Dedicating virtues for the welfare of all sentient beings 
B One should never discard the spiritual spiritual master and the trainings of the Mahayana 
3B2B 2B2B 1A4A 3A Dedicating virtues for the welfare of all sentient beings 
[5,101] 
Whether directly or indirectly , I should not do anything 
That is not for the benefit of others. 
And solely for the sake of sentient beings 
I should dedicate everything towards Awakening. 
 
We should dedicate everything that we do, including the activities that we engage in directly for 
the benefit of others, retreat practices and so fo r t h .  W e  s h o u l d  d e d i c a t e  e v e r y t h i n g  a s  c a u s e s  
towards the enlightenment of all sentient beings. When  we dedicate our merits in such a way, 
dedicating them towards the enlightenment of all sentient beings, then this becomes the supreme 
and best dedication,  encompassing everything. There are no dedications that would not  be 
covered by such a  dedication.   When we summarise and  condense all the conduc t and practices of the bodhisattvas, they can 
be condensed into the practice of benefiting others . Therefore, whatever virt ue we do should be a 
cause for the benefit of others.  
3B2B 2B2B 1A4A 3B One should never discard the spiritual master and the trainings of the 
Mahayana 
[5,102] 
Never, even at the cost of my life, 
Should I forsake a spiritual friend 
Who is wise in the meaning of the great vehicle 
And who is a great Bodhisattva practitioner. 
3B2B 2B2B 1A4A 4 The basis one hears and reflects upon  
A Training in reliance upon the sutras 
B Training in reliance upon the treatises 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
FPMT Basic Program                   Chapter Five  
 
 
276 3B2B 2B2B 1A4A 4A Training in reliance upon the sutras 
[5,103] 
I should practise entrusting myself to my spiritual master 
In the manner taught in the Biography of Shrisambhava ∗      
This and other advice spoken by the Buddha 
I can understand through reading the sutras. 
 
[5,104] 
I should read the sutras 
Because it is from them that the practices appear. 
To begin with, I should look at 
The Sutra of Akashagarba . 
 We should never give up on the Mahayana guru , the one who is completely skilled and well 
versed in all the bodhisattva scriptures. We should never give up such a guru  even at the cost of 
our lives. We should correctly re ly on such a spiritual master an d the way to do so can be found 
in sutras like The Sutra of the Array of Stalks  that talks about how the su perior bodhisattva Losang 
correctly devoted himself to his hundred and ten gurus.  
 The point is to refer to these sutras to understand   how we should rely on our spiritual masters. 
“To begin with, I should look at the  Sutra of Akashagarba”.  The advice here is that we should 
refer to the different sutras to find out what is the proper way of engaging in the trainings eg.   
The Sutra of Akashagarba  talks in detail about the eighteen r oot downfalls of the bodhisattvas and 
clearly shows how to purify oneself when a downfall occurs.  
3B2B 2B2B 1A4A 4B Training in reliance upon the treatises 
[5,105] 
In addition I should definitely read 
The Compendium of all Practices again and again,         
Because what is to be constantly practiced 
Is very well and extensively shown there. 
 
[5,106] 
Also I should sometimes look at 
The condensed Compendium of all Sutras . 
And I should make an effort to study 
The works by the same two (titles) composed by the exalted Nagarjuna. 
 
The Compendium of all Practices  (Shikshasamuccaya ) is a text by Shantideva. There is an English 
translation of this text. The Compendium of all Sutras   was composed by Nagarjuna. We are advised 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
FPMT Basic Program                   Chapter Five  
 
 
277 to refer to these two texts.  
3B2B 2B2B 1A4B Conclusion 
[5,107] 
I should do whatever is not forbidden in those (works), 
And when I see a practice there, 
I should impeccably put it into action 
In order to guard the minds of worldly people. 
 
One should impeccably put into action whatever is not forbidden and taught in these treatises 
and sutras and refrain from that which is  forbidde n in these texts. Why? We do this in order to 
protect or guard the minds of worldly people. 
3B2B 2B2B 1B The conclusion, as it is necessary to put into practice the meaning without 
[leaving it on the level of] mere words, therefore the conclusion is: 
1 Mindfulness and alertness are required in all places of the training 
2 The actual meaning ∗ 
3B2B 2B2B 1B1 Mindfulness and alertness are required in all places of the training 
[5,108] 
The defining characteristi c of guarding alertness 
In brief is only this; 
To examine again and again 
The condition of my body and mind. 
3B2B 2B2B 1B2 The actual meaning  
“The actual meaning” refers to the meaning of this outline. That is why I thought about the 
outline for a while just now. ‘It is necessary to put into practice the meaning without leaving it 
on the level of mere words, therefore the conclu sion is’ – I think the meaning is roughly that. 
The meaning of that appears in th e last verse of this chapter.  
 
[5, 109 ] 
Therefore I shall put this way of life into actual practice, 
For what can be achieved by merely talking about it? 
Will a sick man be benefited 
Merely by reading the medical texts? 
3B2B 2B2B 2 The chapter’s name 
In the Tibetan text, normally the name of the ch apter comes at the end of the chapter. But when 
you format the text for easy reading, you put the name in front. Here, we are following the 
outline: the name of the chapter is Guarding Alertness. 