Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Engaging in the Deeds of a Bodhisattva/BD_ChVI_X_CommGesheChonyi.pdf
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:52:25.433996
================================================================================

 
 
 
FPMT  BASIC PROGRAM   
 
Transcript of the 
 
Oral Commentary to Shantideva’s 
 
  
Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds  
 
by 
 
Geshe Thubten Chonyi 
 
PART TWO: CHAPTER VI-X 
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre 
2006-2007 
    
Translation of the oral commentary by Ven. Gyurme 
Oral commentary transcribed, proofread and checked by students of ABC  
 
Root verses of Chapter VI-VIII from the translation by Stephen Batchelor 
Root verses of Chapter IX translated by Ven. Joan Nicell 
Outline from Gyaltsab Je’s Commentary translat ed by Venerable Losang Sopa (Bob Miller) 
 
Transcripts edited for Basic Programs by Olga Planken, FPMT Education Services, March 2010  
 
 
 
  
Transcript of the oral commentary: 
© Geshe Thubten Chonyi, Amitabha Buddhist Centre & FPMT, Inc. 
December 2009 
All rights reserved 
 
 
The Subject Headings from Gyaltsab Je’s 
Commentary to Shantideva’s ‘Eng aging in the Bodhisattva Deeds’: 
© FPMT, Inc. 
February 2006 
All rights reserved 
 
 
Root verses Chapter VI - VIII 
© Library of Tibetan Works and Archives, 1979 
All rights reserved 
  
Root verses Chapter IX 
© Joan Nicell, 2006
 
All rights reserved 
 
 
 
No part of this work may be reproduced in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, 
including photocopying, recording, or by an y information storage and retrieval system 
or technologies now known or later deve loped, without permission in writing  
from Geshe Thubten Chonyi, Amitabha Buddhist Centre and FPMT, Inc. 
 
 
   
Note from the editor 
 
The root verses up to chapter nine are quoted in their entirety from A Guide to the Bodhisattva’s 
Way of Life , with the permission of the tr anslator, Stephen Batchelor.  
  
The root verses of chapter nine are from the translation by Ven. Joan Nicell, and were used with 
permission from FPMT Education Services.   Root verses are centered, italicized, and marked  by the chapter and verse numbers in square 
brackets. 
 
The outlines are from The Subject Headings from Gyaltsab Je’s  Commentary to Shantideva’s ‘Engaging 
in the Bodhisattva Deeds’, translated by Ven. Losang Sopa (Bob Miller). They were included in the 
transcripts with permission fr om FPMT Education Services.  
  Outlines are indented, in bold, and have been slightly amended by Amitabha Buddhist Centre’s 
interpreter, Ven. Gyurme, for the Basic Program at ABC. The amendments are marked with an 
asterisk. 
 
The transcripts were produced by students and staff of Amitabha Buddhist Centre; the oral commentary was transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek, Vi vien Ng and Angie Xiao and the transcripts 
were proofread and checked by Cecilia Tsong, Fiona O’Shaughnessy and Yap Siew Kee.    Note that in these transcripts ‘angry’ and ‘furio us’ are used interchangeably, and  ‘absorbtion’ 
can generally be taken to mean ‘concentration’. 
 
The transcripts were prepared for FPMT Basic Programs by the editor.   
 
 
Olga Planken,  
FPMT Education Services, March 2010 
 
 
1  
Transcript of the commentary by Geshe Chonyi 
on Shantideva’s  
Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds 
 
PART TWO   Chapter VI-X 
 
The Sixth Chapter: Teaching patience  
Lesson 1   Chapter VI - Introduction 
This new module, which we are starting today, is scheduled to last for about three to four 
months. We will start with an extract from the co llection of advice by the great lama, Gungtang 
Rinpoche1. This advice is aimed at those who want to  study the great treatises. From the onset, 
Gungtang Rinpoche points out that his advice is not directed at Brah ma, the worldly god who 
had the clairvoyance to know past and future li v e s ,  o r   t h e  g o d s  o f  t h e  d e s i r e  r e a l m  w h o  a r e  
endowed with many possessions, great wealth and so on. Rather, Rinpoche said this advice was 
directed at those who had a clear mind and wh o aspired to study the teachings of the Buddha 
correctly. If you are someone who aspires to do th is, then please listen to these instructions: 
 
“All of us are now in the situation where we have  all the favourable conditions for studying. We 
have obtained this precious human life of leisur e and opportunities. Not only that, we have also 
met with the teachings of the Buddha. We have met with teachers who can show us the path. 
Furthermore, we are surrounded by Dharma frie nds who share the same interests and who are 
able to support us in our practice. So, al l the necessary conditions are here now. 
 
It is difficult to meet with such a perfect situ ation again where all the conditions are assembled 
together. Therefore, stop procrastinating in your Dharma studies and practi se. Now is the time to 
take the essence of your life.” 
 With regards to our Dharma studies and practice, mo st of us procrastinate . We always think, “I 
will practise or study tomorrow….Maybe the day after tomorrow, or next year. Or I will study 
after I have concluded this business deal or that project, or maybe when I am 60 or 70 years old. When I retire, then I will start my Dharma practice.” We are all like that. In this particular 
advice, Gungtang Rinpoche is trying to point out that we need to stop this procrastination.  
                                             
 
1 Gungtang Rinpoche: The Path Leading To the Island of Jewels: Advice on the Manner of Studying the Treatises of Sutra 
and Tantra . 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                   CHAPTER VI - PATIENCE  
 
 
2  
It is very important that we really try not to miss any classes.  At the beginning of the module 
when you make a very strong determination not to miss classes, then it is going to be of great 
benefit. If you think that it is OK to miss one or  two classes and you start to do so, then it never 
stops. 
 If you are someone who is really interested in st udying, it is important no t to miss classes. Once 
you start missing one class, you will miss a second  class. Then, there will be a third class and a 
fourth class. If you are someone who really want s to study, you should make it a point not to 
miss any classes. But if you are not really committed or interested in these studies, then that is a 
totally different issue.  
We have completed the first fi ve chapters of this text, Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds.  The 
subject matter of this text can be summarised into three main points: 
- To generate the altruistic intention of becoming a buddha for the benefit of all sentient beings.  
- If bodhicitta has been generated, how to stop it from degenerating.  
- On the basis of that, to try to  strengthen and increase the bo dhicitta that has already been 
generated.  The first three chapters of this text de al with the development of bodhicitta.  
 The first chapter talks about the benefits and th e advantages of cultivat ing such an awakening 
mind if one has yet to generate bodhicitta.   
The second chapter, called Disclosure of Wrongdoing, is about the practice of confessing and 
purifying one’s negativities, those obstacles whic h prevent and interfere with the generation of 
bodhicitta.  
 The third chapter then goes on to show how we can assemble all the favourable and necessary 
conditions for cultivating and developing bodhicitta. 
 The second and the third chapters cover the 7-limb  practice. In the second chapter there is the 
practice of making offerings, prostrations, goin g for refuge to the Three Jewels and confessing 
our negativities through the applicatio n of the four opponent powers.   
 The rest of the 7-limbs are covered in the third ch apter, which discusses th e practice of rejoicing 
in virtue, requesting the buddhas to turn the Wh eel of Dharma, supplicating the buddhas not to 
pass into paranirvana and dedicating our merits for the benefit of others.   The practice of mind training – primarily, the pr actice of exchanging oneself for others – follows 
the completion of the 7-limbs in th e third chapter. On the basis of such mind training, we will be 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                   CHAPTER VI - PATIENCE  
 
 
3  
able to offer even our bodies for the benefit of others. When we have developed and are able to 
embrace bodhicitta in this stable way, we can th en take on the bodhisattva vows through a ritual. 
 
Chapters four to six cover conscientiousness, gu arding alertness (or vigilance/introspection) and 
patience, which are necessary to prevent the bodh icitta we have developed from degenerating. 
Having taken the bodhisattva vows, we must train in the precepts in order to maintain the vows. 
The fourth chapter shows that the main way to cu ltivate such conscientiousness is to reflect on 
our precious human life of leisure and opportun ities and the faults of  the various negative 
emotions.  If we do not guard or protect our minds, then it will be very difficult to protect the bodhisattva 
vows that we had taken.  In order to do that, we  need to cultivate vigilance/introspection, the 
topic of the fifth chapter, which shows how all un desirable and harmful things originate from the 
mind. But, in the same way, all positive things aris e from the mind as well. This is followed by an 
extensive discussion on how to rely on an d develop mindfulness and vigilance.     
 The chapter on patience also fa lls under the second main point of preventing the degeneration 
of the bodhicitta that we have developed. Anger is an obstacle that causes our bodhicitta to 
deteriorate and the antidote for our anger is the pr actice of patience. We will deal with this in 
the next session.  In order to increase and develop wh atever bodhicitta we have genera ted, we then look at the next 
three chapters of this text. Th ey are the chapters on enthusiasm (or joyous perseverance), 
meditation and wisdom. The final ch apter (ten) is on dedication.  
Lesson 2   Chapter VI - verse 1-2 
As mentioned in the Lamrim Chenmo , when listening to the teaching s, we should cultivate the six 
attitudes as our motivation and abandon the th ree faults of the vessel in our behaviour.  
 It is really important to know the reasons and to  have the correct motivati on for listening to the 
teachings. The reasons have to be virtuous an d correct. The more positive and virtuous our 
motivation, the greater the benefit we receive from  listening to the teachings. When we do not 
have the correct motivation, then no matter how we listen to the teachings, they will not be 
beneficial for our minds even if they are very  good and profound. The teachings of the Buddha 
always emphasise the importance of having the correct reason and motivation for doing 
anything.  The responsibility for this lies with each individual. Therefore, please adjust your 
motivation accordingly when li stening to these teachings. 
 Here is another piece of advice from Guntang Rinpoche: 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                   CHAPTER VI - PATIENCE  
 
 
4  
“In these degenerate times, when sentient beings  have very little merit and our minds are also 
weak and degenerate, it is very important to ma ke strong requests to our personal deities for 
blessings. We should work very hard at a ccumulating merit and purifying our minds of 
obscurations. It is important to make offerings, prostrations and engage in the practices of the 7-
limbs. It is extremely important to rely on the power of the meri t field, the buddhas and the holy 
objects that represent the Buddha’s holy body, speech and mind.”  
 Generally speaking, our motivation determines wh ether our actions are virtuous or not. When 
our motivation is virtuous, then our actions are also virtuous.  
 But all actions performed in relation to the merit field or to the holy objects are exceptions to 
this rule. Even when we make offerings or prostrat ions to the merit field or holy objects with an 
incorrect motivation, we still accumulate a great de al of merit. This is due to the power of the 
merit field and the holy objects.   You should therefore grasp the opportunity to rely on holy objects and the merit field to 
accumulate merit and purify your karma, especia lly those of you who really want to learn the 
Buddha’s teachings and complete your studies. It is very difficult to complete your studies, no matter how hard you study, if you do not strive to do this.    This is my own experience from my life in the monastery. There is no guarantee that those who 
are naturally more intelligent or who do well in their studies can complete them. Generally, 
those who work at accumulating merit, purify ing their negative karma, and making whole-
hearted requests to their gurus and special deit ies are the ones who make it in the end and 
successfully complete their studies. Those who are more intelligent tend to  take things easy and 
do not work as hard, whereas those who are not so  intelligent realise that they have to work 
harder.  
3. Explaining the way to train in the remaining four perfections 
A. The way to train in patience 
B. The way to train in joyous effort C. The way to train in the absorptions included in the common and uncommon calm 
abidings 
D. The way to train in wisdom - the nature of insight 
 
After generating the altruistic intention to attain  enlightenment for the benefit of all sentient 
beings, we train in the six perfections. We have completed the first two perfections of generosity 
and ethics. 
 
A. The way to train in patience 
a. Explaining the chapter’s material 
1)  Abandoning hindrances to the accomplishment of abiding by the antidote: 
     devoting oneself to the cultivation of patience 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                   CHAPTER VI - PATIENCE  
 
 
5  
a) The disadvantages of anger 
i) The unseen disadvantages 
1’ Anger destroys the roots of virtue 
2’ One should make effort in cultivating patience 
after having understood the faults and qualities of fury and patience 
ii) The visible disadvantages 
b) Reflecting on the benefits of patience 
2)  Engaging the mind in the methods for accomplishing patience 
1’. Anger destroys the roots of virtue
 
[6, 1] 
Whatever wholesome deeds, 
Such as venerating the Buddhas and generosity, 
That have been amassed over a thousand aeons 
Will all be destroyed in one moment of anger.  
 
All the roots of virtue that we have accumulate d through, for example,  generosity and ethics 
over a thousand aeons are destroyed by a single moment of anger.  
There are three forms of generosity: 
the giving of Dharma; 
the giving of material goods; and   bestowing fearlessness on others The roots of virtue that come from the practice of these thre e kinds of generosity over a 
thousand aeons are destroyed in  just one moment of anger. 
 
‘Venerating the Buddhas’  includes offerings to the Dharma and Sangha Jewels and the other 
practices of the 7-limbs, accumulated over a thou sand aeons, which are also destroyed in that 
moment of anger. ‘ Wholesome deeds’  refer to the practice of ethics  such as keeping one’s vows. The 
roots of virtue that comes from the practice of ethics for a thousand aeons are destroyed in just 
one moment of anger. 
 
While the practices of generosity and ethics are explicitly mentioned here, it is not mentioned 
whether the roots of virtue that come from the practice of concentration are similarly wiped out 
by that moment of anger.  
There is some debate over this issue.  Some scholars quote Chandrakirti’s Commentary on the 
Middle Way.  In this text he claims that the roots of virtue accumulated from the activities of 
generosity and ethics over a period of a hund red aeons are destroyed by a moment of anger. 
However, he makes no such reference with regard to the practice of meditation. Using this as a 
scriptural authority, some assert that the roots of virtue generate d by meditation are be destroyed 
by anger.  
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                   CHAPTER VI - PATIENCE  
 
 
6  
However, in other texts, such as those composed by Arya Asanga, it is asserted that the roots of 
virtue accumulated from activities such as genero sity, ethics and meditation can be destroyed by 
anger.  
 The final conclusion by the great masters and scholars is this: The collection of merit is subject to 
destruction by anger, whereas the collection of wi sdom is not subject to destruction by anger. 
 There are other conditions that a ffect this, such as the subject (i.e. the person who is getting 
angry) not being a bodhisattva  and the object of one’s anger being a bodhisattva. The anger 
referred to here is not mere i rritation but a strong hatred ge nerated towards the bodhisattva, 
without any sense of regret or reliance on any antidotes to purify the negativity that one is 
creating. If we are in that situation, then we have  destroyed whatever roots of virtue that we have 
accumulated over a thousand aeons. This is possibl e just as a small fire arrow can set fire to a 
large heap of hay.  If one is not a bodhisattva and one generates stro ng hatred towards a bodhisattva, one destroys 
the roots of virtue of one’s collection of me rit accumulated over a thousand aeons. One’s 
collection of wisdom, however, is not destroyed. 
 
When a higher level bodhisattva is angered by a lo wer level bodhisattva, then the former destroys 
the roots of virtue from his collection of me rit accumulated over a hundred eons. This is 
mentioned in both the Play of Manjushri Sutra  and Chandrakirti’s Commentary on the “Middle 
Way”. (Refer to Lamrim Chenmo  Vol. 2, pg. 154) 
 When a lower level bodhisattva becomes angry with a higher level bodhisattv a, then he destroys 
roots of virtue from his collection of merit accumulated over one aeon.  For example, a bodhisattva is on  the great path of accumulation
2 and is due to enter the path of 
preparation the next day. On the eve of this ev ent, however, this bodhisattva becomes angry at 
another bodhisattva who is already at the path of  preparation. Instead of entering the path of 
preparation the next day, the realisation of this bo dhisattva is delayed for an aeon and he has to   
retrain for this path all over again.  
 
A non-bodhisattva who gets angry at another non- bodhisattva (e.g. one  ordained person gets 
angry at another ordained person), destroys the amount of merit that comes from making a full 
prostration to a stupa, just from that one moment  of hatred,. (The sutras say that however many 
atoms are covered by the body during such a prostr ation is equal to the nu mber of times that the 
                                              
2 The path of accumulation is divided into 3 levels: small, middling and great. The path of preparation is divided 
into 4 levels: (1) heat (2) peak (3) fo rbearance (4) suprem e mundane qualities.  
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                   CHAPTER VI - PATIENCE  
 
 
7  
person prostrating  will be reborn as a Wheel Turning King). 
 
It is clear, from the above examples, that we ha ve to be careful with each other since we all 
belong to the family of students of the same teac hers. If we get angry at  one another, then our 
roots of virtue will be destroyed. We should, th erefore, try to reduce or stop our anger from 
arising.  
 
There is no certainty that the roots of virtue will be completely  destroyed by generating anger as 
there are different levels of destruction: great, middling and small. Depending on the strength of 
our anger, there are different fruitional effects of the virtue we have accumulated.  
 When our anger is weak, our roots of virtue are on ly slightly destroyed. The fruitional effect is 
the duration of the pleasure  we enjoy is shortened.  
 When our anger is very strong, then our roots of virtue are more severely destroyed. The 
fruitional effect is that, instead of enjoying an ex tended period of pleasure, we will probably not 
experience any enjoyment at all.    When the strength of our anger is middling, the fruitional effect is not clearly explained in the 
texts. It should fall somewhere between the two situations mentioned above.   The exhaustion of the roots of virtue can be likened to burnt seeds, which cannot produce any 
sprouts and cannot grow into trees.  When we create some negative karma but we engage  in the practice of confession by applying the 
four opponent powers, we  do not experience the re sults of the negative action that we did in the 
past. In a similar way, when we generate very st rong hatred towards another person, it destroys 
the roots of virtue in such a way that we will not experience any positive effects from them.   
 
‘Destroying the roots of virtue’ does not mean that all the roots of virtues are completely 
eradicated but it does mean that the ability of th ose virtuous karmic seeds to issue positive effects 
is considerably weakened.  
 
All bodhisattvas can be the recipients of anger bu t not all bodhisattvas can generate anger.  In 
other words, we may   get angry at anyone, includ ing all the bodhisattvas but it is not possible for 
all bodhisattvas to get angry. 
 The roots of virtue of the bodhisattva who has atta ined the peak stage of the path of preparation 
are not destroyed by anger. However, it is unclea r in the texts whether the roots of virtue of the 
bodhisattva are destroyed by anger before  he achieves this level. It seems that bodhisattvas do not 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                   CHAPTER VI - PATIENCE  
 
 
8  
get angry when they have attain ed the peak stage. All bodhisa ttvas, before achieving the peak 
stage of the path of preparation, can get angr y. The superior beings do not get angry.  
 
In general, any virtue that is dedicated toward s enlightenment would not be destroyed. That is 
why we have to dedicate all our merits toward s achieving enlightenment for the benefit of all 
sentient beings. The sutras mention that when we  put a drop of water in to the ocean, until the 
ocean dries up,  our drop of water will remain th ere. In the same way,  any roots of virtue 
dedicated towards enlightenment will never be exhausted.  It is very clear that the roots of virtue of some bodhisattvas are subject to destruction by anger. It 
is also certain that the roots of virtues accumu lated by the bodhisattvas are  always dedicated 
towards enlightenment. This begs the question : Are the roots of virtue dedicated towards 
enlightenment subject to destruction by anger or no t? We should consider this point at the next 
discussion group session.   In Tibetan, anger and hatred has the same meaning. 
2’. One should make effort in cultivating pati ence after having understood the faults and qualities 
of fury and patience.  
(6,2) 
There is no transgression like hatred, 
And no fortitude like patience. 
Thus I should strive in various ways 
To meditate on patience. 
 
Why is there, ‘ no transgression like hatred’ ? This is because when we get angry, we destroy our roots 
of virtue and postpone  our attainment of the higher paths. Anger also  has its own ripening 
result in our future lives in the form of unplea sant experiences and suffering. Therefore, there is 
no negative force that resembles anger.  
 As mentioned in the example given earlier of how anger can postpone the realisation of the 
bodhisattva on the brink of entering the path of preparation, we can infer that if we were to 
generate very strong hatred in our minds fo r even a single second, it will delay our own 
realisations.   
‘And no fortitude like patience’  means there is no better antidote than patience when dealing with 
anger.  
 Since there is no greater negativity than anger and there is no better antidote for anger than 
patience, we must meditate on developing pati ence with great effort. The various ways to 
cultivate patience will be explained in the verses to come. 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                   CHAPTER VI - PATIENCE  
 
 
9  
 
Chandrakirti mentions that there is no greater negativity than anger in his auto commentary to 
his Commentary on the “Middle Way”.  He uses the example of a big ocean. Just as we are not able 
to count the number of drops of water that make up the ocean, in the same way, the fruitional 
effects of anger have no boundary. There is no greater negative force th an anger. The supreme 
antidote for anger is patience. Therefore we need to familiarise ourselves with patience. 
 
In Gyaltsab Je’s commentary to the Engaging in the Bodhisattvas’ Deeds , he mentions that the roots 
of virtue accumulated through the practice of gene rosity, ethics and even patience are subject to 
destruction by anger. 
 
Question from student:  not heard on recording 
When we talk about virtue, there is virtue create d by the body, speech and mind. Since it is easier 
to create virtue with our bodies and speech, such virtues are also more easily destroyed. As it is 
more difficult to create virtue with our minds, probably the virtue created by the mind is more 
difficult to destroy.  
 The roots of virtues that are included in the cate gory of wisdom are not subject to destruction by 
anger whereas the roots of virtue that arose from meditation are subject to destruction by anger. 
This is mentioned in the root text . But it is not saying that all the roots of virtue from meditation 
are subject to destruction by anger.  
Question from student:  What is the penalty for the arhat who gets angry?  
This would depend on the object with which he is  angry and the level of attainment of the other 
party.   
 
Question:  not heard on recording 
The path of preparation where one is accumulating merit for the 1
st great countless eon is 
divided into four levels:- 
1 Heat -  One overcomes the manifest form of the conceptions of the thorou ghly afflicted class of 
phenomenon as truly existent   
2 Peak - One overcomes the manifest form of th e conceptions of completely purified phenomena 
as truly existent  3 Forbearance - One overcomes the manifest form of  the conceptions of the true existence of the 
apprehender that apprehends the pe rson as substantially existent 
4 Supreme mundane qualities -  One overcomes th e manifest form of conceptions of the true 
existence of the apprehender that appreh ends the person as imputedly existent. 
So there are different objects of abandonmen t at each of these four different stages. 
 The bodhisattva on the path of ac cumulation or the path of prepar ation still has the self-grasping 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                   CHAPTER VI - PATIENCE  
 
 
10  
conception holding an “I” to be inherently existe nt. Since that conception has not been stopped, 
there remains an opportunity for the bodhisattva to get angry. 
 
When the bodhisattva has achieved the peak stage of the path of preparation, the bodhisattva has 
abandoned the manifest conception of the appreh ender. This means the bodhisattva has not yet 
abandoned self-grasping but he does not experience  any manifest conception of  grasping at the 
inherently existent “I”. Therefore we can s ay that the bodhisattva does not get angry. 
 This is not the same as saying that the bodhisattva has already abandoned anger as he has not yet 
abandoned the grasping at an “I”. It does no t manifest from that point onwards. While the 
manifest conception of the apprehender remains, be fore achieving  the peak stage of the path of 
preparation, the opportunity for the bodhisattv a to get angry is always there. Once the 
bodhisattva has achieved the peak stage of th e path of preparation,  since that manifest 
conception no longer operates, the bodhisattva does not get angry anymore. (Geshe-la: ‘Maybe 
that is the reason but I am not sure.’) 
Lesson 3   Chapter VI - verse 3-10 
It is important to set the proper motivation fo r listening to the teachi ngs. Think:  ‘For the 
purpose of subduing our unruly, undisciplined minds and our   negative emotions, I am going to 
listen to these teachings on patience from Shantideva’s text, Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds.’   
 
It is important to reflect daily on whatever you have heard and found beneficial from the 
teachings. Use whatever you have  heard and apply it in your daily life. If you do not  use the 
teachings in this way,  you  accomplish  little by merely listening. 
 
This is advice from the teachings of Gungtang Rinpoche called Songs of Expressing Sadness . In one 
of these songs, he laments that although, in real ity, it is the guru who shows us the path and 
protects in this life and all our future lives,  in practice, we make our own decisions without 
relying on him.   
 We may think or even say that there is a need for us to rely on the instru ctions of our teachers  
and recognise  that our guru is the embodiment of  the three refuges. But, in our daily lives, we 
do not pay any heed to his advice or consider our teacher’s instructions to be important.  
 Gungtang Rinpoche goes on to s ay, now that we have attained this precious human rebirth of 
leisure and opportunities that is very difficult to achieve and which give s us the opportunity to 
accomplish so much. We know th is and can even explain it to others. Yet when we examine our 
lives carefully, most of the time, we are spending  it doing meaningless things. When we reflect in 
this way and realise this,  it is a cause for regret and something to be very sad about. 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                   CHAPTER VI - PATIENCE  
 
 
11  
 
Rinpoche’s advice is  very good and beneficial espe cially if we are able to remember it in our daily 
lives. For example, if we explain to others the be nefits of this perfect human rebirth, but do not 
put it to good use ourselves,  then we are in  fact wasting our own precious human rebirth.  
 
In our daily lives we treasure our possessions and wealth and take great care to protect them  from thieves and robbers. But we are not very careful with our life span, which is  being 
exhausted and stolen every moment by the Lord of De ath. We should be very sad about this also.   
We also pursue and hanker after teachings an d instructions on hidden phenomena, which are 
not perceivable or manifest such as emptiness, bo dhicitta, tantra and so forth. But we do not pay 
any attention to those instructions that deal with  subjects  that are very obvious and accessible, 
such as death and impermanence. Agai n, this is a very sad situation. 
 I am quoting some extracts from this set of advi ce as they are in short sentences. If we can 
remember them in our daily lives, then that  will  be beneficial. The advice is not new and can be 
easily found in the Lamrim .  
 In the last lesson, we looked at the faults an d disadvantages of anger and how one moment of 
anger can potentially destroy the roots of virtue accumulated over a long period of time. On top 
of that, generating hatred or anger will lead to its own unpleasant ripening results in the future. 
By understanding the different faults of anger, we can see why the text says: ‘ There  is no 
transgression like hatred.’   
 
When the object of our anger is  someone who has more qualities than ourselves,  we destroy 
even more roots of virtues e.g. when a non-bodh isattva generates hatred towards a bodhisattva, 
the former destroys a lot of the merit that he accumulated. Since, generally speaking, 
bodhisattvas destroy their roots of virtue when  they are angry with one another, then when 
ordinary beings get angry with each other,  roots of virtue are definitely destroyed.3 
 
As mentioned in the texts, it is not necessary to ascertain from our own side whether the object of our anger is a bodhisattva or not. If, in real ity, that person is a bo dhisattva, regardless of 
whether we have ascertained this or not, once we are angry with him, we destroy our roots of 
virtue even if we have valid reasons for being upse t. It is irrelevant whet her our reasons are valid 
or incorrect. Once we get angry with a  bodhisattv a, we destroy our roots of virtue. We may feel 
our anger can be justified, but this is not the case here and  we have to remember this.  
We looked at the unseen disadvantages of anger in the last lesson. 
                                             
 
3 Regardless of whether the recipient of th e anger is ascertained to be a bodhisattva or whether the perceived faults 
that cause the anger are real, the destruct ion of virtue is said nonetheless to be just as explained above (i.e., the 
virtue accumulated over a hundred eons is lost).  ( Lamrim Chenmo , Vol. 2, pg. 155)  
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                   CHAPTER VI - PATIENCE  
 
 
12  
 
a) The disadvantages of anger  
i) The unseen disadvantages 
1’ Anger destroys the roots of virtue 
2’ One should make effort in cultivating patience after having 
understood the faults and qualities of fury and patience 
ii) The visible disadvantages 
1’ Anger eliminates the opportunity for physical and mental 
pleasure  
2’ [Anger] causes us to destroy dear friendships and so forth 
iii) A presentation of the disadvantages in brief  
b) Reflecting on the benefits of patience 
1’ Anger eliminates the opportunity fo r physical and mental pleasure  
(6,3) 
My mind will not experience peace 
If it fosters painful thoughts of hatred. 
I shall find no joy or happiness; 
Unable to sleep, I shall feel unsettled. 
 
We experience physical discomfort and our mi nds becomes unsettled with mental unhappiness 
when anger manifests in our minds.  Due to this , we do not experience any peace. Even though 
our minds are usually relaxed, happy and calm, th e moment anger arises, the mind becomes very 
unsettled and unhappy.  
 People around us such as our friends and associ ates may also become unhappy and upset. Even 
though normally we may be an attractive, good - hearted person with a good disposition, we 
suddenly become very unpleasant when anger arises.   Wearing good clothes and ornaments do not help when we are angry because our whole appearance changes. We are unable to sleep, even  on a soft,  comfortabl e bed. Due to mental 
unhappiness, we toss and turn.  We may even have  thoughts of wanting to harm those who have 
been very helpful and kind to us, forgetting the kindness and help we received from them. 
Sometimes, we may even carry out these th oughts and actually harm such people.  
2’ [Anger] causes us to destroy dear friendships and so forth 
This is shown in the next 6 lines:- 
(6,4) 
A master who has hatred 
Is in danger of being killed 
Even by those who, for their wealth and happiness, 
Depend upon the master's kindness. 
 
(6,5)  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                   CHAPTER VI - PATIENCE  
 
 
13  
By it, friends and relatives are disheartened; 
Though drawn by my generosity, they will not trust me; 
 
We may be someone who gives money and help. But if we are angry all the time, the people who 
depend on us for help will not remember the acts  of kindness that we show ed them. In fact, they 
may  harm, retaliate or even kill us. If this is the case for those who have benefited from our acts 
of generosity,  it goes without saying that those wh o do not depend on us for help are most  likely 
to be unhappy with us too.  
 If we are a bad tempered person, even our close friends, relatives and loved ones will get 
disheartened with us even if we shower them with our generosity, because deep down in their 
hearts, they will never be happy with us. If those people around us whom we help and support 
through material gifts are never happy with us fr om the depths of their hearts, then people to 
whom we do not give gifts and help  won’t be pleased with us either.
4 
iii) A presentation of the disadvantages in brief 
(6, 5 cd)  
In brief, there is nobody 
Who lives happily with anger. 
 
(6,6)  
Hence the enemy, anger, 
Creates sufferings such as these, 
 
In brief, as soon as anger arises in anyone’s mind, regardless of who that person may be, he or 
she doesn’t experience any happiness.  
 
On top of making us unhappy, anger causes us to  engage in actions that  destroy the roots of 
virtues that we worked so hard to accumulate ov er a long period of time. Anger can potentially 
destroy the roots of virtue accumulated over a th ousand eons. Anger causes us suffering in this 
life, but it does not stop there. We continue to ex perience the faults of anger in our future lives. 
                                              
4 The invisible  faults of anger are  
(a) that it projects its own fruitions,  which are extremely unpleasant, and  
(b) that it prevents the arising of the measureless very pleasant fruitions of  its opposite (virtue). 
 
The faults of anger visible  in this lifetime are that you do not expe rience a peaceful and good mind; the joy and 
happiness that you had previously perish , and you cannot regain them; you ca nnot sleep well; and you weaken the 
stability wherein your mind stays ca lm. When you have great hatred, even  those for whom you formerly cared 
forget your kindness and kill you; even  friends and relatives will get annoyed and leave you; although you gather 
others with your generosity, they will not stay; and so on.  
(Lamrim Chenmo,  Vol. 2, pg. 157) 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                   CHAPTER VI - PATIENCE  
 
 
14  
Anger is one of the true causes of unhappiness and suffering in this and all our future lives . 
b) Reflecting on the benefits of patience  
(6,6 cd)  
But whoever assiduously overcomes it 
Finds happiness now and hereafter. 
 
On the basis of thoroughly understanding the faults of anger, when we  strive to destroy anger, we  experience only happiness. The practice of patience is, therefore, 
the only cause of happiness not just in this life but also in future lives. The benefits 
of patience are opposite to some of the faults that we have already discussed. Since 
that is the case, we have to strive to cultivate patience.  
 
A. The way to train in patience 
a. Explaining the chapter’s material 
1)  Abandoning hindrances to the accomplishment of abiding by the antidote: 
     devoting oneself to the cultivation of patience 
a) The disadvantages of anger 
b) Reflecting on the benefits of patience 
2) Engaging the mind in the methods for accomplishing patience 
a) Arresting the causes of anger 
i) The nature of the cause along with its disadvantages 
ii) Instructions on making effort in the methods for overcoming anger 
iii) The actual method for overcoming that 
1’ It is unreasonable to nurture displeasure  
2’ The reasons for that  
iv) Having examined in detail the causes that give rise to anger, making effort to abandon them 
b) The benefits of cultivating patience 
i) The nature of the cause along with its disadvantages 
(6,7) 
Having found its fuel of mental unhappiness 
In the prevention of what I wish for, 
And in doing what I do not want, 
Hatred increases and then destroys me. 
 
In order to stop anger, we have to stop its causes. If we do not do this, we will never be able to 
stop anger. Before we can work on the causes of anger, we must first be able to identify them.  
 
When we and those who are close and dear to us experience suffering, we feel  unhappy. When 
we and our loved ones experience happiness, we are pleased. On the other hand, we get angry 
when somebody creates problems and prevents us from being happy or causes us to suffer. When 
somebody prevents us from accomplishing our wishes, we start to be unhappy. This 
unhappiness/ discomfort causes hatred to increase just as food causes the body to grow. So this 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                   CHAPTER VI - PATIENCE  
 
 
15  
unhappiness is the cause of hatred.  
 
When this hatred increases in our minds, we experience unhappiness/suffering in this and 
future lives. Once there is hatred, there will always be mental unhappiness and not a single 
moment of peace in the mind.  ‘Then destroys me,’ points to how such hatred  causes us to suffer 
not only in this life but also in our future lives.  
ii) Instructions on making effort in the methods for overcoming anger 
(6,8) 
Therefore, I should totally eradicate 
The fuel of this enemy; 
For this enemy has no other function 
Than that of causing me harm. 
 
Since the fuel of hatred is mental unhappiness, we  must eradicate this mental unhappiness. If we 
want to experience happiness, we must stop hatred . In order to stop hatred, we have to stop its 
cause, which is mental unhappiness.   
Why do we need to look upon hatred as our enemy? ‘For this enemy has no ot her function than that 
of causing me harm. ’ Hatred hurts, harms and causes us problems all the time. It serves no other 
function than that.  
 Our enemies may have a change of heart and offer us  help. But it is never like this with our 
internal enemy, hatred. Hatred harm s us continuously and since this is so, we must treat it as our 
main enemy and make every effort to defeat  it
.     
 
What then is the actual method or way of overcoming anger?  
 
iii) The actual method for overcoming that 
1’ It is unreasonable to nurture displeasure 
2’ The reasons for that 
1’ It is unreasonable to nurture displeasure 
(6,9) 
Whatever befalls me, 
I shall not disturb my mental joy; 
For having been made unhappy, 
I shall not accomplish what I wish, 
And my virtues will decline. 
 
As explained earlier, mental unhappiness arises when we experience problems or when others 
interfere with the fulfilme nt of our wishes. So, ‘ Whatever befalls me, I sha ll not disturb my mental 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                   CHAPTER VI - PATIENCE  
 
 
16  
joy,’ means that we must ensure that our mind s remain happy all the time. Maintaining such 
‘mental joy’  means being able to remain continuously in  an undisturbed state. This is something 
that we have to remind ourselves of over and over again.  
 We have to use  whatever method we can to ensu re that we do not become  unhappy with all the 
undesirable things that happen to us. When we keep the mind in this perpetually happy state, 
there will be no opportunity for mental unhappi ness to arise. When mental unhappiness is not 
allowed to arise in the mind, there is no opportunity for ha tred to arise.  
 
Some people may assert that it is not right to remain happy when  things go wrong or when we 
are faced with failure. But, in fact it is  reasonable to remain happy and calm even when 
confronted with problems and hardships.   For example, if someone is making  things difficult for us, our un happiness with this person does 
not make the person disappear. The cause of th e problem is still there while we have to 
experience the suffering of our own unhappiness. On top of that, such mental unhappiness leads 
to the generation of anger and hatred, which se ts in motion all the harmful consequences of 
anger.    In essence, this verse is pointing out that bein g unhappy with the person or situation that is 
causing us difficulties does not make the person or situation go away so we may as well remain 
calm and happy when facing the problem. Furthe rmore, when we are unhappy, we not only do 
not experience happiness in this life but by allo wing the causes of happiness to deteriorate, we 
create the causes for more suffering and unhappiness to come in our future lives.
   
2’ The reasons for that  
(6,10) 
Why be unhappy about something 
If it can be remedied? 
And what is the use of being unhappy about something 
If it cannot be remedied? 
 
When there is a solution to the problem and difficult y we are facing, even if it is life-threatening, 
there is no reason to be unhappy. We should stri ve instead to solve the problem. For example, if 
our pen falls on the ground, there is no reason to  be unhappy since we can pick it up and use it 
again.   If the situation or problem cannot be remedied, again, there is no benefit to being  unhappy about it. For example, if your precious piece of cr ystal falls on the ground and breaks into pieces, 
there is no point in feeling upset about it since you cannot glue it back together. Just buy a new 
one. 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                   CHAPTER VI - PATIENCE  
 
 
17  
 
It is not enough to just know these reasons on an intellectual  level. When difficulties come, we 
need to remember them and apply them to our problems.  
 
Question from student:  Is it possible to scold  someone without anger? 
This is not going to happen overnight. It all de pends on how well we understand that anger is 
bad. Otherwise, it is going to be difficult.  
 The trick here is to stop the mind from feelin g unhappy. The mind must remain happy all the 
time. When mental unhappiness arises in our minds, we should check what is causing the 
unhappiness. By analysing the causes and conditions that brought about that problem, we can check if there is solution. If the problem can be solved, there is no point in being unhappy. If we 
check and nothing can be done, again  there is no  point in being unhappy since that will not  
change the situation. We have to reflect like this all the time to familiarise ourselves with this way 
of thinking.   
Question from student:  What is the difference between mental unhappiness and unhappiness? 
I think they are the same. In Tibetan, me ntal unhappiness and unhappiness are basically 
referring to the same thing. Mental unhappine ss is the fuel or the cause of hatred. Mental 
unhappiness leads to hatred. But once there is ha tred, there is always mental unhappiness. Once 
hatred is manifest, there is not a single moment of mental peace?  
 
Question from student :  Are bodhisattvas who do not  get angry arya  beings? 
Not necessarily. Question : Do arya beings have clairvoyance to be able to  read minds? 
Yes Question:  If the bodhisattva is clairvoyant, he should  be able to see that I will be getting angry 
soon. Shouldn’t that bodhisattva make himself disappear or leave? Otherwise, where is the 
compassion?  
If the sentient being is nearby, where is the bodhis attva to run to? If the person is far away, yes, 
he can run but if the person is next to him, then where can he run to?  
 It is difficult when anger arises. It is also difficult  to see the future. Even for the bodhisattva, it is 
difficult for him to see when you will get angry.   
Question from student : For a beginner, what is the best way to maintain joy? 
It is not easy at the beginning because there is no  familiarity with the ability to remain happy all 
the time. The point here is to stop all mental un happiness from arising and the way to do that is 
by thinking along those lines and using the reason s  that we have discussed before. We have to 
reflect on and think about those reasons over and over again until we gain a good understanding 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                   CHAPTER VI - PATIENCE  
 
 
18  
of them.  Otherwise, it is  going to be difficult.  
 
The better we understand those reasons, the more familiar we will be with applying them; then, 
when difficulties arise, through familiarity with a pplication of the counter-measures, we have less 
mental unhappiness. Less  mental unhappiness me ans more mental happiness, doesn’t it? So we 
improve slowly like that.  
 W i t h o u t  t h i n k i n g  o v e r  w h a t  w e  h a v e  d i s c u s s e d  s o  f a r ,  n o n e  o f  t h a t  i s  g o i n g  t o   h a p p e n .  Therefore, we need patience and we are now st udying  the chapter on patience. When we can 
abide in patience, we will always be happy and undisturbed.  
Lesson 4   Chapter VI - verse 11-16 
W e  a r e  g o i n g  t o  c o n t i n u e  w i t h  m o r e  a d v i c e  f r o m  G u n g t a n g  R i n p o c h e ,  w h i c h  w e  s h o u l d  a l l  
reflect on individually.   
Although we desire liberation, if we examine al l our actions, they are only causes for cyclic 
existence. This is disheartening and some thing we should feel very sad about. 
 
For someone intent on achieving liberation, his ac tions should all become causes to achieve that 
goal and not become causes for samsara. We clai m to have the goal of achieving liberation. But 
when we examine our activities closely, all of them  are actually causes for another cyclic existence. 
When we think about this, it is very sad.   Therefore, from now on, if we are truly intent on achieving liberation, then we must try to 
transform everything that we do to ensure that  it becomes the cause for attaining that goal.  
 
We spend our whole lives bearing the name “a Dh arma practitioner”, someone who is interested 
in practising the teachings of the Buddha. Although we  spend our whole lives with such a name, 
in the next life we still end up as an animal. We have the body of an animal. If that should 
happen again, that would be very sad. 
 Although we bear the name of being “a Dharma practitioner”, when we do not transform all our 
daily actions into Dharma, then it is certain we wi ll end up as an animal in our next life. Bearing 
the name of “a Dharma practitioner” alone will no t guarantee us a good rebirth in the next life. 
 The point of this advice is that it is not sufficien t just to bear the name of a Dharma practitioner. 
That is not enough. We must transfor m whatever we do into the Dharma. 
 This collection of advice is very helpful. From time to time, we sh ould try to remember some of it 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                   CHAPTER VI - PATIENCE  
 
 
19  
as it is very beneficial for the mind. In this instance, this advice is about checking to see if we are 
really Dharma practitioners or not. We call ou rselves Dharma practitioners but when we examine 
our daily activities we discover that they are not Dharma. If we spend our whole lives like that 
then, one day, when it is time for the breath to stop and we suddenly find ourselves in an animal 
body, it will be too late.   Therefore, it is our individual responsibility to  transform this act of li stening to the teachings 
into Dharma. This depends on our motivation. We have to set the proper motivation for 
listening to the teachings.   When we listen to the teachings, we need to pay attention. Sometimes we do not pay attention 
when we are in class; sometimes we do not come to class; sometimes we are not 100% interested. 
Then coming to class is not as beneficial as it is if we pay full attention.  The main obstacle to becoming a good-hearted pers on is anger. In order for us to become good-
hearted people, we have to eliminate our anger. Anger is the opposite of the good heart and is 
very harmful. Anger harmed us in the past. It is harming us in the present and it will harm us in 
the future.   We can see how anger harms us in this life. But it  does not stop there. The results of anger will 
also harm us in the future. Anger harms in the pa st because all the roots of virtue accumulated in 
the past are subject to destruction when anger mani fests in the mind. As a result of our anger, we 
accumulate very powerful negative karma, which will propel us into the lower rebirths in our 
future lives. Even in this life, anger disturbs us , causing our loved ones to dislike us and so on.  
 Mental unhappiness causes anger to arise in our minds and it arises:  
(a) when others create problems for our loved ones and ourselves, or  
(b) when we and our loved ones are preven ted from getting what we want, or   
(c) when we see that everything is going well for people whom we dislike.  
 These are the conditions that bring about mental  unhappiness. Is there any point in becoming 
unhappy with these conditions? It is not going to solve the problem or make these conditions 
disappear. On top of that, it makes us miserable. If matters can be changed for the better, there is 
no reason to feel unhappy. If we find that we cannot do anything about the situation, again, we 
h a v e  t o  s t o p  o u r  m i n d s  f r o m  b e c o m i n g  u n h a p p y  s i n c e  t h a t  s e r v e s  n o  p u r p o s e  a t  a l l  b u t  o n l y  generates additional suffering for ourselves. The point here is to keep the mind happy.   For the other party who is creating difficulties for us, our unhappiness does not rid ourselves of this person or make him change his mind towa rds us. It is possible our unhappiness will make 
him happier.  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                   CHAPTER VI - PATIENCE  
 
 
20  
 
Some of the reasons that we have mentioned can be reflected upon during our meditation. 
Meditation helps us to familiarise ourselves with  these lines of reasoning and there is no better 
meditation than familiarising ourselves with the ways of dealing with anger. Then, when anger 
arises in our minds, we can recall these antido tes and apply them immediately. Of course, we 
may not be so successful in the beginning but if we persevere and become more familiar with 
such thoughts, we will improve. It all depends on how familiar we are with such thoughts.  
  You should do this on your own by spending so me time – maybe 15-20 minutes - thinking about 
these points in stages, sorting them out in your own mind while reflecting on your own 
experiences. ( Geshe-la : I do not know how to lead you in this  meditation so try to do it on your 
own.)  
 
A. The way to train in patience 
a. Explaining the chapter’s material 
1) Abandoning hindrances to the accomplishment of abiding by the antidote: 
    devoting oneself to the cultivation of patience 
2) Engaging the mind in the methods for accomplishing patience 
a) Arresting the causes of anger 
i) The nature of the cause along with its disadvantages 
ii) Instructions on making effort in the methods for overcoming 
anger 
iii) The actual method for overcoming that 
iv)  Having examined in detail the causes that give rise to anger, 
making effort to abandon them 
1’ A general presentation of the divisions [of anger in terms 
of] the objects that give rise to anger 
2’ Arresting fury towards that which brings unwanted 
things 3’ Arresting fury towards that which hinders one’s desires 
b) The benefits of cultivating patience 
1’ A general presentation of the divisions [of anger in terms of] the objects that give rise to anger 
(6,11) 
For myself and for my friends 
I want no suffering, no disrespect, 
No harsh words and nothing unpleasant; 
But for my enemies, it is the opposite. 
 
Regarding the objects that give rise to anger, we  get upset when something happens either to our 
loved ones or ourselves. ‘My friends,’ refers to people whom we consider to be on our side.  
 We do not want ‘the four undesirabl es’ for our loved ones and ourselves: 
(1) suffering  (2) disrespect  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                   CHAPTER VI - PATIENCE  
 
 
21  
(3) harsh words (especially criticism) and  
(4) bad reputation. 
  
With regard to our enemies and people we dislike,  ‘the four undesirables’ that we do not want 
for them are:  (5) to have happiness,  (6) to be praised or respected,  (7) to hear pleasant words and  (8) to be well known.   These are the 8 worldly dharmas.  Another commentary refers to the 12 undesirables and 12 desirables, making 24 things that can 
make one unhappy. The 12 undesirables are the: a) 4 things that we do not want for ourselves,  b) 4 things that we do not want  our loved ones to have and  
c) 4 things that we do not wa nt our enemies to experience.  
 The 12 desirables are the:- a) 4 things that we want for ourselves (the oppo site of those 4 things th at we do not want),  
b) 4 things that we would like ou r loved ones to experience and  
c) 4 things that we want our enemies to experien ce ( t he o ppo s it e o f t ho s e thin gs  w e w an t  fo r 
ourselves).   We can also look at these 24 items in terms of th e past, present and future, making a total of 72, 
in the following way: 
a) a set of 24 for the past (this was done to my loved ones and me and this happened to my 
enemy),  
b) a set of 24 for the present and  c) a set of 24 for the future.   The point here is that the causes of mental un happiness are the 8 worldly dharmas in relation to 
our loved ones, ourselves, and our enemies. We get angry when we think about what has 
happened: in the past -  “He harmed me in this way,”  in the present -  “He is harming me now, ” and  in the future - “He will harm me again next time.”              
2’ Arresting fury towards that which brings unwanted things 
a’ Arresting fury towards those who wrong you 
1” Being patient with those who would create suffering for you 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                   CHAPTER VI - PATIENCE  
 
 
22  
a” Cultivating the patience that accepts suffering 
(1) Reflecting on the fact contam inated phenomena are not beyond 
being of the nature of suffering 
(2) Reflecting on the benefits of meditating on suffering 
(3) Reflecting on the fact that, if one is familiar [with such 
attitudes] they are not difficult to implement 
(4) The benefits of making effort in abandoning the afflictions 
(5) An extensive explanation of the meditations on suffering 
b” Cultivating the patience that is intent on dharma 
c” Cultivating the patience that pays no heed to those who cause harm 
2” Being patient with those who would belittle you and so forth 
b’ Arresting fury towards those who wrong those dear to oneself 
c’ Arresting fury towards those who do well by one’s enemies 
 
We have identified the objects that give rise to  anger. By depending on those objects, we get 
angry. We are now looking at how to stop anger.  Since there are 3 different kinds of patience, 
there are 3 different methods to generate these different kinds of patience.  
The first kind of patience is being patient with those who create suffering for us.   
a” Cultivating the patience that accepts suffering 
(1) Reflecting on the fact contaminated phenomena are not beyond being of the nature of 
suffering  
(6,12) 
The causes of happiness sometimes occur 
But the causes for suffering are frequent. 
 
Contaminated phenomena or cyclic existence is  in the nature of suffering. The causes of 
suffering are numerous but happiness occurs only ra rely. We have to unders tand that this is the 
very nature of cyclic existence. Samsara does no t and will not transcend suffering. In one of his 
texts, Maitreya Buddha uses the ex ample of excrement. It stinks, by  nature, no matter what we do 
to it or whoever smells it.   
Similarly, samsara is in the nature of suffering. Understanding this helps us to be patient with 
samsaric conditions. When we encounter difficulties or problems, thinking, “Why did this 
happen to me? Why must this happen ?” this only adds to the basic suffering that is already there. 
We are in cyclic existence and the very nature of  cyclic existence is such that it will never 
transcend suffering.  
 Regardless of where we are born in the three realms, as long as we are in cyclic existence, we will 
not be free from suffering - just as the very natu re of excrement is to be smelly. When problems 
or suffering arise, we have to try to bear with  them without making the suffering we are already 
experiencing even worse.   
(2) Reflecting on the benefits of meditating on suffering 
(6,12 cd)    
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                   CHAPTER VI - PATIENCE  
 
 
23  
Without suffering, there is no renunciation. 
Therefore, mind, you should stand firm. 
 
(6,13) 
If some ascetics and the people of Karnapa 
Endure the pain of cuts and burns for no reason, 
Then for the sake of liberation 
Why have I no courage? 
 
Some people question the value of thinking abou t suffering. It is appropriate and, indeed, there 
is a need to reflect on samsaric suffering becaus e only then will the wish to be liberated from 
such suffering arise. One then develops renunciation.   It is also important to bear with suffering. When  we are in trouble and think about suffering, it 
moves the mind towards thinking about and engaging  in virtue.  This is quite obvious for those 
of us who practise the Dharma and believe in the teachings.  
 For example, when we are struck with a very se rious illness, our minds start to think about the 
Dharma, “What do I need to practise? I hope I don’t die yet.” But when we are healthy and 
everything is going well, the thought to practise    Dharma does not arise. Therefore, suffering is good since suffering provides the favourable conditions that cause us to prac tise the Dharma. Since renunciation  arises in dependence on the 
presence of suffering and suffering moves our mi nds towards Dharma practice, it is appropriate 
to be patient with suffering. 
 
For example, in India, there are people who worshi p Shiva. In order to please Shiva, they engage 
in their own form of Nyung-nay, fasting and inflic ting pain on themselves by beating, cutting or 
burning themselves, etc. There are also groups of people of Karnapa, in South India, who 
congregate to fight one another.  People of other religious traditions engage in such activities for 
no apparent purpose. We have the greater goal of achieving enlightenment for the benefit of all 
sentient beings. Therefore, we should voluntaril y endure whatever suffering may arise and not be 
afraid of such suffering.   
(3) Reflecting on the fact that, if  one is familiar [with such attit udes] they are not difficult to 
implement 
(a) An extensive explanation 
(i) Establishing that if one has familiarized on eself [with such attitudes] they are easily 
applied 
(ii) Establishing that by means of an analogy (iii) The object towards which one is patient 
(iv) An example of how the strength of patien ce arises if one familiarizes [oneself with it] 
(b) Synopsis 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                   CHAPTER VI - PATIENCE  
 
 
24  
(4) The benefits of making effort in abandoning the afflictions 
(5) An extensive explanation of the meditations on suffering 
(i) Establishing that if one has familiarized oneself [with such atti tudes] they are easily applied 
(6,14) 
There is nothing whatsoever 
That is not made easier through acquaintance. 
So through becoming acquainted with small harms, 
I should learn to patiently accept greater harms. 
 
It is the very nature of the mind  that things become easier for us through familiarity.  When we 
familiarise our minds with virtue, it becomes easier  and easier to accomplish virtue. Accordingly, 
the more familiar our minds are with the 3 mental  poisons, the easier it becomes for them to 
arise.   We may think, “I can’t do this.” But it will become easier the more familiar we are with enduring 
suffering. By first putting up with small sufferings, gradually, over time, we will be able to tolerate greater hardships. The text suggest s that we should first put up with small harms like heat and 
cold or some unpleasant words. When our minds ar e familiar with such practices, our ability to 
put up with greater harms will increase to such an extent that we will be able to endure even the fires of hell. The Buddha said that for bodhisa ttvas who have achieved a particular form of 
concentration, whatever happens to them, instead of experiencing them as problems, they only 
experience bliss and happiness due to their mental habituation with such practice. 
(ii) Establishing that by means of an analogy 
(6,15) 
Who has not seen this to be so, with trifling sufferings 
Such as the bites of snakes and insects, 
Feelings of hunger and thirst, 
And with such minor things as rashes? 
 It is easier for people who have become familiar with the experience of snake or insect bites or 
feelings of hunger and thirst to put up with such hardships. They are more willing to do so but for those who are not habituated to thes e things, it is much more difficult.  
(iii) The object towards which one is patient 
(6,16) 
I should not be impatient 
With heat and cold, wind and rain, 
Sickness, bondage and beatings; 
For if I am, the harm they cause me will increase. 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                   CHAPTER VI - PATIENCE  
 
 
25  
 
When our level of forbearance is very small, even a small problem becomes big. But for those 
who have great forbearance, even a big problem becomes small.   
Lesson 5   Chapter VI - verse 17-21 
Listen very carefully for the next five to ten minutes. I am giving homework. I am not sure 
whether you need to take note s. It is not a written assign ment. It is an oral exam ( laughter ). 
 
There are people who question, “What does studying  all these different subjects and texts have to 
do with my daily life?” Some people do not s ee the benefit or how study can be applied at a 
practical level. These teachings can definitely be a pplied in our daily lives but, of course, this is 
not easy. This homework can help you make this happen.    
 
Those who have registered for the Basic Progra m must do the homework . For the others, you 
have a choice to do the homework  or not. It is up to you.  
  W e  h a v e  c o m p l e t e d  f o u r  c l a s s e s .  W h a t  I  a m  g o ing to say now is a summary of what we have 
covered so far. Try to remember what I say and then spend at least 10 to 15 minutes every day 
reflecting on it. Do this co ntinuously for one week.   
 We are looking at the practice of patience, which is the antidote to  anger and hatred. First, recall 
a time when anger or hatred arose in your mind . How did it feel? Did you feel happy or was the 
feeling unpleasant? When you encounter some proble ms and you feel upset and angry, or there is 
a lot of hatred in your mind, examine that f eeling and experience. Was it good or bad?  
  Reflect on this well. It is very obvious when we  look at our own experiences, we can conclude 
that when there is anger in our minds; there is a lot of unhappiness. This unhappiness is 
something that we neither want nor need. That being the case, we have to think of ways and 
means to rid ourselves of this mental unhappiness.   It is very good when we have faith in the Buddha’s teachings and the workings of karma. It is obvious that anger disturbs us and makes us un happy. Worse still, anger destroys the roots of 
virtue that we accumulated in the past for a thousand eons.  It is also obvious that as soon as anger arises in our minds, it blocks and interferes  with the generation of virtuous thoughts and a 
virtuous state of mind, especially when the ange r has been growing in the mind for a long time. 
It becomes very difficult for the mind to be po sitive and virtuous. Anger also harms us in the 
future, by causing us to take rebirth in the lowe r realms. We need to reflect deeply on how anger 
harms us in these different ways.  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                   CHAPTER VI - PATIENCE  
 
 
26  
We then have to examine the causes of anger arisin g in our minds. What is it that is making us 
upset – a person, an incident or situation? We n eed to sort this out clearly in our minds. The 
conclusion is very clear. As mentioned in the text, when there is mental unhappiness it leads to 
anger/hatred.  
 
We then have to check whether our experiences accord with what is said in the text.  Is it true 
that when we experienced this anger, it was because the mind was unhappy in some way? The 
cause of anger/hatred is mental unhappiness. It becomes clear that first we feel unhappy, then 
that mental unhappiness leads to anger/hatred.   We then have to examine what it is that is caus ing us to feel unhappy. The text points out that 
the main cause of mental unhappiness is the eigh t worldly dharmas. For example, we get angry 
when someone harms us. Is this not so? Think ab out it. We feel unhappy when someone stares 
at us in an unfriendly way, or says something nasty about us or physically hurts us. Because the ‘I’ 
or ‘me’ is harmed, we get angry/unhappy. We co me to this conclusion upon reflection.  
 Let us take as an example the experience of be i n g  v e r b a l l y  i n s u l t e d  b y  s o m e o n e .  W e  b e c o m e  
unhappy, then angry and hatred develops. The co ndition for that mental unhappiness and anger 
is hearing those unpleasant words. We should th en reflect: “The words have already been said. 
Can our anger change what has already taken place? ” We should be able to see that, sooner or 
later, the other party will finish what he has to say.   So think: “Are we able to turn back the clock or change the situation by remaining angry? Can 
the insults be retracted if we continue to be angry?”  When we think like this, it becomes clear that getting angry does not serve any purpose at all. 
The insults have been said. The words cannot be ta ken back. By getting angry, we are unable to 
change the situation so our anger is useless. Furthermore, when we get angry, our own minds 
become disturbed and unhappy.  There would be some purpose to our anger if we could rid ourselves of the condition that 
initially upset us. But we can see that is not so. Our anger also ha s no affect on the other party 
who is insults us. We are the ones who experi ence the mental unhappiness and disturbance. 
 After examining this from every possible angle, the conclusion has to be that anger does not serve 
any beneficial purpose whatsoever. It only  serves to make us unhappy, disturb our minds and 
harm us. Based on this conclusion, we should then be convinced that anger is bad for us and be determined not to give in to it in the future: “I must try to stop my anger from arising.” We must 
remember, “I have to be very careful to take care  of my mind, especially when anger is about to 
arise.” 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                   CHAPTER VI - PATIENCE  
 
 
27  
 
We should not think like this ju st occasionally; we should rely on our mindfulness and vigilance 
all the time. When we become more habituated to remembering the conclusion to the decision 
that we made, and when we rely on our mindfuln ess and vigilance, it becomes easier for us to 
stop anger from arising.  
 Now we may think this is all too difficult and ther e is no way we can curb our anger. This may be 
true because we have not familiarised ourselves with applying the antidote to our anger. Over 
time, however, through such mental familiarity, we  will be able to manage our anger and stop it 
quickly even if it does arise. It will not remain in the mind for long. This is definitely achievable. 
 It is very difficult to subdue anger completely. Ev erything that we see or experience seems to exist 
very solidly from its own side.  Anger arises based on that appearance. Although it is difficult for 
us not to get angry, we can still familiarise our minds with the antidotes to anger by meditating 
on some of the points I mentioned earlier. With gr eater familiarity, we will definitely be able to 
stop anger from remaining in the mind for long. When  anger arises, we will be able to stop it and 
not follow it.   When we do not train our minds in this way, we  w i l l  c o n t i n u e  t o  l i v e  w i t h  a n g e r ,  b e c o m i n g  
angrier with each passing day. The days become mo nths, the months become years.  If we do not 
do anything about our anger, we will spend our whole life like that.  It will not take you longer than 10 minutes a day to reflect on some of these points. You should 
reflect on them daily for at least a week. This is not optional. This is something you must do. 
After a week, if you find it beneficial, then, of course, you can continue with the reflection. But 
you must try this out for at least a week. 10 minutes is not a long time. It is now up to you. It is 
your responsibility to put aside those 10 minu tes. When you see its usefulness, you will be 
motivated to do it and you will be able to find th e time. But if you do not want to do it, you will 
not be able to find any time, even if you are not working and free for the whole day.  
 This is homework and something that you have to  do. As I have said, if you do not feel like 
doing this, you will not be able to find these 10 minutes even if you have nothing to do for the 
whole day. But, if you have the interest and desi r e  t o  d o  i t ,  e v e n  i f  y o u  h a v e  t o  w o r k  f o r  t h e  
whole day, you will definitely find that 10 minutes.   
This is something you have to do. It is how Mao Tse Tung worked (laughter)  - you have to do it 
whether you like it or not.  If yo u don’t do it, you will be punished! (laughter)  Sometimes, the 
mind is too wilful and uncontrolled.  What Ma o Tse Tung did was good. Sometimes, our minds 
need that kind of treatment. It must be whacked! (loud laughter and comments!)  
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                   CHAPTER VI - PATIENCE  
 
 
28  
Some students may wonder what our studies have to do with their lives. They do not see its 
usefulness or benefit. It is true!  We can study and listen to many teachings but when we do not 
reflect on them and try to appl y them to our daily lives, we will always remain the same. 
Therefore, we have to reflect on whatever we ha ve studied and learnt. Think critically and analyse 
how our studies may be related to our lives. There is no better way to integrate the teachings with 
our minds. If we do not meditate in this way, the teachings will never benefit the mind. This is 
my way of persuading you to do this homework. 
 You may have a lot of daily commitments but it re mains to be seen whether the mind changes as 
a result of merely reciting prayers and doing sadh anas alone. I think it is very difficult for the 
mind to improve if you simply spend all your time doing prayers without doing any reflection. But when you spend just 10 minutes every day, co ntinuously for, say, a month, thinking about 
how to stop anger, you will be able to a ssess its usefulness at the end of the month. 
Whether this happens or not depends on you trying  it out for yourself. You have to accumulate 
the experience. Please do not misunderstand I am not saying that you should discard your 
commitments and stop your daily prayers. Since yo u have made the promise to do so, you have 
to continue with your prayers, but do them happily.   This assignment must be done for one week. Be  prepared for questions. I can ask anyone who 
has signed up to share his/her meditation experi ence. I am serious. I am now like Mao Tse Tung 
(laughter).   This is the homework.  
 
a” Cultivating the patience that accepts suffering 
(1) Reflecting on the fact contaminated phenom ena are not beyond being of the nature of 
suffering 
(2) Reflecting on the benefits of meditating on suffering 
(3) Reflecting on the fact that, if one is familia r [with such attitudes] they are not difficult 
to implement 
(a) An extensive explanation 
(i) Establishing that if one has fam iliarized oneself [with such attitudes] 
they are easily applied 
(ii) Establishing that by means of an analogy 
(iii) The object towards which one is patient 
(iv) An example of how the strength of patience arises if one familiarizes 
[oneself with it] 
(b) Synopsis 
(4) The benefits of making effort in abandoning the afflictions 
(5) An extensive explanation of the meditations on suffering 
b” Cultivating the patience that is intent on dharma 
c” Cultivating the patience that pays no heed to those who cause harm 
(iv) An example of how the strength of patien ce arises if one familiarizes (oneself with it) 
(6, 17) 
Some, when they se e their own blood, 
Become especially brave and steady, 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                   CHAPTER VI - PATIENCE  
 
 
29  
But some, when they see the blood of others, 
Faint and fall unconscious. 
 
(6,18) 
These (reactions) come from the mind 
Being either steady or timid 
 
One of the earlier verses discussed how the mi nd can become accustomed to doing anything 
through familiarisation. Similarly, if we grow accu stomed to the practice of patience, our patience 
also increases.   In the course of fighting a war or gang fights, there are injuries and blood is shed. Seeing their 
own blood, some fighters become braver, more de termined and may go on to fight better as a 
result of their extensive fighting  experience. There are also coward s who are afraid of the sight of 
the blood of others. The suffering endured and th e blood shed is the same for these two groups 
of people. The difference lies in the mental cour age of the former group. This is an example of 
how the mind can put up with difficulties when  one’s mind is strong  and courageous.   
(b) Synopsis  
(6,18 cd)  
Therefore, I should disregard harms caused to me, 
And not be affected by suffering. 
 
(6,19)  
Even when the wise are suffering 
Their minds remain very lucid and undefiled; 
 In essence, the greater the famili arity with the practice of patien ce, the stronger our patience is. 
When our minds are strong and courageous, we ar e able to endure difficulties to achieve the 
great purpose of achieving the state of enlightenm ent to benefit other sentient beings. We should 
therefore bear with whatever difficulties may arise.   
The wise  in this context, refers to  the bodhisattvas. The bodhisa ttvas’ minds are never disturbed 
regardless of the suffering they have to experience. They are always very calm and happy. They are 
able to put up with difficulties and suffering due to  their familiarity with the practice of patience 
and their strong, courageous minds. We, on th e other hand, are overwhelmed by even small 
problems, due to our lack of familiarity with such practice.   
(4) The benefits of making effort in abandoning the afflictions 
(6, 19  cd)  
For when war is being waged against the disturbing conceptions, 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                   CHAPTER VI - PATIENCE  
 
 
30  
Much harm is caused at the time of battle. 
 
(6, 20) 
The victorious warriors are those 
Who, having disregarded all suffering, 
Vanquish the foes of hatred and so forth; 
(Common warriors) slay only corpses. 
 
Soldiers in battle are aware of the difficulties that they will meet in the course of waging war, but 
they carry on fighting until their objective is ac hieved, when the enemy is completely destroyed. 
In the same way, we, as Dharma practitioners, ar e waging war against the affliction of anger. In 
the course of doing so, we will definitely suffe r difficulties and problems. However, like the 
soldier, we must carry on.  
 The supreme hero is the person who wages war ag ainst his own afflictions, such as anger, in 
order to achieve the great purpose of enligh tenment to benefit sentient beings and who 
disregards any suffering that may arise in the course of this war.   Those who enter into battle to conquer an extern al enemy are proclaimed victorious when they 
gain control of the enemy’s country or territory . But such victory only came through killing 
corpses. The external enemy that they kill will de finitely have to die one day.  When we do not 
apply the antidotes to our intern al enemies, the afflictions, th ey will never disappear on their 
own.   Therefore, a person who defeats his external enemy is not the real hero. In fact, the real hero is 
the person who subdues his afflictions, for these af flictions follow us into our future lives if we 
do not counteract them with antidotes.  Therefor e, we should make this pledge, “I must try to 
overcome my afflictions by applying the antidote to them. When am I goin g to start if I do not 
start to do this now?”   
(5) An extensive explanation of the meditations on suffering 
(6,21) 
Furthermore, suffering has good qualities: 
Through being disheartened with it, arrogance is dispelled, 
Compassion arises for those in cyclic existence, 
Negativity is shunned and joy is found in virtue. 
 
Suffering has good qualities:  
When suffering arises, our sadness reduces our arrogance. When someone who is usually puffed 
up with pride is struck down by sickness, we  can see their arrogance naturally subsides.  
Recalling our own past suffering and experiencing suffering in the present become conditions for 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                   CHAPTER VI - PATIENCE  
 
 
31  
us to develop immeasurable compassion for those who are suffering.  
 
When we experience suffering and think about its causes, we begin to understand that suffering 
arises from our negative actions. Since we do  not like suffering, we become determined to 
abandon its cause, the negative actions, in order to avoid the result, suffering.  
Since we desire happiness, suffering makes us th ink about creating the causes for happiness by 
engaging in virtuous actions. Suffering thus acts  as a condition for motivating us to practise 
Dharma.  
Lesson 6   Chapter VI - verse 22-26 
Here is more advice from Guntang Rinpoche. Rinp oche points out how we work ourselves to the 
point of exhaustion in our daily lives only to achi eve the goals of this life. Carrying on like this 
brings no benefit at all in our future lives.  Realising this, we become disheartened and sad. 
 
We spend our whole life accumulating wealth and possessions but, at the time of death, we leave 
everything behind and cannot bring it along to the next life. Thinking about this is also 
upsetting.  
 
This advice reminds us that only the holy Dharma  can benefit us in our fu ture lives and that we 
need to give up our attachment to the pleasures an d attractions of this life . Therefore, we have to 
cultivate the patience that is intent on Dharma . We must work hard, actualise the teachings and 
put up with whatever difficulties we may enco unter along the way. In order to bear the 
difficulties that come along with Dharma practi ce, we have to cultivate the three types of 
patience; this is what Gungtang Rinpoch e’s advice actually means. These are: 
- the patience of voluntarily accepting problems or sufferings; - the patience that is willing to undergo whatev er difficulty may arise in the course of one’s 
Dharma practice; and  
- the patience of not retaliating when one is harmed.  
 We have completed discussing the first type of patience – the patience of voluntarily accepting 
suffering.  I think the best way to generate such patience is to understand how all contaminated phenomena 
are in the nature of suffering. For example, we ar e unhappy when we fall ill, grow old or have to 
face death.  Our body is the ba sis upon which we experience the suffering of conditionality (or 
pervasive compounded suffering). Simply having th is body means we have to experience old age. 
It is the very nature of our existence to start aging from the moment we are born.  Thinking in 
this way helps us to be less upset when aging takes place. In the same way, death is inevitable. As 
soon as we are born, it is only a matter of time before we die. We have no choice.  Death is part 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                   CHAPTER VI - PATIENCE  
 
 
32  
and parcel of life. Understanding this helps us to deal with the death of loved ones or parents.  
 
For example, if we own a breakable object and it  falls to the ground and breaks, there is no 
reason to be upset if we understand its fragile nature.  In the same way,  when a loved one passes 
away, we should not be excessively upset or sad. Wh y? That person was not meant to live forever.  
 
If that person was immortal and suddenly died , that would be shocking, “What happened – why 
did she die?” But since death is a natural thing,  there is no reason to be so upset.   
 It is helpful to reflect on these points especially when we face difficulties, sickness, old age or the 
fear of death. By voluntarily accepting these sufferings, which cannot be stopped anyway, we 
don’t create additional suffering to what we are already experiencing.   Not cultivating this type of patience means that we give ourselves additional stress, unhappiness 
and problems. This text offers many different re asons to help us develop such patience. Use the 
one you find most beneficial. Since suffering is inev itable for us all, it’s good to apply what we 
have learnt so that we can improve our lives.  As long you are here in the class, I would like to request you all to listen attentively to the 
teachings. Otherwise, coming to class isn’t very be neficial. When you listen carefully, as you try to 
connect what I have said in the past with the current presentation, questions may arise in your 
mind. You may find discrepancies or have qualms and doubts. When you do not listen attentively, you don’t have any questions related to  what we have discussed so far. What I say in 
class is not necessarily correct.   
A. The way to train in patience 
a. Explaining the chapter’s material 
1) Abandoning hindrances to the accomplishment of abiding by the antidote: devoting 
    oneself to the cultivation of patience 
2) Engaging the mind in the methods for accomplishing patience 
a) Arresting the causes of anger 
i) The nature of the cause along with its disadvantages 
ii) Instructions on making effort in the methods for overcoming anger 
iii) The actual method for overcoming that 
iv) Having examined in detail the causes that give rise to anger, making effort 
     to abandon them 
1’ A general presentation of the divisions [of anger in terms of] the 
    objects that give rise to anger 
2’ Arresting fury towards that which brings unwanted things 
a’ Arresting fury towards those who wrong you 
1” Being patient with those who would create suffering for you 
a” Cultivating the patience that accepts suffering 
b” Cultivating the patience that is intent on dharma 
c” Cultivating the patience that pays no heed to those who 
     cause harm 
2” Being patient with those who would belittle you and so forth 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                   CHAPTER VI - PATIENCE  
 
 
33  
b’ Arresting fury towards those who wrong those dear to oneself 
c’ Arresting fury towards those who do well by one’s enemies  
3’ Arresting fury towards that which hinders one’s desires 
b) The benefits of cultivating patience 
 
b” Cultivating the patience that is intent on dharma 
(1) An extensive explanation 
(a) As both fury and the one who is furious, etc. rely upon causes, they are not independent 
(i) Neither fury nor the furious person is independent 
(1’) The reasons it is unreasonable to be furious with an afflicted person 
(2’) Fury is not willingly developed (3’) As all wrongdoing arises from causes and conditions, it is without 
independence 
(ii) Their causes and conditions are also not independent 
(b) Refuting the existence of independent causes (c) The need to overcome fury (anger) 
(2) Synopsis 
(1’) The reasons it is unreasonable to be furious with an afflicted person  
(6, 22) 
As I do not become angry 
With great sources of suffering such as jaundice, 
Then why be angry with animate creatures? 
They, too, are provoked by conditions. 
 
(6, 23)  
Although they are not wished for, 
These sicknesses arise; 
And likewise, although they are not wished for, 
These disturbing conceptions forcibly arise. 
 
We may develop forbearance as a result of havi ng reflected on the patience of voluntarily 
accepting suffering. But we may still think, “I ca n put up with suffering. But why should I not be 
angry at someone who is giving me problems?” Th ese two verses explain why it is inappropriate 
for us to be angry with such a person. 
 According to Tibetan medicine, wind, bile and phle gm are the basis for all the sicknesses that we 
experience. Although we may be un happy when we are sick, we are no t angry at the sickness itself 
in the same way that we are angry with someone who abuses us. There is no reason to be angry 
with our sickness because we can see that it is th e result of certain causes and conditions coming 
together.  Yet we feel it is justifiable to be angry with our enemy, the person who is harming us, thinking, 
“He did that terrible thing to me. I should be angry with him.”   
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                   CHAPTER VI - PATIENCE  
 
 
34  
For us, getting angry with the enemy and getting angry at our illness are two different matters. 
But, in reality, this is not so. Just as our illnes ses arise due to the coming together of causes and 
conditions and are, therefore, not independent, the abuse (from the person) is also due to the 
coming together of certain causes and conditions. So the two situations are similar in that both 
our enemy and sickness are under the control of  causes and conditions. Our ‘enemy,’ who is 
under the control of his afflictions, has no choice  and is unable to behave independently. It is, 
therefore, inappropriate for us to be angry with him. 
(2’) Fury is not willingly developed  
(6, 24) 
Without thinking, "I shall be angry," 
People become angry with no resistance, 
And without thinking, "I shall produce myself,” 
Likewise, anger itself is produced. 
 
We may reject this rationale by saying, “Yes, thes e two situations may be similar but my sickness 
has no intention of causing me harm, whereas my enemy has every intention of hurting me. 
Therefore, I am justified in being angry with th e enemy”. The first two li nes of Verse 24 refute 
this.  
 
Although we may not have any intention of bein g angry with or harming the other party, anger 
can arise spontaneously, at the slightest provocatio n, or when certain causes and conditions come 
together. The conditions also have no wish to ge nerate anger or harm, but when all the necessary 
conditions come together, anger is the result.   An analogy here may be helpful. The mirror has no intention of reflecting anything on its 
surface, nor does the reflected object have any in tention of being reflecte d.  However, when the 
object and the mirror come together, there is a refl ection of the object in the mirror. Similarly, 
sicknesses and enemies come about through the mere aggregation of causes and conditions. 
Neither have any intention of causing us harm. The enemy may not have the initial thought to 
cause pain and harm but when they are provoked, their anger arises and this leads to the harmful 
actions. 
5 
                                              
5 (a) On analysis of whether the object has self-control, anger is unjustified: Analyze , thinking, “What would be 
reasonable grounds for anger toward harm doers?” Whereupon, you might think, “They first had the thought of 
wanting to harm me, prepared the method, and then ei ther prevented my happiness or inflicted unpleasant 
physical or mental suffering, so my anger is justified.” Ar e you angry because they inflic ted harm while they had the 
self-control not to harm you, or are you angry because they were utterly without any self-control and hurt you while 
helplessly impelled by something else? In the former case, your anger is unjustified because those who inflict harm 
do not have control over themselves, fo r, when the conditions and causes – se eds left by afflictions to which they 
were previously habituated, a nearby object, and erroneou s conceptions – come together, they give rise to the 
thought to harm, even though the harm doers do not thin k, “I will feel malice” ; whereas if those causes and 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                   CHAPTER VI - PATIENCE  
 
 
35  
(3’) As all wrongdoing arises from causes and conditions, it is not independent.   
(6, 25) 
All mistakes that occur 
And all the various kinds of wrongdoing 
Arise through the force of conditions; 
They do not govern themselves. 
 
The negative actions that we commit, motivated by  anger and other afflictions, arise from causes 
and conditions. When others direct  negative actions at us, their actions also come about due to 
causes and conditions. Such people are under the co ntrol of their afflictions so there is no reason 
for us to be angry with them. By reflecting on ho w they will have to experience the results of their 
negative actions, we should generate  compassion for them instead.    
 
b” Cultivating the patience that is intent on dharma 
(1) An extensive explanation 
(a) As both fury and the one who is furious, etc. rely upon causes, they are not independent 
(i) Neither fury nor the furious person is independent 
(ii) Their causes and conditions are also not independent 
(b) Refuting the existence of independent causes 
(c) The need to overcome fury (anger) 
(2) Synopsis 
(ii) Their causes and conditions are also not independent  
(6, 26) 
These conditions that assemble together 
Have no intention to produce anything, 
And neither does their product 
Have the intention to be produced. 
                                                                                                                                                           
conditions are not complete, they will never produce the thought to harm, even if the harm doers think, “I will feel 
malice.” These causes and conditions produce the desire to  harm; this in turn produces the work of harming; and 
this produces suffering for someone else , so those harm doers do not have even  the slightest self-control. Moreover, 
they have become like servants of their afflictions, because they are under the control of others, i.e. their 
afflictions. 
In the latter case – you are angry because the harm do ers are utterly without any self-control and, being 
helplessly impelled by something else, they hurt you – then  your anger is totally unjustified. For instance, some 
people who have been possessed by demons and have co me under their control may wish to hurt those who are 
helping them to get free of their demons and thereupon be at them, etc. However, their helpers think, “They do 
this because their demons have eliminated their ability to  control themselves,” and do not have even the slightest 
anger toward them. They then strive to the best of thei r ability to free them from their demons. Likewise, when 
bodhisattvas are hurt by others, they think, “They do th is because the demons of the afflictions have eliminated 
their ability to control themselves.” Without being even th e slightest bit angry with those persons they then must 
generate the spirit of enlightenment, thinking, “I will st rive at the bodhisattva deeds in order to free them from 
these afflictions.” ( Lamrim Chenmo , Vol. 2, pg. 160) 
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                   CHAPTER VI - PATIENCE  
 
 
36  
 
We may then think, “The enemy harmed me be cause he is under the control of anger and 
certain causes and conditions. But those ca uses and conditions are independent.”  
 
We may be provoked by the sight of  an unpleasant object but if we do not see such a thing, then 
we don’t generate an eye consciousness apprehendi ng such a form. Therefor e, there is no basis 
for anger to arise in relation to such an object.   For anger to arise in relation to a visual form , three conditions must come together: the (1) 
presence of the object, (2) eye sense power (3 ) consciousness. These three conditions don’t 
intend to generate anger in us. Likewise, the a ffliction (anger) doesn’t think, “I shall now be 
produced by these three conditions.”   In summary:  
• The causes and conditions that cause us to be angry are not independent  
• The enemy or person harming us is also not independent as they are under the control of 
their afflictions  
• The afflictions themselves ar e also not independent.  
Lesson 7   Chapter VI - verse 27-30 
We usually begin the lesson with the refuge and bodh icitta prayer.  It is important to think about 
the meaning of this prayer and to try to generate the states of mind mentioned in it. This helps 
us to cultivate the correct motivation for receiving these  teachings. 
 
In the last class, we had complete d the section that dealt  with why it is inappropriate for us to be 
angry with people who are controlled by their afflictions. We have also seen why it is 
inappropriate for us to be upset at the  suffering that we experience. We ma y still think, however, 
“I can put up with the suffering bu t I cannot stand that  person who is making life so difficult for 
me.”   That enemy is harming us due to the convergenc e of causes and condit ions. He may have no 
intention to harm us but, being co ntrolled by his afflictions, when  anger comes, he is unable to 
control himself.  We need to remember this. When we analyse the enemy more deeply, we see 
that when he is behaving so uncontrollably due to his negative emotions, he may also be harming 
others by engaging in negative activities such as  killing, stealing, engaging in sexual misconduct 
a n d  s o  f o r t h .   H e  i s  c r e a t i n g  t h e  c a u s e s  o f  s u f f e r i n g  i n  t h i s  l i f e  a n d  f u t u r e  l i v e s .  W i t h  t h i s  
awareness, we will feel compassion for that  person instead of feeling angry with him. 
 
There are certain Indian non-Buddhist philosophica l systems that assert that there is such a 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                   CHAPTER VI - PATIENCE  
 
 
37  
phenomenon as an independent cause leading to harm . To refute this assertion, we need to have 
a good understanding of their positions. In this  text, we are looking at the assertions of the 
Samkhyas (Numerator) and Nyayas (Logician).   
 We had discussed earlier how, for visual objects, anger arises due to the coming together of three 
conditions:-the presence of the object; the ey e sense power perceiving  the object and the 
consciousness or the mind.  In our system, we assert that independent causes  do not exist. When we see how anger arises 
with the coming together of these three cond itions, we realise that  anger does not arise 
independently.  The three conditions are also no t independent since they are the results of their 
own respective causes. This is how we  establ ish that independent causes do not exist.  
 When we assert that a phenomenon  does not exist independently, we are, in effect, saying that 
that phenomenon is a dependent arising (or of de pendent origination) which means it exists in 
dependence on something else and is ‘empty’ of  independence. In a similar way, our enemy is 
also empty of such independence. There is no basi s for anger to arise when we understand this.  
Why is this so? When we are angry at our enemy,  he appears to be independent and solid, but 
when we understand that he is actually not independent but is controlled by certain causes and conditions, our anger will gradually subside.    
b” Cultivating the patience that is intent on dharma 
(1) An extensive explanation 
(a) As both fury and the one who is furious, etc. rely upon causes, they are not 
independent 
(b) Refuting the existence of independent causes 
(i) Refuting the independent self and principal of the Samkhyas 
(1’) Refuting that the principal generates independent expressions 
(2’) Refuting that an aware being autonomously experiences objects 
(ii) Refuting the independent self of the Nyaya’s (Logicians) 
(1’) It is not valid [to posit that] a permanent phenomenon produces an effect 
(2’) It is not valid [for a permanent phenomenon] to rely upon conditions 
(3’) Permanent phenomena are not related to conditions 
(iii) Once one understands all migrators to be like emanations (they see that) it is 
unreasonable to be furious (with them)  
(c) The need to overcome fury (anger) 
(2) Synopsis 
 
When we studied tenets in an earlier module, we learnt how Buddhists refute the existence of a permanent, unitary and independent self.  
 
The Samkhyas, however,  assert that there is a primal independent substance, which is the basis 
for imputing the self. They assert that this  substance exists, independent of causes and 
conditions, and created the world and everything in  it. It is like an independent creator God who 
is capable of producing independent results. 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                   CHAPTER VI - PATIENCE  
 
 
38  
(1’) Refuting that the principal generates independent expressions 
(6, 27) 6 
That which is asserted as Primal Substance7 
And that which is imputed as a Self,8 
(Since they are unproduced,) do not aris e after having purposefully thought, 
"I shall arise (in order to cause harm)." 
 
(6, 28)9 
If they are unproduced and non-existent, 
Then whatever wish they have to produce (harm will also not exist). 
 
The Samkhyas assert that this independent  prim al substance is capable of creating independent 
harm. As Buddhists, we refute this as an impossibi lity, akin to the horns of a rabbit. The primal 
substance does not exist, as it is not created. Since there is no such thing as an independent 
cause, it cannot produce any effect at all.  
  
The Samkhyas cannot assert that the primal subs tance is created. Creation comes about due to 
causes and conditions. Once they  concede that the primal substance is created by causes and 
conditions, their theory of independent cause collapses.   A created substance is also impermanent. If they co ncede this too, then thei r theory of the primal 
substance being a permanent phenomenon also falls apart.  
                                             
 
6 The non-Buddhist school of the Samkhyas states that all that exists depends on a primal independent substance 
that produces the various phenomena enjoyed by a self, or soul, that is both devoid of parts and permanent, and 
that does not depend on causes and conditions. But since there are no produced phenomena that exist 
without depending on causes and conditions, there cannot exist a substance or a primordial force of that 
sort, nor can there be a permanent self that learns an d takes delight in the various phenomena. This primal 
substance presented by the Samkhyas cannot even possess th e motivation for creating something, and since it is 
not produced itself, it cannot produce in turn, because it is permanent. In fact, any effect can only arise out of 
particular conditions from a substantial cause, which in  turn derives from another cause. (Geshe Yeshe Tobden, 
The Way of Awakening, pg. 154)  
7 According to the non-Buddhist Samkhya school of philosophy, the primal substance is the permanent underlying material 
cause and the nature of all objective phenomena.  
8 This refers to the non-Buddhist concept of an un changing, partless and autonomous self and soul..  
9 Non-Buddhist schools believe in the existence of a permanen t self or "I," whereas Buddhists believe that the self is 
impermanent. By "permanent" we mean something that is not subject to any kind of inner change. 
If there were a soul or a permanent self that had the experience of a particular object, it would have to 
experience that object at all times. 
If we had a permanent self and were enjoying food, we would have to keep  eating without ever stopping, the 
characteristic of immutability being permanent. Instead, we continuously change our activities—we eat, sleep, and 
walk. (Geshe Yeshe Tobden, The Way of Awakening , pg. 154)  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                   CHAPTER VI - PATIENCE  
 
 
39  
If the Samkhyas insist that the primal substanc e is not created, it necessarily follows that it 
cannot produce any results. In order for results to  be produced, the cause itself must come from 
its own cause.  Otherwise, it cannot produce any results.    
(2’) Refuting that an aware being autonomously experiences objects 
(6, 28 cd) 
Since (this Self) would perman ently apprehend its object, 
It follows that it woul d never cease to do so. 
 
The Samkhyas also assert that this primal subs tance (or principal) eman ates the pleasant and 
unpleasant objects that we see.  The independent self (an aware being), then interacts with  and 
enjoys these different phenomena. If the indepe ndent self enjoyed looking at a beautiful form, 
which was emanated by the principal, that self wo u l d  h a v e  t o  d o  s o  f o r e v e r .  W h y ?  S i n c e  i t  i s  
permanent, it cannot change.   
(ii) Refuting the independent self of the Nyaya’s 
(1’) It is not valid [to posit that] a permanent phenomenon produces an effect 
(2’) It is not valid [for a permanent phenomenon] to rely upon conditions (3’) Permanent phenomena are not related to conditions 
(1’) It is not valid [to posit that] a permanent phenomenon produces an effect 
(6, 29)10 
Furthermore, if the Self were permanent, 
It would clearly be devoid of action, like space. 
 
While both the Samkhyas and the Nyayas assert an independent,  permanent self, they are 
differentiated by the nature of that self. The Samk hyas assert that the self is the mind while the 
Nyayas assert the self is matter.  
 
The Nyayas assert that the indepe ndent thought of harming is prod uced by this independent and 
permanent self.   Buddhists refute that such a se lf has the ability to function at all. It cannot 
produce any effect since  it is permanent. Such a self is like uncompounded space, which do not 
produce anything at all. 
                                              
10 If a permanent self existed, it would b e  l i k e  s p a c e ,  d e v o i d  o f  a c t i o n .  B u t  t h e r e  i s  n o  s u c h  t h i n g  a s  a  p r i m a l  
substance endowed with volition and able to create, nor does there exist a permanent self. The Samkhyas say that 
the primal substance is permanent, but that it is able to  create by encountering particular circumstances. Now, 
something permanent cannot come into contact with an y circumstance or condition, since nothing can mod-
ify a permanent phenomenon, whose nature is definitively unchanging. 
What influence can any agent have on this hypothetical primal substance whose nature is supposed to be 
permanent? None whatsoever! 
Nothing can modify or benefit a permanent self, becaus e self and object could not relate, and would not be 
connected. (Geshe Yeshe Tobden, The Way of Awakening , pg. 154)  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                   CHAPTER VI - PATIENCE  
 
 
40  
(2’) It is not valid [for a permanent phenomenon] to rely upon conditions 
(6, 29 cd) 
So even if it met wi th other conditions, 
How could its unchanging (nature) be affected? 
 
(6, 30)11    
Even if when acted upon (by other conditions) it remains as before, 
Then what could actions do to it? 
(3’) Permanent phenomena are not related to conditions 
(6, 30 cd)   
Thus if I say that this (condition ) acts upon (a permanent Self), 
How could the two ever be (causally) related? 
Lesson 8   Chapter VI - verse 31-40 
The reason it is inappropriate for us to be an gry with our enemy is because he is under the 
control of causes and conditions  that leave him with neither in dependence nor choice in his 
behaviour. Any created phenomenon depends on  a cause. Such causes and conditions are 
themselves subject to their previous causes an d conditions, which means that the continua of 
causes and conditions are beginningless and not independent.  
 
According to the Prasangika Madhyamika tenet sy stem, there is no such phenomenon as an 
independent cause.   
                                              
11 Fire and smoke are of different natures, and yet fire ha s an effect and an influence on smoke. If there were 
a permanent self, nothing could influence it. 
Relationships between various phenomen a can be of two kinds: of the same nature, and cause and effect. "Of 
the same nature" refers to two characteristics of th e same phenomenon, such as being produced and being 
impermanent, or warmth and light, two characteristics of fire. The "of the same nature" argument is invoked 
after denying the possibility of acting on something permanent. The Samkhyas defend their position by stating 
that there is an additional type of relationship by wh ich a permanent self can interact with other objects. In 
reality, however, the only relationships that exist are the two previously described, in which phenomena relate 
mutually. If one phenomenon were permanent, it could not relate with the other!  
In order to speak of causal relation ships between phenomena, there must be an effect. For instance, if we are 
ill and become healthy again after taking medicine, we can say that we were cured as a result of the medicine. 
Since a permanent phenomenon cannot ever change, any ac tion or influence on it will not produce an effect. 
The Samkhyas consider the objects of the world to be im permanent and the self to be  permanent. This permanent 
s e l f  s h o u l d  t h e n  e n j o y  i m p e r m a n e n t  o b j e c t s — b u t  t h i s  t y p e  o f  r e l a t i o n s h i p  i s  c o m p l e t e l y  a b s u r d .  F o r  i f  o n e  
phenomenon is permanent and the others are impermanent,  it is neither possible for a same-nature relationship 
nor a relationship of cause and effect to  exist between them. (Geshe Yeshe Tobden, The Way of Awakening,  pg. 
154)  
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                   CHAPTER VI - PATIENCE  
 
 
41  
 
There are, however, non-Buddhist philosophical sy stems that assert that there are independent 
causes, which can produce independent results. We  assert that, if such an independent cause 
exists, it exists without depending on other caus es and conditions, which will also mean that it 
cannot produce any effect.   
b” Cultivating the patience that is intent on dharma 
(1) An extensive explanation 
(a) As both fury and the one who is furious, etc. rely upon causes, they are not 
independent 
(b) Refuting the existence of independent causes  
(i) Refuting the independent self and principal of the Samkhyas 
(ii) Refuting the independent self of the Nyaya’s 
(iii) Once one understands all migrators to be like emanations (they see that) it is 
unreasonable to be furious (with them)  
(c) The need to overcome fury (anger) 
(2) Synopsis 
(iii) Once one understands all migrators to be lik e emanations (they see that it is) unreasonable 
to be angry (with them) 
(6, 31) 
Hence everything is governed by other factors 
(which in turn) are governed by (others), 
And in this way noth ing governs itself. 
Having understood this, I should not become angry 
With phenomena, which are like apparitions. 
 
Our enemies are ‘other-powered,’ which means they do not exist independently of causes and 
conditions. The anger generated by our enemies ca me about due to causes and conditions that, 
in turn, arose from their own causes and condit ions, which also arose from their own set of 
preceding causes and conditions and so forth. Therefore, we ca nnot posit a beginning to the 
causes and conditions or find the initial cause th at started the chain of events that brought about 
the anger in the first place. The causes and cond itions themselves are also other-powered and not 
independent.   We need to understand how the enemy is like an illusion or a dream; he appears but he does not 
exist truly. For example, an illusion does not appear suddenly without a reason. It comes about 
due to certain causes and conditions, such as th e presence of the illusionist and the substances 
he uses, etc.   Amongst all the different rationales given, this is sa id to be the best method to deal with anger. If 
we can ascertain that the enemy does not exist independently but as a dependent-arising (due to certain causes and conditions) and therefore has no  control over his actions, we can definitely 
prevent anger from arising in our minds. For ex ample, we would not be angry if our loved one 
who was possessed by spirits harmed us. Since we would know that he was under the control of 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                   CHAPTER VI - PATIENCE  
 
 
42  
other causes and conditions, we would only feel  compassion for him.  We should apply that 
same understanding towards our enemies. 
 
b” Cultivating the patience that is intent on dharma  
(1) An extensive explanation 
(a) As both anger and the one who is angry, etc. rely upon causes, they are not 
independent 
(b) Refuting the existence of independent causes  
(c) The need to overcome anger 
(2) Synopsis 
(c) The need to overcome anger 
(6, 32) 
- (If everything is unreal, like an apparition,) then who is there to  
restrain what (anger)? 
Surely (in this case) restraint would be inappropriate- 
It would not be inappropriate, beca use (conventionally) I must maintain 
That in dependence upon restraining (ang er), the stream of suffering is severed. 
 
In response to the previous verse, a qualm may arise, “If all phenomena are like apparitions, 
since they do not exist truly, how can the medita tion on patience be the antidote to anger?”  
 All lower tenet systems assert that phenomena exis t inherently because they do not know how to 
posit the functioning of cause an d effect in any other way.   
 According to the Prasangika-Madhyamika tenet system , we will be able to stop the continuum of 
the effects of anger conventionally  – such as rebirths in the hell realms - through the practice of 
patience. Using the analogy of mistaking a coil of ro pe for a snake, once we understand that it is 
actually a rope, the fear of a snake is eliminated . Similarly, by understanding that our enemy is 
not inherently existent, we will be able to eliminate our anger towards him.   The Prasangika-Madhyamika School refutes the argu ment of the lower tenets in this way: “We 
are only able to abandon the objects of abando nment and to cultivate the relevant antidotes 
because phenomena do not exist inherently. If one asserts that things exis t truly, this assertion 
has to apply to the objects of abandonment as  well. This means that they exist without 
depending on causes and conditions and are, th erefore, not subject to change. That being the 
case, how would we be able to abandon such objects?” 
(2) Synopsis  
(6, 33) 
So when one sees an enemy or even a friend 
Committing an improper action, 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                   CHAPTER VI - PATIENCE  
 
 
43  
By thinking that such things arise from conditions 
I shall remain in a happy frame of mind. 
 
(6, 34) 
If things were brought into being by choice, 
Then since no one wishes to suffer, 
Suffering would not occur 
To any embodied creature. 
 
By understanding that their behaviour is contro lled by causes and conditions, when our enemies 
or friends commit negative actions, we should be  patient and keep our minds in a happy state. 
 Things do not arise independent of causes and co nditions. If they did, we would have a choice. 
Since it is the wish of all living beings to be ha ppy, we should always be happy. But that is not the 
case. This shows our lack of independence from other factors.  When we are harmed, that situation does not aris e without a cause. When we grasp strongly at 
the enemy as solid, independent and not subject to  other causes and conditions, we continue to 
be angry. For example, when we mistake a coil of rope for a snake, fear arises. Only through 
understanding that there is no snake are we be ab le to overcome our fear. In the same way, by 
understanding how the enemy does not exist inhe rently but exists in dependence on other 
factors, are we able to pacify our anger towa rds the enemy. Understanding and meditating on 
dependent arising, on how phenomena are empty of  inherent existence, is the supreme antidote 
for overcoming any afflictions. It not only stop s manifest afflictions but can also destroy their 
seeds.  
In summary, why is it that we experience suffering  despite our wish to be happy? This shows that 
all phenomena – including our enemies and the harm they inflict on us - do not exist inherently 
or independently of causes and conditions. The more we familiarise ourselves with meditating on 
emptiness, the weaker our anger and other nega tive emotions will be. When we achieve the 
direct realisation of emptiness, we can uproot al l our negative emotions, such as anger, together 
with their seeds.  
A. The way to train in patience 
a. Explaining the chapter’s material 
1) Abandoning hindrances to the accomplishment of abiding by the antidote: devoting 
    oneself to the cultivation of patience 
2) Engaging the mind in the methods for accomplishing patience 
a) Arresting the causes of anger 
i) The nature of the cause along with its disadvantages 
ii) Instructions on making effort in the methods for overcoming anger  
iii) The actual method for overcoming that 
iv) Having examined in detail the causes that give rise to anger, making effort 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                   CHAPTER VI - PATIENCE  
 
 
44  
     to abandon them 
1’ A general presentation of the divisions [of anger in terms of] the 
    objects that give rise to anger 
2’ Arresting fury towards that which brings unwanted things  
a’ Arresting fury towards those who wrong you 
1” Being patient with those who would create suffering for you 
a” Cultivating the patience that accepts suffering 
b” Cultivating the patience that is intent on dharma  
c” Cultivating the patience that pays no heed to those who 
     cause harm 
2” Being patient with those who would belittle you and so forth 
b’ Arresting fury towards those who wrong those dear to oneself 
c’ Arresting fury towards those who do well by one’s enemies  
3’ Arresting fury towards that which hinders one’s desires 
b) The benefits of cultivating patience 
 
c” Cultivating the patience that pays no heed to those who cause harm 
(1) Engaging the mind in the method of compassion 
(a) Some sentient beings cause you harm due to the lack of understanding (b) If one can kill even oneself due to lack of  understanding, it is not amazing that they 
can cause harm to others (c) Therefore, it is reasonable to feel compassion for them 
(2) Arresting the causes of fury 
(3) Reflecting on unwanted occurrences being due to one’s own faults 
(a) Some sentient beings cause you harm due to the lack of understanding
 
(6, 35) 
Through not being careful, 
People even harm themselves with thorns and other things, 
And for the sake of obtaining women and the like, 
They become obsessed and de prive themselves of food. 
 
(6, 36) 
And there are some who injure themselves 
Through the unmeritorious deeds 
Of hanging themselves, leaping from cliffs, 
Eating poison and unhealthy food. 
 
Sometimes, people harm themselves due to lack  of conscientiousness. When they are obsessed 
with women (or men), wealth and possessions, etc. , they may even starve  themselves. Controlled 
by strong afflictions, they commit suicide by hanging themselves, leaping from buildings or 
t a k i n g  p o i s o n  a n d  t h e y  e n g a g e  i n  a l l  s o r t s  o f  n e g a t i v e  a c t i o n s  s u c h  a s  k i l l i n g ,  s t e a l i n g ,  s e x u a l  misconduct, lying, harsh speech etc. Their negative  actions become the causes of suffering in this 
and future lives. Despite their wish for self-pre servation, they uncontrollably indulge in such 
foolish actions. This shows that they are not free and independent.  Instead of anger, it would be 
more appropriate for us to feel compassion for them. 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                   CHAPTER VI - PATIENCE  
 
 
45  
(b) If one can kill even oneself due to the lack of understanding, it is not amazing that they can 
cause harm to others 
(6,37) 
If, when under the influence of disturbing conceptions, 
People will even kill their treasured selves, 
How can they be expected not to cause harm 
To the bodies of other living beings? 
 
If they can harm even their own dearly cherishe d bodies, harming others will not be unexpected. 
Understanding this, we develop patience an d keep our minds in a happy state.   
(c) Therefore, it is reasonable to feel compassion for them  
(6, 38) 
Even if I cannot develop compassion for all such people 
Who, through the arisal of  disturbing conceptions, 
Set out to try and kill me and so forth, 
The last thing I should do is to become angry with them. 
 People who harm themselves and others are not ac ting independently because they are controlled 
by their afflictions; in the sa me way that some people are possessed by spirits. Understanding 
this, we develop patience and compassion for them in stead of anger. Even if we are unable to feel 
compassion for them, at the every least,  we should not be angry with them.  
 
(2) Arresting the causes of anger 
(a) It is unreasonable to be angry with a child if it is in his nature (to lack understanding 
and act so) 
(b) It is unreasonable to be furious even if the conditions that brought about harm are adventitious 
(c) By examining the direct and/or indirect causes, [one comes to see that] being furious 
is unreasonable 
(a) It is unreasonable to be angry with a child if it is in his nature (to lack understanding and act 
so) 
(6, 39) 
Even if it were the nature of the childish 
To cause harm to other beings, 
It would still be incorrect  to be angry with them, 
For this would be like begrudging fi re for having the nature to burn. 
 
‘The childish ,’ here means ordinary beings. We need to analyse this: Is it in the nature of ordinary 
beings to harm others? If it is in their nature, it is inappropriate to be angry with them, just as it 
is inappropriate for us to be angry at fire for being hot and burning us when we put our hand in 
it.  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                   CHAPTER VI - PATIENCE  
 
 
46  
(b) It is unreasonable to be angry even if the c onditions that brought about harm are adventitious 
(6, 40) 
And even if the fault were temporary 
In they who are by nature reliable, 
It would still be incorrect to be angry, 
For this would be like begrudging spac e for allowing smoke to arise in it. 
 
Though it is not in their nature to cause harm, but due to some adventitious conditions, we are 
harmed. It is still inappropriate for us to get angr y. When we are angry, we should be angry with 
the anger or afflictions in the enemy and not the enemy himself because, by nature, he may be a 
good-hearted person. Getting angry with the enemy here would be like getting angry at space when billowing smoke irritates our noses.
12    
Lesson 9   Chapter VI - verse 41-50 
In Gungtang Rinpoche’s collection of advice, he says that we spend 20 years of our lives not 
thinking about the Dharma and another 20 years, thinking, “Oh, I must practise the Dharma,” 
but never doing anything about it. Then we spend another 20 years not being able to practise the 
Dharma, at the end of which we thin k, “Oh, I didn’t get to practise  the Dharma after all.” In this 
way, we waste our entire lives.  
 When we examine our own lives carefully, we ca n see how this advice is applicable to us, 
describing exactly our situation here in this particular module. In th e beginning, we did not 
think of studying. Then we decided we needed  to study, yet we did nothing about it.  
 It is your responsibility to ensure that what  Rinpoche describes does not happen to you. You 
have to make sure that this opportunity does not go to waste. You must pay attention when 
listening to the teachings. Otherwise, even th ough physically, you will have spent 5 years 
attending classes, you will end up knowing nothing. It is important that you try your best to pay 
attention when you are in class.   Sometimes, the mind gets distracted. It is impo rtant that not only the sound of the words is 
going into the ears but the mind must be listenin g as well. If you do not pay attention with your 
mind, at the end of class, if someone asks you,  “What was covered in class today?” your reply 
might be, “Oh, I can’t remember.” A lot of people end up like this. This is not a good thing and 
                                             
 
12 On analysis for either adventitiousness or inherency, an ger is unjustified: The fault of doing harm to others 
either is or is not in the nature of living beings. If it is in  their nature, it is wrong to get angry, just as it is wrong to 
get angry at fire for being hot and burning.  Similarly, if it is adventitious, it is  also wrong to be angry, just as when 
smoke and the like appear in the sky, it is wrong to be angry at the sky on account of these flaws of smoke and so 
forth. Thinking in this way, stop your anger. ( Lamrim Chenmo , Vol. 2, pg 162)  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                   CHAPTER VI - PATIENCE  
 
 
47  
not beneficial.  You must retain something that is  beneficial to the mind.  Please keep this in 
mind.   
 
Most of the points explained in this text need to be understood  and practised through analytical 
meditation, where logic is applied to the reason s given. When the rationale is explained, you 
need to check whether it makes sense or not. If it  does not make sense to you, then you need to 
ask and clarify. Please generate the correct and positive motivation for participating in this 
session. Please listen carefully.  
c” Cultivating the patience that pays no heed to those who cause harm 
(1) Engaging the mind in the method of compassion 
(2) Arresting the causes of fury 
(a) It is unreasonable to be furious with a child if it is in his nature [to lack 
understanding and act so] 
(b) It is unreasonable to be furious even if the conditions that brought about harm are adventitious 
(c) By examining the direct and/or indirect causes, [one comes to see that] being 
furious is unreasonable  
(3) Reflecting on unwanted occurrences being due to one’s own faults 
(c) By examining the direct and/or indirect causes, [one comes to see that] being furious is unreasonable
 
(6, 41) 
If I become angry with the wielder, 
Although I am actually harmed by the stick, 
Then since the perpetrator, too, is secondary, being in turn  
incited by hatred, 
I should be angry with the hatred instead. 
 
If we are physically attacked with a stick or so mebody throws stones at us, most of us will be 
angry with the attacker. Although it is actually the weapon – the stick or stone – that is causing 
pain and hurting the body, we do not get angry at  it. Our reasoning is this: “The stick or stone 
cannot hurt me unless it is used by someone.  Th erefore I should be angry with the attacker and 
not the weapon.”  
 But if we think like this, we should apply the same  line of reasoning to the attacker, who is under 
the complete control of his anger. Therefore, we  should direct our anger towards the anger of 
our attacker and not the attacker himself. The cause of the attack is the hatred in the attacker’s 
mind. He is wedged in between the weapon that is  directly hurting us and the hatred in his own 
mind. By thinking in this way, when we are a ttacked, we can prevent anger from arising towards 
our attacker.  
 
It is said that trying to meditate without listen ing extensively to the teachings is like trying to 
climb a cliff face without fingers. Subduing anger is not easy and requires a lot of effort. This text 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                   CHAPTER VI - PATIENCE  
 
 
48  
shows us many ways of doing this.  If we do no t have a wide variety of methods at our disposal, 
we will have nothing to work with even if we have the wish to overco me our anger. The more 
extensively we listen and learn, the wider will be our perspective and the more tools we will have 
to cope with our anger. If we don’t adopt these tools, then we have to rely on only one or two 
antidotes to our anger, which do not really he lp to develop our minds. So, when we hear 
someone saying, “Oh, you don’t need to study in order to meditate,” this is not an acceptable 
position to take.   
(3) Reflecting on unwanted occurrences being due to one’s own faults 
(a) The meaning of the actual 
(i) Reflecting on the harm brought upon you by another as one’s own fault 
(ii) The cause of suffering is a disadvantage of having taken a body 
(iii) [Seeing it as] a disadvantage of havi ng created the causes of suffering in a 
former life 
(iv) As it is one’s own karma that presses others into bringing suffering upon us, 
it is unreasonable to be furious with them 
(v) fury itself is erroneous and thus unreasonable 
(b) Abandoning objections  
(i) Reflecting on the harm brought upon you by another as one’s own fault  
(6, 42) 
Previously, I must have caused similar harm 
To other sentient beings. 
Therefore, it is right for this harm to be returned 
To me, who caused injury to others. 
 
Here is another method to deal with harm directed  at us. All the suffering that we experience in 
life is the fruitional effect of negative action s that we committed in the past. Having harmed 
others, now the harm is returning to us. Reflecti ng on this is one way of curbing our anger and 
developing our patience.  
We discussed the meaning of this verse exte nsively discussed in the previous module, The Wheel 
of Sharp Weapons . Different kinds of negative actions result  in the different kinds of suffering we 
experience in this life.  
 If we can reflect that it is reasonable for onesel f to experience the results of one’s past negative 
actions, we will be able to prevent the mind from  becoming agitated and keep it in a calm and 
peaceful state. 
(ii) The cause of suffering is a disadvantage of having taken a body 
(6, 43) 
Both the weapon and my body 
Are the causes of my suffering. 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                   CHAPTER VI - PATIENCE  
 
 
49  
Since the other gave rise to the weapon, and I to the body, 
With whom should I be angry? 
 
(6, 44) 
If, in blind attachment, I cling 
To this suffering abscess of a human form 
Which cannot bear to be touched, 
With whom should I be angry when it is hurt? 
 
This is another reason to be patient when we are harmed physically. Both the weapon and our 
bodies play an equal role in our experience of pain when we are attacked. The weapon is the 
cause of the physical pain we feel while our bodi es are the bases for experiencing that pain and 
suffering.   
When we are attacked, there are two causes for th at painful experience: the main (or substantial) 
cause and the contributory cause. The main cause of  our pain is the set of aggregates (body) that 
we have as the result of our karma and delusion s.  The contributory cause of our pain is the 
attacker. Both these causes are equally responsible for our suffering.   
 Why then do we focus our anger only on the attacker and not on our own bodies? It is, 
therefore, inappropriate to be angr y at the attacker. By reflecting  
in this way, we can keep our minds calm and peaceful.   Our bodies, which are made of blood and filth, are unable to bear heat an d cold, causing us great 
agitation. Since this is the natu re of our bodies, which are the result of our own ignorance and 
negativities, then why are we angry when we are ex perience pain and harm? It is unreasonable to 
blame someone else for such physical suffering.   Anger has to be stopped at all times. There ar e people who are angry with and loath their own 
bodies thinking they are too fat/thin/ugl y, etc. This is also inappropriate.  
(iii) [Seeing it as] a disadvanta ge of having created the causes of suffering in a former life 
(6,45) 
It is the fault of the childish that they are hurt, 
For although they do not wish to suffer, 
They are greatly attached to its causes. 
So why should they be angry with others? 
 
(6,46) 
Just like the guardia ns of the hell worlds 
And the forest of razor-sharp leaves, 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                   CHAPTER VI - PATIENCE  
 
 
50  
So is this (suffering) produced by my actions; 
With whom therefore should I be angry? 
 
“The childish,” refers to us ordinary beings.  Al l the suffering and unpleasant experiences of this 
life are the results of our actions in previous live s. Attached to negative actions such as killing, 
stealing, etc., we have accumulated negative ka rma, which is now ripening in the form of 
suffering. There is no reason, therefore, to blame others for our present suffering. 
 An example is given in verse 46. The experiences of  rebirth in the hell realms – the fearsome hell 
guardians wielding many weapons or being cut by the razor-sharp leaves in the forest of trees – 
are created by and the result of our own negative karma.  (In the previous module, we questioned 
whether the hell guardians were actual beings or only one’s own karmic a ppearances. We need to 
think about this).   Since all our unpleasant experiences and sufferings are the result of our own negative actions, we 
should restrain ourselves from engaging  in these actions again in the future. 
(iv) As it is one’s own karma that presses others into bringing suffering upon us, it is 
unreasonable to be furious with them  
(6,47) 
Having been instigated by my own actions, 
Those who cause me harm come into being. 
If by these (actions) they  should fall into hell, 
Surely isn't it I who am destroying them? 
 
We harmed someone in our previous life. With th at as a cause and the ripening of the karma in 
this life as a condition, our victim is returnin g the harm now.  Our negative karma is the main 
cause that is instigating our enemies to hurt us  now. In that sense, we are responsible for 
‘encouraging’ our enemies to harm us. 
 Since that is so, we also become responsible fo r causing our enemies to create the cause for a 
rebirth in hell through the negative karma they ge nerate by harming us. Reflecting in this way, 
the situation changes dramatically and we can s ee how we are actually harming our enemies.  
 These are excellent tools to help us deal with ou r anger. Combined with our faith of conviction 
in the law of cause and effect (karma) and our co nstant reflection and contemplation, we will be 
able to reach a stage where we will find it hard  to justify our anger in any circumstances and we 
will not become angry anymore.   
When we are angry, our anger is completely focu sed on the enemy. In order to stop our anger, 
we need to stop the mind that always blames the ot her party. The only way to do this is to reflect 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                   CHAPTER VI - PATIENCE  
 
 
51  
constantly on the various reasons given. 
(v) Fury itself is erroneous and thus unreasonable  
(6, 48) 
In depending upon them, I purify many transgressions 
By patiently accepting the harms that they cause. 
But in depending upon me, they will fall 
Into hellish pain for a very long time. 
 
(6, 49) 
So since I am causing harm to them 
And they are benefiting me, 
Why, unruly mind, do you become angry 
In such a mistaken manner? 
 
When we engage in the practice of patience, our enemies become the causes for us to purify our 
negativities. By being patient with the enemy and by depending on him, we also accumulate vast 
amounts of merit. When we think like this , the enemy becomes someone who is extremely 
beneficial and helpful instead of someone harmfu l. By depending on the enemy, we can engage 
in the practice of patience, purify our negativiti es and also accumulate merit in the process. On 
the other hand, we become the condition for our enem y to engage in negative actions, as a result 
of which he has to experience the suffering of   rebirth in the hell realms.   
We need to understand why the outline states that, “ Anger itself is erroneous and thus unreasonable.” 
Thinking that the enemy is harmful and not benefi ting us is erroneous. Our enemies provide the 
conditions for us to purify our negativities and accumulate virtue, while we actually provide the 
conditions for our enemies to engage in negativiti es. Therefore, it is inappropriate to be angry 
with the enemy. Instead we should be pleased with him. Patience is cultivated by thinking in this 
way. 
 
c” Cultivating the patience that pays no heed to those who cause harm 
(1) Engaging the mind in the method of compassion 
(2) Arresting the causes of fury 
(3) Reflecting on unwanted occurrences being due to one’s own faults 
(a) The meaning of the actual 
(b) Abandoning objections  
(i) Rejecting [the position that holds] that it is invalid for others to do 
something that benefits us 
(ii) Rejecting [the position that holds] th at it is invalid fo r us to bring harm 
upon others 
(iii) Arresting ingrat itude towards those who act beneficially 
(i) Rejecting [the position that holds ] that it is invalid for others to do something that benefits us 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                   CHAPTER VI - PATIENCE  
 
 
52  
(6, 50) 
If my mind has the nobl e quality (of patience), 
I shall not go to hell. 
 
Some people may disagree with verses 48-49, that the enemy is actually benefiting rather than 
harming us. They argue that since we provide th e conditions for the en emy to harm us, as a 
result of which he goes to the lower realms, we too will experience the suffering of going to the 
hell realms for harming our enemy in this way.  Therefore, the enemy is not benefiting us after 
all since he provides the condition for us to go to hell.  
 The refutation to this qualm appears in the fi rst two lines of verse 50. When we develop the 
noble quality of patience, which means we are able  to refrain from retaliating even when we are 
harmed, then we will not go to he ll. This means that the enemy does not necessarily provide the 
condition for us to go to hell.  This is how the enemy benefits, instead of harming us. 
Lesson 10   Chapter VI - verse 50-55 
I gave you some meditation homework a few week s ago. This is another piece of meditation 
homework for you to reflect on for the next couple of weeks. This is revision of what we have 
covered so far, a kind of self-stu dy done with the mind. If you like to study, then you have to do 
this homework. As students, you should follow the in structions of the teacher. Put aside 10 to 15 
minutes every day and reflect on the following points:  
 The points seem quite long. If you can, reflect on them all in the sequence I give you. If you do 
not have the time, then choose and meditate on the points you find most useful.   
 1. Visualise on the crown of your head your medi tational deity and root guru. Your meditational 
deity is inseparable in nature from your root guru.   2. Next, generate the motivation for doing this practice: “In or der to achieve the enlightened 
state of my guru deity, I must perfect my practice of patience.”  3. Visualise you are surrounded by all sentient be ings, including your enemies who are in front 
of you, and make a mental pledge and promise: “Even if all sentient beings rise up as my 
e n e m i e s ,  I  w i l l  n o t  b e  a n g r y  w i t h  t h e m . ”  M a k i n g  t h i s  k i n d  o f  m e n t a l  p l e d g e  i s  p a r t i c u l a r l y  
beneficial and helpful if you can sustain this  mental commitment for the duration of your 
meditation session. You can pledge to keep this  commitment for 10 minutes, a longer period of 
time or even for a whole day, like observing the 8 Mahayana precepts.   
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                   CHAPTER VI - PATIENCE  
 
 
53  
4. In dealing with anger, it is imperative to reflec t on the faults and disadvantages of anger.  It is 
mentioned in the text, “ There is no transgression like hatred .”  
 
Anger not only destroys merits accumulated in th e past, present and future ; but also, when anger 
is present in the mind, there is no room for virtuous states of mind to arise.  
 For instance, when we dislike and are angry with someone, we are unable to rejoice even when 
that person is doing a virtuous action. Due to th e presence of anger in our minds, we are unable 
to see the good qualities of that person. It also  becomes difficult to generate positive thoughts 
towards the people who are close to our object of  anger, such as their friends and relatives and 
we are not happy to see them.   It is also said that anger prevents the ge neration of higher spiritual qualities.   
 
The opposite of anger is the practice of pa tience. As mentioned in the text, there is “ no fortitude 
like patience. ” With patience, we are able to generate positive thoughts even towards our enemies 
and one has the mental space for positi ve thoughts to arise in one’s mind. 
 
5. Anger arises when we are harmed in some w ay, be it our bodies, possessions or reputation. 
Focusing on our enemy, we should check whether: it is the nature of that person to harm us; or whether that tendency to harm us is adventitious?   If it is the nature of that person to cause prob lems for us, then there is no reason to be angry 
with them. Such anger would be like begrudging fire for having the nature to burn. When you 
put your hand in the fire, your hand is burnt. It would be foolish to be angry at the fire.   
 Different people have different natures. If the ob ject of our anger is a person who is troublesome 
or who speaks harshly, understanding that that is  his nature, we will be less likely to become 
angry when he behaves badly. Even if anger arises, we  will be able to stop it quickly and not be so 
bothered. We can see this from our own experience.   We may know that person to be good-hearted bu t due to certain causes and conditions coming 
together, that person gets angry at us and harms us . This is an adventitious fault on the part of 
the person. It would be good to find out why that  person is behaving in such a way and not be 
angry or upset with him. 
 
6. Now focus on ourselves. We want happiness and do not want suffering yet we allow ourselves 
to get angry with other people. Our behaviour contradicts our wishes and is completely 
inappropriate.   
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                   CHAPTER VI - PATIENCE  
 
 
54  
We are unable to bear being harmed in little ways  and become angry.  This is a negative action. 
We are only accumulating the propelling /throw ing karma for ourselves to be reborn in the 
lower realms. We destroy our own roots of virtue . We should realise how extremely foolish we 
are. Why? Because we are choosing to sacrifice small sufferings for the greater suffering of rebirth 
in the lower realms. When we endure small suffe rings (by not becoming angry), then we do not 
have to experience the greater suffering of rebirt h in the hells. So we need to look at ourselves 
and correct our foolish behaviour. 
 7. Next, focus on our bodies which are the bases for experiencing the pain of being harmed by 
weapons and so forth.   Our bodies are as fragile as a water bubble, unab le to bear even the prick of a thorn. When 
attacked, besides the attacker and the weapon h e  u s e s ,  o u r  b o d i e s  a l s o  c o n t r i b u t e  t o  t h e  
experience of pain. The very existence of this bo dy lends itself to suffering. If we did not have 
such a body in the first place, we would not be harmed when attacked. Therefore, both the 
external conditions and our bodies are equal in co ntributing to our experience of pain when we 
are attacked. Since that is so, there is no reason fo r us to be angry at the attacker or his weapon.  
 We tend to place the blame entirely on the a ttacker and never blame our own bodies. We need 
to stop thinking like this by understanding that the mere existenc e of our bodies plays a part in 
our experience of suffering and pain.  We have looked at some of the ways to weaken anger by focusing on: 
our enemies, ourselves, and our bodies. Many re asons are given in the text, but they can be 
condensed into these three points.  
 8. I n  a d d i t i o n ,  i f  y o u  c a n ,  r e f l e c t  o n  h o w  t h e  enemy has no independence or freedom but is 
controlled by other factors. He gets angry and en gages in harmful activities because he has no 
choice.    But this is not how the enemy appears to us. We s ee him as being very solid, existing inherently 
without depending on causes and conditions and we react by getting angry with him. We can 
stop this by reflecting on how he does not exist independently but is also subject to causes and conditions.   We should see the enemy as an apparition or a dream. As long as the causes and conditions 
come together for the production of an event, that event will happen.  
 
Question:  What should we do when anger arises wh en we choose our enemy as the object of 
focus?  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                   CHAPTER VI - PATIENCE  
 
 
55  
 
Answer:  Yes, that is possible. When you choose the enemy as the medi tation object, it is possible 
that anger will arise toward that person. But if you leave it unchecked, it will only become worse. 
The point here is to focus on the enemy, apply so me of the reasons we have discussed so far and 
see whether our anger towards that person decreases or not?  
 We also have to focus on ourselves and ask ou rselves what we want. Do we want happiness? 
Using the points discussed so far, there will be benefit when we analyse them correctly.  
c” Cultivating the patience that pays no heed to those who cause harm 
(1) Engaging the mind in the method of compassion 
(2) Arresting the causes of fury 
(3) Reflecting on unwanted occurrences being due to one’s own faults 
(a) The meaning of the actual 
(b) Abandoning objections 
(i) Rejecting [the position that holds] that it is invalid for others to do something 
that benefits us 
(ii) Rejecting [the position that holds] that it is invalid for us to bring harm upon 
others 
(iii) Arresting ingrat itude towards those who act beneficially 
(ii) Rejecting [the position that holds] that it  is invalid for us to bring harm upon others 
(6, 50 cd)  
Although I am protecting myself (in this way), 
How will it be so for them? 
 
Qualm : If our enemies are benefiting us, why will they go to hell?  
 
Reply:  Through our cultivation of patience, we beco me able to protect ourselves even when we 
are harmed. But our enemies have no such protec tion. This shows that we are not benefiting 
them.  
 This  s ho uld be un der s t o o d w it hin  t he co n t ext  o f pra ct is in g pat ien ce.  Here,  w e are able t o  s ee how others benefit us. This helps in our practice of patience.   
(iii) Arresting ingrat itude toward those who act beneficially 
(6, 51) 
Nevertheless, should I return the harm, 
It will not protect them either. 
By doing so my conduct will deteriorate, 
And hence this fortitude will be destroyed. 
 
Qualm:  When others harm me, it benefits me. Since that is the case, if I return the harm, I will 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                   CHAPTER VI - PATIENCE  
 
 
56  
be benefiting them as well. Therefore, it is  all right for me to harm them in return.  
 
Reply:  It is incorrect to return the harm because th is causes the anger in the minds of our enemies 
to increase, whereupon they will engage in negative  actions. We will not be able to protect them 
from going to the lower realms. 
 Also such retaliation harms our practi ce of the 4 virtuous dharmas:   
(a) even when scolded,  do not scold in return,  (b) even when someone gets angry at you, do not get angry in return,  
(c) even when hit, do not hit back, and  (d) even when one’s faults are exposed, do not expose others’ faults   
As mentioned in the beginni ng of this chapter, ‘ there is no fortitude like patience’ . By retaliating, 
this fortitude will be destroyed. Furthermore, we  will not be able to protect our enemy from 
going to the lower realms and our practice of the 4 virtuous dharmas will degenerate.  
 
A. The way to train in patience 
a. Explaining the chapter’s material 
1) Abandoning hindrances to the accomplishment of abiding by the antidote: devoting     oneself to the cultivation of patience 
2) Engaging the mind in the methods for accomplishing patience 
a) Arresting the causes of anger 
i) The nature of the cause along with its disadvantages 
ii) Instructions on making effort in the methods for overcoming anger 
iii) The actual method for overcoming that 
iv) Having examined in detail the causes that give rise to anger, making effort 
     to abandon them 
1’ A general presentation of the divisions [of anger in terms of] the     objects that give rise to anger 2’ Arresting fury towards that which brings unwanted things
 
a’ Arresting fury towards those who wrong you 
1” Being patient with those who would create suffering for you 
a” Cultivating the patience that accepts suffering 
b” Cultivating the patience that is intent on dharma  
c” Cultivating the patience that pays no heed to those who 
     cause harm 
2” Being patient with those who would belittle you and so forth 
b’ Arresting fury towards those who wrong those dear to oneself c’ Arresting fury towards those who do well by one’s enemies  
3’ Arresting fury towards that which hinders one’s desires 
b) The benefits of cultivating patience 
 
2” Being patient with those who would belittle you and so forth 
a” Despising and belittling one does not harm one’s body b”  It is unreasonable for one to be furious with a person who is himself in a rage c”  It is unreasonable to be furious because material gain has been obstructed 
d”  It is unreasonable to be furious because others lack faith in you 
a” Despising and belittling one does not harm one’s body
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                   CHAPTER VI - PATIENCE  
 
 
57  
(6, 52) 
Since my mind is not physical 
In no way can anyone destroy it, 
But through its being greatly attached to my body 
It is caused harm by  (physical) suffering. 
 
(6, 53) 
Since disrespect, harsh speech 
And unpleasant words 
Do not cause any harm to my body, 
Why, mind, do you become angry? 
 
When someone despises us, puts us down or beli ttles us, we have to check whether those actions 
are harming our bodies or minds. Since the mind is formless, such things cannot harm it in the 
same way the body can be hurt when attacked by  weapons. Harsh speech and the like also cannot 
harm the body. If this is the ca se, then obviously such things ca nnot harm the mind as well. If 
even the atomic bomb cannot destroy the mind , how can harsh words and criticism do so? 
 Due to our attachment to our bodies, we experien ce great suffering when they are harmed. But if 
there is no strong grasping to our bodies, we will  not suffer even when weapons harm them. It is 
said in the teachings that superior bodhisattvas are able to give away their bodies to all living 
beings. They do not experience any pain even when  they cut away their flesh, piece by piece. It 
only causes their bliss and happiness to increase due to their lack of self-cherishing and self-
grasping. By reflecting on these verses, we keep the mind in a peaceful state.
13  
b” It is unreasonable for one to be angry with a person who is himself in a rage  
(6, 54) 
-Because others will dislike me- 
But since it will not devour me, 
Either in this or in another life, 
Why do I not want this (dislike)? 
 Despite having established how unpleasant speec h and the like harm neither our bodies nor 
minds, nevertheless we are unhappy with our critic, thinking, “I do not like those things to be said because other people will not like me  when they hear what you have said.”  
 
                                             
 
13 Prevent your unhappiness, thinking, “Since the mind is not material, it cannot be directly harmed by others. 
While the mind is indirectly harmed by directly harm ing the body, the body canno t be harmed by contempt, 
offensive speech, and unpleasant words. These harm neithe r body nor mind, so I should be delighted.” When you 
prevent your unhappiness,  you do not give rise to hostility. ( Lamrim Chenmo , Vol.2, pg. 168)  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                   CHAPTER VI - PATIENCE  
 
 
58  
The response to this objection is: Their dislike will not affect you in this and future lives.14 
 
c” It is unreasonable to be angry because material gain has been obstructed 
(1) It is unreasonable to be furious at obstructions to material gain because they quickly 
perish 
(2) Arresting the pursuit of wrongdoing 
(3) Establishing, by means of an example, th e unreasonableness of craving material gains 
(4) The reasons craving material gains is unreasonable 
(5) Refuting the reasoning behind spending one’s time in material pursuits 
(1) It is unreasonable to be angry at obstructions to material gain because they quickly perish 
(6, 55) 
-Because it will hinder my worldly gain- 
Even if I do not want this, 
I shall have to leave my worldly gains behind 
And my wrongdoing alone will remain unmoved. 
 
Objection:  When others dislike me, they will lose faith in and respect for me. As a result, it will 
hinder my material gain, so I will be angr y at those who say nasty things about me. 
 
Reply:  Even if you do not meet with any obstacle s and are able to acquire great wealth, you 
cannot bring your wealth and possessions with you to the next life. You have to go alone.   
 
You also have negative karma that comes from ge nerating anger in the process of acquiring this 
wealth. When you committed those negativiti es, you planted imprints in your mental 
continuum, which you will have to carry to your  next life. These imprin ts will continue to 
produce undesirable results in the future. Given a choice between not getting angry and getting 
angry in the process of acquiring material ga in, it is better to choose the first option. 15 
Lesson 11   Chapter VI - verse 56-63 
2” Being patient with those who would belittle you and so forth 
a” Despising and belittling one does not harm one’s body 
b” It is unreasonable for one to be furious with a person who is himself in a rage c” It is unreasonable to be furious because material gain has been obstructed 
                                              
14 Objection : When someone has contempt for me, etc., other peop le will not like me, so this is why I am unhappy 
about it. Reply:  This would have some truth if others’ dislike were to harm you. However, since their dislike does 
nothing to you, give up your unhappiness about others’ contempt.( Lamrim Chenmo , Vol. 2, pg. 169) 
15 Objection: Indeed I am not harmed by their dislike, bu t in dependence on it I may be hindered in acquiring 
things from them, so I will get angry at those who have co ntempt for me, scorn me, or say unpleasant words to me. 
Reply: Even if you acquire things, you must leave them here , whereas the sin of your anger at them will follow you. 
Hence, of the two choices – dying quickly in destitution or li ving for a long time improperly – the former is better.  
(Lamrim Chenmo , Vol. 2, pg. 169)  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                   CHAPTER VI - PATIENCE  
 
 
59  
(1) It is unreasonable to be furious at obstructions to material gain because they 
quickly perish 
(2) Arresting the pursuit of wrongdoing 
(3) Establishing, by means of an example, the unreasonableness of craving 
material gains (4) The reasons craving material gains is unreasonable 
(5) Refuting the reasoning behind spending one’s time in material pursuits 
d” It is unreasonable to be furious because others lack faith in you 
(2) Arresting the pursuit of wrongdoing
  
(6, 56) 
Thus it is better that I die today 
Than live a long but wicked life; 
For even if people like me  should live a long time, 
There will always be the suffering of death. 
 
W e  h a v e  s e e n  h o w  i n a p p r o p r i a t e  i t  i s  t o  b e  angry with those who prevent us from acquiring 
wealth and possessions. Some may object to this, saying, “I wouldn’t be able to survive if I 
couldn’t acquire life’s necessities. I could even lo se my life and die. So, I am justified in being 
angry at those who stand in my way.”  
 
However, verse 56 says that, “ It is better that I die today/Than li ve a long but wicked life.” “Wicked 
life,” refers to sustaining oneself through wron g livelihoods, of which there are 5 kinds, 
mentioned in the Lamrim16 and The Precious Garland : 
                                              
16 The five wrong livelihoods are: flattery, hinting, giving order to receive, exerting pressure on others, and being 
on one' best behaviour. 
'Flattery' is as follows. You compliment your benefactor, for example, in the hope that you will get something in 
return. If they actually give you something, the act of flattery has become a wrong livelihood. However, if you 
compliment someone sincerely, and without the above motive, it is not a wrong livelihood, even if they 
give you something.  
‘Hinting’ is telling your benefactor things like, 'I have te a and butter moment, but not a great deal of grain,’ in the 
hope of receiving a gift. Or you might say, 'That barley fl our you gave me last year was a big help.' In other words, 
you are hinting that you want grain or barley flour. Ho wever, if you say these things in all honesty without any 
motive of receiving a gift, it is not hinting. 
‘Giving in order to receive' is giving some trifle in order to receive something better. For example, you might 
take a ceremonial scarf or a pot of tea to your benefactor, or anyone else for the matter, so that they will reward 
you or make an offering to your monastery on your behalf. In other words you have gone to the expense of the 
gift as a means of getting something better in return. We call this 'baiting the hook' nowadays. People these days 
are rather keen to commit this wrong livelihood. But if you make a present to your benefactor sincerely and 
without this motive, it is not a wrong livelihood — even if they reward you. 
‘Exerting pressure on others' means pest ering someone for something they do not want to give you, or getting someone 
to give you something they were going to give someone else. Or, you could say things like, 'My benefactor so-and-so 
gave me some really good tea and butt er.' But if you say these things out of sincerity, without any motive of 
receiving gifts as a result, it is not the wrong livelihood of 'exerting pressure.' 
‘Being on one's best behaviour' means doing whatever you like in the privacy of your own room, but acting like a 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                   CHAPTER VI - PATIENCE  
 
 
60  
Flattery – in the hope of getting something in return, one flatters the benefactor or sponsor. 
Hinting – wanting to get something but saying so  indirectly to another person, e.g. “I have 
enough to wear but I could do with a little bit more cash.” 
Giving in order to receive – e.g. giving a small gift to the benefactor in the hope of getting 
something big in return. 4) Exerting pressure on others – obtaining some thing through force by harassing the benefactor 
who may not have the wish to give. 5)  Being on one’s best behaviour – e.g. an ordained person acting in a holy way to impress the benefactor, hoping to get something from him.   If we engage in wrong livelihoods, even if we live  a long time, we will accumulate a lot of negative 
karma. Even if someone interferes with our lifespan , it is still inappropriat e to become angry with 
them; this is shown in the la st two lines of verse 56, “ For even if people like me should live a long time, 
/There will always be the suffering of death” . As mentioned in the teac hings of the great Kadampa 
masters, “It is better for evil beings to have short lives.” 
(3) Establishing, by means of an example, th e unreasonableness of craving material gains 
(6, 57) 
Suppose someone should awaken from a dream 
In which they experienced one hundred years of happiness, 
And suppose another should awaken from a dream 
In which they experienced ju st one moment of happiness; 
 
(6, 58) 
For both of these people who have awoken, 
That happiness will never return. 
Similarly, whether my life has been long or short, 
At the time of death it will be finished like this. 
 This is an analogy showing why it  is inappropriate to be attached to material gain. In their 
dreams, one person may experience a hundred years of happiness while another may enjoy 
himself for a very short period of time. When both of them wake up, they will only have 
memories of their dream experiences. They cannot relive those experiences again.  In the same 
w a y ,  a t  t h e  t i m e  o f  d e a t h ,  w h a t e v e r  p o s i t i v e  l i f e  e x p e r i e n c e s  w e  h a v e  b e c o m e  o n l y  m e m o r i e s .  Therefore, there is no difference whether one ha s a long or short life. Understanding this, we 
                                                                                                                                                          
 
good monk who observes all the rules in front of your benefactors in the hope they will give you something because 
of your disciplined behaviour. But my own precious lama, my refuge and protector, told me that if you do not 
have these motives, and instead feel, 'It wouldn't be right to upset this lay person,' and behave like a good monk -
in contrast to the way you behave at h o m e  - you are not 'being on your best behaviour.' ( Liberation in the Palm of Your 
Hand, pg. 142)  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                   CHAPTER VI - PATIENCE  
 
 
61  
should not be angry when someone obstruct s us from gaining wealth and fortune.  
(4) The reasons craving material gains is unreasonable  
(6, 59) 
Although I may live happily for a long time 
Through obtaining a great deal of material wealth, 
I shall go forth empty-handed and destitute 
Just like having been robbed by a thief. 
 
Even if we become very wealthy and have long live s enjoying our material comforts, at the time of 
death, we will have to leave everything behind. It is liked being robbed of all our possessions and 
going on to the next life, empty handed and nake d. Recalling this is another way of preventing 
ourselves from becoming angry when we are hindered from acquiring more money and 
possessions.  
(5) Refuting the reasoning behind spending one’s time in material pursuits 
(6, 60) 
-Surely material wealth will enable me to live, 
And then I shall be able to co nsume transgressions and do good- 
But if I am angry on account of it 
Will not my merit be consumed  and transgressions increase? 
 
(6, 61) 
And what use will be the life 
Of one who only commits wrongdoing, 
If, for the sake of material gain, 
One causes (the merits needed  for) life to degenerate? 
 W e  m a y  t h i n k ,  “ I f  I  h a v e  m o n e y ,  I  c a n  d o  s o  many wonderful things with it - I can go on 
pilgrimages, make offerings to the Sangha, commission holy object s, accumulate merit and purify 
my negative karma. Therefore, I am justified in being upset when someone prevents me from 
making money to do these things.”     The very first verse of this chap ter points out how a single moment  of anger can destroy the roots 
of virtue amassed over a thousand eons. Since that is so, generating anger in the course of amassing wealth would defeat the purpose of acquir ing such wealth in the first place, in addition 
to which, we still have to experience the ne gative results of our anger in future lives. 
 Five reasons have been given as to why we shou ld not be angry with those who hinder us from 
accumulating wealth. If we should find ourselves in these situations, we should reflect on these 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                   CHAPTER VI - PATIENCE  
 
 
62  
points to deflect our anger.   
 
In the Mahayana sutras, anger must be stoppe d at all costs and is never justified unlike 
attachment and desire, which may be used on th e path. There are no exceptions to this.  All 
possible justifications for generating anger are re futed in this chapter. As said in one text, 
“Compared to the arising of desire in our minds a hundred times, generating anger in our minds 
just once is much worse.”  
 
d” It is unreasonable to be furious because others lack faith in you 
(1) As speaking ill of oneself caus es one to lose faith in the speaker, it is reasonable to be 
furious with [the act of] speaking ill of others  
(2) If one can bear the lack of faith in others, it is reasonable to bear the lack of faith 
others may not have in oneself due to the afflictions   
(1) As speaking ill of oneself causes one to lose faith in the speaker, it is reasonable to be furious 
with [the act of] speaking ill of others  
(6, 62) 
-Surely I should be angry with those 
Who say unpleasant things that weaken  other beings’ (confidence in me)- 
In the same way, why am I not angry 
With people who say unplea sant things about others? 
 
We feel justified in our anger when someone critic ises us to others. We may think, “I should be 
angry with my critics. If they continue saying nasty things about me, they will generate negative 
karma and end up in the lower realms. Therefore I should display my anger and displeasure.”  
 
But when someone else is being criticised, we ar e not angry with the critic then. Our concern for 
the critic creating negative karma and going to th e lower realms should also be applicable when 
someone else is being criticised.  The way to  stop our anger is to reflect on this.   
(2) If one can bear the lack of faith in others, it is reasonable to bear the lack of faith others may 
not have in oneself due to the afflictions  
(6, 63) 
If I can patiently accept this lack of confidence 
Because it is related to someone else, 
Then why am I not patient with unpleasant words (about myself), 
Since they are related to the aris ing of disturbing conceptions? 
 When we see people criticising each other, due to their lack of faith in each other and their 
different perspectives and viewpoints, even when on e party is at fault, we think, “If I get angry 
and become involved, there will be no end to th is situation. These people just have different 
perceptions of each other.  It is better for me to keep quiet, be patient and not say anything.  
This is their problem.” In the same way, when th e enemy says nasty things to us, we should be 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                   CHAPTER VI - PATIENCE  
 
 
63  
patient and bear with it, remembering that he is acting under the control of his negative 
emotions. 
Lesson 12   Chapter VI - verse 64-73 
A. The way to train in patience 
a. Explaining the chapter’s material 
1) Abandoning hindrances to the accomplishment of abiding by the antidote: devoting 
    oneself to the cultivation of patience 
2) Engaging the mind in the methods for accomplishing patience 
a) Arresting the causes of anger 
i) The nature of the cause along with its disadvantages 
ii) Instructions on making effort in the methods for overcoming anger  
iii) The actual method for overcoming that 
iv) Having examined in detail the causes that give rise to anger, making effort 
     to abandon them 
1’ A general presentation of the divisions [of anger in terms of] the 
    objects that give rise to anger 
2’ Arresting fury towards that which brings unwanted things  
a’ Arresting fury towards those who wrong you 
1” Being patient with those who would create suffering for you 2” Being patient with those who would belittle you and so forth 
b’ Arresting fury towards those who wrong those dear to oneself 
1” Arresting it by means of the patience that is intent on 
    dharma 
a” The reasons it is unreasonable to be furious with those 
who cause harm to the bodies [of those dear to oneself] etc. 
b” Likewise, it is reasonable to be patient with those who cause harm to those dear to oneself 
2” Arresting it by means of the patience that pays no heed to 
    those who cause harm 
c’ Arresting fury towards those who do well by one’s enemies  
3’ Arresting fury towards that which hinders one’s desires 
b) The benefits of cultivating patience 
 
a” The reasons it is unreasonable to be furious with those who cause harm to the bodies [of 
those dear to oneself] etc.  
(6, 64) 
Should others talk badly of or even destroy 
Holy images, reliquaries and the sacred Dharma, 
It is improper for me to resent it, 
For the Buddhas can never be injured. 
 
Objection : It is fine when the harm is directed at  me, but my anger is justified when someone 
harms or criticises objects of my faith e.g.  statues of the Buddha or holy objects.  
Reply:  Even so, it is still inappropriate to be an gry with these people. The Buddha can never be 
d i r e c t l y  h a r m e d  b y  t h e s e  a c t i o n s .  H o l y  o b j e c t s  are simply matter. Instead, we should generate 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                   CHAPTER VI - PATIENCE  
 
 
64  
compassion for these people who are ignorant of the negative co nsequences of their actions or 
who proceed, even when they are aware of the consequences. In both instances, they are 
controlled by their three mental poisons and are not acting independently.  Such people are 
committing very heavy negative karma that will br ing about immediate retribution, i.e. rebirth in 
the hell realms, in the next life. When bodhisa ttvas see these people, they only feel strong 
compassion for them.  
b” Likewise, it is reasonable to be patient with those who cause harm to those dear to oneself 
(6, 65) 
I should prevent anger arising towards those 
Who injure my spiritual mast ers, relatives and friends. 
Instead I should see, as in  the manner shown before, 
That such things arise from conditions. 
 
It is inappropriate to be angry with those who ha rm our loved ones such as our teachers, parents, 
relatives and friends. They are experiencing harm  because they have created the cause of harming 
others in the past. We should stop our anger by reflecting in this way. In the case of our gurus, 
this reflection only applies to  those who are ordinary beings, not those who are already buddhas 
since a buddha is no longer subject to th e consequences of their actions.    
 
2” Arresting it by means of the patience that pays no heed to those who cause harm 
a” It is unreasonable to be furious only with  animate beings [lit. those who have minds] 
b” The reasons fury is unreasonable 
c” Reflecting on one’s own faults 
d” Reflecting on the benefits of patience 
a” It is unreasonable to be furious only with  animate beings [lit .those who have minds] 
(6, 66) 
Since embodied creatures are injured 
By both animate beings and inanimate objects, 
Why only bear malice to the animate? 
It follows that I should patiently accept all harm. 
 
When our loved ones are harmed by animate be ings (i.e. those with minds) and inanimate 
objects, such as the four elements (wind, wate r, fire, and earth), we are upset only with the 
former. We patiently accept the harm of the elem ents understanding that this is their nature.  
But the animate and inanimate objects are equal in  terms of harming our loved ones. There is no 
reason to be angry only with animate beings. Th erefore, when our loved ones are being harmed 
by animate beings, we should stop our anger from arising and cultivate patience.     
b” The reasons why anger is inappropriate  
(6, 67) 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                   CHAPTER VI - PATIENCE  
 
 
65  
Should one person ignorantly do wrong, 
And another ignorantly become angry (with the wrongdoer), 
Who would be at fault? 
And who would be without fault? 
 
When we witness someone who, ou t of ignorance, commits negati ve actions such as stealing, 
abandoning the Buddha’s teachings, etc., we gene rate anger instead of compassion towards him. 
Who is blameless then?  Both parties are at faul t and are creating negative karma. Enemies who 
harm our loved ones probably think badly of us. We are no better if we respond to harm with anger.  Therefore, it is inappropriate to be  angry with those who harm our loved ones.  
c” Reflecting on one’s own faults 
(6, 68) 
Why did I previously commit those actions, 
Because of which, others now cause me harm? 
Since everything is related to my actions, 
Why should I bear malice towards these (enemies)? 
 
(6, 69) 
When I have seen this to be so, 
I should strive for what is meritorious 
(In order to) certainly bring about 
Loving thoughts between all. 
 Whether the harm is directed at us or our loved ones, it is the result of our actions committed in 
the past. There is, therefore, no justification in our bearing malice towards our enemies.  
Understanding this, we should strive to develop loving kindness and compassion towards all living beings and focus our minds on virtue.    
d” Reflecting on the benefits of patience 
(1) Making effort so that one’s virtue does not deteriorate 
(2) Accepting small sufferings will act to ov ercome the cause for the sufferings of the 
hells 
(3) It is reasonable to enjoy hardships that accomplish greater purposes 
(1) Making effort so that one’s virtue does not deteriorate  
(6, 70) 
For example, when a fire in one house 
Has moved into another house, 
It is right to get rid of straw and such things 
That will cause the fire to spread. 
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                   CHAPTER VI - PATIENCE  
 
 
66  
(6, 71) 
Likewise, when the fire of hatred spreads 
To whatever my mind is attached to, 
I should immediately get rid of it 
For fear of my merit being burned. 
 
When a neighbouring house is on fire, there is th e danger of the fire spreading to our house and 
destroying all our valuables.  In order to stop  the fire from spreading, we would get all our 
flammable items, including our valuables, out of the house. We should no t be attached to them 
for the sake of saving our home. 
 
Likewise, when we see our loved ones, to whom we  have strong attachment, harmed, the fire of 
hatred blazes in our minds. We need to stop anger from arising towards those who are harming 
our loved ones. The way to do this is to temp orarily suspend our attachment towards our loved 
ones.   Just as the external fire that is spreading from house to house, damages our valuables, similarly, 
the fire of hatred burning in our minds, direct ed at those harming our loved ones, destroys our 
stores of merit. Just as we have to throw any fl ammable objects out of the house when the fire is 
coming, we should abandon our attachment towards our loved ones (which will ignite the fire of 
hatred in our minds) in order to prot ect our stores of virtue and merit. 
 
Question : But when we see someone hurting our loved ones, such as our parents, shouldn’t we 
protect them instead of just letting it happen?  
 
Answer:   We are discussing here all the different fa ults and disadvantages of anger. Any actions 
motivated by anger are bad. In whatever we do, we should make an aspirational prayer, “May all 
my actions not be influenced by anger, desire or attachment.”  
 
When our loved ones are harmed, it is our respon sibility to stop the harm. In fact, it is the 
responsibility of bodhisattvas to stop harm direct ed at other sentient beings. But the point is to 
do this without anger. In a situation where on e is extremely angry at the person harming our 
loved ones, at this time it is important to ab andon our attachment towards our loved ones and 
keep some distance from them.  When two parties are strongly atta ched to one another, a lot of 
unhappiness and anger can arise. In such a case , remaining together brings more harm than 
benefit and it is better to physically di stance oneself from the other party.  
 There is no contradiction in what we have discu ssed here. It is the practice of bodhisattvas to 
benefit others and to stop them from being harmed. We are aspiring to follow the bodhisattvas’ deeds. Bodhisattvas are able to see all sentient beings as their parents and loved ones. It goes 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                   CHAPTER VI - PATIENCE  
 
 
67  
without saying that we must take care of our parents of this life. 
 
In the case of our parents, when  they are old and become highly dependent, taking care of them 
c a n  b e    e x t r e m e l y  c h a l l e n g i n g .  B u t  w e  s h o u l d  d o  s o  w i t h  a  m i n d  o f  l o v i n g  k i n d n e s s  a n d  
compassion, with the patience that is able to be ar any hardships that might come along the way.  
This is the best approach.   
(2) Accepting small sufferings will act to overco me the cause for the su fferings of the hells 
(a) Example 
(b) Meaning 
(a) Example  
(6, 72) 
Why is a person condemned to death not fortunate 
If they are released afte r having a hand cut off? 
Why am I who am experiencing human misery not fortunate 
If by that I am spared from (the agonies of) hell? 
 
Objection : If I have to give up my attachment towards my loved ones, in order to stop the fire of 
hatred from spreading in my mind, I will experien ce unhappiness, suffering and dissatisfaction.    
Reply:  A man being led to the execution ground is re leased by merely having his hand cut off. 
Similarly, what is wrong with bearing the sma ll suffering of being separated from your loved 
ones, when that can replace the sufferin g of the hell realms in the next life? 17  
(b) Meaning 
(6, 73) 
If I am unable to endure 
Even the mere sufferings of the present, 
Then why do I not restrain myself from being angry, 
Which will be the source of hellish misery? 
 
If w e are u n able t o  bear t he s uffe rin gs  o f t his  life such as hunger, thir st, cold, and separation 
from our loved ones, how are we going to bear the unbearable sufferings in the lower realms? 
Therefore, it is reasonable to stop anger.   
                                             
 
17 Reflect well on the differences between short-term an d long-term suffering, thinking, “A man who is to be 
executed is overjoyed when he is freed from execution by having merely his finger cut off. How excellent it would 
be if similarly, by means of this slight suffering of human hardship, I could permanently dispel the suffering of 
limitless cyclic existence in general and in particular the su ffering of miserable rebirths such as the hells, etc.” If 
you do this well, you produce fearless courage with respect to hardship. ( Lamrim Chenmo , Vol. 2, pg. 175)  
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                   CHAPTER VI - PATIENCE  
 
 
68  
In essence, these two verses are pointing out that it is inappropriate to be  angry, because when we 
are angry, we create the cause for even greater su ffering than what we are presently experiencing. 
Therefore, it is appropriate to voluntarily acce pt small sufferings for the sake of preventing 
greater suffering in the lower realms in the future.18 
Lesson 13   Chapter VI - verse 74-79 
It is important that we motivate ourselves to continue with our Dharma  studies and practice, 
especially when there is the opportunity to do  so. We should not wast e this chance. All the 
conditions are here to facilitate our Dharma st udies: we have liked-minded friends attending 
classes with us coupled with  our own amazing interest to study.  We should,  therefore, 
encourage ourselves to continue our studies and not to procrastinate. We are not yet old and 
useless. When we become old, even if we wanted to,  we might not be able to study and practise 
so well. Remembering this, we should focus our mind s, listen to the teachings and try our best to 
put them into practice.   
 Coming to class does not mean just being physic ally present and marking the attendance sheet. It 
is not about the body sitting in class. The mind has to be present as well. We are studying the 
practise of patience here. We should focus our minds on these teachings and check how they can 
be beneficial for us. It is our responsibility to ex tract from this chapter on patience material that 
will  really benefit our lives.  Even if we cannot  apply everything we learnt, at the very least, we 
should be able to think: “I reme mber that piece of advice from the text. That is really good.” 
When others ask us what we have learnt from this chapter, our replies should not, “I am not 
sure. I can’t remember anything. ” We should at le ast be able to say,  “This is something I know 
about patience.”   It is extremely important to put aside time for Dharma practice instead of spending our entire lives, being completely engrossed in our worldly ac tivities.   The Kadampa masters have said that 
we can never finish our worldly activities. The only  way to finish them is to put a stop to them. 
Therefore, no matter how busy we are, it is our responsibility to ensure we put aside some time 
for our Dharma practice.   
                                             
 
18 If you get angry at a harmdoer through an inability to be ar suffering, it is contradictory because, even as you are 
failing to bear slight suffering in the present, you are aggressively creating th e cause of measureless suffering in the 
miserable realms. Therefore induce a sense of embarrassmen t, thinking “I am very stupid,” and work to contain 
your anger. 
 The suffering generated by harm is the effect of prev ious bad karma; by experiencing it, you exhaust this 
karma. If you bear the suffering, you do not accumulate new sins and you greatly increase your merit. Therefore 
you must not consider how harmdoer ruin  their virtue, but view them as kind in that it is as though they are 
engaged in actions for the sake of clearing away your sins. ( Lamrim Chenmo , Vol. 2, pg. 164)  
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                   CHAPTER VI - PATIENCE  
 
 
69  
We are studying the practice of patience in order to deal with the stubborn negative emotions in 
o u r  m i n d s ,  e s p e c i a l l y  h a t r e d .  I f  w e  h a v e  p r o b l e m s  w i t h  a n g e r ,  t h e n  w e  h a v e  t o  a p p l y   t h e  
antidote, patience. This should be our motivation for learning  the ways to  deal with our anger. 
We should familiarise ourselves with these methods through meditation. 
 
iv) Having examined in detail the causes that give rise to anger, making effort to 
abandon them 
1’ A general presentation of the divisions [of anger in terms of] the objects that 
give rise to anger 
2’ Arresting fury towards that which brings unwanted things 
a’ Arresting fury towards those who wrong you 
b’ Arresting fury towards those who wrong those dear to oneself 
1” Arresting it by means of the patience that is intent on dharma 
2” Arresting it by means of the patience that pays no heed to those who 
cause harm 
a” It is unreasonable to be furious only with animate beings [lit. 
those who have minds] 
b” The reasons fury is unreasonable 
c” Reflecting on one’s own faults d” Reflecting on the benefits of patience 
(1) Making effort so that one’s virtue does not deteriorate (2) Accepting small sufferings will act to overcome the cause for the sufferings of the hells 
(3) It is reasonable to enjoy hardships that accomplish 
greater purposes 
(a) Feeling regret for how many bodies we have 
wasted in the past and still not accomplished either 
our own or others’ welfares 
(b) It is reasonable to enjoy accomplishing the 
welfare of all migrators by being patient with present 
hardships  
c’ Arresting fury towards those who do well by one’s enemies 
3’ Arresting fury towards that which hinders one’s desires 
(a) Feeling regret for how many bodies we have wasted in the past and still not accomplished 
either our own or others’ welfares 
(6, 74) 
For the sake of satisfying my desires, 
I have suffered numerous  burnings in hell; 
But by those actions, 1 neither fulfilled the purpose 
Of myself nor others. 
 
We should reflect on this verse when we find it hard to endure the problems and  harm caused 
by our enemies.   
While circling continuously  in cyclic existence in the past, we had engaged in all sorts of activities 
for the sake of fulfilling our desires. In the pr ocess, we accumulated the karma for rebirth in the 
hells countless times. We had been suffering in  the cold hells and the hot hells. Yet, despite 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                   CHAPTER VI - PATIENCE  
 
 
70  
suffering so much, we still have not fulfilled ou r own and others’ purposes. Reflecting like this, 
we would then voluntarily accept the harm directed at us by our enemies. 
(b) It is reasonable to enjoy accomplishing the welfare of all migrators by being patient with 
present hardships 
(6, 75) 
Yet now, since great meaning will accrue 
From harm which is not ev en (a fraction) of that, 
I should indeed be solely joyful 
Towards such suffering that dispels the harms of all. 
 
This verse means that we should voluntarily accept the suffering of harms directed at us and our 
loved ones. Such suffering is nothing compared to our past suffering in the hells. By voluntarily 
accepting this suffering now, we can achieve th e state of full enlightenment and accomplish the 
welfare of ourselves  and all other living beings . Reflecting like this, we see no reason for 
unhappiness when we are  experiencing harm. In fact, we should rejoice and be happy that we 
will be able to practise patience through this ex perience of   voluntarily accepting those harms. 
 
These, then, are two ways to deal with our inability to bear harm directed at ourselves or our  
loved ones:- Reflect on how, for the sake of accomplishing sm all purposes in the past, we had experienced the 
consequences of those actions by taking rebirths in hell for a very long time. In the end, we did not fulfil our own purposes or the purposes of  others. If we were to compare our present 
suffering to what we had experien ced in the past, it is insignif icant. Therefore,  we should 
voluntarily accept our enemies’  harm now. 
In addition, we should recall that,  by  voluntaril y accepting the present suffering, this  will act as 
a condition for us to achieve the state of full en lightenment whereby we can fulfil the purposes of 
all living beings. 
 
Bodhisattvas work only for the welfare and purposes of al l living beings. This is how the 
bodhisattvas practise when they  and their loved one are harmed. We should reflect in the same 
way and even if we cannot practise like that now,   we can make aspirational prayers to be able to 
do so in the future.    
c’ Arresting fury towards those who do well by one’s enemies 
1” Abandoning impatience with the praise and renown of one’s enemies 
a” As it is the cause of one’s own happiness [it is unreasonable to wish for such] 
b” As it is the cause of others’ happiness, it is unreasonable to not wish for it 
2” Abandoning impatience with the accomplishment of our enemies’ pleasure 
3” Abandoning impatience with the accomplishment of material gain 
 
“Arresting fury towards those who do well by one’s enemies,” means stopping anger when 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                   CHAPTER VI - PATIENCE  
 
 
71  
something good happens to our enemies.   
a” As it is the cause of one’s own happiness [it is unreasonable to wish for such] 
(6, 76) 
Should someone else find joyous happiness 
In praising (my enemy) as an excellent person, 
Why, mind, do you not praise them, too, 
And likewise make yourself happy? 
 
(6, 77) 
That joyous happiness of yours 
Would be a source of joy, not something prohibited, 
A precept given by the Excellent Ones 
And a supreme (means) for assembling others. 
 
We get angry when others praise our enemy. In th is situation, there are three parties involved:- 
ourselves our enemy or the  person we dislike  the person praising  our enemy.  The person praising our enemy does so happily. Since he is  not upset with our enemy or influenced by anger, he is able to see the good  qualities of our enemy. When we are angry with 
our enemy, we are unable to see any good qualitie s, perceiving the enemy only as unpleasant.   
 Why are we not following the example of that person who is praising our enemy and making 
himself happy at the same time? We should follow  his  example instead of allowing ourselves to 
be consumed by the fire of hatred or jealousy. We can also become happy through  praising the qualities of the enemy. When the enemy hears su ch praise, he also experiences happiness. In 
order to increase our enemy’s happiness, we  should praise his good  qualities.  
 
Our praising our enemy will also make the person  who was praising our enemy in the first place 
happy. This is virtue praised by the buddhas an d bodhisattvas that becomes the source of our 
own happiness. In the bodhisattvas’ practice of “T he Four Ways of Gathering Disciples,” one of 
them is the ability to speak pleasantly.  Being able  to see and praise the good qualities of others 
and abandoning our jealousy is the supreme method for doing so.  
 
b” As it is the cause of others’ happiness,  it is unreasonable  to not wish for it 
(1) If you do not want others to be happy, your own happiness will decline 
(2) Thus, it is reasonable to wish for others to be happy 
(1) If you do not want others to be happy, your own happiness will decline 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                   CHAPTER VI - PATIENCE  
 
 
72  
(6, 78) 
It is said that others are made happy through (bei ng praised) in 
this way. 
If in this way, you do not want (them to have) this happiness, 
Then, (since it makes them ha ppy), you should cease giving 
wages and the like (to your servants). 
However, you would be adversel y affected both in this and 
future lives. 
 
When our enemy is being praised, we might say,  “I have no problems with his good qualities but 
I am unhappy when I see my en emy happy at receiving such praise.” Our unhappiness comes 
from our jealousy.  
 
What is the condition for the enemy’ s happiness? It is the praises that had been  uttered. It is like 
saying that we do not like the praises that were uttered. In the same way, if we do not want our servan t to be happy, we should stop paying his wages 
since the wages are the condition for our servant’ s happiness. But by doing this, we will suffer in 
this life as our  servant will stop working for us. We will also suffer in the lower realms in future 
lives because we have created the negative karma of owing wages to our servant in this life.  
(2) Thus, it is reasonable to wish for others to be happy 
(6, 79) 
When people describe my own good qualities 
I want others to be happy to, 
But when they describe the good qualities of others 
I do not wish to be happy myself. 
 We like it when  our enemy praises our good qual ities. At the same time, we are also happy with 
the happiness he derives from praising us. But,  we are not happy with the happiness that our 
enemy experiences  when his own good qualities are praised by others. Likewise, we should be happy with this happiness felt by our enemy, when he is being praised.  
Lesson 14   Chapter VI - verse 79-86 
The difference between a Buddhist  who has studied and reflected on the teachings extensively 
(hereinafter referred to as ‘A’) and a Buddhist wh o has done neither (hereinafter referred to as 
‘B’) can be seen in the quality of their meditation. ‘A’ will be able to meditate in a very extensive 
way while ‘B’ will find difficulties in sustaining his meditation.   When reciting the refuge prayer, at the mere me ntion of “Sang gyä” (going for refuge in the 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                   CHAPTER VI - PATIENCE  
 
 
73  
Buddha) ‘A’ will be able to reflect in the followin g way: “Who is the Buddha? He is in the entity 
of the 4 holy bodies19 and is someone who has eliminated all faults and perfected all his good 
qualities.” Being familiar with such reflections, ‘A ’ is able to recall many different aspects of the 
refuge practice instantly and his faith in the Bu ddha  increases. When ‘B’ recites, “Sang gyä,” 
however, he may only recall the Buddha as the historical figure who achieved enlightenment 
under the bodhi tree over 2,500 years ago. It woul d be difficult for someone like ‘B’ to have any 
deep sense of faith. If this is so for a person like  ‘B,’ then obviously there would be even less faith 
in someone who have not even he ard of the historical Buddha. 
  
When ‘A’ recites “chö” ( ‘I go for refuge to th e Dharma’), he will immediately understand that 
there are conventional and ultimate Dharma, and the object of refuge here is not merely the 
physical scriptures themselves, but their  contents,  which clarify  the true path (the antidotes to 
our afflictions) and true cessation (what we achieve once all our afflictions are abandoned). Understanding that the Dharma is the actual refu ge and that, “This is what protects me,” will 
definitely increase ‘A’s’  faith. He will then ge nerate the faith of aspiration, which is the mind 
that aspires to actualise the Dharma.   When ‘B’ recites “chö,” he may only recall the phys ical texts and he is unlikely to have the same 
level of faith as ‘A.’  When ‘A’ recites, “Tsog kyi chog nam la” (I go for refuge to the Supreme Assembly), he 
understands immediately that the Sangha Jewel refe rs here to all the arya beings, including the 
hearer superior beings, the solitary realiser supe rior beings and the bodhisattva superior beings. 
He knows the inconceivable qualities of these holy beings, in particular, how the superior 
bodhisattvas practise at each level, actualisin g all the ten perfections and how they achieve the 
higher realisations on the path. Based on such  understanding and knowledge, irreversible faith 
will arise in ‘A’s’ mind towards these arya beings and he will aspire to emulate their example. ‘A’ 
will never give up his faith in the Three Jewe ls regardless of whatever conditions he may 
encounter.   When ‘B’ recites, “Tsog kyi chog nam la,” he will only remember that the Sangha refers to the 
ordained community and he is reminded to be respectful towards them.  With such limited 
understanding, it is very difficult to have real fa ith in the Sangha Jewel because it is difficult to 
see all ordained persons as pure and perfect and one may end up criticising them or questioning 
the benefit of ordination.   The difference between ‘A’ and ‘B’ is very clear fr om simply examining the quality of their refuge 
practice. The Buddhist who has studied will have stable and irreversible faith while the Buddhist 
                                             
 
19 The four holy bodies of the Budd ha are the Truth Body (made up of the Wisdom Truth Body & the Nature 
Body) and the Form Body (made up of th e Enjoyment Body & Emanation Body).  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                   CHAPTER VI - PATIENCE  
 
 
74  
who does not study will give up his faith easi ly when faced with the smallest obstacle.  
 
We should put into practice, familiarise oursel ves and reflect upon whatever we have learnt. 
Even if we engage in extensive listening  and re flection, it would not be beneficial without such 
mental familiarity.  
 Using the earlier example of refuge, we can a pply it to other topics and see the difference 
between engaging in practice with and with littl e or no understanding.   When we realise the 
benefits of studying and reflection, the aspiration  to do so will arise naturally from our own side. 
When this happens, no matter what difficulties we  encounter, we will try our best to come to  
class and listen to the teachings.    Lama Tsongkhapa said, “On the outset, seek ex tensive teachings. In the middle, reflect on 
whatever you have learnt. In the end, day and ni ght, put into practice the understanding of the 
teachings that you have ascertained. This is wh at I have done. You who want to follow after me 
should do likewise.”   He also said that, at the end, “You should alw ays dedicate your merit towards the preservation 
and flourishing of the Buddha’s teachings.” Even th ough this dedication verse seems short, it is 
very meaningful. Why do we need to dedicate in this way?  Understanding the perfect qualities of 
the Buddha’s teachings, if such teachings were to  flourish in the world, they will benefit many 
beings.    
c’ Arresting fury towards those who do well by one’s enemies 
1” Abandoning impatience with the praise and renown of one’s enemies 
a" As it is the cause of one’s own happiness, [it is unreasonable to wish for such 
b” As it is the cause of others’ happiness, it is unreasonable to not wish for it 
(1) If you do not want others to be happy, your own happiness will decline 
(2) Thus, it is reasonable to wish for others to be happy 
2” Abandoning impatience with the accomplishment of our enemies’ pleasure  
3” Abandoning impatience with the accomplishment of material gain 
(2) Thus, it is reasonable to wish for others to be happy 
(6, 79) 
When people describe my own good qualities 
I want others to be happy to, 
But when they describe the good qualities of others 
I do not wish to be happy myself. 
 
We are happy when people praise our good qual ities and we accept that our admirers feel 
happiness in praising us. Yet when others  praise our enemy, due to our jealousy,  we cannot bear 
our enemy experiencing such happiness.  Applying  this same reasoning, we should then reject 
the praise of our admirers, saying, “Forget it, I don’t want to be happy.” 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                   CHAPTER VI - PATIENCE  
 
 
75  
 
Geshela : “When your enemy sincerely praises you, you feel happy. You like that happiness. In the 
same way, when you praise your enemy, your enem y will experience the same kind of happiness. 
We should accept our enemy’s  happiness.” 
 In other words, we do not want our enemy to be happy at all, yet we do not mind the enemy’s happiness when he is praising us.  This is a contradiction. 
2” Abandoning impatience with the accomplishment of our enemies’ pleasure  
(6, 80) 
Having generated the Awakening Mind 
Through wishing all beings to be happy, 
Why should I become angry 
If they find some happiness themselves? 
 When we took the bodhisattva vows, we had pled ged to work for the benefit of all sentient 
beings and to place them in the state of buddhahood . So why should we be upset when they find  
happiness on their own,  without our help?  If we profess to work for the benefit of all sent ient beings, we should rejoice when they find 
happiness. Instead, due to our jealousy, we  are unhappy when they find happiness.  
 
3” Abandoning impatience with the accomplishment of material gain 
a” Reflecting on how it accomplishes one’s own desires 
(1) It is reasonable for oneself to enjoy sentient beings’ accomplishment of 
material gains 
(2) Example 
(3) If one does not want th at, bodhicitta will deteriorate 
b” Reflecting on how there is nothing to not want [in that] 
(1) It is reasonable for oneself to enjoy sentient beings’ accomplishment of material gains 
(6,  81) 
If I wish for all sentient beings to become 
Buddhas worshipped throughout the three realms, 
Then why am I tormented 
When I see them receiving merely mundane respect? 
 
When we develop bodhicitta, we generate the wi sh to bring all sentient beings to buddhahood. 
As buddhas, they would be  worshipped by all sent ient beings of the 3 realms. Yet we cannot bear 
to see our enemies receiving some material gain, re spect or service from others, which is partially 
fulfilling the goals of our altruistic intention. This is another contradiction. Our unhappiness, 
therefore, is once again not justified.20 
                                              
20 Contemplate as follows, “After I have  engaged the spirit of enlightenment fo r the sake of accomplishing all living 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                   CHAPTER VI - PATIENCE  
 
 
76  
(2) Example  
(6, 82) 
If a relative for whom I am caring, 
And to whom I must give many things, 
Should be able to find their own livelihood, 
Wouldn't I be happy, rather than angry? 
 
This verse is self-explanatory. 21 
(3) If one does not want th at, bodhicitta will deteriorate 
(6, 83) 
If I do not wish for beings to have even this, 
How can I wish for them to awaken? 
And where is there an Awakening Mind 
In one who becomes angry when others receive things? 
 
How would can it be possible for us to bring all sentient beings to full enlightenment when  we 
cannot even bear our enemies enjoying simple mu ndane respect or material gain? We can never 
generate bodhicitta with such jealousy in our mi nds. Even if we had developed bodhicitta in our 
mental continua, our bodhicitta will deteriorat e if we continue to entertain such thoughts. 
Therefore, we should strive to abandon our jealousy.    
 
Question:  When we are practising patience, are we advi sed to abandon our jealousy as well as our 
anger? 
 
Answer : The practice of patience de als with anger as well as jealousy, because jealousy is a 
derivative of anger. Jealousy is defined in Asanga’s ‘Compendium of Knowledge’  :  “ D u e  t o  o n e ’ s  
strong attachment to material gains and respect, one’s mind is disturbed and upset and unable to 
bear others enjoying these things.” Since jealousy  is the derivative of anger,  the antidote of 
patience acts against both jealousy and anger.22 
                                                                                                                                                           
beings’ benefit and happiness, I get angry at harmdoers when they obtain happiness on their own. After I have said 
that I want all beings to become buddhas, I get unhappy when harmdoers get even minimal prosperity or honor. 
This is extremely contradictory.” You must eliminate your  jealousy regarding any sort of attainment by other 
persons and delight in it from the depths of your he art. Otherwise your spirit of enlightenment and the 
achievement of the welfare and happiness of beings are nothing but words. ( Lamrim Chenmo, Vol. 2, pg. 170)  
 
21 I f  a  c h i l d  i n  o u r  c a r e  s u c c e e d s  i n  b e c o m i n g  s e l f - r e l i a n t ,  w e  a r e  d e l i g h t e d .  L i k e w i s e ,  w h e n  o t h e r s  s u c c e e d  i n  
a t t a i n i n g  h a p p i n e s s  b y  t h e m s e l v e s  w e  s h o u l d  b e  h a p p y ,  e v e n  t h o u g h  w e  h a v e  v o w e d  t o  a s s u m e  p e r s o n a l  
responsibility for the ha ppiness of all beings. ( The Way of Awakening  by Geshe Yeshe Tobden, pg. 164)  
22 Regarding jealousy, the Compendium of Knowledge  s a y s :  I t  i s  a  d e e p  d i s t u r b a n c e  o f  m i n d  t h a t  c a n n o t  t o l e r a t e  
another’s marvellous attributes due to excessive attachment to gain and honour, and is involved with hatred. It has 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                   CHAPTER VI - PATIENCE  
 
 
77  
 
b” Reflecting on how there is nothing to not want [in that] 
(1) It is unreasonable to feel jealousy for the material gain of others 
(2) It is unreasonable to discard one’s own qualities 
(3) While it is right to feel sorrow for one’s own negativities, it is not right to be jealous of 
others’ virtues 
(1) It is unreasonable to feel jealousy for the material gain of others 
(6, 84) 
What does it matter if (my enem y) is given something or not? 
Whether they obtain it 
Or whether it remains in the benefactor's house, 
In either case, I shall get nothing. 
 
When we are competing against our enemy for do nations and a benefactor makes a donation to 
him instead of us, we become angry with  both of them.   
 
But we receive nothing when the benefactor give s the money to someone else, and even if he 
does not give a donation, we still get nothing. Therefore, there is no reason to get angry and 
jealous when the benefactor makes a donation (or not) to someone other than ourselves since we 
will be receiving nothing anyway. 
(2) It is unreasonable to discard one’s own qualities  
(6, 85 ) 
So why, by becoming angry,  do I throw away my merits, 
The faith (others have in me ) and my good qualities? 
Tell me, why am I not angry (with myself) 
For not having the causes for gain? 
 
We need to create the merit to acquire the materi al gains enjoyed by others. Others also need to 
h a v e  f a i t h  i n  u s  b e f o r e  t h e y  w i l l  g i v e  u s  a n y t h i n g .  T o  r e c e i v e  s u c h  f a i t h ,  w e  h a v e  t o  b e h a v e  ethically, keeping pure morality and continue to  listen and reflect on the Buddha’s teachings. 
When we get angry, we destroy our merits, which ar e the causes for receiving material gain. If we 
want to be angry, therefore, we should be angry with ourselves. 
(3) While it is right to feel sorrow for one’s own nega tivities, it is not right to be jealous of others’ 
virtues  
                                                                                                                                                           
the function of (causing) mental unhappiness an d of not abiding in contact (with happiness). 
 Just as it has been said above, it is a deep distur bance of mind that cannot be ar another’s success due to 
attachment to gain and honor. It produces serious undesira ble (consequences) in both th is and future worlds (i.e., 
rebirths); in this life there will be mental unhappiness, and in future lives one will be impelled in to bad migrations. 
(Minds and Mental Factors  by Yeshe Gyaltsen, pg. 72)  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                   CHAPTER VI - PATIENCE  
 
 
78  
(6, 86) 
Let alone not having any remorse 
About the wrongs that you committed, (O mind,) 
Why do you wish to co mpete with others 
Who have committed me ritorious deeds? 
 
Sometimes, when we cannot get some thing, we also do not wish for others to be able to get that 
thing, thinking: “If I can’t get it, no one else will  either.”   
 
What we should be doing, however, is  generate regret for having accumulated the past negative 
karma that prevents us now from getting what we want, esp. the karma of stealing from or 
robbing others. To create the causes to get what we want, we need to accumulate a vast amount 
o f  m e r i t ,  l i v e  a n  e t h i c a l  l i f e ,   k e e p  p u r e  m o r a l i t y  a n d  b e  w i s e  a n d  s k i l f u l  i n  a b a n d o n i n g  w h a t  
needs to be abandoned and cultivating what need s to be cultivated. Those who are  prosperous 
have created the cause for such pr osperity in the past. Since this is so, how can we compete with 
those who have great merit and vi rtue? Therefore, it is inappropriate to be jealous of others’ 
virtue. Instead we should feel remorse  for our own negativities.   
Lesson 15   Chapter VI - verse 87-97 
2) Engaging the mind in the methods for accomplishing patience 
a) Arresting the causes of anger 
i) The nature of the cause along with its disadvantages 
ii) Instructions on making effort in the methods for overcoming anger iii) The actual method for overcoming that 
iv) Having examined in detail the causes that give rise to anger, making effort to abandon 
them 
1’ A general presentation of the divisions [of anger in terms of] the objects that 
give rise to anger 2’ Arresting fury towards that which brings unwanted things 
3’ Arresting fury towards that which hinders one’s desires 
a’ It is unreasonable to be impatient with that which hinders the harm 
destined for one’s enemies 
1” Disliking enemies is of no benefit to oneself 
2” Enemies are not harmed by your developing ill will 3” It harms oneself 
b’ It is unreasonable to be impatient with that which hinders the benefit 
directed towards oneself and one’s interests 
b) The benefits of cultivating patience  
1” Disliking enemies is of no benefit to oneself
 
(6, 87) 
Even if your enemy is made unhappy, 
What is there for you to be joyful about? 
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                   CHAPTER VI - PATIENCE  
 
 
79  
We are happy when something bad happens to ou r enemies and upset when they are saved from 
harm. This kind of wrong rejoicing is not beneficial for us in any way.  
2” Enemies are not harmed by your developing ill will 
(6, 87 cd) 
Your merely wishing (for them to be hurt) 
Did not cause them to be injured. 
 
Our hatred for our enemies can be so strong that we may even make perverse prayers for them to 
die soon. Whether our enemies suffer or not depe nds solely on whether they have created the 
causes for such suffering.  Therefore, we shou ld abandon our malicious thoughts and perverse 
prayers since they can neither harm our enemies nor benefit us in any way. 23  
 
3” It harms oneself 
a” It is unreasonable  to enjoy the harm that befalls your enemy 
b” If one holds onto that joy, it will be come a cause of great suffering for oneself 
a” It is unreasonable  to enjoy the harm that befalls your enemy  
(6, 88) 
And even if the enemy does suffer as you had wished, 
What is there for you to be joyful about? 
 
What benefit is there for us even if such malicious thoughts and perverse prayers were to succeed in harming our enemies?   
b” If one holds onto that joy, it will be come a cause of great suffering for oneself  
(6, 88 cd) 
If you say, "For I shall be satisfied," 
How could there be anything more wretched than that?24 
 
(6, 89 ) 
This hook cast by the fisher men of disturbing conceptions 
Is unbearably sharp. Havi ng been caught on it, 
                                              
23 Even your mere malicious thoughts that delight in your enemies' troubles or that wish for their destruction do 
not harm your enemy; they lead only to your own suffering. Yet, if such malice were to harm them, you should 
stop it completely, reflecting on the drawback that  this would bring ruin to yourself and others. ( Lamrim Chenmo , 
Vol. 2, pg. 171)  
24 You will be unhappy if you view as absolutely undesi rable the obstacles to what you and your friends want, 
movement in directions you do not want, and the prosperity  of your enemies. If this unhappiness increases, you 
become hostile. If you stop your absolute dislike of th ese three things, you prevent un happiness. Once you do this, 
you will not feel hostile. Thus, dispel your absolute dislike of these by using the reasoning previously thought. Take 
many approaches to stop your anger,  because it is a very great fault. (Lamrim Chenmo , Vol. 2, pg. 171)  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                   CHAPTER VI - PATIENCE  
 
 
80  
It is certain that I shall be cooked 
In cauldrons by the guardians of hell. 
 
We are happy when we see the suffering of our en emies since  this is our heart wish. What could 
be more despicable than that? We are only creating the causes for our own suffering and 
downfall in this and future lives. Our maliciou s thoughts cannot harm our enemies but, because 
of entertaining such thoughts, we will have to ex perience their fruitional effects, which can ripen 
even in this very life. If we have received th e bodhisattva vows, such malicious thoughts mean 
that we are abandoning sentient beings and our bodhicitta. This is a root downfall for which we 
will have to suffer in the lower realms in the next life.  
 The analogy in verse 89 describe s how fishes caught by the fish ermen’s hooks are pulled out from 
the sea and cooked in a pot. Similarly, the fish ermen are our afflictions and once we are hooked 
by the karma generated by our hatred we will defi nitely be cooked in the same way by the hell-
guardians.    The third and fourth lines of verse 88 and verse 89 are under the outline,
 If one holds onto that 
joy, it will become a cause of great suffering for oneself.  We will generate great suffering for 
ourselves if we take delight in our enemies’ suffering.25 
 
b’ It is unreasonable to be impatient with that  which hinders the benefit directed towards oneself 
and one’s interests 
1” It is unreasonable to be furious with that which hinders mundane interests 
a” It is unreasonable to be furious with that which hinders one’s own praise and 
renown 
(1) There is no need for just praise and renown 
(2) It is unreasonable to seek merely mental joy 
(3) Grasping for merely that is erroneous 
(4) The reasons is it erroneous 
b” Reflecting on the benefits 
2” It is unreasonable to be furious with that which hinders merit 
(1) There is no need for just praise and renown  
(6, 90) 
The honour of praise and fame 
Will not turn into merit or life; 
It will give me neither strengt h nor freedom from sickness, 
And will not provide any physical happiness. 
 
                                              
25 Even your mere malicious thoughts that delight in your enemies’ troubles or that wish for their destruction do 
not harm your enemy; they lead only to your own suffering. Yet, if such malice were to harm them, you should 
stop it completely, reflecting on the drawback that  this would bring ruin to yourself and others. ( Lamrim Chenmo , 
Vol. 2, pg. 171)  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                   CHAPTER VI - PATIENCE  
 
 
81  
(6, 91) 
If I were aware of what  held meaning for me, 
What value would I find in these things? 
 
Amongst the 8 worldly dharmas,  we desire praise and fame and we are upset when our 
reputation or our receiving praise is interfered with or hindered in any way.  The antidote to 
such unhappiness is given in these verses.  
 
Praise and fame, unlike virtue and merit, cannot be nefit us in our future lives.  A group of 15-20 
people may continuously praise us, like a grou p of monks doing puja together, but such praise 
and fame cannot extend our lifespan, strengthen our bodies or help us recover from illness.  They cannot even offer the  pleasure and satisfacti on that we experience from eating a mouthful 
of delicious food.  Praise and fame cannot help us reach  those mean ingful goals, which we hope to achieve.  We 
can stop our anger directed at those who hinder our acquisition of  praise and fame by reflecting in this way. 
26 
(2) It is unreasonable to seek merely mental joy  
(6, 91) 
If all I want is (a little) mental happiness, 
I should devote myself to gambling, drinking and so forth. 
 
Objection : Praise, fame, and honour may not bring any pl easure or benefit to my  body, but they 
do give me mental happiness. Therefore, I will be angry with those who ruin my praise and fame. 
 
Reply : If your goal in life is merely to seek shor t-lived mental happiness, you may as well indulge 
in gambling, drinking or sex, etc., the prohibit ed activities of those holding the individual 
liberation vows of ordained persons. It is ina ppropriate to pursue such temporary happiness as 
our ultimate  goal.   
 
(3) Grasping for merely that is erroneous 
(a) There is no need for just praise and renown 
(b) To dislike the loss of praise and renown is childish 
                                              
26 When others praise you and spread your fame, it serves neither of two purposes: 
-  for this life it does not bring you long life, health, and the like, and 
-  for futures lives it does not bring merit and so forth. 
Therefore, do not get attached to fame and praise, but reproach yourself by thinki ng, “My displeasure when my 
praise and fame are ruined is no different from when small children cry upon the collapse of their sand castles, 
which lack any of the requisites for a dwelling. ( Lamrim Chenmo , Vol.2, pg. 167)  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                   CHAPTER VI - PATIENCE  
 
 
82  
(a) There is no need for just praise and renown 
(6, 92) 
If, for the sake of fame, 
I give away my wealth or get myself killed, 
What can the mere words (of fame) do then? 
Once I have died, to whom  will they give pleasure? 
 
There are those who crave for fame as philanthropist s, even though their wealth is limited or as 
courageous warriors in battle. But, having attained  such fame for their generosity and courage, it 
brings them neither physical nor mental benefit at the time of death. Therefore, it is a mistake to 
pursue such goals.  
(b) To dislike the loss of praise and renown is childish 
(6, 93) 
When their sandcastles collapse, 
Children howl in despair; 
Likewise, when my praise and reputation decline, 
My mind becomes like a little child. 
 Children are very excited and happy when they have completed building their sand castles and they cry and experience great distress when such sa nd castles are destroyed, as if they had lost 
something extremely important. In the same way,  we are excited and happy when we are praised 
and we become upset and depressed when our pr aise and fame decline. This is childish 
behaviour.  
(4) The reasons it is erroneous 
(a) It is unreasonable to be attached to the joy one feels for praise of oneself 
(b) If, because of the joy [one associates with them, praise and renown] were something to strive for, then it would be reasonable for all beings [who have that] to enjoy them [but 
they don’t] 
(a) It is unreasonable to be attached to the joy one feels for praise of oneself 
(6, 94) 
Since short-lived sounds are inanimate, 
They cannot possibly think of praising me. 
But as it makes (the be stower of praise) happy, 
(My) reputation is a source of pleasure (for me)- 
 
(6, 95) 
Whether this praise is directed  at myself or someone else 
How shall I be benefited by the joy (of the one who bestows it)? 
Since that joy and happiness is theirs alone, 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                   CHAPTER VI - PATIENCE  
 
 
83  
I shall not obtain even a part of it. 
 
When we are praised, what is it that is making us happy? Are we happy with the sound of the 
words that we hear? Or are we happy with the mind of the person who is praising us, our 
admirer?   If it is the former case, our happiness is inappr opriate since the words or  sounds themselves had 
no intention to praise us.   In the latter case, we are happy because the person  who is praising us is happy. Our happiness is 
still inappropriate because the happiness in the mind of our admirer belongs to him alone and 
cannot be shared or given to us.    
 
(b) If, because of the joy [one associates with them, praise and renown] were something to strive 
for, then it would be reasonable for all beings [who have that] to enjoy them [but they don’t] 
(i) The actual 
(ii) Dismissing the joy of praise for oneself as child’s play 
(i) The actual 
(6, 96) 
If I do find happiness in their happiness, 
Then surely I should feel the same way towards all? 
And if this were so, then why am I unhappy 
When others find pleasure in that which brings them joy? 
 
We are happy with praise and fame because our admi rer is happy. In that case, we should also be 
happy when our admirer praises our enemy, since it makes him happy to do so. But this is not 
the case because we are unhappy when our enemy is happy.  
 
Furthermore, our reasoning – the happiness of our admirer makes us happy as well – should be 
applied to all beings. When others (including ou r enemies) are happy being praised, we should 
be happy seeing their happiness. The happine ss of others becomes the cause of our own 
happiness. This is how bodhisattv as think. Therefore, we should  be happy when good things 
happen to our enemies.  
(ii) Dismissing the joy of praise for oneself as child’s play 
(6, 97) 
Therefore the happiness that arises 
From thinking, "I am bein g praised," is invalid. 
It is only the behaviour of a child. 
 
“Therefore”  refers to what have been mentioned earlier:  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                   CHAPTER VI - PATIENCE  
 
 
84  
(a) that the sound of pleasant words directed at  us have no intention to praise us; and   
(b) that the happiness in the mind of our ad mirer cannot be shared or given to us.  
 
Thinking otherwise has been established as invali d. Since praise and fame are made up of mere 
words, which have  no  essence, attachment to th em is akin to a child’s attachment to his sand 
castle.   
Lesson 16   Chapter VI - verse 98-108 
3’ Arresting fury (anger) towards that which hinders one’s desires 
a’ It is unreasonable to be impatient with that which hinders the harm destined for one’s 
enemies b’ It is unreasonable to be impatient with th at which hinders the benefit directed towards 
oneself and one’s interests 
1” It is unreasonable to be furious with that which hinders mundane interests 
a” It is unreasonable to be furious with that which hinders one’s own 
praise and renown 
b” Reflecting on the benefits 
(1) As that which acts to hinder praise and renown [also] arrests the 
lower realms, it is unreasonable to be furious with it 
(a) Grasping after praise and renown(fame) leads to the 
development of all wrongdoing 
(b) That which acts to arrest that [also] arrests the lower realms 
(2) As it is something that acts to liberate one from conditioned existence (samsara), it is unreasonable to be furious with it 
2” It is unreasonable to be furious with that which hinders merit  
(a) Grasping after praise and renown (fame) leads to the development of all wrongdoing 
(6, 98) 
Praise and so forth distract me, 
And also undermine my disillusion (with cyclic existence) 
I start to envy those wh o have good qualities, 
And all the very best is destroyed. 
 
Verse 98 shows us how to stop our anger with those who damage our repu tation and fame. Such 
praise, fame and  respect are obstacles for Dharma  practitioners because they become the causes 
for us to generate pride, arrogance and attachme nt to material gain. We end up spending our 
time, effort and even our whole lives pursuing such worldly goals.  As a result, there will be no time for Dharma practice, attending cla sses or reflecting on the teachings.  
 The more distracted and attached we are to the ob jects of desire,  the more difficult it becomes 
for us to develop renunciation, the sense of disenc hantment with samsara and even if we were to 
generate some renunciation, it quickly disintegrated.   Without renunciation,  it is very difficult for us to appreciate or aspire to achieve qualities such 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                   CHAPTER VI - PATIENCE  
 
 
85  
as concentration, which will remain undeveloped.  We will not engage in Dharma practice with 
our minds due to the many mental distractions and even our attemp ts to engage in physical and 
verbal virtues will be feeble.   
 Moreover, since the praise and fame that we receiv e are the  results of whatever small qualities we 
may possess, such admiration from others become s the condition for us to be jealous with the 
good qualities of others, especially when they ha ve more qualities than we do. With such anger 
and jealousy, we destroy all the good things that we crave  - praise, fame, material comforts -  in this and all our future lives.   So the way to stop anger with those who preven t us from receiving praise and fame is to 
understand the faults of such things. Anger will  n o t  a r i s e  w h e n  w e  a p p r e c i a t e   h o w  t h e y  c a n  
become the source of wrongdoings and hinder th e attainment of our spiritual goals. Then, we 
may even feel happy when someone stops us from receiving such praise and admiration.
27 
(b) That which acts to arrest that [also] arrests the lower realms 
(6, 99) 
Therefore, are not those who are closely involved 
In destroying my praise and the like, 
Also involved in protecting me 
From falling into the unfortunate realms? 
 
‘Therefore, ’ refers to the previous verse on how prai se, fame, and honour actually  destroy us. 
Since this is the case, are those involved in dest roying our praise, fame and material gains, our 
pursuit of which will definitely send us to the lo wer realms, not protecting us from such a fate ?  
 Driven by our attachment to these worldly dharma s, we engage in non-virtuous actions and are 
too distracted to be interested in any virtuous activities.  Our critics and enemies are preventing 
our descent into the lower realms. We should, th erefore, reflect on the kindness of the enemy 
instead of fixating on him as an  enemy.   
(2) As it is something that acts to liberate one from conditioned existence, it is unreasonable 
inappropriate to be furious with it 
(a) As that which hinders praise and so forth acts to liberate one from conditioned 
existence (samsara), it is unreasonable to be furious with it 
(b) As it is something that cuts the avenues of suffering, it is unreasonable inappropriate 
to be furious with it 
                                              
27 Develop disgust for praise and so forth, thinking, “Praise, fame, and honor distract my mind with the 
meaningless, destroy my disenchantment with cyclic existence, make me jealous of those with good qualities, and 
spoil my virtuous activities. ( Lamrim Chenmo , Vol. 2, pg. 167)  
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                   CHAPTER VI - PATIENCE  
 
 
86  
(a) As that which hinders praise and so forth acts to liberate one from conditioned existence, it is 
unreasonable to be furious with it 
(6, 100) 
I, who am striving for freedom, 
Do not need to be bound by material gain and honour. 
So why should I be angry 
With those who free me from this bondage? 
 
When we are striving for liberation and freedom from the bondage of our afflictions, material 
gain, praise, fame and honour will only hold us back. Those who are preventing us from 
acquiring these things are helping us achieve our goals. Therefore, we should not be angry with 
them. 
(b) As it is something that cuts the avenues of suffering, it is unreasonable to be furious with it  
(6, 101) 
Those who wish to cause me suffering 
Are like Buddhas bestowing waves of blessing. 
As they open the door for my no t going to an unfortunate realm, 
Why should I be angry with them? 
 Our attachment to praise, fame and  material gain s is a sign that we had opened the door to the 
lower realms. We enter that door, which we have opened ourselves, by engaging in seeking these 
worldly dharmas.   Those who obstruct us from acquiring these thin gs are, therefore, like the buddhas bestowing 
blessings on  us as they stop us from entering that door to the lower realms. It is inappropriate to be upset with them, because they are the ones   who close  the door to the lower realms. 
28 
3’ Arresting fury (anger) towards that which hinders one’s desires 
a’ It is unreasonable to be impatient with that which hinders the harm destined for one’s 
enemies 
b’ It is unreasonable to be impatient with th at which hinders the benefit directed towards 
oneself and one’s interests 
1” It is unreasonable to be furious with that which hinders mundane interests 
2” It is unreasonable to be furious with that which hinders merit 
a” It is unreasonable  to be furious because merit has been hindered 
(1) One should abide by the supreme austerity  (2) If that acts as a hindrance, you yourself will become an 
obstacle to merit 
                                              
28 Stop your anger and feel delight from the depths of your  heart, thinking, “In that case, damage to my praise, 
fame, gain, and honor protects me from going to miserable realms, cuts the bonds of my attachment, and, like the 
Buddha’s blessing, blocks the door through which I am ab out to enter into suffering.” Thinking like this, you 
should from the depths of your heart stop anger and feel happy.( Lamrim Chenmo , Vol. 2, pg. 168)  
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                   CHAPTER VI - PATIENCE  
 
 
87  
b” It is not a hindrance to merit 
c” Reflecting on it as an object one ought to have respect for 
(1) One should abide by the supreme austerity  
(6, 102) 
-But what if someone should obstruct my gaining merit?- 
With them, too, it is incorrect to be angry; 
For since there is no fortitude similar to patience, 
Surely I should put it into practice. 
 
Objection: It is, indeed, inappropriate to be an gry with someone who prevents me from seeking 
the 8 worldly dharmas. But my anger is justified when someone obstructs me from acquiring 
merit or engaging in the practice of generosity and ethics.   
 
Reply : It is still inappropriate for us to be angry with those who are obstructing our practice of 
virtue because there is,  “no fortitude like patience ,” which is the supreme virtue. 
(2) If that acts as a hindrance, you yourself will become an obstacle to merit  
(6, 103) 
If due to my own failings, 
I am not patient with this (enemy), 
Then it is only I who am preventing myself 
From practicing this cause for gaining merit. 
 
When  we are not patient with those who obstruct our acquisitio n of praise, fame and material 
gains, due to our jealousy and hatred, then we  are obstructing our acq uisition of the supreme 
form of merit,  the fortitude of patience  
b” It is not a hindrance to merit 
(1) A general presentation 
(2) Establishing that by an analogy 
(1) A general presentation 
(6, 104) 
If without it, something does not occur, 
And if with it, it does comes to be, 
Then since this (enemy) would be the cause of (patience) 
How can I say that (the  enemy) prevents it? 
 
An enemy is the indispensable cause for the deve lopment of patience. Patience cannot arise in 
the absence of an enemy.  How can we then say that enemies prevent us from generating patience? The enemy is not an obstruction to the generation of merit (which, in this context, 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                   CHAPTER VI - PATIENCE  
 
 
88  
means patience). 
(2) Establishing that by an analogy 
(6, 105) 
A beggar is not an obstacle to generosity 
When I am giving something away, 
And I cannot say that those who give ordination 
Are an obstacle to becoming ordained. 
 
When we are seeking a recipient with whom we can practise generosity, the appearance of a 
beggar would aid, rather than hinder, our practice . In the same way, the presence of the abbot 
helps, rather than obstructs, th ose  seeking ordination. Similarly,  the enemy is the cause for our 
practice of patience.    
 
Question : Is the enemy not preventing me from getting the kind of merit I want by putting me in 
a situation whereby I have to practise patience? For example, the enemy hinders my practice of 
generosity by stealing the money I had set aside for offerings.  
 
Reply : What you want is actually merit. We ha ve already established that there are no 
circumstances under which anger can be justified.  Since the perfection of patience is more 
difficult to practise than the perfection of generosity, you can accumulate more merit from 
practising patience. 
 
c” Reflecting on it as an object one ought to have respect for 
(1) As it is something that acts to de velop qualities, one should respect it  
(a) Its benefits for oneself are great 
(i) The rarity of the special field  
(ii) It is reasonable to take joy in that  
(iii) It is reasonable to adopt the attitude that it is beneficial 
(b) It is not reliant upon having reflected upon the qualities (c) Seeing it to be like the Teacher 
(2) Due to faith in the Teacher, one should respect it 
(i) The rarity of the special field 
 
(6, 106) 
There are indeed many beggars in this world, 
But scarce are those who inflict harm; 
For if I have not injured others, 
Few beings will cause me harm. 
 
When comparing the two, we will find that there are more objects of generosity (such as beggars) 
than objects of patience (such as the enemy). The reason for this is shown in the last 2 lines, “ For 
if I have not injured others,/Fe w beings will cause me harm.”  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                   CHAPTER VI - PATIENCE  
 
 
89  
 
Bodhisattvas  work solely for the benefit of ot hers, seeing all beings as beneficial and never 
harming them.  Because of this, they are not ha rmed in return and, for them, the objects of 
patience are very rare.  
 
Geshela:   I guess it must be easier for bodhisattvas to  practise generosity than to practise patience 
due to the rarity of the objects of  patience. Therefore, the virtue acquired through the practice of 
patience is greater than the virtue acquired throug h the practice of generosity. This goes with the 
outline, The rarity of the special field,  where the field refers to the  object of patience. 
(ii) It is reasonable to take joy in that  
(6, 107) 
Therefore, just like treasu re appearing in my house 
Without any effort on my part to obtain it, 
I should be happy to have enemies 
For they assist me in my  conduct of Awakening. 
 
‘Therefore,’  refers to what we have established earlier: The rarity of the object of patience.  When 
an impoverished person, who lacks even the basi c necessities of life, suddenly and effortlessly 
finds a great treasure in his home, he will be very happy.  
 Similarly, when bodhisattvas find their objects of patience, they are as overjoyed as the poor man. 
So, when we meet with an enemy with whom we can practise patience, which is one of the six 
perfections, we should rejoice instea d of becoming angry with the enemy. 
(iii) It is reasonable to adopt the attitude that it is beneficial 
(6, 108) 
Because I am able to practice (patience) with them, 
They are worthy of being given 
The very first fruits of my patience, 
For in this way, they are the cause of it. 
 
There was once a famous, wealthy and well-respecte d spiritual master. One day, he was robbed of 
all his possessions. Because of this, he genera ted renunciation and retreated to a mountain 
hermitage, turning his back on all worldly activities. In his autobiography, he wrote, “When 
someone asked me who my teacher was, my answer was, ‘It is that very kind person who robbed 
me for he was the one  who sent me  up here into the mountains’.”’  
 
We should apply this perspective when we encoun ter problems. When we meet with difficulties, 
we tend to focus on the negative aspects, thinki ng, “Why me? Why am I sick? Why did he do this 
t o  m e ? ”  T h i s  o n l y  a g g r a v a t e s  o u r  s u f f e r i n g .  B y  s e e i n g  t h i n g s  d i f f e r e n t l y ,  w e  c a n  u s e  s u c h  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                   CHAPTER VI - PATIENCE  
 
 
90  
hardships  to complement, rather than see them as obstacles to  our practice.   
 
It may seem easier to practise when things are go ing well. But, at such times, nothing gets done 
because we are so absorbed in pursuing fame, honour and material possessions.  As Buddhist 
practitioners, when we meet with difficult situatio ns, that is the time to apply whatever we have 
learnt so that we can patiently accept the pr oblems and suffering. Otherwise, despite having 
studied and reflected on the teachings, in times of  crisis,  those of us who claim to be Dharma 
practitioners may end up worse off than ordina ry people. We need to reflect on how to 
transform adverse conditions into the path.  
 If we are determined to do so, we will be able to develop patience by depending on our enemies.  Since the enemy is the condition for us to develop patience, it is appropriate to dedicate to him 
the very first fruits of our practice (which come s from applying the various methods outlined in 
the text). Therefore, as stated in  the outline, it is appropriate to adopt a positive attitude and to 
benefit our  enemy. 
Lesson 17   Chapter VI - verse 109-114 
In the last lesson, we considered how the enem y, an essential condition for the practice of 
patience, occurs rarely. Therefore, like the bodh isattvas, we should rejoice when we meet the 
enemy and dedicate to him  the very first fruits of our practice of patience.   
 
2” It is unreasonable to be furious with that which hinders merit 
a” It is unreasonable  to be furious because merit has been hindered 
b” It is not a hindrance to merit 
c” Reflecting on it as an object one ought to have respect for 
(1) As it is something that acts to develop qualities, one should respect it 
(Reflecting on it as an object of respect) 
(a) Its benefits for oneself are great 
(b) It is not reliant upon having reflected upon the qualities 
(i) It does not cease to be an object worthy of offerings just 
because one does not have the attitude that it benefits oneself 
(ii) It does not cease to be an object worthy of offerings just 
because one has the attitude that it is harmful to oneself  
(iii) Thus, as it acts as a focal condi tion for patience, it  is worthy as 
[an object of] offerings 
(c) Seeing it to be like the Teacher 
(2) Due to faith in the Teacher, one should respect it 
(i) It does not cease to be an object worthy of offerings just because one does not have the 
attitude that it benefits oneself 
(6, 109) 
-But why should my enemy be venerated, 
who has no intention for me to practice patience?- 
Then why venerate the sacred Dharma? 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                   CHAPTER VI - PATIENCE  
 
 
91  
(It too has no intention) but is a fit cause for practice. 
 
Because the enemy causes us to develop  patience, we are advised to dedicate the very first fruits 
of our practice of patience to the enemy. 
Qualm : Why should I venerate the enemy who has no  intention of helping me to develop my 
patience? 
Reply:  It follows then that the holy  Dharma, which motivates us to  develop virtue,  is not a 
worthy object of worship, since it too has no intention to benefit us.  
The holy Dharma is made up of the ulti mate and conventional Dharma Jewels.  
The ultimate Dharma Jewel refers  to the true paths and true ce ssation while the conventional 
Dharma Jewel consists of the 12 branches of script ures.  The scriptures do not have any intention 
to benefit us because they are physical form an d not consciousness. True cessation also has no 
intention to benefit us since it is an uncompos ed and, therefore, permanent phenomenon that 
does not possess a mind. (Whatever is consciousn ess or intention is necessarily impermanent). 
 
A person can ‘possess’ an intention, but we have  to check if true path s possess any intention to 
benefit or not. We may argue that ‘possess the inte ntion to benefit’ is in true paths’ nature; but 
we need to be clear as to what this means.  
 
Question (from student) : Don’t the true paths in the mental continua of superior bodhisattvas 
possess the intention to benefit others?  
 
Reply:  Superior bodhisattvas have actualised true  paths. Bodhisattvas possess bodhicitta; since 
they possess bodhicitta, bodhisattvas possess the in tention to benefit others as well. Bodhicitta 
benefits others, but does bodhicitta po ssess the intention to benefit others?  
 
Upon further analysis, we can argue that since a true path is a main mind, it is necessarily 
accompanied by the 5 omnipresent mental factors,  of which intention is one. (The others are 
feeling, discernment, contact and attention).  In this context, the Dharma refe rs to the scriptures. Scriptures containing the Buddha’s teachings 
may not possess any intention to benefit us yet they  are worthy of veneration because they are the 
Dharma. Therefore, the intention to benefit is not a pre-requisite for an object to be worthy of 
worship.    
Geshe-la:  Whatever is a true cessation necessarily does not possess mind. Is there a buddha who 
does not possess compassion? Are the true cessations possessed by the Buddha a buddha? 
 (Students) reply : Yes, it is a buddha. 
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                   CHAPTER VI - PATIENCE  
 
 
92  
Geshe-la : Do the true cessations possessed by the Buddh a have great compassion? It is helpful if 
you think about this in an extensive way. Then yo u can come to the firm conclusion that the true 
cessations possessed by the buddha superior ar e the final Dharma Jewel. According to the 
Prasangika-Madhyamika tenet school, this is the Nature Truth body. If we maintain that the true 
cessations possessed by the buddha superior are no t buddha, then we are also saying that the 
Nature Truth body is not the buddha, in wh ich case a buddha would only have 3 bodies. 29 
(ii) It does not cease to be an object worthy of of ferings just because one has the attitude that it 
is harmful to oneself  
(6, 110) 
-But surely my enemies are not to be venerated 
For they intend to  cause me harm- 
Then how could patience be practised  
If, like doctors, people al ways strove to do me good? 
 
Qualm : The Dharma may not have the intention to benefit me, but it also does not have the 
intention to harm me. Therefore, it is worthy of worship. My enemies, however, have only the 
intention to harm me.   
Reply:  How could we practise patience  if our enemies were always we ll-behaved and only strove to 
benefit us? As mentioned earlier, the existence o f   b e g g a r s  i s  a  n e c e s s a ry condition, not an 
obstruction, for our practice of generosity. In  the same way, the exis tence of the enemy who 
harms us is a necessary condition for our developm ent of patience. Therefore, we should rejoice 
in the existence of the enemy.  For those who do  not wish to practise patience, the enemy only 
causes the generation of irritation and anger.  
(iii) Thus, as it acts as a focal condition for pati ence, it is worthy as [an object of] offerings 
(6, 111) 
Thus, since patient acceptance is produced 
In dependence upon (one with) a very hateful mind, 
That person should be wo rthy of veneration just like the sacred Dharma, 
Because they are a cause of patience. 
 
‘Thus, ’ refers to the fact that we will never be ab le to develop patience with people who always 
treat us well. Since patience is developed in dependence on the enem y, he is worthy of 
veneration, even though he never had any  intention to benefit us, just as the Dharma is worthy 
of veneration because it causes  us to develop virtue. 
                                              
29 The four bodies of a buddha are th e emanation body, the complete enjo yment body, the wisdom truth body 
and the nature truth body 
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                   CHAPTER VI - PATIENCE  
 
 
93  
 
(c) Seeing it to be like the Teacher 
(i) An extensive explanation 
(1’) The scriptures teach that sentient beings and Buddhas are comparable fields 
of merit 
(2’) Establishing that by reason  (3’) Abandoning objections 
(ii) Synopsis 
(1’) The scriptures teach that sentient beings and Buddhas are comparable fields of merit 
(6, 112) 
Therefore the Mighty One has said 
That the field of sentient beings  is (similar to) a Buddha-field30, 
 
The Buddha said in the Sutra of Pure (Perfect) Prayer31 that to attain the state of full enlightenment 
which perfectly fulfils the two purposes, we need to depend on the field of sentient beings and 
the buddha-field.  
 
The field of sentient beings is the cause for achi eving the state of full enlightenment. Since we 
need to depend on it in order to develop the four immeasurables and meditate on love and compassion, it is perfect for fulfilling the two pu rposes. The buddha-field is  also a necessary cause 
for us to achieve the state of full enlightenment. Since we need to go for refuge to the buddhas in 
order to achieve enlightenment, the buddha-field fulfils the purposes of ourselves and others. 
The buddhas and sentient beings are therefore comparable in terms of both of them being 
necessary causes for us to achieve enlightenment.  An alternative interpretation of what the Buddha sa id in this sutra is that the field of sentient 
beings is the Buddha-field. The Buddha-field is the ba sis upon which we achieve enlightenment. 
Since sentient beings are the causes for us to ac hieve enlightenment, the field of sentient beings 
itself is the Buddha-field.     
(2’) Establishing that by reason  
(a’) One attains the final object of desire by  having faith in Buddhas and sentient beings 
(b’) As having faith in both is comparable in terms of attaining Buddhahood, it is 
unreasonable to discard one and embrace the other 
(a’) One attains the final object of desire by  having faith in Buddhas and sentient beings 
(6, 112 cd)  
                                              
30 Text Footnote on pg 173: Dharmasangiti Sutra, Thog. P126 
‘The field of sentient beings is a Buddha field because it  is from that Buddha field that the qualities of a Buddha 
are attained. Hence, in that field, it is incorrect to practise in a mistaken way.’ 
 
31 The Dharma-samgiti-sutra  is translated in the Lamrim Chenmo  as the Compendium of the Teachings Sutra.  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                   CHAPTER VI - PATIENCE  
 
 
94  
For many who have pleased them 
Have thereby reached perfection. 
 
“The final object of desire,” here refers to buddhahood. Many people have achieved 
enlightenment through generating love and compa ssion that pleased many sentient beings and 
through practicing Buddhadharma, which made the buddhas happy.  
(b’) As having faith in both is comparable in te rms of attaining Buddhahood, it is unreasonable to 
discard one and embrace the other 
(6,113) 
A Buddha's qualities are gained 
From the sentient beings an d the Conquerors alike, 
So why do I not respect them 
In the same way as I respect the Conquerors? 
 
When we are enlightened, we achieve many qualities such as the 10 powers and the 4 
fearlessnesses32. Such enlightenment comes from having faith in both the buddhas and sentient 
beings, so they  are similar (comparable) in terms of being causes for us to achieve enlightenment. 
It is, therefore, inappropriate to pay respect only  to the buddhas. We should also pay respect to 
all sentient beings33.  
                                              
32 The four fearlessnesses of a Buddha are:- 
1 fearlessness in revealing the Dharma of renunciation 
2 fearlessness in revealing the Dhar ma of overcoming obstructions 
3 fearlessness in revealing the Dhar ma of excellent abandonment and 
4 the fearlessness in revealing the Dharma of excellent realizations 
The ten powers of a tathagata:  
(1) knowing what is possible and what is not possible,  (2) knowing the results of actions,  (3) knowing the aspirations of men,  (4) knowing the elements, (5) knowing the higher and lower powers of men,  (6) knowing the path that leads everywhere, (7) knowing the origin of kleshas, which leads to meditation, liberation, samadhi, and equanimity,  
(8) knowing previous lives,  (9) the knowledge of tran sference and death,  
(10) knowing that the defilements are exhausted. 
 
33 To produce the attitude that cherishes beings in this way, you must remember their kindness or recognize that 
they help you. For example, once farmers see that through sowing heal thy seeds they will reap a good and 
abundant harvest, they value a fertile field. Likewise, once you are certain that you will accomplish all temporary 
and final well-being through sowing the seeds of generosity and so forth in the field of living beings, you will 
cherish others. Reflect on this. Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds  states: “Living beings and Conquerors are similar – 
from them you achieve a buddha’s qualities. How is it that you do not respect living beings just as you respect 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                   CHAPTER VI - PATIENCE  
 
 
95  
 
Question:  I thought there was no duality or diffe rence between the object and subject for 
buddhas. So how can we say that Buddha observes others and is pleased by them?  
 
Reply:  We can still talk about the obje ct and the subject in relation to the buddhas, e.g. that the 
buddhas possess certain qualities such as the 4 fearlessness and the 10 powers, or that the 
buddhas have hands, noses and eyes. The budd has also do not have  any afflictions.  
 The buddhas generate great compassion by focusi ng on sentient beings, who become the objects 
of their compassion. No conventionalities appe ar to the perspective of a non-buddha who is 
absorbed in meditative equipoise focusing on em ptiness. But for the buddhas, although they are 
always in meditative equipoise on emptiness, conventionalities do appear to them. They see 
everything. In the case of buddhas, only emptine ss appears to the perspective of the mind seeing 
emptiness.   
Lesson 18   Chapter VI - verse 114-126 
2” It is unreasonable to be furious with that which hinders merit 
a” It is unreasonable  to be furious because merit has been hindered 
b” It is not a hindrance to merit c” Reflecting on it as an object one ought to have respect for 
(1) As it is something that acts to develop qualities, one should respect it (Reflecting on it as an object of respect) 
(a) Its benefits for oneself are great 
(b) It is not reliant upon having reflected upon the qualities 
(c) Seeing it to be like the Teacher 
(i) An extensive explanation 
(1’) The scriptures teach that sentient beings and Buddhas are comparable fields of merit 
(2’) Establishing that by reason  
(3’) Abandoning objections 
(a’) Rejecting [the position that holds] that it is invalid to cultivate 
equal faith in objects that are not equal in terms of their qualities 
(b’) The greatness of faith in both: It is reasonable to cultivate equal faith [on the basis that] they are comparable [in terms of 
their ability to act as] causes for Buddhahood 
                                                                                                                                                           
conquerors?” In reference to this, killing living beings le ads you to the three miserable realms. If you save others 
from being killed, you go to a happy realm and have a long life there. In the same way, stealing or giving away your 
resources, being hostile or cultivating love and compassion, will produce result s such as leading you respectively to 
a miserable realm or to a happy realm. Contemplate especi a l l y  t h a t  y o u  n e e d  t o  f o c u s  o n  l i v i n g  b e i n g s  a s  y o u  
develop the spirit of enlightenment, and that by accompli shing the bodhisattva deeds for the sake of living beings, 
you reach buddhahood – so these too depend on living be ings. Also, reflect on brin ging generosity, etc. to 
perfection in dependence on living bein gs as taught in the verses on the nece ssity of making living beings happy. 
(Lamrim Chenmo , Vol.. 2, pg. 57)  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                   CHAPTER VI - PATIENCE  
 
 
96  
(c’) It is reasonable to have faith because there is unlimited merit 
in making offerings to sentient beings who possess only a fraction of the qualities of a Buddha 
(ii) Synopsis 
(2) Due to faith in the Teacher, one should respect it 
(a’) Rejecting [the position that holds ] that it is invalid to cultivat e equal faith in objects that are 
not equal in terms of their qualities 
(6, 114) 
(Of course) they are not similar in  the quality of their intentions 
But only in the fruits (that they produce); 
So it is in this respect that  they have excellent qualities 
And are therefore (said to be) equal. 
 
We should respect sentient beings in th e same way that we respect the buddhas.  
 
Qualm : The buddhas and sentient beings may be equal in terms of being objects of my 
accumulation of merit but  they are not equal in te rms of their qualities. This being the case, I do 
not need to give sentient beings the sa me respect that I give to the buddhas.  
Reply:  By having faith in and respect towards th e buddhas, we create the cause to achieve 
enlightenment. In the same way, when we respec t sentient beings, we also create the cause to 
achieve enlightenment. Therefore, though the buddhas and sentient beings are not equal in 
terms of the qualities they possess, they are equal in terms of being causes for us to achieve 
enlightenment.       
(b’) The greatness of faith in both: It is reasonabl e to cultivate equal faith [on the basis that] they 
are comparable [in terms of their ability to act as] causes for Buddhahood  
(6, 115) 
Whatever (merit comes from) vene rating one with a loving mind 
Is due to the eminence of sentient beings. 
And in the same way, the meri t of having faith in Buddha 
Is due to the eminence of Buddha. 
 
(6, 116)   
Therefore, they are asserted to be equal 
In the share they have in e stablishing Buddha-qualities. 
 
If someone was to make offerings to a sentient being absorbed in meditative equipoise focusing 
on love, the merit generated is said to be so powerful that he would experience the positive 
fruitional karmic effects in this very lifetime.  This  can be attributed to the greatness of the object 
of the meditator’s concentration, i.e. all sentient beings.  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                   CHAPTER VI - PATIENCE  
 
 
97  
When we make offerings as small as one flower or a stick of incense to a buddha, with strong 
faith and palms joined, the merit generated will continue to produce positive effects until we 
achieve enlightenment. This is due to the power of  the object, i.e. buddha.  This is the greatness 
of the buddhas.  
 Therefore, buddhas and sentient beings are eq ual in terms of being causes of achieving 
enlightenment.       
(c’) It is reasonable to have faith because there is unlimited merit in m aking offerings to sentient 
beings who possess only a fraction of the qualities of a Buddha 
(6, 116 cd)   
Yet none of them are eq ual (in good qualities) 
With the Buddhas who are boun dless Oceans of Excellence. 
 
(6, 117) 
Even if the three realms were offered, 
It would be insufficient in paying veneration 
To those few beings in whom a mere share of the good qualities. 
Of the Unique Assemblage  of Excellence appear. 
 Since buddhas possess infinite qualities such as  the 10 powers, the 4 fearlessness, the 18 
unshared characteristics, etc. beings cannot be comp ared with them in terms of qualities. Even if 
we were to offer the three realms to sentient be ings who possess only  a fraction of the Buddha’s 
qualities, this would be insufficient since they de serve far more than that. This shows that we can 
accumulate vast amounts of merit through making su ch offerings; this aligns with  the outline: 
because there is unlimited merit in making offerings to sentient beings who possess only a fraction of 
the qualities of a Buddha.  
(ii) Synopsis 
(6, 118) 
Thus since sentient beings have a share 
In giving rise to the supreme Buddha-qualities, 
Surely it is correct to venerate them 
As they are similar in merely this respect? 
 In summary, the buddhas and sentient beings may  not be equal in terms of qualities, but they 
are equal in being causes for us to achieve enlighte nment. Since this is so, it is appropriate for us 
to venerate sentient beings.    
(2) Due to faith in the Teacher, one should respect it 
(a) One should respect [the Teacher] because he acted as if all sentient beings were his 
only child 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                   CHAPTER VI - PATIENCE  
 
 
98  
(i) Accomplishing the principal method required of Buddhas 
(1’) [Showing respect and cherishing other beings is] identified as the 
principal method for repaying the kindness of the Buddhas in light of what 
they have done 
(2’) Establishing that  
(a’) One should be patient with harm done by sentient beings 
(b’) Abandoning conceit one feels in relation [to other] sentient 
beings 
(c’) Abandoning harm 
(1”) The reasons it is unreasonable to cause harm (2”) There is no way to please the Buddhas while one is 
harming others 
(ii) Confessing previous displeasing actions (iii) Refraining from [allowing nega tivities] to arise in the future 
(b) Thus, this shows in brief that we should respect sentient beings as well 
(1’) [Showing respect and cherishing other beings is] identified as the principal method for repaying the kindness of the Buddhas in light of what they have done
 
(6, 119) 
Furthermore, what way is there to repay (the Buddhas) 
Who grant immeasurable benefit 
And who befriend the world without pretension, 
Other than by pleasing sentient beings? 
 
‘Furthermore, ’ here means there are more reasons why it is important to venerate sentient beings 
in the same way we venerate the buddhas. The buddhas and bodhisattvas are honest, without 
deceit and pretension. They work only to benefit sentient beings, whom they treat as their loved 
ones, bringing them the happiness of this life an d all future lives. There is no better means to 
repay such kindness than by pleasing and benefiting sentient beings. 
 
(2’) Establishing that 
(a’) One should be patient with harm done by sentient beings 
(6, 120) 
Therefore, since benefiting these beings will repay 
Those who give their bodies and enter the deepest hell for their sake, 
I shall behave impeccably in all (that I do) 
Even if they cause me a great deal of harm. 
 
The buddhas happily sacrifice their bodies, which ar e formed from many virt ues, by entering the 
hell realms, in order to accomplish the welfare of sentient beings. To repay the great kindness of 
such buddhas, we should voluntarily accept whatever harms our enemies may inflict on our 
bodies or possessions.  
(b’) Abandoning conceit one feels in relation [to other] sentient beings  
(6, 121) 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                   CHAPTER VI - PATIENCE  
 
 
99  
When for their sake, th ose who are my Lords 
Have no regard even for their own bodies, 
Then why am I the fool so full of self-importance? 
Why do I not act like a servant towards them? 
 
When working for others, the buddhas (“ my Lords”)  disregard their bodies and are prepared to 
endure any hardships in order to benefit sentient  beings. But we behave like fools, generating 
great pride and arrogance towards those very sent ient beings who are the objects of the buddhas’ 
actions. We should abandon such behaviour. Just  as we hold the buddhas in great esteem, the  
buddhas themselves see sentient beings as very important and hold them in great esteem. Since 
this is so, we should abandon our arrogance, co nceit and pride towards sentient beings and treat 
them in the same way a good servant serves her master.    
 
(c’) Abandoning harm 
(1”) The reasons it is unreasonable to cause harm 
 
(6, 122) 
Because of their happiness, the Conquerors are delighted. 
However, if they are harmed (the Conquerors) are displeased. 
Hence by pleasing them I sh all delight the Conquerors, 
And by harming them I sh all hurt the Conquerors. 
 
The best way of pleasing the buddhas is to bene fit sentient beings. Harming them, we displease 
the buddhas. Therefore, it is incorr ect to harm sentient beings.    
(2”) There is no way to please the Buddhas while one is harming others  
(6, 123) 
Just as desirable sense-objects wo uld give my mind no pleasure 
If my body was ablaze with fire, 
Likewise, when living creatures are in pain 
There is no way for the Compassionate Ones to be pleased. 
 
If our bodies were on fire, there is no way we could experience any mental happiness, even if we 
were given delicious food, wealth or possessions.  Such offerings would only add to our suffering. 
In the same way, when we continue to harm sent ient beings while making extensive offerings to 
the buddhas,  there is no way the buddhas will be pleased with our offerings and conduct.   
(ii) Confessing previous displeasing actions 
(6, 124) 
Therefore, as 1 have caused harm to living beings, 
Today I openly declare all my unwholesome acts 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                   CHAPTER VI - PATIENCE  
 
 
100  
That have brought displeasure  to the Compassionate Ones. 
Please bear with me, O Lords, for th is displeasure I have caused you. 
 
I n  t h e  p a s t ,  w e  h a r m e d  m a n y  l i v i n g  b e i n g s  a n d  t h u s  d i s p l e a s e d  t h e  b u d d h a s .  N o w ,  i n  t h e  
presence of the buddhas, we completely confess our past misdeeds and ask the buddhas for their 
forgiveness.  
(iii) Refraining from [allowing nega tivities] to arise in the future  
(6, 125) 
From now on, in order to delight the Tathagatas 
I shall serve the universe and definitely cease (to cause harm). 
Although many beings may kick  and stamp upon my head, 
Even at the risk of dying, may I delight the Protectors of the World (by not retaliating). 
 
After confessing our past negativities, we gene rate the strong determination to please  the 
buddhas and bodhisattvas by refraining from such  negative actions again in the future. We make 
a pledge, “I promise, henceforth, to refrain from such negativities and to abandon pride, conceit, 
and arrogance towards sentient beings. Even if, in the future, they stamp on my head or kick me 
with their feet, I will not retaliate. Through such re straint, may I be able to please the buddhas.”    
(b) Thus, this shows in brief that we should respect sentient beings as well 
(6, 126) 
There is no doubt that those wi th the nature of compassion 
Regard all these beings (the same) as themselves. 
Furthermore, those who see (this Bu ddha nature) as the nature of sentient beings also see the Buddhas 
themselves; 
Why then do I not respect (sentient beings)? 
 
When the buddhas and bodhisattvas were on the path, they trained thei r minds in the method 
of exchanging themselves for othe rs. Just as we cherish ourselves more than others, the buddhas 
and bodhisattvas cherish others with the same inte nsity.  Why then do we  not see those sentient 
beings as buddhas and pay respect to them? 
 Another way of interpreting this verse is that all sentient beings possess buddha-nature, which 
means they all  have the potential to become  buddhas. We should, therefore, respect sentient 
beings in the same way we respect the buddhas. There are many ways of interpreting the third 
line: ‘ Furthermore, those who see (this Buddha na ture) as the nature of sentient beings’  We can discuss 
the meaning of this  nature in the future. 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                   CHAPTER VI - PATIENCE  
 
 
101  
Lesson 19   Chapter VI - verse 127-134 
2) Engaging the mind in the methods for accomplishing patience 
a) Arresting the causes of anger 
b) The benefits of cultivating patience 
i) A brief presentation 
ii) Explaining the benefits by means of an analogy 
1’ The meaning of the analogy in terms of benefit 
a’ Analogy 
b’ Meaning 
2’ Explaining [that the reality of it] surpasses the analogy 
iii) A condensed presentation of the types of benefit 
1’ The principal effect 
2’ The visible effects 
3’ Explaining the fully ripened effect 
i) A brief presentation  
(6, 127) 
(Pleasing living beings) delights the Tathagatas 
And perfectly accomplishes my own purpose as well. 
In addition, it dispels the pain  and misery of the universe, 
Therefore I should always practise it. 
 
By practising the many different methods for ge nerating patience with our enemies offered in 
this text, we are able to respect all sentient be ings. Our constant practice of patience is the 
supreme method for pleasing the buddhas and comp leting the collection of merit in our mental 
continua. The patience of accept ing the harm inflicted by our en emies and responding only with 
affection and respect may bring them to th e Dharma, which is the supreme means for 
eliminating their suffering. Since pleasing an d respecting sentient beings are the supreme 
methods for delighting the buddhas, accompli shing our own purposes and eliminating the 
sufferings of other living beings, we should al ways strive to perfect such conduct.    
 
ii) Explaining the benefits by means of an analogy 
1’ The meaning of the analogy in terms of benefit 
a. Analogy 
b. Meaning 
a. Analogy  
(6, 128) 
For example, should some of the king's men 
Cause harm to many people, 
Farsighted ones would not return the harm 
Even if they were able (to do so). 
 
(6, 129 ) 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                   CHAPTER VI - PATIENCE  
 
 
102  
For they see that (these men) are not alone 
But are supported by th e might of the king. 
 
When the king’s tax officials act on royal instru ctions, intelligent people, though unhappy with 
being taxed, do not harm such officials even if th ey can, because they know  these officials have 
the support and protection of the king.   
b. Meaning  
(6, 129 cd) 
Likewise, I should not underestimate 
Weak beings who cause me a little harm; 
 
(6, 130) 
For they are supported by  the guardians of hell 
And by all the Compassionate Ones. 
 
In the same way, sentient beings are supported  by the frightening hell guardians and all the 
buddhas and bodhisattvas. We are, therefore, advise d not to retaliate or harm sentient beings as 
this displeases the buddhas and bodhisattvas. Th en, their blessings do not enter our minds and 
we distance ourselves from them.  
2’ Explaining [that the reality of it] surpasses the analogy.   
(6, 130 cd)  
So, (behaving) like the su bjects of that fiery king, 
I should please all sentient beings. 
 
(6, 131) 
Even if such a king we re to become angry, 
Could he cause the pain of hell, 
Which is the fruit I would have to experience 
By displeasing sentient beings? 
 
(6,132) 
And even if such a ki ng were to be kind, 
He could not possibly grant me Buddhahood, 
Which is the fruit I would obtain 
By pleasing sentient beings. 
 The outline means that the meaning is more exalted than the analogy. Just as the king’s subjects 
have to bear with the edicts of the king, no ma tter how  absurd they may be, we are also advised 
to please the sentient beings who harm us. For, ev en if the subjects chose to rise up against the 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                   CHAPTER VI - PATIENCE  
 
 
103  
king, the most he could do was torture them, conf iscate their possessions and at the very worst, 
sentence them to death. Displeasing sentient bein gs, on the other hand,  results in our going to 
the hell realms - something that a king is incapable of doing to us.  
 If we were to please the king, at the very most , he would reward us with money and property. By 
pleasing sentient beings, however, we can attain the state of full enlightenment, which the king is 
unable to confer.   It is commonly acknowledged that pleasing or di spleasing our superiors may result in rewards of 
wealth and property or, at worst, a death senten ce. But pleasing or displeasing sentient beings 
leads us, respectively, to the attainment of the supreme bliss of full enlightenment or the 
suffering of  the hell realms. There is, therefor e, a significant difference between the analogy and 
its meaning.   
Question from Geshe-la : How can you achieve enlightenment by  pleasing sentient beings and by 
pleasing the buddhas? 
(Student’s answer not on recording.)  
 
iii) A condensed presentation of the types of benefit 
1’ The principal effect 
2’ The visible effects 
3’ Explaining the fully ripened effect 
1’ The principal effect 
(6, 133 ) 
Why do I not see 
That my future attainment of Buddhahood, 
 
Both the temporary benefit of happiness in this life and the  future attainment of buddhahood 
comes from pleasing sentient beings. Therefore, it  is appropriate to please and be patient with 
them.  
2’ The visible effects 
(6, 133 cd)  
As well as glory, renown and happiness in this very life, 
All come from pleasi ng sentient beings? 
 
When we practise patience by ac cepting the harm inflicted by ou r enemies and pleasing sentient 
beings, this results in our being well-liked, we enjoy great wealth and renown and bring others 
into our fold. In short, when we practise patien ce, we get along with people wherever we go and 
experience the happiness of this li fe. Therefore, we should always strive to make others happy.  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                   CHAPTER VI - PATIENCE  
 
 
104  
3’ Explaining the fully ripened effect 
(6, 134) 
While in cyclic existence, patience causes 
Beauty, health and renown. 
Because of these, I shall live for a very long time 
And win the extensive pleasure of  the universal Chakra Kings. 
 
The practice of patience brings about a very pleasa nt appearance, complete fa culties, long life and 
good health, fame and renown, while we are in  cyclic existence. We can also enjoy the 
possessions and happiness of the wheel- turning kings.   In summary, the principal benefit of practising patience is our future attainment of 
enlightenment; but, even in this life, we will  always experience happiness wherever we are.  
b The chapter’s name 
The name of this chapter is, “ Teaching patience .” 
 
In essence, then, why is there a need to cult ivate patience? There are 3 types of patience: 
 
(1) The patience that pays no heed to those who cause harm : It is very difficult to engage in any virtue 
with very strong anger in our minds. Unable to  accomplish our own purposes, how are to work 
for the welfare of others? Therefore, there is a need to cultivate this patience. 
 
(2) The patience of voluntarily accepting suffering : When the problems we experience are so intense 
and cause so much mental suffering, it becomes impossible to engage in virtue. We neglect our 
Dharma practice. We need to develop this kind of  patience to cope with  such  circumstances. 
 
(3) The patience that is intent on dharma : This is the antidote for those whose interest in the 
Dharma and virtue is weak or th ose who give up their practice wh en they encounter the slightest 
difficulty, thinking, “I don’t want to study this text  because it’s so difficult,” or “I’m not going to 
follow karma because it’s so difficult.” 
 Whenever we experience problems or unhappiness and our minds are no longer able to focus on 
our Dharma practice, it is important to investigat e what is causing these situations and work on 
cultivating  the three types of patience.  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                   CHAPTER VII - JOYOUS EFFORT  
 
 
105  
The Seventh Chapter: Teaching Joyous Effort  
Lesson 20   Chapter VII - verse 1-2 
Whether we are prostrating or reciting “Om Mani Padme Hum,” it is our responsibility to make 
this beneficial for our minds by doing this happily  and willingly from our hearts. It is a mistake 
to think that studying or listening to the teac hings is purely to accumulate information and 
knowledge, leaving our hearts and minds untouched.  
 We have to do our own Dharma practice. We sh ould mind our own instead of other people’s 
business, focus on our practice and check our prog ress to see how far we have been able to apply 
what we have learnt. Dharma should be used to check up on ourselves, not others. It is not hard to find examples of good practitioners. When we look at the examples set by the holy beings, we 
should be inspired to strive and pray to be like them one day.  
 We have now reached the chapter on joyous effort  or joyous perseverance. As mentioned before, 
the first three chapters of this te xt relate to generating bodhici tta, the next three chapters show 
how to prevent the bodhicitta generated from degenerating and the following three chapters 
(joyous effort, concentration and wisdom) deal with  how to increase the bodhicitta that has not 
degenerated. 
3. Explaining the way to train in the remaining four perfections 
A. The way to train in patience 
B The way to train in joyous effort 
a Explaining the chapter’s material 
1) Imploring one in the need to undertake joyous effort 
a) The actual 
b) Identifying joyous effort 
2) How to undertake joyous effort 
b The chapter’s name  
C. The way to train in the absorptions included in the common and uncommon calm 
abidings D. The way to train in wisdom - the nature of insight 
a) The actual 
(7,1) 
Having patience, I should develop enthusiasm; 
For Awakening will dwell only in  those who exert themselves. 
Just as there is no movement without wind, 
So merit does not occur without enthusiasm. 
 
Having patience, I should develop enthusiasm  accords with the Ornament for the Mahayana Sutras by 
Maitreya which states that the latter perf ections depend on the former ones.  
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                   CHAPTER VII - JOYOUS EFFORT  
 
 
106  
The first perfection is the perfec tion of generosity, the antidote to attachment. As our generosity 
increases, our attachment will subside, making  it easier for us to practice ethics.  
 
There are 3 kinds of ethics, one of which is refraining from committing negative actions. 
Supported by such restraint, it is easier  for us to practice patience as well.  
 There are different kinds of patience: the patience of disregarding harm done to you the patience of voluntarily accepting suffering the patience that is intent on dharma Cultivating these kinds of patience will make it easier for us to develop joyous effort.  
 In order to fully develop our joyous effort, our practice of patience must be very stable. Such stability comes from the preceding pr actice of ethics. In order to ha ve strong ethics, we must have 
minimal or no attachment.  We overcome our attachment to our wealth and possessions by 
giving them away through our practice of generosity.   Those who want to achieve full enlightenment quickl y need to develop joyous effort on the basis 
of developing the patience of disregarding ha rm done to them and being able to endure 
difficulties. Enlightenment exists and can be achi eved. With joyous effort , enlightenment is not 
too far away and within our grasp.    The flame of the butter lamp will not flicker wh en there is no wind around. Without joyous 
effort, we will not accumulate the collections of merit and wisdom. Conversely, when there is 
wind, the flame will flicker. In the same w ay, with joyous effort, we can complete our 
accumulations of merit and wisdom and achieve enlightenment. This verse is, therefore, 
imploring us to develop joyous effort.  
b) Identifying joyous effort 
(7, 2) 
What is enthusiasm? It is find ing joy in what is wholesome. 
 
Joyous effort is the mind that delights in virtue. The effort we put into non-virtuous activities or 
activities that are neutral by nature is not joyous  effort. The virtuous activities engaged in by our 
bodies and speech are also not considered joyo us effort. We usually think that someone who 
does a lot of prayers, practices and prostrations  and works very hard at their commitments, as 
having a lot of joyous effort. But this is not joyous effort. It is like giving the name of the cause to 
the result.   In the Lamrim Chenmo, the division of joyous effort has three parts: 1. Armour-like joyous effort 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                   CHAPTER VII - JOYOUS EFFORT  
 
 
107  
2. Joyous effort of gathering virtue  
3. Joyous effort of acting for the welfare of living beings  
The Ornament for the Mahayana Sutras classifi es four types of joyous effort while the 
Compendium of Knowledge refers to five types of joyous effort.  
 The armour-like joyous effort is ak in to soldiers putting on armour  for protection before going to 
war and refers to generating determination before we engage in any virtuous activity.   When engaged in virtuous activities, we then apply the joyous effort of gathering virtue, 
developing and maintaining delight, happiness in and the sense of enthusiasm for those 
activities.   Irreversible joyous effort is the mind that deli ghts in virtue and does not get disheartened or 
disturbed regardless of whatever conditions may aris e when engaged in such virtue.  This kind of 
joyous effort is essential for bringing the virtuous activity to completion.  
 Question from student:  What is the difference between joyous effort and the patience that is 
intent on dharma? Answer: They are different entities. Joyous effort is the mind that delights in virtue, while the 
patience that is intent on dharma remains un disturbed by any hardships that may arise.  
 For example, one is cultivating the patience that is intent on dharma. Reflecting on the law of 
cause and effect, one concludes that  that it is inappropriate to re taliate when one is harmed. The 
mind is thus undisturbed by whatever cond ition one faces, but that mind may not be 
enthusiastic about the situation.   
Then, there is the joyous effort of non-complacenc y, which is a mind that delights in virtue and 
is not satisfied with whatever has been achieved  but always aims for something higher, like the 
way a hungry yak eats grass. 
34  
 
In order to bring our practice to completion, we need to have these four kinds of joyous effort. 
 
2) How to undertake joyous effort 
a) Abandoning that which is incongruous with joyous effort 
i) Identifying that class of things that are incongruous [with joyous effort] 
ii) How to abandon those 
                                              
34 The supreme beings of the past said that one should prac tise like a hungry yak grazing. As a yak tugs at one 
clump of grass, its eye is already fixed on the next. In the same way, before you finish one Dharma practice, tell 
yourself that as soon as you have finished your present practice you will start this or that new practice. ( The Words 
of My Perfect Teacher  by Patrul Rinpoche, pg 246)  
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                   CHAPTER VII - JOYOUS EFFORT  
 
 
108  
b) Increasing the strength of joyous effort - the antidote 
i) Identifying that class of things that are incongruous [with joyous effort] 
(7, 2 cd) 
Its opposing factors are explained 
As laziness, attraction to what is harmful 
And despising oneself out of despondency. 
 
There are three forms of laziness: the laziness that relishes idleness, the laziness th at clings to unwholesome activities , and the 
laziness that is disheartened about virtue.   The first is the laziness that delights in inacti vity, deriving pleasure in  doing nothing, making 
one’s body and mind unserviceable for any virt uous activities. The laziness that clings to 
unwholesome activities refers to our attraction to non-virtuous activities such as singing and 
dancing, etc. The laziness that is disheartened ab out virtue refers to our disinterest in virtue, 
discouraging oneself by thinking, “I can’t do this. It is too difficult and beyond me.”  
 These are the three opposing factors to joyous effo rt and we must overcome them in order to be 
able to apply joyous effort in ou r pursuit of full enlightenment.  
Lesson 21   Chapter VII - verse 2-10 
And please remain stable, without separa tion from my body, speech, and mind, 
 until I attain enlightenment 
 
This is an important prayer from the Lama Tsongkhapa guru yoga  practice that we have just recited. 
It is important for us to pray an d think that Lama Tsongkhapa is at our hearts all the time. It 
makes a definite difference to our sense of his taki ng care of us in all our future lives by being 
able to meet his teachings again. 
 
Meditating on the great Lama Tsongkhapa at our hearts and remaining there inseparably is also 
one of the best ways of doing the protection wheel  meditation to protect ourselves  from spirit 
harms and the different kinds of obstacles.  We benefit from visualising, with faith, Lama Ts ongkhapa abiding at our hearts as he embodies 
the protectors of the three lineages: Chenrezig,  Manjushri and Vajrapani. This visualisation  
helps to develop a good heart since Lama Tsongk hapa is inseparable from Chenrezig. We also 
develop our wisdom because Lama Tsongkhapa is  the manifestation of Manjushri and since he 
also embodies Vajrapani, it helps us to overcome our problems and obstacles. So if we do this 
practice with faith, we enjoy all these benefits . Furthermore, it will help us to meet Lama 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                   CHAPTER VII - JOYOUS EFFORT  
 
 
109  
Tsongkhapa’s teachings again in all our future lives. 
 
There is also a great difference when we meditate  on guru devotion conjoined with entrusting 
ourselves to  Lama Tsongkhapa abiding at ou r hearts. This is because Lama Tsongkhapa, 
embodying the protectors of the three lineages, is  the definitive spiritual master. Relying on him 
as our protector, with strong faith and with th e determination to accomplish all his wishes and 
advice, he becomes our ultimate object  of refuge.   
 There are many different kinds of prayers we can do on top of the many commitments we may 
have; it will be very beneficial if  we can do this visualisation with this short practice of Lama Tsongkhapa Guru Yoga.  We always emphasise the importance of the motiva tion in whatever we do, such as coming to  
listen to the teachings. The motivation must be correct and pure. Otherwise, we will only 
encounter problems and sufferings in the future. For example, some people think, “I need to 
come to class and take exams because I need to gi ve face to Geshe-la. I need to support him to 
make him look good.” This is a completely  wrong motivation.  I don’t need any support. When 
we listen to the teachings or practise the Dhar ma, we are practising the Dharma for ourselves, 
aren’t we? From my side, when there are students, I’ll teach. When there are no students, I won’t 
teach. It makes no difference to me at all. But if you have this kind of wrong motivation, then 
you are the ones who  end up with mental unhappiness.  
 
Then there are those who rely on a teacher with the thought, “If I rely on this teacher, he will 
like me, be close to me and show me affection an d care.” When one relies on a teacher with that 
kind of motivation and the care and affection do not materialise, again that leads to the mind 
feeling unhappy and dissatisfied. Then one gives up and criticises the teacher. Such reliance on a 
teacher is completely wrong and mistaken. Why do  these things happen? Because, from the very 
start, the motivation was wrong.  
 The whole point of relying on a teacher is not to seek his attention but to learn how to travel on 
the path from now until one achieves full enligh tenment, to build the proper foundation from 
the very beginning in order to be able to achieve happiness for one’s future lives. We rely on a teacher to learn the Buddha’s teachi ngs from him and to be able to  generate the realisations of 
the path. That should be our motivation. If the teacher is able to give us what we need, he helps 
us accomplish those goals. Since we benefit so mu ch from our relationship with him, it is most 
unlikely that we will lose faith in him. If the te acher is not able to offer us the Buddha’s teachings 
and help us on the path, then he is not really a teacher, right? 
 In essence, what I am saying is that whatever we do,  make sure our  motivation is correct and pure. Otherwise, even though, externally, our ac tions seem correct and positive, we will meet 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                   CHAPTER VII - JOYOUS EFFORT  
 
 
110  
with difficulties and problems at the end. 
 
2) How to undertake joyous effort 
a) Abandoning that which is incongruous with joyous effort 
i) Identifying that class of things that are incongruous [with joyous effort] 
ii) How to abandon those 
1’ Abandoning the laziness that relishes the taste of idleness  
a’ Examining the causes of laziness and abandoning them  
b’ How to abandon them 
2’ Abandoning the laziness that clings to unwholesome (ignoble) activities  
3’ Abandoning the laziness that is disheartened about virtue 
b) Increasing the strength of joyous effort- the antidote 
a’ Examining the causes of laziness and abandoning them  
(7, 3) 
Because of attachment to the pleasurable taste of idleness, 
Because of craving for sleep 
And because of having no disillusion wi th the misery of cyclic existence, 
Laziness grows very strong. 
 
In order to abandon laziness, we first have to iden tify its causes, one of wh ich is the, “attachment 
to the pleasurable taste of idleness.” This is th e attachment to the pleasure of doing nothing at 
all, of simply ‘spacing out.’ Because of the atta chment to this form of laziness, we spend days, 
weeks, our entire lives, doing nothing. There is no  j o y o u s  e f f o r t  s i n c e  w e  h a v e  n o  i n t e r e s t  i n   
engaging in virtue.   Then there is the craving for sleep, especially the attachment to comfortable beds or blankets, 
which obstructs the mind that wishes to engage  in virtue, rather than the sleep itself.  
 Attachment to these two causes of  laziness, treating them as if they are our main goals in life, 
gives rise to a lack of disenchantment with cy clic existence, which, in turn, becomes another 
cause of laziness. Such a lack of disenchantme nt with cyclic existence, together with the 
attachment to the pleasurable taste of idleness an d craving for sleep, act as the causes for laziness 
to grow.
35  
 
a’ Examining the causes of laziness and abandoning them  
b’ How to abandon them 
1" Abandoning laziness by reflecting on the disadvantages of it in this life 
a" Explaining by means of an analogy that death will soon cause [this body] to perish 
(1) It is clear to see that death causes [this body and life] to perish 
                                              
35 Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds  says: “Laziness arises from craving based upon indolence, enjoyment of pleasure, 
and sleep; and from a lack of disenchantment with the suffer ing of cyclic existence.” Some assert that the first two 
lines indicate the form that lazine ss takes rather than its causes. ( Lamrim Chenmo , Vol. 2, pg. 187)  
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                   CHAPTER VII - JOYOUS EFFORT  
 
 
111  
(2) Explaining that by means of an analogy 
b" As even you yourself are under the dominion of death, it is inappropriate to 
carry on as if you had time 
c" You will be tormented by suffering if you do not make effort in virtue 
2" Abandoning laziness by reflecting on the disadvantages of it in future lives  
(1) It is clear to see that death causes [this body and life] to perish 
(7, 4) 
Enmeshed in the snare of disturbing conceptions, 
I have entered the snare of birth. 
Why am I still not aware 
That I live in the mouth of the Lord of Death? 
 
This is the antidote for the first kind of laziness, the laziness that  is attached to the pleasurable 
taste of idleness. Fishermen trap fish by luring th em into the net. In the same way, our afflictions 
have lured us into the snare of cy clic existence, which is made up of the 3 realms. Once the fish 
are in the net, it is definite th at they will die. Similarly, on ce we enter the snare of cyclic 
existence, death is certain. We are definitely go ing to enter the mouth of the Lord of Death. Why 
are we not afraid? Understanding this, we should engage in virtue.  
 
These verses are explained in terms of analog ies in the outlines of other commentaries but 
Gyaltsab Je explains them in relation to our di rect daily experience. In this life, death will 
definitely come. Many people died in the past. Ma ny more are dying in the present. Seeing death 
directly in this way, why are we not afraid? 
 What is it that prevents us from engaging in vi rtue? It is the laziness that relishes the taste of 
idleness; the laziness that is attached to the plea sure that comes from doing nothing. The way to 
stop this particular form of laziness is to meditate on death and impermanence. 
(2) Explaining that by means of an analogy 
(7, 5) 
Do I not see 
That he is systematically slaughtering my species? 
Whoever remains soundly asleep 
(Surely behaves) like a buffalo with a butcher 
 We have seen many deaths, yet we remain attrac ted to the pleasurable taste of idleness and sleep 
without engaging in virtue. Such  behaviour is like ned to a buffalo that lives near a butcher. Even 
as they see other buffalos being slaughtered by the butcher, they still roam around grazing happily 
and enjoying sleeping. We consider ourselves supe rior to animals but on closer examination, we 
are no better than buffalos in this respect.   
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                   CHAPTER VII - JOYOUS EFFORT  
 
 
112  
In fact, we are even more foolish than buffalos.   They are blameless because they do not know 
the Dharma and have no capacity to critically  analyse issues, whereas we have both Dharma 
knowledge and critical ability yet we still behave like them.  
 S u c h  a d v i c e  s h o u l d  b e  u s e d  t o  m o v e  o u r  m i n d s  t o w a r d s  e n g a g i n g  i n  v i r t u e .  W h e t h e r  t h i s  happens or not depends on whether we reflect on these points.  If we are happy remaining more 
foolish than buffalos, we can carry on as before. But for those of us who accept past and future 
lives and wish to do well in our future rebirths, it is our responsibility to motivate ourselves to engage in virtue by reflecting on the advice given in this text. The choice is ours.   
b" As even you yourself are under the dominion of death, it is inappropriate to carry on as if you 
had time 
(1) As you yourself are under the dominion of the lord of death, you should not be lazy 
(2) As death will come swiftly, make effort in virtue 
(3) The time of death is no time to abandon laziness 
(4) As death will come suddenly without your having been able to do all that you want, 
you should not be lazy 
(1) As you yourself are under the dominion of the lord of death, you should not be lazy 
(7, 6) 
When having blocked off every (escape) route, 
The Lord of Death is look ing (for someone to kill), 
How can I enjoy eating? 
And likewise, how can I enjoy sleep? 
 Imagine that we are travelling along a road. All other routes are blocked and we have no 
alternative other than this road. Somewhere along this road, our enemy is waiting in ambush to 
kill us.  In the same way, death closes all other roads and we have no choice but to walk towards death. The Lord of Death can take us at any time. This being so, it is completely inappropriate to 
spend our lives  in distractions such as eating, sl eep, etc. This outline is referring to us now and 
our present situation.    As long as we take rebirth in any of the three realms, under the power of karma and afflictions, 
death is certain.  Accumulating negative karma leads us to a lower realm. When we accumulate 
virtue, we go to a happy realm or can even achi eve liberation and enlightenment. Therefore, we 
must engage in virtue before death overcomes us.    
(2) As death will come swiftly, make effort in virtue 
(7, 7)   
For as long as death is actually approaching 
Then I shall accumulate merits; 
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                   CHAPTER VII - JOYOUS EFFORT  
 
 
113  
Understanding that death is certain, we may still th ink, however, “I still have some time. I can do 
it later.” This is not true, because death can su ddenly come.  Before that happens, we have to 
ensure that we have engaged in some virtue. Ther e are many causes of death – sicknesses, spirit 
harms and natural disasters, even the  danger of  nuclear weapons. It is uncertain when these 
conditions will occur but it shows th at death can happen very quickly.   
(3) The time of death is no time to abandon laziness 
(7, 7 cd) 
Even if I then put a stop to laziness, 
What will be the use? That is not the time! 
 
When we are about to die, we will experience gr eat discomfort. Even if someone gives us food 
and drink, we will be unable to swallow it.  If the thought of engaging in virtue arises in us then, 
we won’t be able to do anything about it as it will be too late. So we must practise virtue before 
death overcomes us.  
(4) As death will come suddenly without your having been able to do all that you want, you 
should not be lazy 
(7, 8) 
When this has not been done , when this is being done 
And when this is only half finished, 
Suddenly the Lord of Death will come. 
And the thought will occur, "Oh no, I am done for!" 
 
We spend our whole life thinking, “I’m going to  start on this project.” When the project is 
underway death suddenly comes, not waiting for us to finish our project.  Death possesses great 
independence and power as it can come at any time. When the Lord of Death suddenly appears, 
we have so much regret and remorse, thinking, “I  couldn’t do this. I couldn’t finish that.”  
 As mentioned in the Lamrim, death is certain and the time of death is uncertain. It can come 
suddenly, without fanfare or warning. Because of this, we have to start on virtue right now. 
When we wake up in the morning, it is good to remind ourselves of this. By reflecting on death 
and impermanence, we persuade our minds to put aside some time for  engaging in virtue.  
c" You will be tormented by suffering if you do not make effort in virtue 
(1) At the time of death, you will be tormented with sorrow 
(2) If you do not pursue virtue from this mome nt forward, you will not accomplish what is 
necessary 
(1) At the time of death, you will be tormented with sorrow 
(7, 9) 
Their faces flowing with tears 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                   CHAPTER VII - JOYOUS EFFORT  
 
 
114  
And their eyes red and swollen with sorrow, 
My relatives will finally lose hope, 
And I shall behold the vision of the messengers of death. 
 
At the time of death, we experience great sorrow.  Surrounded by our loved ones and relatives, we 
realise that we cannot bring them with us. Thei r eyes are red and swollen with tears as they 
realise we are dying. We may also experience the fearful karmic appearance of the Lord of Death 
or sometimes of our relatives and  friends re gardless of whether we like it or not.  
(2) If you do not pursue virtue from this moment forward, you will not accomplish what is 
necessary 
(7, 10) 
Tormented by the memory of my wrongdoing, 
And hearing the sounds of hell, 
In terror, I shall clothe my body in excrement. 
What virtue can I do in  such a delirious state? 
 
At the time of death, we may also be tormented by  the memories of our past  negative actions. If 
w e  a r e  g o i n g  t o  b e  r e b o r n  i n  t h e  h e l l s ,  w e  m a y  s t a r t  t o  h e a r  t h e  c r i e s  o f  t h e  h e l l  b e i n g s  undergoing their sufferings there. We will be so terrified that we will lose control of our minds 
and bodily functions. Hence, I shall clothe my body in excrement.  At this point, it will be too late to 
do anything at all. Therefore, while we still have  control over our lives and the choice to engage 
in virtue, we should start straightaway.  
Lesson 22   Chapter VII - verse 11-18 
The foundation of all good qualitie s is the kind and venerable guru; 
Correct devotion to him is the root of the path, 
By clearly seeing this and applying great effort, 
Please bless me to rely upon him with great respect. 
 
The first verse of The Foundation of All Good Qualities  composed by Lama Tsongkhapa stated that 
we must put effort into our practice of guru devotion, which is, the root of the path . This  shows 
that correct devotion to the guru  is the root of the entire path  to enlightenment. Recognising 
this, we  rely properly on the spiritual master, in both thought and action, and generate faith and 
respect towards him.  
 The Lamrim stated that we should first investig ate and check if the prospective spiritual master 
possesses the requisite qualities to lead us alon g the path to enlightenment, whether they can 
teach and help us develop the realisations of the path in our mental continua. It is important to 
do this. Having decided to pursue a Dharma connection with that gu ru, from that point 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                   CHAPTER VII - JOYOUS EFFORT  
 
 
115  
onwards, it is our responsibility to correctly de vote ourselves to him in both thought and action. 
Incorrect devotion to the guru brings many proble ms in this life. Needless to say, it will also 
bring  problems and sufferings in future lives. If we practise guru devotion correctly, we will find 
success in whatever we do in this life. Our activiti es to benefit others will also increase. Kyabje 
Lama Zopa Rinpoche always points out that wh ether lamas and geshes are successful in their 
Dharma careers to benefit sentient beings and the teachings depends on how well they devote 
themselves to their gurus.  
 I will give my own example. I believe I may have  told you this story before but I am not sure. 
When I was studying in Sera, I had many teachers  there.  I was around 25 or 26 years old at the 
time. I received daily teachings from this one specific teacher, except on Tuesdays because 
Tuesday was our day off. One day, I had to pass a message and some offerings to my teacher.  
When I arrived at his rooms, he was occupied with  someone else so I could not go in.  I waited 
outside for almost an hour. My teacher was quit e upset with me because he was conveying some 
secret instructions to this other student. I did not hear anything since I was outside his door. I 
knew he was with someone and I thought that I sh ould wait till the other person came out before 
I went in to pass the message and the offerings to him. After an hour, he shouted loudly at me 
from inside, “Hey!” So, I opened the door and we nt inside. He asked me, “Why are you listening 
to all my secrets?” He was very upset with me an d proceeded to scold me for the next five to ten 
minutes. At that time, I was quite upset and an gry because I thought I had not done anything 
wrong, especially since I had stood outside for almo st an hour. I placed the offerings on his table 
and left. I went back to my room. I was quite upse t and thinking of what to do. What is the best 
thing for me to do now? Should I give up this teacher or go back and apologise? I had only two choices. Fortunately, after deliberating for over two hours, I decided that I did not want to give 
up my teacher. I thought, “This teacher has taug ht me for seven years so far and I have many 
more years to go before I can complete my stud ies.” So, after some time, I went to buy some 
biscuits and food. Still, I did not want to apologise because it was not my fault and I was not eavesdropping at all. I had no intention to harm  him and yet he still shouted at me. I could not 
accept that kind of shouting. So I could not say so rry and I did not say sorry in the end. I went to 
my teacher’s room and pretended that I was not angry. He did not say anything. I offered the 
fruit and asked some Dharma questions.   This only happened to me once . The problem was I thought that  I had not made any mistake, 
but just because I was right, in this situation, it would still have been inappropriate for me to give 
up my teacher. I am fortunate to be able to thin k like this. This is my personal experience. That 
was the only time in my life that I was angry wi th my teacher, thinking that I was right and he 
was wrong.   Having such thoughts can lead to us abandoning  our teachers. We need to remember how much 
they benefit us, how much they teach us. This happens in Singapore also. Sometimes, students 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                   CHAPTER VII - JOYOUS EFFORT  
 
 
116  
forget the benefits they have re ceived from their teachers. Just like my example, due to a small 
misunderstanding, they get angry with th eir teachers, whom they then give up. 
 
In the end, who loses out? When I think about my situation, that teacher would have been fine 
because he had many students; he would have no t lost anything by not teaching me. For me, 
though, it would have meant a big difference. It  is possible for this to happen to anybody. 
Generally, when you rely on a teacher, you have to think carefully whethe r you want to give him 
up or not. If we do, in the end, we lose out.  As mentioned in the Lamrim, there would be no 
success not only in this life bu t also in our future lives.  
 I  h a v e  v e r y  s t r o n g  d e v o t i o n  t o  t h a t  p a r t i c u l a r  t e a c h e r .  W h e n e v e r  h e  t a u g h t  a  p h i l o s o p h y  t e x t ,  there would be some passages that I’d try to figure  out but I wouldn’t be able to get the answer. 
Once I listened to him giving the correct answe r, the feeling would be different. There’d be a 
strong feeling – of “How come he understood this  logic and I could not?”  Then there is faith. 
Every time I learnt something new from him, the st ronger my devotion to that guru became. This 
is just my personal experience.  Jealousy can also cause problems in student-teac her relationships. I did not have such problems. 
My teacher had many students. Many of us helped and served him. From my side, I was never jealous with regard to the other students who were serving him. There were times when my 
teacher liked certain students better and others no t so much. I am the kind  of student that does 
not talk very much to my teacher,  but I have never felt jealous of  my fellow students. I was only 
angry once at my teacher in that incident I mentioned earlier. That was a big mistake.  
 We all have anger since we have not perfecte d our patience. We make  mistakes as do our 
teachers but it does not matter wh o made the mistake. We need to think very carefully. That is 
the most important point.   Therefore, it is important that once a Dharma connection is made, we must rely correctly on our guru. The greater our faith in our guru, the grea ter will be the benefit  derived from that 
relationship, especially when we receive teachings from him. If we have great faith in him, then 
his teachings will benefit us greatly even though th e words he uses are the same as that of another 
teacher giving the same teaching . Without such faith, his teachi ngs will not benefit us as much 
because we will start to think, “I have heard this teaching before.” 
 In the section in the Lamrim on ho w to listen to the teachings and the attitudes to be adopted, it 
mentions the importance of respect for the teachi ngs and the teacher. The listener is encouraged 
to cultivate the attitude that the teacher  giving the teaching is the Buddha himself. This does not 
mean, in reality, that the teacher is necessarily  a buddha nor is t here a need for him  to be a 
buddha.  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                   CHAPTER VII - JOYOUS EFFORT  
 
 
117  
 
It is only when we listen to the teachings with su ch a positive attitude that  we benefit from the 
teachings. Therefore, the motivati ons for both teaching and listenin g to the teachings have to be 
pure - that we are engaging in such activities in order to subdue our own minds. Otherwise, the 
mind degenerates and becomes more stubborn. That which is supposed to be medicine becomes 
poison. Joyful at hearing the teachings, faith arises in our minds when we see how logical, 
profound and extensive the teachings are. Apprecia ting these qualities of the Buddha’s teachings, 
faith will also arise towards the Buddha himsel f, who founded and taught the entire Dharma. 
We then think, “How amazing and inconceivable the Buddha is.” This also helps us to develop 
faith in our guru who explains and actualises the teachings in his practice.   
2) How to undertake joyous effort 
a) Abandoning that which is incongruous with joyous effort  
i) Identifying that class of things that are incongruous [with joyous effort] 
ii) How to abandon those 
1’ Abandoning the laziness that relishes the taste of idleness  
a’ Examining the causes of laziness and abandoning them  
b’ How to abandon them 
1" Abandoning laziness by reflecting on the disadvantages of it in this life 
2" Abandoning laziness by reflecting on the disadvantages of it in future 
lives 
a" Suffering is certain to arise 
b" It will be difficult to bear 
c" It is contradictory to want happiness yet not pursue virtue 
d" Imploring one to pursue the methods by which one may be 
liberated from suffering  
2’ Abandoning the laziness that clings to unwholesome (ignoble) activities  
3’ Abandoning the laziness that is disheartened about virtue 
b) Increasing the strength of joyous effort- the antidote 
a" Suffering is certain to arise 
(7, 11) 
If even in this life I shall be gripped with fear 
Like that of a live fish being rolled (in hot sand), 
Why even mention the unbe arable agonies of hell 
That will result from my unwholesome deeds? 
 
The suffering that we may have to experience at the time of death is likened here to a live fish left 
on the hot sand. This is only the suffering at the time of our death. We also accumulated so 
much negative karma in our past lives, which ca n only lead to rebirth in the hot hells. Once 
there, we will have to undergo the suffering of  being burnt, boiled, fried, etc. These are the 
definite consequences of our negative karma. Wh y are we not afraid now? This being so, while 
we still have the time, we should strive in  virtue instead of idling and being lazy.  
b" It will be difficult to bear 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                   CHAPTER VII - JOYOUS EFFORT  
 
 
118  
(7, 12) 
How can I remain at ease like this, 
When I have committed the actions (that will bear fruit) 
In my delicate infant's body encountering boiling acids 
In the hell of tremendous heat? 
 
We accumulated so many negative actions in our past  lives. In this life, we continue to spend our 
time completely absorbed in the pleasures of th e many distractions around us, creating causes 
that will only lead us to the he ll realms where vats of molten iron  and acids await us. Once there, 
our suffering will be intensified because our skin wi ll be as delicate as a baby’s. Therefore, while 
we still have time, we should stop laziness and engage in virtue.  
c" It is contradictory to want happiness yet not pursue virtue 
(7, 13) 
Much harm befalls those with little forbearance 
And those who want results wi thout making any effort. 
While clasped by death, they  shall cry like the gods, 
"Oh no, I am overcome by misery!" 
 We want happiness but we do not create its caus e s .  W e  w a n t  t o  b e  l e a r n e d ,  g a i n  d i f f e r e n t  
attainments and be born in a pure land, yet we do not create the  causes for this to happen. 
Those who have a low threshold for pain and su ffering often find themselves in trouble and 
suffer even more.   We will definitely die once we are reborn in any of the 3 realms. Yet we behave like desire realm gods, completely distracted by pleasures. We do not remember death and impermanence, 
thinking we are immortal and spending our entire lives  accumulating only negative karma. Such 
behaviour can only lead to problems and sufferings in this life and future lives. Therefore, it is appropriate to remember death and impermanence  at all times and to strive in virtue.  
d" Imploring one to pursue the methods by which one may be liberated from suffering 
(7, 14) 
Relying upon the boat of a human (body), 
Free yourself from the great river of pain! 
As it is hard to fi nd this boat again, 
This is no time for sleep, you fool. 
 On the basis of the human life of leisure and o pportunity that we have obtained now, we can 
free ourselves from the river of suffering. If we let the boat leave without boarding it, it will take a 
long time for it to come back. Likewise, it is extremely difficult to find such a human life of 
leisure and opportunity again in th e next life, because the causes fo r attaining it are so rare. As 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                   CHAPTER VII - JOYOUS EFFORT  
 
 
119  
we are not creating the causes for such  a rebirth, it will not come again: As it is hard to find this 
boat again, / This is no time for sleep, you fool. Therefore, while all the conditions for practising the 
Dharma are present, we must trai n in the paths of the person of small, medium or great capacity, 
(according to our abilities) and free ourselves from the river of suffering.  
 T h e  D h a r m a  s h o u l d  b e  u s e d  t o  m o v e  o u r  m i n d s  to strive for virtue at times when we are 
distracted by non-virtuous activities. We mu st use the Dharma to benefit our own minds, 
checking to see whether our mental states are impr oving or not, rather than  using it to check on 
the progress of others, which is none of our business!
36 
 
Verses 3-14 contain the advice for overcoming the laziness that relishes the taste of idleness. In 
summary, reflect on:   
• The great purpose that can be achieved with this human life of leisure and opportunity, 
which can bring us across the river of suffering;  
• How difficult it will be to achieve such a rebirth again;  
• How death is certain.   
Meditating on these points will stop this fo rm of laziness and move our minds to engage 
wholeheartedly in virtue.   
 
2) How to undertake joyous effort 
a) Abandoning that which is incongruous with joyous effort  
i) Identifying that class of things that are incongruous [with joyous effort] 
ii) How to abandon those 
1’ Abandoning the laziness that relishes the taste of idleness  
2’ Abandoning the laziness that clings to unwholesome activities  3’ Abandoning the laziness that is disheartened about virtue 
b) Increasing the strength of joyous effort- the antidote 
2’. Abandoning the laziness that clings to unwholesome activities  
(7, 15) 
Having rejected the supreme joy of the sacred Dharma, 
Which is a boundless source of delight, 
Why am I distracted by the causes for pain? 
Why do I enjoy frivolous amusements and the like? 
 
The Dharma is the source of endle ss joy in this life and future li ves, but we do not practise it. 
                                              
36 The achievement of the final goal, ce rtain goodness, is spoken of in the Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds:  
“Relying on the boat of the human body, free yourself from  the great river of suffering.” As Shantideva says, you 
must rely on a life in a happy realm – exemplified in  the verse by the human body – and cross the ocean of 
existence, reaching omniscience. Moreover, you must pass successively through many  lifetimes. Consequently, 
ethical discipline – the pre-eminent cause of achieving a body in a happy realm – is the root of the path. ( Lamrim 
Chenmo,  Vol. 2, pg. 262)  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                   CHAPTER VII - JOYOUS EFFORT  
 
 
120  
Instead, we are distracted by those frivolous am usements, which are only the sources of suffering. 
Why do we enjoy such pleasures? It is incorrect to be attached to them because they are only the 
source of pain and suffering, while it is appropriat e to strive in the Dharma as it is the source of 
boundless happiness in this and all future lives. 
 
3’. Abandoning the laziness that is disheartened about virtue 
a’ Instructions on making effort in the antidote to being disheartened  
b’ How the scriptures teach the way to put the antidote into practice  
c’ If one makes effort, laziness will be arre sted and one will be capable of accomplishing 
enlightenment 
a’ Instructions on making effort in the antidote to being disheartened  
(7, 16) 
Without indulging in despondency,  I should gather the supports  
(for enthusiasm) 
And earnestly take control of myself. 
(Then by seeing) the equality  between self and others, 
I should practise exchanging self for others. 
 Being disheartened is a form of laziness. It is th e mind that thinks, “How can I ever practise the 
Dharma. I can’t do it.”  An analogy was used earlier for joyous effort.  Be fore going into battle, the generals put on their 
armour and ensure that all the necessary preparat ions have been completed. During the battle, 
they do not turn back regardless of whatever hardships they may encounter. Even when the 
enemy is defeated, they do not sit idly by but continue to be alert,  watching to see if the enemy is 
reassembling and returning again to challenge them.   Applying this to the training of the bodhisattvas, prior to engaging in the practice of virtue, they 
uplift their minds and generate very strong dete rmination. Then they strive to gather the two 
collections. When practising,  they utilise both mindfulness and vigilance.  T h e y  s t r i v e  t o  g a i n  
complete control over their bodies, speech, and mi nd to make them  serviceable in their pursuit 
of virtue. They visualise exchanging themselves for others. We can also apply these 4 types of 
joyous efforts in order to strive in virtue.   
b’ How the scriptures teach the way to put the antidote into practice  
(7,17) 
I should never indulge in despondency by entertaining such thoughts as, 
"How shall I ever awaken?" 
For the Tathagatas who speak what is true 
Have uttered this truth: 
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                   CHAPTER VII - JOYOUS EFFORT  
 
 
121  
(7, 18) 
"If they develop the strength of their exertion, 
Even those who are flies, mosquitoes, bees and insects 
Will win the unsurpassable Awakening, 
Which is so hard to find." 37 
 
This is the advice for stopping the discouragement that thinks, “I  can’t do this.” We may think, 
“The Buddha was an exceptionally capable pers on who had joyous effort and had accumulated 
the two collections over 3 great countless eons and achieved enlightenment. I’m incapable of 
such a feat.” We s hould never think like this . Such dis couragement is a form of laziness. The 
Buddha said that even vultures, dogs , insects, etc. can attain enligh tenment, so we should rely on 
joyous effort.  
 
I have linked this outline to verse 17 alone. It seems all right to include verse 18 though I am not 
100%  sure of this.    
 
                                              
37 Root text footnote. pg 173;  Suba hupariprccha Sutra, Thog p.136: ‘F urthermore the Bodhisattva should 
perfectly train himself in the followin g  w a y :  H e  s h o u l d  c o n s i d e r  t h a t  i f  those who are now lions, tigers, dogs, 
jackals, vultures, storks, crows, owls, insects, bees and mosquitoes will (in the future) awaken to the unsurpassable 
Enlightenment; why, while I am a human being, should I degenerate the enthusiasm in attaining Enlightenment 
even at the cost of my life?. 
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                   CHAPTER VII - JOYOUS EFFORT  
 
 
122  
Lesson 23   Chapter VII - verse 19-27 
The Lamrim texts teach that the wh ole purpose of explaining and listening to the teachings is to 
subdue our own minds, in order to  benefit othe rs. This is the motivation we should set for 
attending this session, thinking, “For the sake of  subduing my own mind, I am listening to these 
teachings.” 
 We studied the antidotes to the first two kinds of laziness: (1) the laziness that relishes the taste 
of idleness and (2) the laziness that  clings to ignoble activities. 
 Even if we are able to overcome these two form s of laziness and the wish to practise Dharma 
arises in our minds, that wish may be impaired by  the feeling of despondenc y, “I wish to practise 
the Dharma but I don’t have the ability to do so.”  We have to stop this third form of laziness, 
which is disheartened about virtue, by uplifting our minds and generating the determination to encourage ourselves. Otherwise, we will  cont inue our lives as before, without any Dharma 
practice.   
2) How to undertake joyous effort 
a) Abandoning that which is incongruous with joyous effort  
i) Identifying that class of things that are incongruous [with joyous effort] 
ii) How to abandon those 
1’ Abandoning the laziness that relishes the taste of idleness  
2’ Abandoning the laziness that clings to unwholesome activities  
3’ Abandoning the laziness that is disheartened about virtue 
a’ Instructions on making effort in the antidote to being disheartened  
b’ How the scriptures teach the way to put the antidote into practice  
c’ If one makes effort, laziness will be arrested and one will be capable of 
accomplishing enlightenment 
1" Reflecting on the way in which one will be capable of attaining 
enlightenment if one develops the strength of effort  
2" It is reasonable to bear the hardships that accompany working to attain 
enlightenment, for they are not even a fraction of those of the lower 
realms' suffering 
3" As the king of doctors prescribed gentle rites for healing the great 
disease, it is reasonable to bear [the hardships involved] 
4" There is no suffering in that and happiness increases, therefore, it is 
reasonable to take joy in that 
b) Increasing the strength of joyous effort- the antidote 
1" Reflecting on the way in which one will be capable of attaining enlightenment if one develops 
the strength of effort  
(7, 19) 
(It will be) so, if I do not forsake the Bodhisattvas' way of life. 
Why should someone like myself, who has been born, in the human race, 
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                   CHAPTER VII - JOYOUS EFFORT  
 
 
123  
Not attain Awakening, since I am able to recognize 
What is beneficial and what is of harm? 
 
In verse 18, the Buddha said that animals and inse cts are able to complete the accumulation of 
the two collections and achieve enlightenment th rough the power of joyous effort. We have 
achieved a human rebirth,  considered the best of the 6 kinds of rebirths, we are able to articulate 
and to understand what needs to be abandoned an d cultivated. If we do not get discouraged, if 
we develop the altruistic intention and follow the bo dhisattva way of life, then we will definitely 
be able to achieve the state of full enlightenment.   When we start to think: “How will I be able to develop this bodhicitta? How it is possible for me to engage in such great deeds to benefit countle ss sentient beings? How is it possible for someone 
like me to achieve enlightenment?” - that is the ti me to recall what is ment ioned in verse 19: “If I 
put in the effort,  I will definitely be able to achieve enlightenment.”   The text says that there is nothing that cannot be  accomplished when one has  joyous effort. If 
animals can achieve it, then we human beings ca n definitely achieve enlightenment. Therefore, 
there is no reason to be discouraged.  
2" It is reasonable to bear the hardships that accompany working to attain enlightenment, for 
they are not even a fraction of those of the lower realms' suffering 
a" It is unreasonable to fear the hardsh ips of giving up one's arms and legs, etc. 
b" One does not need to experience even a fraction of the lower realms' suffering 
c" An analogy illustrating the reasonableness of bearing mino r suffering in order to destroy 
the great disease 
a" It is unreasonable to fear the hardsh ips of giving up one's arms and legs, etc. 
(7, 20) 
-Nevertheless, it frightens me to think 
That I may have to give away my arms and legs- 
Without discriminating between what  is heavy and what is light, 
I am reduced to fear through confusion. 
 
(7,21) 
For over countless myriads of aeons 
I have been cut, stabbed, burned, 
And flayed alive innumerable times, 
But I have not awakened. 
 We established earlier that when we possess joyous effort, we will be able to achieve 
enlightenment.    
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                   CHAPTER VII - JOYOUS EFFORT  
 
 
124  
Qualm : That is true but in order in achieve enlighte nment, I must practise the charity of giving 
my arms and legs etc. I cannot do this as it is too difficult.  
 
Reply:  This fear arises from the failure to discriminate  between what is heavy and what is light,  as 
mentioned in verse 20. We should not be afraid  of the wrong things.  Why be  afraid of 
something  we need not be afraid of?  
 Verse 21 points out that we have been in cycl ic existence since beginningless time, experiencing 
all sorts of sufferings such as having our heads ch opped off, being stabbed, and taking rebirth in 
the hell realms where we were burnt countless time s. Yet such sufferings did not benefit us at all 
nor help us in our quest for  enlightenment. Sa crificing our limbs is nothing compared to the 
sufferings we  endured in the past. Instead of bein g afraid of having to experience these terrible 
sufferings again, we are afraid of the much smaller suffering of offerings our limbs to others.  We  are afraid for the wrong reasons: we are not conc erned about that which is really serious but are 
worried about the trivial.   Should fear arise in our minds with regard to having to sacrifice our arms and legs for the 
purpose of achieving enlightenment, then we have to reflect that we have   experienced far worse 
suffering in samsara  since beginningless time. 
b" One does not need to experience even a fraction of the lower realms' suffering  
(7, 22) 
Yet the suffering 
Involved in my awakening will have a limit; 
It is like the suffering of  having an incision made 
In order to remove and destroy greater pain. 
 The suffering of sacrificing our limbs for the purp ose of achieving enlightenment is far less when 
compared with the suffering we experienced in th e lower realms in the past. The duration of the 
suffering of such sacrifice is also much less comp ared to the length of time we suffered in the 
past.    At the very most, it takes three countless great eons for us to complete the two accumulations 
with the application of patience and joyous effort  to achieve enlightenment.  There is, therefore, 
a time limit to our exertions and whatever sufferin gs that may have to be endured to achieve our 
goal. On the other hand, the duration and intensit y of suffering in the lower realms is endless 
and far greater.     If we were shot and the bullet was lodged in our stomach, the do ctor would have to operate on 
us to remove the bullet. We would probably feel some pain. But we would be prepared to put up 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                   CHAPTER VII - JOYOUS EFFORT  
 
 
125  
with the pain in order to achieve the greater goal  of removing the bullet. In the same way, we 
should put up with the small suffering invo lved in order to achieve the big goal of 
enlightenment. 
c" An analogy illustrating the reasonableness of bearing minor suffering in order to destroy the 
great disease 
(7, 23) 
Even doctors eliminate illness 
With unpleasant medical treatments, 
So in order to overcome manifold sufferings 
I should be able to put up with some discomfort 
 
Enduring the hardships that come  with Dharma practice in order to achieve greater happiness 
and eliminate samsaric suffering is analogous to the patient who has to put up with some 
discomfort during his treatment in order to reco ver from his illness. We develop determination 
and courage by reflecting that by putting up with  smaller problems and hardships, we can achieve 
something really worthwhile. This prev ents us from getting disheartened. 
 
3" As the king of doctors prescribed gentle rites for healing the great disease, it is reasonable to 
bear [the hardships involved] 
a" The Teacher taught a method by which we may be cured of the great disease without 
even needing to experience the mere suffering associated with curative treatments 
b" Giving away one's body when one still finds  it difficult to do so is prohibited 
c" It is taught that one gives away one's body [only] when one is familiarised with the idea to 
a certain point, and thus there is no difficulty [in giving it away] 
a" The Teacher taught a method by which we may be cured of the great disease without even 
needing to experience the mere suffering associated with curative treatments 
(7, 24) 
Yet the Supreme Physician does not employ 
Common medical treatments such as these, 
With an extremely gentle technique, 
He remedies all the greatest ills. 
 
The ordinary doctor may use unpleasant meth ods to treat their patients. But the methods 
prescribed by the Buddha for us to achieve en lightenment are neither harsh nor difficult.  His 
methods are deemed gentle, peaceful and blissful  as he taught that by depending on the blissful 
path, we can attain the blissful state. His me thods for achieving enlightenment are primarily 
accomplished with our minds, not our speech or bodies. On the basis of abiding in meditative 
equipoise with perfect concentrat ion, we can definitely achieve enlightenment. With wisdom, we 
can eliminate the obstructions to liberation, the afflictions as well as their predispositions and 
free ourselves from the sufferings of cyclic existence.   
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                   CHAPTER VII - JOYOUS EFFORT  
 
 
126  
Qualm : In order to achieve enlightenment, I need  to give up my limbs. How can that be 
considered gentle or blissful? 
Reply : This appears in verse 25.  
b" Giving away one's body when one still finds  it difficult to do so is prohibited 
(7,25) 
At the beginning, the Guide of the World encourages 
The giving of such things as food. 
Later, when accustomed to this, 
One may progressively start to give away even one's flesh. 
 
The Buddha did not say that we need to give ou r legs and arms right from the very beginning. 
Instead, we start by giving away something small th a t  i s  e a s y  f o r  u s  t o  p a r t  w i t h ,  s u c h  a s  a n  
offering of food. Accustomed to this, we progress to giving away things of greater value such as 
our wealth. Finally, when we are familiar with th e practice of giving without any sense of loss or 
attachment, only then is it permissible to give away our bodies.38 
 
It has been said that since practitioners of the perfection vehicle must give away their bodies and 
lives and undergo such torment, their paths are very  difficult to follow. This text clearly refutes 
this view, clarifying that we do not give away our bodies as long as we find it difficult to do so but 
only do so once it becomes very easy, like giving away food.  
c" It is taught that one gives away one's body [only] when one is familiarised with the idea to a 
certain point, and thus there is no difficulty [in giving it away] 
(7, 26) 
At such a time when my mind is developed 
To the point of regarding my body like food, 
Then what hardship would there be 
When it came to giving away my flesh? 
 
When our minds are so developed that we can give away our bodies as easily as giving away food, we will not experience any difficulty or  hardships in giving away our bodies. 
 
Qualm : In order to work for the benefit of sentient  beings, I have to take rebirth in cyclic 
existence for a long time and endure the suffering  that comes with such a rebirth. That is too 
                                             
 
38 With respect to giving away your body, you do not give  it in the beginning when you are afraid. But through 
graduated training in generosity, you end your attachment to your body. Once you have increased the strength of 
your great compassion, you ha ve no difficulty when you give it away , provided it is for a great purpose.( Lamrim 
Chenmo , Vol.2, pg. 191) 
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                   CHAPTER VII - JOYOUS EFFORT  
 
 
127  
difficult and it takes too long. I am afraid this is beyond me. 
  
Reply:  The answer to this qualm can be found in the next outline.  
 
4" There is no suffering in that and happiness increases, therefore, it is reasonable to take joy in 
that 
a" Although there is physical and mental discomfort for a person unknowledgeable in the 
stages of accomplishing that path, there is no suffering from such hardships for one who is 
knowledgeable 
b" Therefore, for a great being, there is no cause for despairing in the prospect of remaining 
in cyclic existence 
c" Due to such reasons, in terms of progressing along the path, they are explained to be 
more knowledgeable than a Hinayanist 
d" Therefore, it is unreasonable to be disheartened in the bodhisattvas' conduct 
a" Although there is physical and mental discomfort for a person unknowledgeable in the stages 
of accomplishing that path, there is no suffering from such hardships for one who is 
knowledgeable  
(7, 27) 
Having forsaken all transgression, there would be no suffering, 
And due to wisdom, there would be no lack of joy; 
But now my mind is afflic ted by mistaken conceptions 
And my body is caused ha rm by unwholesome deeds 
 
Since bodhisattvas take rebirth in cyclic existenc e due to the power of their  prayers and wishes, 
unlike sentient beings who take such rebirths under the power of their karma and afflictions, 
they are not stained by the fault of cyclic existence just as the lotus remains unstained by the mud 
from which it grows.  Having abandoned all form s of negativities, bodhisattvas are no longer 
subject to suffering or experiencing any physical pain. Also, since they have directly perceived and 
are skilled in the meaning of selflessness, due to  such wisdom, they are always joyful.  Another 
commentary notes that the bodhisattvas are expert wi th regard to when it is appropriate to give 
away their bodies. Due to such knowledge,  they also have no “lack of joy”. 
 “And my body is caused harm by unwholesome deeds,” refers to our perceiving ourselves as having a ‘self,’ grasping at ‘I,’ and ‘mine.’ Due to  such mistaken conceptions, we experience great 
mental unhappiness. Due to engaging in all sorts of  negative actions such as killing and stealing, 
we experience the consequences in the form of physical harm.
39 
                                              
39 Qualm:  R e a c h i n g  b u d d h a h o o d  r e q u i r e s  t a k i n g  l i m i t l e s s  r e b i r t h s  i n  c y c l i c  e x i s t e n c e ,  s o  I  w i l l  b e  h a r m e d  b y  t h e  
suffering therein. I am not capable of such a thing. 
Reply : Reflect as follows. Bodhisattvas have eliminated all sin; therefore, sin's affect—the feeling of suffering—will 
not arise because they have stopped the cause. Through firm knowledge that cyclic  existence lacks an intrinsic nature, 
like a magician's illusion, they also have no mental suffer ing. Given that their physical and mental bliss increases, 
they have no reason to become disheartened even though they are still in cyclic existence.( Lamrim Chenmo , Vol.2, 
pg. 191)  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                   CHAPTER VII - JOYOUS EFFORT  
 
 
128  
 
Through the collection of merit, we eliminate the suffering of the body. 
Through the collection of wisdom, we eliminate the suffering of the mind. 
Lesson 24   Chapter VII - verse 28-32 
We will achieve the blissful result by depending on the true path taught by the Buddha. There 
are qualms as to how the Buddha’s teachings can be blissful when we have to give up our bodies 
in order to gain enlightenment.  But  there ar e no contradictions in the teachings. Buddha 
taught us to familiarise ourselves by starting wi th giving something small and gradually increasing 
the giving until we are ready to sacrifice our bodies . Only when giving our bodies is like offering 
food to someone is it permissible fo r us to make such a sacrifice.  
 
Superior bodhisattvas at the first ground (or first bhumi ), having abandoned all negativities, attain 
the extremely exalted mind generation, which enab les them to experience no physical pain or 
suffering even when sacrificing their bodies. They also know exactly the appropriate time for such 
giving and, having directly realised emptiness, they  do not experience any mental suffering. 
Chandrakirti said in his Supplement to the Middle Way  that, for bodhisattvas on the first bhumi, 
merely hearing from afar someone asking for thei r flesh, brings them far greater happiness than 
the bliss experienced by Hearer and Solitary Realis er arhats. This being so, what need is there to 
mention the happiness they derive from  actually giving away their flesh?  
 
Ordinary beings, on the other hand, experi ence great mental suffering due to their 
misconceptions adhering to a self and apprehen ding things to be mine. Since they have not 
abandoned their negativities, they also experience  physical pain and suffering. If we wish to 
analyse this further, we can consider the followin g: Since hearer superiors and solitary realiser 
superiors have direct realisations of emptiness, do they still experience mental unhappiness? Do 
they have physical suffering?  
2) How to undertake joyous effort 
a) Abandoning that which is incongruous with joyous effort  
i) Identifying that class of things that are incongruous [with joyous effort] 
ii) How to abandon those 
1’ Abandoning the laziness that relishes the taste of idleness  
2’ Abandoning the laziness that clings to unwholesome activities  
3’ Abandoning the laziness that is disheartened about virtue 
a’ Instructions on making effort in the antidote to being disheartened  
b’ How the scriptures teach the way to put the antidote into practice  c’ If one makes effort, laziness will be arrested and one will be capable of accomplishing enlightenment 
1" Reflecting on the way in which one will be capable of attaining 
enlightenment if one develops the strength of effort  
                                                                                                                                                           
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                   CHAPTER VII - JOYOUS EFFORT  
 
 
129  
2" It is reasonable to bear the hardships that accompany working to attain 
enlightenment, for they are not even a fraction of those of the lower 
realms' suffering 
3" As the king of doctors prescribed gentle rites for healing the great 
disease, it is reasonable to bear [the hardships involved] 
4" There is no suffering in that and happiness increases, therefore, it is 
reasonable to take joy in that  
a" Although there is physical and mental discomfort for a person 
unknowledgeable in the stages of accomplishing that path, there is 
no suffering from such hardships for one who is knowledgeable  
b" Therefore, for a great being, there is no cause for despairing in 
the prospect of remaining in cyclic existence 
c" Due to such reasons, in terms of progressing along the path, they 
are explained to be more knowledgeable than a Hinayanist  
d" Therefore, it is unreasonable to be disheartened in the 
bodhisattvas' conduct 
b) Increasing the strength of joyous effort- the antidote 
b" Therefore, for a great being, there is no cause for despairing in the prospect of remaining in 
cyclic existence 
(7, 28) 
As their bodies are happy due to their merits, 
And their minds are happy due to their wisdom, 
Even if they remained in cyclic existence for the sake of others, 
Why would the Compassionate Ones ever be upset? 
 
Wherever bodhisattvas abide, because they are kn owledgeable in the meanin g of selflessness, they 
do not experience any mental unhappiness and due to their store of virtue, they also do not 
experience any physical suffering.  They are never stained by the faults of the three realms while 
they remain in cyclic existenc e for the sake of accomplishing the welfare of sentient beings. 
Through their familiarity  with the two collectio ns, they are always happy, finding no cause for 
despair.   Question from student: It says ‘Their bodies are happy.’ I thought happiness is associated with 
the mind rather than the body. Answer: Physical happiness or bliss refers to the f eelings of pleasure or bliss associated with any 
of the 5 sense consciousnesses. 
40 
c" Due to such reasons, in terms of progressing along the path, they are explained to be more 
knowledgeable than a Hinayanist  
                                              
40 What is the difference between bodily and mental feelings ? Feelings that arise in the retinue of the five sense 
consciousness are called “bodily feelings”; feelings that arise in the retinue of the mental consciousness are called 
“mental feelings.” ( A Necklace for Those of Clear Awareness Clearly Revealing the Modes of Minds and Mental Factors  by 
Yeshe Gyaltsen, pg. 18)   
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                   CHAPTER VII - JOYOUS EFFORT  
 
 
130  
(7, 29) 
Due to the strength of  the Awakening Mind, 
The Bodhisattvas consume their previous transgressions 
And harvest oceans of merit: 
Hence they are said to excel the Shravakas.    
 
The Mahayana vehicle is said to be superior to  the Hinayana (or lesser vehicle) because of the 
manner in  which one travels on the path. Due to the power of their bodhicitta, all past 
negativities of bodhisattvas are completely dest royed as taught in the earlier chapter on the 
benefits of bodhicitta. Nothing is more powe rful than bodhicitta, which is likened to, the fire at 
the end of an age , (2, 14), in terms of purifying negativiti es.  Whether we are asleep or awake, as 
long as bodhicitta is in our mental continua, our merit will constantly increase. This is how 
bodhisattvas accumulate and complete the collection  of merit, which also ac ts as the antidote to 
past negativities.  
 
The generation of bodhicitta is the primary reason why bodhisattvas are superior to Hearers. It is 
bodhicitta that transforms their direct realisat ion of emptiness into a full-fledged realisation. 
Unlike the direct realisation of emptiness achi eved by the bodhisattvas, the realisation of 
emptiness attained by the Hearers and Solitary Re aliser arhats cannot act as the antidote to the 
obstructions to omniscience. Bo dhisattvas are, therefore, supe rior to the Hinayana arhats in 
terms of both their collection of merit and wisdom.        
d" Therefore, it is unreasonable to be disheartened in the bodhisattvas' conduct 
(7, 30) 
So, having mounted the horse of an Awakening Mind 
That dispels all discouragement and weariness, 
Who, when they know of this mind that proceeds from joy to joy, 
Would ever lapse into despondency? 
 
So, refers to the reasons stated in the preceding verse. Discouragement , relates to mind while 
weariness   relates to the body. Bodhisattvas have ne ither because they are both eliminated by 
bodhicitta, the blissful path, in dependence on which they  achieve the state of full 
enlightenment.  
 
Who, when they know of this mind:  Knowing this, how could anyone with discernment become 
discouraged? Some commentaries  take this discer nment to refer to the ability to differentiate 
between what is right and wrong. Another commentar y points out that this quote refers to those 
who possess realisations. Yet another commentary interprets this to mean those who really 
understand the benefits of bodhicitta. If we take mind  here to mean bodhicitta and know of this 
mind,  as the knowledge of the benefits  of bodhicitta, then it can be  interpreted as, ‘‘a person who 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                   CHAPTER VII - JOYOUS EFFORT  
 
 
131  
knows the benefits of bodhicitta  will never become dispirited.” 
 
Having mounted the horse of an Awakening Mind: We can easily reach our destination by riding a 
subdued horse on a paved road. The horse, here refers to the blissful  path, bodhicitta.  Mounting 
the  horse of bodhicitta, which has been gene rated in our minds, we ultimately reach our 
destination -   buddhahood. Those who can disc ern between right and wrong and wish to  
achieve enlightenment never become disheartened. Th erefore, strive in joyous effort and do not 
lapse into despondency.  
 In summary, it is inappropriate to become dishea rtened with accumulating the two collections of 
merit and wisdom – the causes of enlightenment – for they will quickly eliminate all suffering of 
body and mind. It is completely appropriate, howe ver, to be disheartened with accumulating the 
causes of cyclic existence, because such causes only bring about limitless suffering. The former 
puts an end to suffering, while the latter only le ads to more suffering. Knowing the qualities of 
one and the faults of the other, why should we then become disheartened about achieving 
enlightenment?
41     
 
Questions from Geshe-la:  
How does bodhicitta stop you from becoming discouraged?  
How does bodhicitta stop physical suffering and pain?  Some may think, “When I reflect on the suffering of others, it makes me disheartened.” The text 
says that when we have bodhicitta, we do not become disheartened. Since compassion is a mind 
wishing sentient beings to be free from suffering, we must reflect on the suffering of others and 
develop love and compassion. On that basis, we  generate bodhicitta and stop ourselves from 
becoming dispirited. But how does this accord wi th the feeling people usually have when they 
think of the suffering of others?  Another mistake people make is  thinking, “I may develop bodh icitta and enter the Mahayana 
path. But to accumulate the two collections, I must train in the limitless deeds of bodhisattvas for 
three countless great eons. This is too difficult fo r me.” Discouraged, they look for a quick path 
and engage in tantra.    Such dispiritedness causes the degeneration of their bodhicitta. With su ch a degeneration, how 
would they be able to achieve anything even if  they found a quick path ? The bodhicitta in the 
mind of a practitioner seeking a quick path must be so strong that he cannot bear to spend such 
                                             
 
41 Likewise, do not become discouraged even by being delaye d in cyclic existence for an immeasurable length of 
time, because a long length of time is not in itself a reas on to be disheartened. If suffering is extremely intense, 
even a brief period of it is disheartening. But if there is no suffering and you are happy, even a long time is not 
disheartening. ( Lamrim Chenmo , Vol. 2, pg. 193)  
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                   CHAPTER VII - JOYOUS EFFORT  
 
 
132  
a long time to achieve enlightenment before he ca n work for the benefit of sentient beings. Such 
bodhicitta is further supported by great courage and determination. It is therefore much more 
powerful than the bodhicitta that is required for a practitioner  travelling on the sutric path to 
enlightenment.42  
 
2) How to undertake joyous effort 
a) Abandoning that which is incongruous with joyous effort  
i) Identifying that class of things that are incongruous [with joyous effort] 
ii) How to abandon those 
1’ Abandoning the laziness that relishes the taste of idleness  
2’ Abandoning the laziness that clings to unwholesome activities  
3’ Abandoning the laziness that is disheartened about virtue 
b) Increasing the strength of joyous effort- the antidote 
i) Increasing the strength of the conditions conducive to joyous effort  
1' A brief presentation by means of identifying the four powers  2' An extensive explanation 
ii) Devoting oneself to the practice of the conduct by means of mindfulness and 
alertness 
iii) Accomplishing the conduct is within your power 
1' A brief presentation by means of identifying the four powers   
(7, 31) 
The supports when working for the sake of living beings 
Are aspiration,25 steadfastness, joy and rest.26 
Aspiration is developed through fear of misery 
And by contemplating the bene fits of (aspiration) itself. 
 
(7, 32) 
Thus in order to increase my enthusiasm 
I should strive to abandon its opposing forces, 
To (amass the supports of) aspiration, self-confidence,27 joy and rest, 
To practice in earnest and to become strong in self-control.43 
                                              
42 It is most wonderful to think, “If only I could attain bu ddhahood in a brief time for the sake of living beings,” 
because you are moved by the very inte nse power of your love, compassion, and spirit of enlightenment. However, 
when you are not within the sphere of these motivations,  and you see the necessity of a very long training in 
endless deeds and that much hard work is required, you might think, “If this is the case, who could possibly do it?” 
If you should then claim that you are seeking a quic k path, you directly damage the engaged spirit of 
enlightenment and indirectly damage the aspirational sp rit of enlightenment. Your capacity for the Mahayana 
lineage steadily weakens, and your enlightenment fades in to remote distance, for you have utterly contradicted 
what Nagarjuna and Asanga determined to be the Conquero r’s own thought on how to increasingly strengthen the 
spirit of enlightenment. ( Lamrim Chenmo , Vol. 2, pg.193-194)  
 
43 25 In the root text the term ‘appreciation’ (mos-pa; Skt: adhimukti) appears, but Thog-me Zang-po, in agreement 
with the Indian commentary ‘Grel-chen and the Tibetan tr anslator Lama Pang, substitutes ‘aspiration’ (dun-pa; 
Skt: chanda). See Thog. P139 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                   CHAPTER VII - JOYOUS EFFORT  
 
 
133  
We may agree with all the reasons given so far, but we may still  think, “I cannot work for the 
benefit of sentient beings.” The bodhisattvas counter such thoughts by relying on the four 
powers:  
 (1) The power of aspiration (or the power of esteem): The term “belief” is used in the 
Tibetan root text, which some commentaries take to mean just that while ot hers interpret this to 
mean “aspiration”. In the division of the 5 object -ascertaining mental factors, there is a difference 
between “belief” ( mos pa ) and “aspiration” ( dun pa ).44 
 Since aspiration is one of the bases for the de velopment of joyous effort, I think it may be 
more appropriate to interpret ‘mos pa’ as  the mental factor of aspiration. Regardless of the 
different interpretations, what is referred to here is the need for us to re flect on karma – the law 
of cause and effect. Based on such reflection, we  aspire to abandon the objects of abandonment 
and to cultivate the objects of cultivation. Unde rstanding how positive and negative actions lead 
to happiness and misery respectively, we seek to cultivate positive actions and to abandon 
negative actions. Such a mind is referred to as “a spiration” in this context. Not only do we need 
to have aspiration, but our aspiration must also be irreversible.  
 (2) The power of steadfastness (or the powe r of stability): We analyse the objects of 
abandonment and cultivation by checking which activities are appropriate and which are not. 
On that basis,  we finally engage in the practice  of abandonment  and cultivation, and bring that 
practice to completion without turning back. Th is power causes our joyous effort to become 
irreversible. 
 (3) The power of joy: This mean s that when we first engage in  an activity, we do it with 
delight and enthusiasm, and once so engaged, we  are insatiable in that we do not want to 
discontinue the activity. The Lamrim Chenmo gives an analogy of children at play who cannot be 
satiated.  
 (4) The power of relinquishment (or the po wer of suspension): When our minds and 
bodies are tired from our joyous exertions, we sh ould rest for a while. Immediately after we have 
rested, we should continue with the practice of virtue again.   
                                                                                                                                                          
 
26. The discussion of the support of aspiration is covere d in stanzas 31-48, steadfastn ess in stanzas 49-62, joy in 
stanzas 63,66, and rest in stanza 67. 
27. n g a - r g y a l ;  S k t :  m a n a .  H e r e  t h i s  t e r m  i s  e q u i v a l e n t  to steadfastness (brtan pa), the second support for 
e n t h u s i a s m  m e n t i o n e d  i n  s t a n z a  3 1 .  I t  s h o u l d  n o t  b e  c o n f u s e d  w i t h  ‘ s e l f - i m p o r t a n c e ’  a l s o  n g a - r g y a l .  F o r  t h i s  
distinction, see Chapter VII, 56-59. (F ootnotes from the root text, pg. 174-5) 
 
44 Belief is a knower which holds the object that has been as certained by its valid cognizer, thinking, “It is like this 
and not otherwise.” Here its function is specified as “non -captivation” because when one has gained firm belief in 
the object that one has ascertained, an opponent cannot steer one away from it; whereas aspiration is a knower 
that, upon observing some intended thing, seeks it. It is the very wish to be endowed with this or that (attribute) of 
a desired thing. It has the function of acting as a support for making effort. ( A Necklace for Those of Clear Awareness 
Clearly Revealing the Modes of Minds and Mental Factors  by Yeshe Gyaltsen, pg. 26, 28)   
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                   CHAPTER VII - JOYOUS EFFORT  
 
 
134  
Understanding its benefits and the fear of cyclic  existence leads to the development of the power 
of aspiration. In order to develop joyous effort, we need to: 
(a) eliminate its opposing factors whic h are the three forms of laziness,  
(b) cultivate its supporting condit ions which are aspiration, pride, joy, and relinquishment,  
(c) practise earnestly,  applying mindfulness and vigilance, and  
(d) gain control over our bodies  and minds.   Some commentaries classify six powers, the additi onal ones being the power of mindfulness and 
vigilance and the power of mastery of or control over one’s body and mind. We increase our joyous effort through mastery of our bodies and minds, which are cultivated through the 
application of the four powers together with th e power of mindfulness an d vigilance. The third 
line of verse 32 refers to the four powers; To practice in earnest , refers to the power of mindfulness 
and vigilance and To become strong in self-control , refers to the power of mastery of one’s body and 
mind. 
Lesson 25   Chapter VII - verse 33-43 
2) How to undertake joyous effort 
a) Abandoning that which is incongruous with joyous effort  
b) Increasing the strength of joyous effort- the antidote 
i) Increasing the strength of the conditions conducive to joyous effort  
1' A brief presentation by means of identifying the four powers  
2' An extensive explanation 
ii) Devoting oneself to the practice of the conduct by means of mindfulness and 
alertness 
iii) Accomplishing the conduct is within your power 
 
In the last class, we looked at the four powers  conducive for the generation of joyous effort, 
which are: 
1. the power of  aspiration (or esteem) 
2. the power of steadfastness (or stability) 3. the power of joy  4. the power of relinquishment (or suspension) 
Some commentaries add the following two powers making a total of six:  
5.  the power of mindfulness  6.  the power of mastery of one’s body and mind  To cultivate joyous effort, we have to strive to abandon the discordant (or opposing) factors, 
which are the three types of laziness: 1. the laziness that relishes the taste of idleness 
2. the laziness that clings to unwholesome activities  
3. the laziness that is disheartened about virtue  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                   CHAPTER VII - JOYOUS EFFORT  
 
 
135  
2' An extensive explanation 
a’ The power of esteem  
1" The esteemed object  
a" Discarding wrongdoing 
b" Adopting qualities 
c" Examining the list of things to do and not to do 
2" The effect 
3" The cause for esteem  
4" Conclusion 
b’ The power of stability 
c’ The power of joy 
d’ The power of suspension 
a" Discarding wrongdoing  
(7, 33) 
I shall have to overcome 
The boundless faults of  myself and others, 
And (in order to destroy) each of these faults (alone) 
(I may have to strive until) an  ocean of aeons is exhausted. 
 
(7, 34) 
Yet if within myself I do not perceive 
Even a fraction of the perseverance (required) to exhaust these faults, 
Then why do I not have a heart attack? 
For now I have become an abode for infinite misery. 
 
When we generate bodhicitta, we  pledge to destroy the 84,000 negative emotions of sentient 
beings and ourselves, even though abandoning one of them would take many eons and great 
effort. When we examine our minds, we see that we do not have even a fraction of the joyous 
effort that is required to abandon just one of those faults. Due to these faults, in the future, we 
will take rebirth in the hell realms, where imme asurable suffering awaits us. Therefore, why are 
we not panicking? These verses help us develop the aspiration to overcome, the boundless faults of 
myself and others.  
b" Adopting qualities 
(7, 35) 
Likewise, I shall have to realize 
Many excellent qualities for myself and others, 
And (in order to attain) each  of these qualities (alone) 
I may have to acquaint myself with  its cause until an ocean of  
aeons is exhausted. 
 
(7, 36) 
However, I have never developed acquaintance 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                   CHAPTER VII - JOYOUS EFFORT  
 
 
136  
With even a fraction of these excellences. 
How strange it is to squander 
This birth I have found by some coincidence. 
 
When developing bodhicitta, we also pledge to endow other sentient beings and ourselves with 
liberation and enlightenment, for which we need to acquire the infinite qualities of a buddha. 
To create the causes to acquire just one of these qualities requires many eons and a lot of effort. 
Presently, we are neither familiar nor acquainted with even a fraction of these qualities. 
 It is very meaningful for us to apply this huma n life we have attained, endowed with leisure and 
opportunity and extremely difficult to achieve, to acquiring buddha qu alities. It is very strange to 
squander this precious opportunity to be nefit our present and future lives.   
 This advice is for us to cultivat ing joyous effort perseverance. This verse is directed at our minds, 
asking us why  we doing this to ourselves when  we should be working to acquire the infinite 
qualities of the Buddha.  Verses 33 and 34 are encouraging us to abandon our faults. Verses 35 and 36 are urging us to 
acquire the infinite qualities of  the Buddha. We do both by depending on joyous effort.  
c" Examining the list of things to do and not to do  
(7, 37) 
I have not made offerings to the Lord Buddhas, 
I have not given the pleasure of great festivals, 
I have not performed actions for the teachings, 
I have not fulfilled th e wishes of the poor, 
 
(7, 38) 
I have not granted fearlessness to the frightened 
And I have not given happiness to the weak. 
All I have given rise to is 
The agonies in the mother's  womb, and to suffering. 
 
I have not made offering s to the Lord Buddhas,  refers to the fact that we  have not made offerings to 
the Buddha when he was alive and now that the Buddha is no longer here, we do not even 
visualise making mental offerings to him.    
I have not given the pleasure of great festivals,  points to our failure to make any offerings of food or 
robes to Sangha communities and not making offe rings to superior bodhisattvas. Furthermore, 
we have not studied the three collections of script ural teachings (the three pitakas) nor put into 
practice the realisational teaching s of the three higher trainings. 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                   CHAPTER VII - JOYOUS EFFORT  
 
 
137  
 
Verse 37 refers to the giving of material gifts wh ile verse 38 deals with the giving of fearlessness. I 
have not granted fearle ssness to the frightened : We have not saved sentient beings when they were in 
danger, e.g. we have not engaged in liberating  animals. We have not given teachings of the 
Buddha even though we have been capable of doin g so nor have we  shar ed the teaching with 
others, guiding them as to what is to be cultivated and what is to be abandoned.  
 
We have benefited neither the objects of our wo rship and offering (the Three Jewels) nor the 
objects of our compassion (sentient beings). We ha ve either failed to make any offerings to the 
Three Jewels or we have acquired our offering s to them through wrong livelihood, accompanied 
by negative motivations. With re gard to the Buddha, we have no t practised his teachings. With 
regard to sentient beings, we have not practise d the three types of giving and not given them 
what they have needed - we have not benefited them in any way. It seems that our purpose in 
coming into this world is only to give our mothers great suffering!  
 
Seeing that we have not done any justice to ou rselves nor done anything beneficial for other 
sentient beings, we must develop joyous effort, courage and determination and keep 
d i s c o u r a g e m e n t  a t  b a y .  T h i s  a d v i c e  i s  f o r  the bodhisattvas. For us, such advice seems 
disheartening because we have neither bodhicitta  nor determination but it should not be like 
that.   It is important to know when we should reflec t on these points. For example, when things are 
not going well and we are overwhelmed with proble ms and feeling hopeless, that is not be the 
time for applying this advice.   
2" The effect 
a" It is unreasonable to abandon esteem for the dharma 
b" The reasons for that  
a" It is unreasonable to abandon esteem for the dharma 
(7, 39) 
Both now and in previous lives, 
Such deprivation has arisen 
Because of my lack of aspiring for the Dharma. 
Who would ever reject this aspiring for Dharma? 
 In this and our previous lives, due to our lack of aspiration for the Dharma, we have not engaged 
in virtue and we experience suffering as a resu lt. Those seeking happiness will never give up; they 
only work at enhancing their aspiration for the Dharma.   
 Just as a dog is completely disinterested when we  eat vegetables in front of it, we have neither 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                   CHAPTER VII - JOYOUS EFFORT  
 
 
138  
interest in nor aspiration for th e teachings even though the Dharma  is right in front of us. We 
have access to the wonderful and profound teachi ngs of the people of small, medium and great 
capacity and the tantric teachings, but we do  not have the aspiration to cultivate them. 
b" The reasons for that  
(7, 40 ) 
The Mighty One (Subduer) himself has said 
That aspiration is the root of every facet of virtue; 
 
The Buddha says in the sutras The Ocean of Intelligence  and The Moon Lamp , that the roots of 
virtue of working for liberation and enlightenmen t all come from the aspiration for the Dharma.  
Therefore, it is inappropriate to abandon aspirati on.  It is obvious that those who have strong 
aspiration for the Dharma become good practiti oners. Those with middling aspiration become 
middling practitioners and those who have no as piration for the Dharma remain as ordinary 
beings. Aspiration is important in whatever we do, be it studying or practising; without it, 
nothing gets done. When studying the Buddha’s teac hings, we need aspiration to learn as much 
as we can. Without it, we only end up receiving imprints in our minds and they remain forever at 
that level.   
  It is important to aim high. When  we see a person doing prostrat ions, we should not think, “I 
can’t do that,” but instead take that person as a role model and aspire to become like him. But 
when we see an angry person, we should not foll ow his example. No one is perfect; nobody has 
all the qualities and is free from all faults and obscurations from the start. If such a perfect 
person existed, there would be no need for the Dharma. Everyone has different karma and levels 
of intelligence. Some enjoy good conditions to practise Dharma while others do not.  Due to 
such differences, there will also  be differences in people.  
 By aiming high and striving to develop joyous e ffort, all this helps us develop the aspiration for 
the Dharma. Without it, our Dharma practice will degenerate and we will only experience 
unhappiness.  What we want is happiness. Therefor e, we have to create the cause for virtue and 
practise the Dharma. Aspiration for the Dharma is  essential and extremely important. In order to 
experience perfect happiness, we  must create perfect causes in  terms of perfect virtue and 
practice. This requires the perf ect aspiration for the Dharma.  
 
b) Increasing the strength of joyous effort - the antidote 
i) Increasing the strength of the conditions conducive to joyous effort  
1' A brief presentation by means of identifying the four powers  
2' An extensive explanation 
a’ The power of esteem  
1" The esteemed object  
2" The effect 
3" The cause for esteem   
a" Presentation 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                   CHAPTER VII - JOYOUS EFFORT  
 
 
139  
b" Explanation 
(1)  Reflecting on mixed karma and its effects 
(2)  Reflecting on solely white karma and its effects 
(3)  Reflecting on black karma and it effects. 
4" Conclusion 
b’ The power of stability 
c’ The power of joy 
d’ The power of suspension 
ii) Devoting oneself to the practice of the conduct by means of mindfulness and alertness 
iii) Accomplishing the conduct is within your power 
a" Presentation 
(7, 40 cd) 
Its root is constant acquaintance 
With the ripening-effects (of actions). 
 
The root of aspiration is the constant acquaintance  with the fruitional effects of karma – 
understanding how happiness is the fruit of virtuous  actions and suffering the fruitional effect of 
negative actions. Meditating on the law of cause and effect and generating the faith of conviction 
in karma becomes the root for the generation of aspiration.45 T h i s  i s  t h e  s a m e  a d v i c e  a s  t h e  
major outline in the lamrim literature which states  that, “meditating on ka rma is the root of all 
happiness and goodness.”  
 
With our faith of conviction in karma, we wi ll naturally have the aspiration to abandon non-
virtuous actions, which cause suffering and, na turally, we have the aspiration to engage in 
virtuous actions, which causes happiness. At best  our aspiration is weak because we do not have 
the heart-felt faith of conviction in karma.   
 
 
                                              
45 It then states how to develop aspiration 
Its root, in turn, is constant meditation 
On karma’s fruitional effects.   
This means that the way to develop aspiration is to medi tate on how pleasant and unpleasant effects arise from 
virtuous and nonvirtuous karma respectively . This is because it is taught that faith acts as the basis for yearning, so 
that the faith of conviction in the two types of karma and their effects will generate two kinds of desire: to elimi-
nate non virtuous karma and to adopt virtuous karma.  
Furthermore, you consider karma and its effects in general,  and in particular, the causality underlying the benefits 
of the bodhisattva deeds and the faults of violating them.  
Once you aspire to the Mahayana, you enter its door  through a commitment to clear away all faults and 
achieve all good qualities for yourself and others. You must exhort yourself, thinking, "I will have to meditate for 
many eons to purify myself of every single fault along wi th its latent propensity and to develop every single good 
quality to the fullest extent. Yet since I have not even a fr action of the joyous perseverance needed to clear away 
faults or accomplish good qualities, I have pointlessly wasted my leisure.” ( Lamrim Chenmo , Vol. 2, pg. 195)  
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                   CHAPTER VII - JOYOUS EFFORT  
 
 
140  
When we have achieved the faith of conviction in karma, then whenever we engage in virtuous 
actions, we will be confident that these actions wi ll definitely lead to good results and happiness. 
We will avoid negative actions because we will know  that they only result in suffering. With such 
strong conviction, the aspiration for Dharma will arise naturally.  
 
Gyaltsab Je says in his commentary that without fa ith of conviction in karm a, it is difficult for 
our Dharma practice to be pleasing to the bu ddha and bodhisattvas. Therefore, from the very 
start, we should meditate on karma to deve lop conviction. Gyaltsab Je also mentions 
practitioners who proclaim they have realised em ptiness yet have total disregard for the workings 
of karma in the way they lead their lives. Such people have no realisation of emptiness to speak 
of and their understanding of emptiness is  also mistaken. The stronger our correct 
understanding of emptiness, the stronger will be our faith of conviction in  karma. To understand 
emptiness, we must understand dependent arisin g. The more we understand what constitutes 
dependent arising, the more our faith of conviction in karma will increase.   
b" Explanation 
(1) Reflecting on mixed karma and its effects 
 
(7 41) 
(Physical) pain, mental, unhappiness, 
All the various kinds of fear, 
As well as separation from what is desired 
All arise from an unwholesome way of life. 
 
(7, 42) 
(However) by committing wholesome actions, 
Which are (motivated by aspiration) in the mind, 
Wherever I go I shall be presented with 
Tokens of the fruit of that merit. 
 
(7, 43) 
Yet by committing negative (actions), 
Although I may wish for happiness, 
Wherever I go I shall be completely overcome 
By weapons of pain (cause d) by my wrongful life. 
 If the faith of conviction in karma gives rise to aspiration, how do we produce this faith? All the 
unpleasant and suffering experiences of this life - physical suffering, unhappy minds, or danger of 
losing our lives - are the effects of negative ac tions. We do not get (or we are separated from) 
what we desire. On the other hand, our aspiration  f o r  v i r t u e  c a u s e s  u s  t o  e n g a g e  i n  p o s i t i v e  
actions. Then, due to the accumulation of those virtues, we will experience happiness regardless 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                   CHAPTER VII - JOYOUS EFFORT  
 
 
141  
of where we may be born. Suffering or happiness cannot arise by merely wishing for it. Suffering 
and happiness arise due to causes, which are non-vi rtue and virtue respectively. When we engage 
in non-virtuous actions, even though we wish to be happy, no matter where we are born, we will 
have to experience the effects of those negativi ties in the form of unpleasant experiences and 
suffering. As verse 43 points out, one will be completely overcome by weapons of pain. 
 
Karma can be divided into propelling karma, which determines our rebirth, and completing 
karma, which determines the conditions experience d in that rebirth. For example, when a person 
is born as a human being and experiences good health, long life and wealth in that lifetime, that 
is the result of virtuous propelling karma and completing karma.   When a sentient being is born in the hell real ms, they will experience suffering continuously 
until that lifespan is finished. That rebirth is the result of non-virtuous propelling karma and 
completing karma. For beings born as humans or gods who nevertheless experience ill health, 
sickness, poverty or lack of enjoyments, the rebi rth is the result of virtuous propelling karma 
while the unpleasant experiences are the resu lts of non-virtuous completing karma.   
 Some beings born as animals owned by wealthy peop le do not lack food or  comfort. This animal 
rebirth is the result of non-virtuous propelling  karma, but their pleasant experiences are the 
result of virtuous completing karma. There can al so be situations where the rebirth is the result 
of virtuous propelling karma and the experiences of  that life are a mixture of the results of both 
virtuous and non-virtuous completing karma.  There is an historical account of a butcher who vowed to only slaughter animals during daytime 
and would not do so in the evening. He was reborn in the surrounding hells, where he experienced much suffering during the day, but, when night fell, he experienced great 
enjoyments. There is also an account of a person  who engaged in sexual misconduct during the 
night but vowed to refrain from doing so during  the day. Similarly, this person experienced 
enjoyments during the day but great suffering at night.  A human rebirth is the result of virtuous prop elling karma. But as human beings, we have 
different experiences throughout our lives. Some  may enjoy good health and wealth when they 
are younger but as they grow older, they ex perience a lot of problems and suffering. The 
happiness or suffering experienced is the result  of the negative or positive actions.  
 As mentioned in the Lam Rim, one of the four  characteristics of karma is its certainty. 
46 If we 
have not created the action, we will not experience its effects. But once the action has been done, 
the effect will not disappear. In this particular ou tline, it does not mean that the karma itself is 
                                              
46 The four characteristics of karma are:- 1. The certainty of karma, 2. The magnification of karma, 3. Not 
experiencing the effects of actions that you did not do, 4. That the actions you have done do not perish.  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                   CHAPTER VII - JOYOUS EFFORT  
 
 
142  
mixed up. It is referring to the fact that, as a resu lt of negative and positions actions, in this life, 
one can experience both happiness and suffering.  
Lesson 26   Chapter VII - verse 44-49 
b) Increasing the strength of joyous effort - the antidote 
i) Increasing the strength of the conditions conducive to joyous effort  
1' A brief presentation by means of identifying the four powers  
2' An extensive explanation 
a’ The power of esteem  
1" The esteemed object  
2" The effect 
3" The cause for esteem 
a" Presentation 
b" Explanation 
(1)  Reflecting on mixed karma and its effects 
(2)  Reflecting on solely white karma and its effects 
(3)  Reflecting on black karma and it effects. 
4" Conclusion 
b’ The power of stability 
c’ The power of joy 
d’ The power of suspension 
ii) Devoting oneself to the practice of the conduct by means of mindfulness and 
alertness 
iii) Accomplishing the conduct is within your power 
(2) Reflecting on solely white karma and its effects 
(7, 44) 
As a result of virtue, I shall dwell in the spacious, fragrant and  
cool heart of a lotus flower, 
My radiance will be nourished by  the food of the Conqueror's  
sweet speech, 
My glorious form will spring fr om a lotus unfolded by the  
Mighty One's light, 
And, as a Bodhisattva, I shall abide in the presence of the Conquerors. 
 
This outline refers to how the bodhisattvas ar e born in the pure lands, which are spacious, 
fragrant, pleasant and cool, unlike the mother’s womb which is vile and smelly. As a result of 
having familiarised themselves with positive ac tions, bodhisattvas spring forth from beautiful 
lotuses. If a bodhisattva is reborn in the pure la nd of Amitabha Buddha, he is sustained by that 
buddha’s holy speech, he gains realisations and exudes radiance as a result. A baby in the 
mother’s womb, on the other hand, only gets to feed on coarse nutrients.   At the time of birth of a bodhisattva, the lotus opens due to being struck by light emitted from 
the holy body of Amitabha. This special birth is unlike birth from a womb where both the infant 
and mother suffer. The bodies of bodhisattvas in  the pure lands are also endowed with special 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                   CHAPTER VII - JOYOUS EFFORT  
 
 
143  
marks and signs. The ways in whic h bodhisattvas are cared for or sustained in the pure lands are 
also different. Once bodhisattvas are born from a lotus, they remain in the presence of Amitabha 
Buddha and receive the nectar of his holy speech.  
 The special birth place, method of  birth, type of body, sustenan ce and care received are the 5 
special features that are the results of having en gaged solely in white actions. This being so, we 
should persevere joyfully at accumulating positive karma.   Reflecting on this verse in such a way helps us to  generate the power of aspiration in our minds. 
(3) Reflecting on solely black karma and its effects 
(7, 45) 
However, as a result of non- virtue, my skin will be ripped off by the henchmen of Yama. 
In this feeble state, liquid copper melted by tremendous heat will be poured into my body. 
Pierced by flaming swords and daggers, my  flesh will be cut into a hundred pieces, 
And I shall tumble upon the fiercely blazing iron ground. 
 The fruitional effect of having engaged only in non- virtue, such as killing, is rebirth in the hell 
realms. Once there, we will be attacked by the frightful hell guardians, the henchmen of Yama , with 
their flaming swords and daggers. As our skin is ri pped off, we will suffer tremendously since our 
skin will be as delicate as that of a baby. We wi ll experience unbearable pain as molten iron and 
copper are poured onto our bodies. We will be pierced by blazing weapons, cut into a hundred 
pieces and spread out on the, fiercely blazing iron ground . All these unbearable sufferings will have 
to be borne day and night for a long time. Unde rstanding that these experiences are the results 
of non-virtuous actions, we generate the aspira tion wanting to abandon the negative actions we 
currently engage in and refraining from such actions again in the future. 
4" Conclusion 
(7, 46) 
Therefore, I should aspire for virtue, 
And with great respect acquaint myself with it. 
 
Therefore  r e f e r s  t o  w h a t  w e  d i s c u s s e d  e a r l i e r ,  i . e .  e n g a g i n g  i n  p o s i t i v e  o r  n e g a t i v e  a c t i o n s  w i l l  
produce positive or negative results respectively. Therefore, we must aspire to engage only in 
virtue, develop the faith of conviction in karm a and its effects and abandon what needs to be 
abandoned and cultivate what needs to be cultiv ated. This completes the extensive explanation 
of the first power, the  power of aspiration. 
 
b) Increasing the strength of joyous effort - the antidote 
i) Increasing the strength of the conditions conducive to joyous effort  
1' A brief presentation by means of identifying the four powers  
2' An extensive explanation 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                   CHAPTER VII - JOYOUS EFFORT  
 
 
144  
a’ The power of esteem  
b’ The power of stability   
1" Stable effort  
a" Examining it well and undertaking it 
b" The disadvantages of discarding it after one has undertaken it 
(1) A brief presentation 
(2) Explaining each individually 
2" Having undertaken [joyous effort], stabilizing its engagement 
c’ The power of joy 
d’ The power of suspension 
ii) Devoting oneself to the practice of the conduct by means of mindfulness and 
alertness 
iii) Accomplishing the conduct is within your power 
a" Examining it well and undertaking it 
(7, 46) 47 
Having undertaken the wholesome  in the  manner of Vajradhvaja,28 
I should then proceed to acquaint myself with self-confidence. 
 
(7, 47) 
First of all, I should examin e well what is to be done, 
To see whether I can pursue it or cannot undertake it, 
(If I am unable,) it is best to leave it, 
But once I have started  I must not withdraw. 
 
The sun and moon gods are included in the 8 classes of wrathful ones. The Buddha said in 
chapter 6 of the Avatamsaka Sutra , “When the sun shines, its rays are not obstructed by the 
height of the mountains or the evenness of the gr ound. It simply illuminates everything in its 
path. Likewise, bodhisattvas, who pledge to work  for the benefit of all, do not turn back 
regardless of the kind of situations or people they  encounter. Instead, they continue to work for others in accordance with their inte rests, dispositions, and abilities.” 
 Remembering this, we should generate the though t, “Like the bodhisattvas, once I start on any 
activity to benefit others, I shall ensure that I complete that activity.” We familiarise ourselves 
with the pride of developing great determinatio n, always thinking, “I can do this.” Before 
engaging in any virtuous activity, we have to ex amine whether we have the ability to undertake it. 
We should proceed only when we see that we can do it. Otherwise, it is best not to undertake it, to avoid giving up mid-way before the activity  can be completed. We must complete such 
virtuous activities without giving up. Most of us start a virtuous activity without first examining it 
                                             
 
47 Root text footnote pg174 - Avatamsaka  Sutra, Thog.p.144: ‘For example, De vaputra, when the sun shines forth 
it illuminates any suitable place without being turned back  by such obstacles as blindness in people or uneven 
mountain formations. Likewise when a Bodhisattva shines fo rth for the sake of others he ripens and liberates any 
suitable disciple and is not turned back by th e various obstacles present in sentient beings.’ 
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                   CHAPTER VII - JOYOUS EFFORT  
 
 
145  
carefully. We give up in the middle and then move on to another commitment. In this way, 
nothing is well done or  accomplish ed in the end.            
 
Question from student : When we think we cannot do a project,  how do we know whether it is the 
laziness of despondency or our in ability to accomplish the task? 
 
Reply:  The laziness of despondency is a mind that thinks, from the very beginning, “I cannot do 
this,” without even checking. As mentioned earlier, the Buddha said  that even insects can attain 
enlightenment. So we humans can definitely attain enlightenment as long as we put effort into it. 
It is this laziness of despondency that prevents  the generation of determination. Since this 
laziness is the mind that thinks, “I cannot do th is,” from the onset, wi thout even examining the 
activity, there is no determinat ion in the very first place.  
 
Here we are examining the pride that thinks, “I can do it.” The determin ation is there from the 
very beginning. Producing such a thought alone ho wever, does not necessarily mean that we will 
accomplish our goal. We may not have checked, pr ior to embarking on the project, whether it is 
achievable. For instance, we may have the determ ined thought to give away $100,000. But if we 
do not have the money in the first place, nothin g is achieved by such determination, in which 
case, it is better not to make such a pledge to others.  
b" The disadvantages of discarding it after one has undertaken it 
(7, 48) 
(If I do,) then this habit will continue in other lives 
And wrongdoing and misery will increase; 
Also, other actions done at the time of its fruition 
Will be weak and will not be accomplished. 
 There will be negative consequences when we do not honour pledges we make, e.g. abandoning a 
retreat half-way through or promising to do a certain commitment but giving up before we complete it. The negative karma accumulated by su ch actions increases daily and we will have to 
experience great suffering in the future.   This also applies practicing a particular meditation al deity. Wishing to accomplish a specific deity 
practice, we take the initiation and engage in th e practice. After some time, we hear of another 
deity who appears to be more powerful or well- known. Without having accomplished anything 
with the first deity, we take on another initia tion and set of commitments. In this way, we 
complete neither the first nor second deity practice   and we take a long time to see any results, 
which are only of inferior quality if they do appear.   The following example may also appl y to us. Having decided to read a text, we start reading a few 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                   CHAPTER VII - JOYOUS EFFORT  
 
 
146  
pages; but after a while we lose interest and st art on another text thinking, “This one might be 
better.” In the end, we complete nothing. In the beginning, we should select a text that we wish 
to study.  Having established that we can study it, we should follow through and complete what 
we have started. If our physical or mental abilit ies deteriorate to the point that we can no longer 
carry out our project, then nothing can be done. But, as long as we are able, we should strive to 
complete what we have committed ourselves to doing. 48   
(1) A brief presentation 
(7, 49) 
Self-confidence should be appl ied to (wholesome) actions, 
The (overcoming) of disturbing conce ptions and my ability (to do this). 
 
This outline addresses three types of pride: pride about karma, being proud of one’s capacity and 
being proud of the affliction. We should not ge t discouraged but instead generate determination 
by developing pride with regard to karma (or action), our afflictions and ability.  
 
The pride about karma (or action) means enthusiasm for and delight in engaging in virtue for the 
benefit of others. 
Being proud of the afflictions is a mind that wishes to destroy the afflictions. 
Being proud of one’s capacity is a mind that th inks, “I can engage enthusiastically and with 
delight in actions to benefit others, and I can overcome my afflictions.”   Some commentaries clarify  that these 3 types of pride are not to be cultivated prior to engaging 
in an action, but are to be generated when we be come disheartened in the course of engaging in 
the virtuous activity we had chosen. 
                                             
 
48 Developing the power of steadfastness means that you br ing to conclusion, without turning back, anything at 
which you joyously persevere. First, do not try to do ever ything; examine the situation ca refully. If you see that you 
can do it, you engage in it; whereas if you cannot do it, yo u do not engage in it. You should not even start in the 
first place things you will do for a while and then discard. Th e reason is that if you beco me habituated to giving up 
in the middle what you have committed yourself to do, then  through this conditioning you will in other lives again 
abandon your commitment to the training, etc. Consequently, your si n will increase in that life, and in subsequent 
lives the suffering that is the effect of this sin will in crease. Furthermore, you will not accomplish other virtues 
because you will be thinking of carrying out your earlier commitment; there will be an inferior result because you 
turned away from your earlier commitment; and your earlier commitment itself will not be fulfilled because you 
did not follow through. In sum, committing yourself to do something but leaving it unfinished is a hindrance to 
your accomplishment of other projects, and the conditioni ng also destabilizes your commitment to the vows you 
have taken. ( Lamrim Chenmo , Vol. 2, pg. 196) 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                   CHAPTER VII - JOYOUS EFFORT  
 
 
147  
Lesson 27   Chapter VII - verse 49-54 
b) Increasing the strength of joyous effort - the antidote 
i) Increasing the strength of the conditions conducive to joyous effort  
1' A brief presentation by means of identifying the four powers  
2' An extensive explanation 
a’ The power of esteem  
b’ The power of stability 
1" Stable effort 
(1) A brief presentation 
(2) Explaining each individually 
(a) Pride of karma  
(i) Identifying the pride of karma  
(ii) The reasons one acts in that way 
(iii) Being proud of assuming the burden of others of 
inferior karma 
(b) Being proud of [one's] capacity 
(c) Being proud of the afflictions 
2" Having undertaken [joyous effort], stabilizing its engagement 
c’ The power of joy 
d’ The power of suspension 
ii) Devoting oneself to the practice of the conduct by means of mindfulness and 
alertness 
iii) Accomplishing the conduct is within your power 
(i) Identifying the pride of karma  
(7, 49) 
Thinking, "I alone shall do it," 
Is the self-confidence of action. 
 
In the previous lesson, the sun, the residence of the sun god, was described as analogous to 
nectar. We depend on the sun for ripening our cr ops and its rays illuminate the entire universe. 
In a similar way, the bodhisattvas, who possess gr eat compassion and the wisdom that realises 
emptiness, work to liberate all sentient beings . Regardless of the nature of the people they 
encounter – be they ignorant, hot-tempered or fu ll of afflictions - they never give up. With 
wholehearted determination and courage, bodhis attvas think, “I alon e will accomplish the 
welfare and happiness of these sentient beings.” This kind of motivation and determination in 
the minds of bodhisattvas is said to  be the pride of karma (or action).49 
(ii) The reasons one acts in that way 
(7, 50) 
                                              
49 Pride about action means that no matter who else may be  your companion as you practice the path, you do not 
count on them but accomplish it yourself alone. The th ought, “I alone shall achieve this without having any 
expectation of others,” is simi lar to pride, so it is given the name “Pride about action.” 
(Lamrim Chenmo , Vol. 2, pg. 197) 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                   CHAPTER VII - JOYOUS EFFORT  
 
 
148  
Powerless, their minds disturbed, 
People in this world are un able to benefit themselves. 
Therefore, I shall do it (for them), 
Since unlike me these beings are incapable. 
 
As sentient beings are controlled by their negati ve emotions, whatever they do becomes mistaken 
actions. As sentient beings cannot even accomplish  their own purposes and welfare, it is unlikely 
that sentient beings will engage in any activity  that will benefit others. When bodhisattvas 
observe that sentient beings cannot benefit others  as they cannot even benefit themselves and see 
no one else working to accomplish the happi ness of sentient beings, they generate the 
extraordinary courage and determination that, “I alone shall do this for sentient beings.”  
(iii) Being proud of assu ming the burden of others of inferior karma 
(7, 51) 
(Even) if others are doing inferior tasks, 
Why should I sit here (doing nothing)? 
I do not do those tasks because of self-importance; 
It would be best for me to  have no such pride. 
 Different commentaries offer different explanatio ns to the first two li nes of this verse: 
(Even) if others are doing inferior tasks,  Why should I sit here (doing nothing)? 
 One explanation is: Sentient beings who are controlled by  the 8 worldly dharmas overcome their enemies due to 
their anger. Because of their attachment, they enga ge in all sorts of activities to support their 
loved ones and those on their side. “I,” in line 2, refers to the bodhisattva who observing this 
thinks, “I cannot just sit here and behave like thes e people. I need to train in the six perfections, 
instead of engaging in such inferior activities.”   We should not engage in such virtuous behaviou r with a proud and arrogant attitude thinking, 
“While these inferior worldly beings are engaging  in such worldly activities, I, the superior 
practitioner, will do something far better than them.” Such conceit an d afflicted pride are 
negative emotions we must avoid if we wa nt to perfect the bodhisattva conduct.  
 Another explanation is: When bodhisattvas see helpless, destitute sentie nt beings who are old, sick and poor, it is 
impossible for them to do nothing and remain ha ppy. In this context, “old, destitute people” 
refers to those who are menial labourers and have to carry heavy loads. The bodhisattvas think, “I 
must do something to help them,”  and they proceed to do so. We should learn from this advice; 
when we see helpless people we should try to  help them instead of doing nothing.   
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                   CHAPTER VII - JOYOUS EFFORT  
 
 
149  
Determination and courage seem to be the same as ordinary pride so we must be able to 
distinguish between the two. Ordinary or afflicte d pride is a negative emotion, which has very 
limited qualities. When one is conceited about one’s  own qualities, such pride is an obstacle to 
the development of real courage and wholehearted  d e t e r m i n a t i o n .  I t  l e a d s  t o  d i s r e s p e c t  f o r  
others and only becomes the basis for experiencing  suffering. Such suffering is then followed by 
discouragement.  
 The pride of karma of the bodhisattvas, on the ot her hand, helps them to develop strong courage 
and determination to benefit othe rs. In fact, when bodhisattvas generate such pride, it only 
makes them more respectful of others and be comes the basis for experiencing happiness.  
 The Lam Rim texts mention pride as a great obstac le for the development of good qualities and 
realisations. The karmic result of having pride is rebirth in a lowly state as a servant or  slave. The 
Precious Garland states that pride causes one to be born in  a lower caste, jealously causes one to be 
born without  charisma, and anger causes one to have an unpleasant appearance. Having studied 
different teachings, we should subdue our pride in stead of increasing it as there is great danger 
that we may feel proud of our Dharma knowledg e and feel superior to others who may be less 
knowledgeable.   Studying the Buddha’s teachings is different fr om studying ordinary secular subjects. The 
purpose of studying the Dharma is to weaken an d not reinforce our  nega tive emotions such as 
pride and jealousy. It is important that we  overcome our conceit, arrogance and pride.
50 
 
The Buddha never said that the teachings were rese rved exclusively for certain castes or types of 
people, even though during his time a caste system existed. Anyone with the ability to practise his 
teachings was welcome to do so.  
 However, there were certain restrictions related to  the time and place. For example, in the Vinaya 
(the code of conduct for ordained people), bu tchers and blacksmiths are not allowed to take 
ordination. (In certain countries, being born in a butcher’s family is not considered to be a good 
thing.) This restriction was set by the Buddha in accordance with the social situation during his 
time. If butchers and blacksmiths had become or dained, it would have caused people to look 
down upon and criticise the teachings and genera te negative karma. For the same reason, the 
handicapped were also prohibit ed from taking ordination. 
                                             
 
50 Furthermore, practice while thinking, “If these beings stri ve at lowly activities without interruption, why should 
I not perform the actions that will achieve the perfect effe ct?” However, when you achieve these two prides [about 
action and ability], you should not do so with self-conceit , out of contempt for others. Rather, regard others with 
compassion, and do not mix in any pride. Thinking, “Others are not capable; I am able,” again resembles pride, so 
it is labelled “pride”. ( Lamrim Chenmo , Vol. 2, pg. 197) 
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                   CHAPTER VII - JOYOUS EFFORT  
 
 
150  
 
(b) Being proud of [one's] capacity 
(i) The shortcomings of taking no pride in one's capacity 
(ii) The benefits of taking pride [in one's capacity] 
(iii) Abiding in pride as an antidote  
(iv) It is unreasonable to be proud of the afflictions 
(v) The benefits of pride as an antidote 
(i) The shortcomings of taking no pride in one's capacity 
(7, 52) 
When crows encoun ter a dying snake, 
They will act as though  they were eagles. 
(Likewise,) if (my self -confidence) is weak, 
I shall be injured by the slightest downfall. 
 
( 7, 53) 
How can those who, out of faint-hear tedness, have given up trying to 
Find liberation because of this deficiency? 
 
These verses help us to overcome our negative emotions. Without pride in our own ability, we 
will be, injured by the slightest downfall . The downfall , here refers to the root downfalls and faults of 
the bodhisattva vows. When we commit such tran sgressions, we are discouraged and unable to 
apply any joyous effort to accomplishing the purposes  of others and ourselves. It is difficult then 
for us  to achieve liberation, How can those who, out of faint-heartedn ess, have given up trying to find 
liberation because of this deficiency . Without such joyous effort, we wi ll only experience all types of 
problems in this and our future lives. How can we ever be free from suffering then?  
 The crow behaving  like an eagle before a dying snake is an analogy for th ose of us who are weak 
in cultivating the antidotes to our negative em otions. When such antidotes in our minds are 
weak, we are easily harmed by even small downfa lls or faults; we become discouraged and give 
u p .  I f  t h i s  h a p p e n s ,  w e  w i l l  c o n t i n u o u s l y  e x p e r i e n c e  p r o b l e m s  a n d  s u f f e r i n g .  S o   w e  n e e d  t o  cultivate powerful antidotes to the negative emotions in our minds.  
(ii) The benefits of taking pride [in one's capacity]51 
(7, 53)  
Yet even the greatest (obstacle) will find it hard to overcome (one with a firm mind). 
 
(7, 54) 
                                              
51 Pride about ability means that you accomplish your own an d others’ welfare, thinking: “Since living beings are 
under the power of afflictions, they ar e unable to achieve even their own welf are, much less the welfares of others. 
I am able to accomplish the welfare of both myself and others.” ( Lamrim Chenmo , Vol. 2, pg. 197)  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                   CHAPTER VII - JOYOUS EFFORT  
 
 
151  
Therefore, with a steady mind, 
I shall overcome all falls, 
For if I am defeated by a fall, 
My wish to vanquish the thr ee realms will become a joke. 
 
One with a firm mind,  refers to someone who has cultivated  very strong antidotes to his own 
negative emotions. Such people are able to  puri fy whatever negativities they have accumulated 
and they are not harmed by downfalls; they don’t take rebirth in the lower realms. We need to 
cultivate this pride in our own ability to over come all downfalls. When the reverse happens, 
instead of us overcoming the downfalls, the downfalls overwhelm us. Then our wish to achieve 
the state of full enlightenment and complete vict ory over all the objects of abandonment of the 
three realms becomes a mere joke. 
Lesson 28   Chapter VII - verse 55-60 
Despite our busy working lives and feeling tired at the end of the day, we are still able to put 
aside time to attend Dharma classes. Since we ar e here, we should spend this time meaningfully 
by listening attentively to the teachings. Even if we cannot absorb everything taught in class, we 
will be able to find something that is beneficial  and helpful for us. We can then try to put that 
into practice.  
 
We listen to the teachings and practise the Dhar ma not for achieving just the happiness of this 
life. What is more important is the happiness of our future lives, which can be accomplished by 
practising the Dharma and engaging in virtue. Th ere is no other way of benefiting our future 
lives.   We need to attend class with this  understandin g that we are working to secure the happiness of 
our future lives. This is the motivation we should  generate for our attendance. When we listen to 
the teachings, we plant imprints in our mental continua. We should familiarise ourselves with 
what we have understood so that we can improve from life to life until the completion of our 
practices. Securing successive good human rebirt hs in our future lives, our minds are naturally 
more virtuous and we are more good-hearted. Havi ng placed the imprints in this life, whatever 
practice we do in our future lives will also beco me much easier. Obviously, the more attentively 
we listen to the teachings, th e more stable and powerful our mental imprints will be.   
 In order to cultivate joyous effort, we have to ov ercome the three forms of laziness. With laziness 
no Dharma gets done. The reflection on deat h and impermanence, base d on the 9-point death 
meditation mentioned in the Lam Rim texts,  is the best antidote. When this reflection is not 
done well, we can forget about Dharma practice as  it is almost impossible to develop any form of 
joyous effort.    
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                   CHAPTER VII - JOYOUS EFFORT  
 
 
152  
 
The way to develop the aspiration for the Dharma is to reflect on karma (the law of cause and 
effect). The Lam Rim mentions that  the faith of conviction in karm a is the root of all excellent 
things. When we generate this faith in our minds,  naturally, from our hearts, we will aspire for 
virtue. We also need to generate courage an d determination by thinking, “I can and I will 
succeed in my practice,” rather than giving in to  thoughts of self-defeatism: “This is too difficult 
for and is beyond me.” We need to give up th e laziness of despondency by thinking, “If others 
can do it, so can I.” 
As mentioned in this chapter on developing jo yous effort, we need to  abandon the  factors 
incongruous with joyous effort, i.e. we need to abandon the three forms of laziness. We need to 
cultivate the favourable conditions for developing joyous effort and that is achieved through the 
generation of the four  powers. We have covere d the first power, the power of aspiration. Now 
we are looking at the second power, the power of stability.  When we do not apply the relevant 
antidotes, we will be stained by even the  smalle st fault, which may cause us to fall into the lower 
realms.  
b) Increasing the strength of joyous effort - the antidote 
i) Increasing the strength of the conditions conducive to joyous effort  
1' A brief presentation by means of identifying the four powers  
2' An extensive explanation 
a’ The power of esteem  
b’ The power of stability  
1" Stable effort 
(1) A brief presentation 
(2) Explaining each individually 
(a) Pride of karma  
(b) Being proud of [one's] capacity 
i) The shortcomings of taking no pride in one's capacity 
(ii) The benefits of taking pride [in one's capacity] 
(iii) Abiding in pride as an antidote  
(iv) It is unreasonable to be proud of the 
afflictions 
(v) The benefits of pride as an antidote 
(c) Being proud of the afflictions 
2" Having undertaken [joyous effort], stabilizing its engagement 
c’ The power of joy 
d’ The power of suspension 
ii) Devoting oneself to the practice of the conduct by means of mindfulness and 
alertness 
iii) Accomplishing the conduct is within your power 
(iii) Abiding in pride as an antidote  
(7, 55) 
I will conquer everything 
And nothing at all shall conquer me! 
I, a child of the Lion-like Conqueror, 
Should remain self-confident in this way. 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                   CHAPTER VII - JOYOUS EFFORT  
 
 
153  
 
I will conquer everything and no thing at all shall conquer me!  means that we will conquer all the 
objects of abandonment of the three realms. The “I” here refers to a child of the Conquerors. 
The text mentioned earlier that pride is something to be abandoned, but now it says that pride is 
something to be cultivated. We will find the answe r to this apparent contradiction in the next 
verse. 
(iv) It is unreasonable to be proud of the afflictions 
(a') Decrying pride in the afflictions  
(b') The disadvantages of that  
(c') The reasonableness of abandoning it  
(a') Decrying pride in the afflictions   
(7, 56) 
Whoever has self-importance is destroyed by it, 
Is disturbed and has no self-confidence. 
For those with self-confidence do not succumb to the power of the enemy, 
Whereas the former are under the sway  of the enemy of self-importance. 
 
We need to differentiate between the pride of one’s capacity (or the pride of ability) and afflictive 
pride. When bodhisattvas generate the pride of abilit y, thinking, “I can do this,” it only serves to 
increase their respect for others, their determ ination and happiness.  We have to abandon 
afflictive pride because it causes us to disrespect others and only gives rise to suffering. When we rely on afflictive pride, we are controlled by afflictions.    
(b') The disadvantages of that  
(7, 57) 
Inflated by the disturbing conception of my self-importance, 
I shall be led by it to the lower realms. 
It destroys the joyous festival of being human. 
I shall become a slave, eating the food of others, 
 
(7, 58)  
Stupid, ugly, feeble and everywhere disrespected. 
 Pride causes rebirth in the lower realms. Even when reborn as humans, we will experience 
unhappiness  as we will be in lowly positions, such as being  servants and the like, not knowing 
what to abandon and cultivate ( stupid ), with unpleasant physical appearances, being weak ( feeble ) 
and disrespected everywhere. Despite not having done  anything to hurt or offend others, we will 
be bullied or looked down upon by others.  
 
Question by student : We see different words like “self-impo rtance,” “self-confidence” and “divine 
pride” in the English translation. Is it the same in Tibetan? Is the “pride about ability” the same 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                   CHAPTER VII - JOYOUS EFFORT  
 
 
154  
as “divine pride”? 
Reply:  In Tibetan, the root word for “pride” is the same, which is “nga rgyal.” For “divine pride,” 
we just add one more word “ha”, making it "ha ng a rgyal.” “Pride of ability” is not the same as 
“divine pride.” After bodhisattvas  start a particular  task, they cultivate the three kinds of pride by 
generating the determination to complete the ta sk. But when we engage in deity yoga, on the 
basis of visualising ourselves as  deities, we labe l, “This is me.” We do not identify ourselves as 
deities with the ordinary “I”. “Divine pride” is generated to overcome ordinary appearance. This 
is the way of meditating on oneself as a deity.  
(c') The reasonableness of abandoning it  
(7, 58)  
Tough people bloated by conceit 
Are also counted amon g the self-important; 
Tell me, what is more pathetic than this? 
 
Pride, which is a puffing up of the mind, prev ents us from practising the Dharma. This is 
something to be abandoned and is not included in  the pride of ability. Otherwise, there would 
be no one that we could point to  as a ‘lowly’ person who could no t cultivate the pride of ability. 
In other words, if we posit that afflictive pride is included in the pride of ab ility, then all sentient 
beings would have the same ability as the bodh isattvas to cultivate the pride of ability.  
(v) The benefits of pride as an antidote 
(7, 59) 
Whoever seizes self-confidence in order to  conquer the enemy of self-importance, 
They are the self-confident on es, the victorious heroes, 
And in addition, whoever definitely conquers the spread of this enemy, self-importance, 
Completely (wins) the fruit of a Conquero r, fulfilling the wishes of the world. 
 It is this pride of ability that enables bodhisattvas  to be victorious over the enemy and  afflictive 
pride. Also, it earns them the title, “heroes” due to their destruction of this affliction from the 
root, thereby attaining the state of full enlightenmen t, through which they ca n fulfil the wishes of 
limitless sentient beings.  
(c) Being proud of the afflictions 
(i) One should develop the strength of the antidotes to the afflictions 
(ii) One should act so as not to fall under their power even in the slightest 
(iii) One should develop a special intention to stabilize the antidotes 
(i) One should develop the strength of the antidotes to the afflictions 
(7, 60) 
If I find myself amidst a crow d of disturbing conceptions, 
I shall endure them in a thousand ways; 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                   CHAPTER VII - JOYOUS EFFORT  
 
 
155  
Like a lion among foxes, 
I will not be affected by this disturbing host. 
 
When we find ourselves amid the objects that are the causes for the three mental poisons (anger, 
attachment, and ignorance) to arise, we need to cultivate the antidotes in a stronger way than we 
normally would: in a thousand ways.  Just as lions cannot be harmed  by foxes, we should ensure 
that we are not affected by the hosts of afflic tions through cultivating very strong antidotes 
against them.  
 We can apply different types of antidotes when we are surrounded by the objects of anger or 
desire. The best practitioners can transform ad verse conditions into the path. The middling 
practitioners should apply the relevant antidote s while remaining where they are and, by so 
doing, they can remain unaffected by these obje cts. The novice practitioners should distance 
themselves from the objects. This advice pertains  to how we should deal with different kinds of 
objects to ensure we will not be affected by them.     
Lesson 29   Chapter VII - verse 61-76 
b' The power of stability 
1" Stable effort 
2" Having undertaken [joyous effort], stabilizing its engagement 
(1) A brief presentation 
(2) Explaining each individually 
(a) Pride of karma  
(b) Being proud of [one's] capacity 
(c) Being proud of the afflictions 
(i) One should develop the strength of the antidotes to the afflictions 
(ii) One should act so as not to fall under their power even in the 
slightest 
(iii) One should develop a special intention to stabilize the antidotes 
(ii) One should act so as not to fall under their power even in the slightest  
(7, 61) 
Just as men will guard their eyes 
When great danger and turmoil occur, 
Likewise, I shall never be swayed by  the disturbances within my mind, 
Even at times of great strife. 
 When we are in great danger, we protect our eyes. Similarly, when afflictions such as attachment 
a n d  a n g e r  a r i s e  i n  o u r  m i n d s ,  w e  s h o u l d  e n s u r e  t h a t  w e  a r e  n o t  c o n t r o l l e d  b y  t h e m  i n  t h e  slightest way.  
(iii) One should develop a special intention to stabilize the antidotes 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                   CHAPTER VII - JOYOUS EFFORT  
 
 
156  
(7, 62)52 
It would be better fo r me to be burned, 
To have my head cut off and to be killed, 
Rather then ever bowing down 
To those ever-present disturbing conceptions. 
(So likewise, in all situations, I should  do nothing other than what is fit.)53 
 
This verse is saying that regardless of how bad or  difficult the situation we may find ourselves in 
is, it is better for us to endure the physical hard ships than to give in to our negative emotions. 
The worst that can happen is that we will be killed but our killer will not be able to send us to 
the lower realms. However, if we give in to ou r negative emotions, we will definitely find 
ourselves there. The suffering there is far worse and more unbearable than the worst suffering we 
will ever encounter in cyclic existence. This was already explained in earlier lessons when we 
looked at the karma of engaging in negative acti ons and the resultant rebirth in the hell realms.  
 The essence of verses 60 - 62 is  t he importance of ensuring that we do not allow ourselves to 
succumb to our negative emotions, by cultivatin g very strong antidotes against them and not 
engaging in any inappropriate or improper conduct.   
b) Increasing the strength of joyous effort - the antidote 
i) Increasing the strength of the conditions conducive to joyous effort  
1' A brief presentation by means of identifying the four powers  
2' An extensive explanation 
a’ The power of esteem  
b’ The power of stability  
c’ The power of joy 
1" Making effort in virtue without considering the fully ripened effect  
2" Accomplishing virtue by mentally engaging the effect  
3" The way to apply oneself with the power of joy 
d’ The power of suspension 
ii) Devoting oneself to the practice of the conduct by means of mindfulness and 
alertness 
1' Devoting oneself to conscientiousness 
2' Devoting oneself to mindfulness and alertness 
3' Not distinguishing a time of wrongdoing for mindfulness and alertness  
4' One should overcome wrongdoing as soon as it arises 
5' One should make effort in reasonable activities  
iii) Accomplishing the conduct is within your power 
1" Making effort in virtue without considering the fully ripened effect  
(7, 63) 
                                              
52 Footnote of root text, pg. 174 
 
53 These two lines occur in some editions of the text, but it is not certain whether they are the actual words of 
Shantideva. See Thog. p. 148 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                   CHAPTER VII - JOYOUS EFFORT  
 
 
157  
Just like those who yearn for the fruits of play, 
(Bodhisattvas) are attracted 
To whatever task they may do; 
They never have enough, it  only brings them joy. 
 
When children are engrossed in playing, they ar e only concerned with th e happiness that comes 
from playing. They don’t think about future happine ss. They don’t get tired; they just wish for 
the playtime to never end.   In the same way, when the bodhisattvas are enga ged in bodhisattva conduc t - the practice of the 
six perfections - they do not expect anything in  return nor are they concerned about the future 
fruitional effects of their actions.  Th ey simply focus on their practices.  
 When bodhisattvas are working to benefit others , they do so happily with great delight and 
enthusiasm, just like children at  play. Just as children do not tire of playing, so bodhisattvas 
never tire of working for others. They engage in their practices continuously. 
 In the same way, when we are working to benefi t others, we should have  no expectations of 
receiving anything  in return nor should we look forward to the positive fruitional results that await us in the future.  Like children playing, we should work to benefit others with great delight 
and enthusiasm, without distraction or tiredness.
54  
2" Accomplishing virtue by mentally engaging the effect  
(7, 64) 
Although people work in order to be happy, 
It is uncertain whether or not they will find it; 
But how can those whose work itself is joy 
Find happiness unless they do it? 
 
(7, 65) 
If I feel that I never have  enough sensual objects, 
Which are like honey smeared upon a razor's edge, 
Then why should I ever feel that I have enough 
Merit which ripens in happiness and peace? 
 There is no certainty as to whether the worldly activities we engage in to achieve happiness – 
                                             
 
54 So strive with an attitude like that of children who enga ge in play without being satiated. That is, you must be 
just as insatiable about what causes pleasurable results as you are about the results themselves. For, if ordinary 
persons strive even when they are unce rtain whether they will obtain a pleasant  result, what need is there to speak 
about activities which are certain to bear pleasurable result? (Lamrim Chenmo ., Vol. 2, pg. 200) 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                   CHAPTER VII - JOYOUS EFFORT  
 
 
158  
going to work, doing business, etc. -  will brin g us the happiness we seek. On the other hand, the 
Bodhisattvas practice of the six perfections is gu aranteed to yield positive results and happiness. 
We want that kind of happiness yet we are not prepared to engage in its cause. How on earth 
then can we expect to find happiness in this and our future lives?  We are very attached to the five sense objects of  desire. When these objects contact the respective 
consciousnesses, we experience and become atta ched to these minute moments of pleasure. We 
begin to crave for them and yet we are never satiated  by these pleasures. It is like drinking salt 
water, which can never quench our thirst.   Licking honey that is smeared upon a razor’s edge is very dangerous as we could cut our tongues but the resultant pleasure is minimal. In the same  way, the activity of enjoying sense objects is 
fraught with danger, yet it brings limited conten tment.  The more attached we are to them, the 
greater control our attachment has over our minds.  Once we are controlled by our afflictions, we 
will definitely go to the lower realms. Therefore, is there greater danger or profit from indulging 
in the five objects of desire?  The collection of merit and wisdom, on the other hand, is the cause for us  to achieve the higher 
rebirth states of humans and gods and the goals of  liberation and full enlightenment. Working to 
accumulate merit and wisdom only benefits us, so we  should engage in these activities as much as 
we can.    In summary, we should develop contentment toward s those activities that are highly dangerous 
and bring only limited benefit. But, we should never be satisfied by how much we engage in 
virtuous activities that are highly beneficial and safe for us.   
Reflecting on these different points helps us to  keep our minds enthusiastic and delighted when 
we are engaging in virtue. This is the power of joy.
55 
3" The way to apply oneself with the power of joy 
(7, 66) 
Thus in order to complete this task, 
I shall venture into it 
Just as an elephant torm ented by the mid-day sun 
Plunges into a (cool, refreshing) lake. 
                                              
55 Develop an attitude of being insatiable, thinking, “Indul ging in sensual pleasure is like licking honey off the 
sharp blade of a razor; it is the source of a little sweetness,  but it slices up the tongue. If I cannot get enough of this 
experience, which gives me great suffering for the sake of just a slight, temporary plea sure, what sense could there 
be in feeling that I have had enough of the collections of merit and sublime wisdom, which give flawless, infinite 
happiness, both immediate and long-term?” (Lamrim Chenmo , Vol.2,pg.200)  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                   CHAPTER VII - JOYOUS EFFORT  
 
 
159  
 
When bodhisattvas are working to complete thei r virtuous activities to benefit others they 
generate enthusiasm and take delight in the activi ties, like the elephant who is tormented by heat 
plunging happily into a pool of water. Just as the elephant suffers when it cannot find a lake to 
cool off in, so bodhisattvas suffer when they are unable to find any opportunity to benefit others. 
W h e n  w e  e n g a g e  i n  v i r t u o u s  a c t i v i t i e s  t o  b e n e f i t others, we should do so enthusiastically and 
happily like the bodhisattvas.  
d' The power of suspension   
1" Periodic suspension  
2" Total suspension  
1" Periodic suspension  
(7, 67) 
When my strength declines, I should leave whatever I am doing 
In order to be able to continue with it later. 
 
We should always complete any virtuous activity th at we have started. However, if along the way, 
we fall ill or become extremely worn out and ou r physical condition no longer allows us to 
continue, we should rest awhile thinking, “I am  only resting to regain my physical strength. 
When I have recovered, I will co mplete the task at hand.”   
The determination and thought to continue the task once we have recovered is extremely 
important. Therefore, this is called periodic  suspension or temporary relinquishment.  
2" Total suspension  
(7, 67)  
Having done something well, I should put it aside 
With the wish (to accomplish) what will follow. 
 
In order to achieve the state of full enlightenmen t, we need to engage in and accomplish many 
virtuous activities and practices. Having comple ted a specific practice well, we should aim to 
engage in more advanced practices and not be complacent or be content with what we have 
accomplished. In order to start the new advanced practices, we have to relinquish the preceding 
activities that we completed. 56 
                                              
56 Developing the power of relinquishment:  If you be c o m e  p h y s i c a l l y  o r  m e n t a l l y  f a t i g u e d  f r o m  y o u r  
perseverance, you must rest for a while. Otherwise, yo u will become exhausted and very disheartened, thereby 
later preventing your joyous persev erance. Immediately after you have re sted, persevere again, and when you 
have completely finished your earlier activity, do not let this satisfy you. You must jo yously persevere at other, 
higher activities. The next task is important, because if  you consider each earlier g ood quality sufficient, this 
will be a big obstacle to the attainment of many higher attributes. ( Lamrim Chenmo , Vol. 2, pg. 201)  
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                   CHAPTER VII - JOYOUS EFFORT  
 
 
160  
 
ii) Devoting oneself to the practice of the conduct by means of mindfulness and alertness 
1' Devoting oneself to conscientiousness 
2' Devoting oneself to mindfulness and alertness 
3' Not distinguishing a time of wrongdoing for mindfulness and alertness  
4' One should overcome wrongdoing as soon as it arises 
5' One should make effort in reasonable activities  
1' Devoting oneself to conscientiousness 
(7, 68) 
Just as an old warrior approaches 
The swords of an enemy upon the battlefront, 
So shall I avoid the weapons of  the disturbing conceptions 
And skilfully bind this enemy. 
 
When an experienced warrior goes to battle and sees the enemy approaching, he looks out for 
the enemies’ weapons and plans how to avoid be ing hit by the enemy. At the same time, he 
thinks of ways to destroy the en emy. In the same way,  we should check if  the weapons of our 
afflictions are harming our minds an d think of how to uproot them.57 
2' Devoting oneself to mindfulness and alertness 
(7, 69) 
If someone dropped a sword during a battle, 
They would immediately pick it up out of fear. 
Likewise, if I lose the weapon of mindfulness, 
I should quickly retrieve it, being afraid of hell. 
 
When someone engaged in battle dropped his sword, he would immediately pick it up out of fear. Our sword is related to our mindfulness, the mindfulness of not forgetting the chosen 
object of virtue. In the same way when we lose the mindfulness of the virtuous object, we come 
under the control of the negative emotions and we experience all kinds of suffering and go to the 
lower realms. By remembering this and generati ng fear we need to conscientiously apply 
                                             
 
57 For example, when seasoned warriors – the adepts who ar e accustomed to the activity of fighting battles – enter 
into a sword fight, etc., with their en emy, they do not put value only on de stroying their opponent. Rather, they 
must accomplish two things – skilfull y avoiding the blows of weapons directed at them and destroying their 
opponent. Likewise, when practitioners battle their afflicti ons, they must persevere as they become proficient in 
two things – taking defensive precautions and thus avoi ding a wound to their mind, and, on the offensive, 
destroying the afflictions by applying their remedies. For,  otherwise, while they may use the remedy to stop the 
activity of one portion of the afflictions,  they are either robbed of some aspect of virtue by other afflictions, or else 
they develop a great fault in their mind so that the harm of  the afflictions and the creation of virtue are equal, in 
w h i c h  c a s e  i t  w i l l  b e  h a r d  t o  m a k e  f u r t h e r  p r o g r e s s  i n  t h e  v i r t u o u s  p r a c t i c e  o f  a p p l y i n g  t h e  r e m e d y .  ( Lamrim 
Chenmo , Vol. 2, pg. 202)  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                   CHAPTER VII - JOYOUS EFFORT  
 
 
161  
mindfulness.58 
3' Not distinguishing a time of wrongdoing for mindfulness and alertness  
(7, 70) 
Just as poison spreads throughout the body 
In dependence upon the (circulation of) blood. 
Likewise, if (a disturbing conc eption) finds an opportunity, 
Unwholesomeness will permeate my mind. 
(7,71) 
Those who practice should be as attentive 
As a frightened man carrying a jar full of mustard oil, 
Who is being threatened by someone with a sword, 
(And told) that he will be kille d if he spills just one drop. 
 
We usually think in this way: “When a small delusi on arises in my mind, it is not serious as it 
cannot harm me so there is no need for me to put in the effort to overcome  it.”  This is not a 
correct way of thinking; the reason is in verse 70 : When we are injected with poison, it spreads 
throughout our bodies via the bloodstr eam and puts us in grave danger.   
 Even the slightest distraction can fill our minds with different kinds of problems. When our minds are clouded by these mental poisons, our pa th to a good rebirth is completely blocked and 
we go to the lower realms. Therefore, as mentione d in verse 70, we must stop the arising of even 
the smallest affliction in our minds at once.  
                                             
 
 
58 Furthermore, regarding the object to which mindfulne ss attends, mindfulness apprehends an object that 
wisdom has fully discerned; mi ndfulness does not distinguish its object on its own.  
Question : What does wisdom discern? 
Reply:  I n  g e n e r a l  w i s d o m  d i s c e r n s  e v e r y t h i n g  t o  b e  a d o p t e d and everything to be cast aside as explained in 
scripture; in particular, it discerns what is to be adopted and what is to be cast aside according to the vows that you 
have taken. Therefore, once you apply mindfulness and vigilance to these, you will complete your practice; you will 
not be successful by just applying mindfulness and vigilance within the narrow confines of attention to an object of 
meditation. 
What is more, when warriors are in a battle, they strive from the beginning not to lose their sword; when by 
chance they do drop it, they pick it up immediately. Th ese two actions rest on a fear of being killed that is not 
mere words. Likewise, those who cultivat e the path are afraid to lose the mind fulness that does not forget what is 
to be adopted and what eliminated; even if they do lo se it, they immediately reapply it. These two actions are 
based on the development in their minds of a real terror  of falling into miserable realms as a result of the 
pollution of infractions and faults that occur when mindfulness lapses. This, in turn, depends on having made 
karma and its effects central to their practice and then sustaining that a pproach. Those who fa il to develop the 
awareness that these points are profou nd instructions sever the root of the good qualities ensuing from the 
practice that delights the learned, the sacred foundati on of the path. ( Lamrim Chenmo , Vol. 2, pg. 203) 
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                   CHAPTER VII - JOYOUS EFFORT  
 
 
162  
 
We can use this analogy to motivate ourselves: im agine we are forced to carry a jar full of mustard 
oil on our backs down an uneven and slippery path. We are told that we will be killed if we spill 
a drop of this oil. In this situation, our minds will be very focussed and we will be very careful 
indeed.   
 Bodhisattvas protect their vows by relying on mindfulness, aler tness and conscientiousness and 
remembering the suffering of the lower realms and cyclic existence. We should do likewise to 
protect the vows we have taken.  
4' One should overcome wrongdoing as soon as it arises 
 
(7, 72) 
Just as I would swiftly stand up 
If a snake came into my lap, 
Likewise, if any sleep or laziness occurs, 
I shall quickly turn it back. 
 
(7,73) 
Each time something unwholesome occurs 
I should criticize myself, 
And then contemplate for a long time 
That I shall never let this happen again. 
 
Just as I would swiftly stand up, if a snake came into my lap : When laziness suddenly strikes, by 
reflecting on death and impermanence and reme mbering the suffering of the hell realms, we 
should immediately engage in virtue.  
 The point is to stop any kind of wrongdoing i mmediately by generating the thought, “I am not 
going to do this again.” How do we do this? We’v e encountered all sorts of undesirable situations 
due to  our past negativities. By reflecting on this and generating regret for our past negative 
actions, when we find ourselves repeating th ese actions we should reprimand ourselves and 
abstain from them by applying the four opponent powers, as they will harm us in this and our future lives. 
59 
                                              
59 Furthermore, do not merely discontinue faults, but actively feel displeasure at their having occurred. 
Contemplate as follows, "Because I proc eeded in this way in the past as we ll, I have been wandering in cyclic 
existence up to now. In particular, it is especially blameworthy that I have taken the bodhisattva vows and yet con-
tinue with things that are incompatible with the vows' prec epts." Become inspired to henceforth restrain yourself, 
thinking, "From now on I shall make sure that this fault never occurs." Frequently employ both these attitudes. 
(Lamrim Chenmo , Vol. 2,pg.204) 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                   CHAPTER VII - JOYOUS EFFORT  
 
 
163  
5' One should make effort in reasonable activities  
(7, 74) 
"Likewise in all these situations 
I shall acquaint myself with mindfulness." 
With this (motivation) as a cause, I shall aspire 
To meet (with teachers) or accomp lish the tasks (they assign me). 
 
By depending on conscientiousness, mindfulness and alertness, we prevent the arising of afflictions  in our minds and we aspire to meet  with teachers who can show us the unmistaken 
path. Even if we are unable to meet such spir itual masters, we should continue to practise 
whatever instructions or precepts we have rece ived by depending on mindfulness and alertness. 
We should engage in whatever is appropriate and abandon inappropriate actions. 
60 
 
iii) Accomplishing the conduct is within your power 
1' Through pliancy of body and mind, one should even arise in virtue  
2' Applying the analogy to the meaning  
1' Through pliancy of body and mind, one should even arise in virtue  
(7, 75) 
In order to have strength for everything, 
I should recall before undertaking any action 
The advice in (the chapter on) conscientiousness, 
And then joyfully rise (to the task). 
 
B e f o r e  e n g a g i n g  i n  a n d  i n  o r d e r  t o  c o m p l e t e  a n y virtuous activities, we need to generate the 
power of joyous effort. We need conscienti ousness to do this. In order to develop 
conscientiousness, we need to listen to and remember well the instructions for developing it. 
When we engage in virtue, we should be able to do so easily, at any time. Pliancy , refers to both 
physical and mental pliancy.61 
                                              
60 Strive at any deep causes that give rise to the continuous, powerful mindfulness that is the root of this practice. 
Rely on such activities as keeping the company of excellent teachers and excellent companions, and broad 
learning, which are the causes of this powerful mindfulness. In this vein,  Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds states: 
"In any of these situations 
I will practice mindfulness." 
With this motive aspire to meet teachers And engage in appropriate activities.  
In summary, you must study and discern well what bodhisattva training requires you to adopt and to cast aside, and then joyously persevere at continuo usly being mindful in all your conduct of what you have understood about 
what to adopt and what to cast aside. Hence, it is extr emely important not to err about that at which you are to 
persevere. ( Lamrim Chenmo , Vol. 2, pg. 205)  
 
61 The method for using joyous perseverance to make the mind and body serviceable is the power of mastery. 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                   CHAPTER VII - JOYOUS EFFORT  
 
 
164  
2' Applying the analogy to the meaning  
(7, 76) 
Just as the wind blowing back and forth 
Controls (the movement of ) a piece of cotton, 
So shall I be controlled by joy, 
And in this way accomplish everything 
 
Just as the wind blowing back and forth, controls (the movement of) a piece of cotton :  
Due to the power of enthusiasm for virtue, we will be able to employ our bodies, speech and 
minds to accomplish any virtue we like, just like  the piece of cotton drif ting wherever the wind 
blows.  
b. The chapter's name 
The name of the chapter is Teaching Joyous Effort 
                                                                                                                                                           
Shantideva sets forth in the chapter on conscientiousness [in his Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds  the necessity of 
learning the bodhisattva trainings; th e extremely grave consequences if you do not train in these once you have 
pledged to do so; how to regard the afflictions as the enem y; and the ways to generate the courage that looks upon 
the hardship of battling the afflictions as an ornament rath er than as a burden. Meditate  on these before taking up 
the task of training in the bodhisattva deeds. Thus sto pping all the inhibitions that prevent you from using your 
body and mind for virtuous activity, rise gladly to that task. ( Lamrim Chenmo , Vol. 2, pg. 206)  
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program               CHAPTER VIII - CONCENTRATION  
 
165  
The Eighth Chapter: Teachi ng Absorbtion (Concentration) 
Lesson 30   Chapter VIII - verse 1-3 
In The Placements of Mindfulness , Buddha said that laziness is one of the bases for the generation 
of all our mental afflictions. Anyone who has la ziness in their  mental continuum will find it 
d i f f i c u l t  t o  e n g a g e  i n  v i r t u e .  I n  o r d e r  t o  o v e r c o m e  l a z i n e s s ,  w e  h a v e  t o  r e l y  o n  j o y o u s  e f f o r t .   
Therefore, we should strive to develop it.   To develop joyous effort in our minds, we have to eliminate its obstructin g factors by relying on 
the favourable conditions for generating this qual ity. The three forms of laziness are identified to 
be incongruous with the generation of joyous effort. We also need to generate the four powers that are conducive conditions for its development.     What are some of the obstacles that prevent us from developing joyous effort? We understand 
the need to practise Dharma and we know that we  can practise but nothing gets done at the end 
of the day. Why does this happen? We procrastin ate and postpone the practice to some time in 
the future, thinking, “I still have time and I will  do it later.” We are completely overwhelmed by 
our attachment to ignoble activities. Due to our low self-esteem, we think, “I can’t do this” and 
become discouraged.   In order to overcome the laziness of procrastination,  thinking, “I still have time and I will do it 
later”, we reflect on how our bodies are disinteg rating quickly as we mo ve towards death. When 
death occurs, due to our failure to engage in any be neficial or positive actions, we will fall into 
the lower realms. We should also remember how difficu lt it is to obtain this human life of leisure 
and opportunities.   To overcome the laziness of attachment to igno ble activities, we should reflect on how the 
practice of the holy Dharma is the source of  happiness in this and our future lives. The 
meaningless pursuit of reputation and worldly go als will only cause our virtue to degenerate. 
Relying on worldly activities will only generate more suffering for us.   The other obstacle that prevents us from developing  joyous effort is the th ought, “I can’t do this. 
It is beyond me.” To overcome this, there are three different antidotes.  Some people become discouraged, thinking, “The Buddha was an exceptionally capable person. How can I ever hope to achieve his limitless qualit ies?” In this instance, we should reflect on how 
the Buddha attained buddhahood. In the beginning, the Buddha was like us and he did not have 
a n y  s p e c i a l  a d v a n t a g e .  B u t  h e  w o r k e d  v e r y  h a r d  a n d  i m p r o v e d  h i m s e l f  f r o m  l i f e  t o  l i f e  t i l l  h e  finally attained enlightenment. All the buddhas of  the past were once ordinary beings like us. 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program               CHAPTER VIII - CONCENTRATION  
 
166  
Buddha points out that if inferior beings such as animals and insects ca n achieve enlightenment, 
then obviously we can achieve enlightenment if we are willing to work hard for it. 
 
Others are discouraged at the thou ght of the extensive practices of  the bodhisattvas such as the 
sacrifice of one’s limbs, in order to achieve en lightenment.  But the Buddha never expects us to 
make such sacrifices. In fact, he  stipulates we should not do so until we have perfected our 
practice of giving - when giving away our bodies  would mean no more to us than giving away a 
plate of food.  We will not experien ce any difficulties then. By reflecting like this, we will be able 
to overcome this form of discouragement.  
 Yet, there are still others who are discouraged by the thought of how the bodhisattvas have to 
take rebirth repeatedly in cyclic existence and su ffer there in order to benefit sentient beings. But 
when the superior bodhisattvas (who have achiev ed the direct realisation of emptiness and have 
abandoned all their afflictions) take rebirth in cyclic existence, they do not experience any 
physical suffering. Because of their direct percepti on of emptiness, all samsaric sufferings appear 
illusory to them and they do not experien ce any mental unhappiness. These superior 
bodhisattvas are, therefore, both  physically and mentally happy wh en they are abiding in cyclic 
existence. Again, there ar e no grounds for this form of discouragement.  
 By depending on the various antidotes, we  can overcome all the different forms of 
discouragement.   We also have to cultivate the fo ur powers conducive to the develo pment of joyous effort. We rely 
on the power of aspiration to generate joyous effo rt for the first time. Then, we rely on the power 
of stability (or steadfastness) to prevent this joyous effort from degenerating, rendering it 
irreversible. When engaging in virtuous work, we should do so with grea t delight and enthusiasm 
by cultivating the power of joy, which is like th e joy of a child completely engrossed in play.   
 Having developed joyous effort, we also have to be skilful in its application. In the process of 
cultivating virtue, we may overtax ourselves and our health may deteriorate. We then need to 
cultivate the power of relinquishment and su spend our activities, either temporarily or 
completely.   Some texts mention two additional powers that are also included in the root text though they are 
not explicitly named. These are the power of ea rnest application and the power of mastery. We 
need to generate very powerful antidotes to over come our negative emotions. In order to do this, 
we have to generate the power of  earnest application where we a pply ourselves to the cultivation 
of mindfulness and vigilance. Through such applic ation, we gain mastery (or control) over our 
bodies and minds, which can then be employed  for virtue as and when we wish. Negative 
emotions are easily subdued. Th is is the power of mastery. 
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program               CHAPTER VIII - CONCENTRATION  
 
167  
Developing joyous effort makes it easier to ac complish calm abiding. On the basis of calm 
abiding, we can then cultivate special insight fo cusing on emptiness. This becomes the direct 
antidote to our negative emotions, which can be removed from the root. This will be explained 
in the chapter on wisdom. We need joyous effo rt to develop calm abiding and we need calm 
abiding to generate special insight. Hence, we  have this chapter on teaching absorption.  
 
3. Explaining the way to train in the remaining four perfections 
A. The way to train in patience 
B. The way to train in joyous effort 
C. The way to train in the concentrations included in the common and uncommon calm 
abidings  
a Explaining the chapter's material 
1)  Instructions on cultivating concentration 
a) The reasons it is necessary to accomplish calm abiding 
b) Instructions on abandoning the class of things incongruous with 
calm abiding 
2)  Abandoning the class of (discordant) things incongruous with calm abiding 
a) Abandoning the bustle of the world 
i)  Identifying the causes of attachment to the world  ii) The way to abandon these 
b) Abandoning erroneous conceptions  
3)  How to cultivate calm abiding 
b The chapter's name 
D. The way to train in wisdom - the nature of insight 
 
Common calm abiding can also be achieved by non-Buddhists.  Uncommon calm abiding is cultivated by Buddhists and refers specifically to the type of calm abiding that leads to the 
generation of special insight. 
a) The reasons it is necessary to accomplish calm abiding 
(8,1) 
Having developed enthusiasm in this way, 
I should place my mind in concentration; 
For the person whose mind is distracted 
Dwells between the fangs of  disturbing conceptions. 
 
(8,2)  
However, through solitude of body and mind 
No distractions will occur; 
 
O n  t h e  b a s i s  o f  h a v i n g  d e v e l o p e d  j o y o u s  e f f o r t  by following the instruct ions in the previous 
chapter, we should now focus on developing the concentration that is free from the faults of 
excitement and laxity and is able to remain focu ssed on the chosen object of observation without 
distraction.  What are the disadvantages of not having this kind  of concentration? When we distracted by the 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program               CHAPTER VIII - CONCENTRATION  
 
168  
different sense objects and our minds pursue them, this will give rise to afflictions such as 
attachment or anger, which destroy our virtue an d lead us to the lower realms and immeasurable 
suffering. A distracted mind is like living amid dangerous wild animals ready to devour us. This 
verse points out the need for physic al isolation and mental solitude. 
 
How do we overcome distractions while living in th e hustle and bustle of life? We have to engage 
in physical and mental isolation. Physical isol ation means abandoning the hustle and bustle of 
life and abandoning living with others. Mental  isolation means keeping the mind free from the 
disturbance of afflictions such as anger and attachment. 
b) Instructions on abandoning the class of things incongruous with calm abiding 
(8, 2) 
Therefore, I should forsake the worldly life, 
And completely discard distorted conceptions. 
 Physical solitude is achieved by abandoning th ose who are close to us, such as our friends, 
parents, loved ones and relatives and our attachme n t  t o  t h e  h u s t l e  a n d  b u s t l e  o f  l i f e .  M e n t a l  
isolation is achieved by distancing ourselves fr om attachment and anger (some texts also mention 
sleep and lethargy) and abandoning the objects of desire.  There are different levels of concentration: mund ane (worldly) and supramundane. It is very rare 
for one to achieve mundane concentration. To achieve enlightenment and supramundane 
concentration is even rarer. If we are dist racted, how can we hope to develop mundane 
concentration? And if it is so difficult to de velop mundane concentration, how can we achieve 
enlightenment?  Therefore, the Buddha mentions  in the sutras the importance of not being 
distracted.   
2)  Abandoning the class of things incongruous with calm abiding 
a) Abandoning the bustle of the world 
i)  Identifying the causes of attachment to the world  
ii) The way to abandon these 
b) Abandoning erroneous conceptions  
i)  Identifying the causes of attachment to the world  
(8,3) 
Worldly life is not forsaken because of attachment (to people), 
And due to craving for mate rial gain and the like; 
 
Worldly life is not forsaken because of our atta chment to the self and others, material gain, 
respect and honour. We have to abandon the atta chment that comes from this sense of “I” and 
“mine”, which leads on to attachment for othe rs and material gain, respect and honour and 
keeps us completely bound to the hustle and bustle of life.  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program               CHAPTER VIII - CONCENTRATION  
 
169  
Lesson 31   Chapter VIII - verse 3-11 
In the last lesson, we considered why we need to  cultivate calm abiding, where we generate the 
concentration that is able to place the mind single-pointedly on a chosen virtuous object. 
Without stable concentration, our minds will be  under the influence of laxity and excitement, 
which will weaken the virtue in our mental co ntinua. We become like someone surrounded by 
dangerous wild animals ready to pounce on and devour us.   
 If we are overcome by laxity, excitement and dist ractions, we will create negative karma, which 
will lead us to the lower realms. The way to stop this from happening is to strive for physical and 
mental solitude. The distractions come from the hu stle and bustle of  worldly life and the mind 
that is attached to worldly activities, due to  our attachment to the “self” and “mine”.  
 In this lesson, we identify the causes of attachment to different objects, such as sentient beings, wealth, honour and gain. These ar ise primarily from this attachme nt to the “self” and “mine”, 
from which follows the attachment to  worldly life. 
 
In order to eradicate all these forms of attach ment, we need special insight to help us to 
eliminate our self-grasping. The development of  special insight must be preceded by the 
development of calm abiding. In order to develo p calm abiding, we must give up all forms of 
distraction and in order to do this, we  must give up our worldly activities. 
 
3. Explaining the way to train in the remaining four perfections 
A. The way to train in patience 
B. The way to train in joyous effort C. The way to train in the concentrations included in the common and uncommon calm abidings  
a Explaining the chapter's material 
1)  Instructions on cultivating concentration 2)  Abandoning the class of things incongruous with calm abiding 
a) Abandoning the bustle of the world 
i)  Identifying the causes of attachment to the world  
ii) The way to abandon these 
1' Identifying the antidote 
a' Instructions on abandoning attachment  
b' Identifying the antidotes that act to abandon attachment  
2' The methods for developing the antidote 
a' Inner: Abandoning attachment to sentient beings  
1" The disadvantages of attachment 
a" Not encountering what one wants 
b" Lack of discrimination in regards to sensory 
objects 
c" Not being content despite the fact that one has 
obtained [what one sought] 
d" It acts to hinder liberation 
e" It causes one to waste the leisures and endowments  
2" Abandoning them by knowing the disadvantages  
a’’ Reflecting on the disadvantages 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program               CHAPTER VIII - CONCENTRATION  
 
170  
(1) An extensive explanation 
(a) It destroys what could otherwise be very 
meaningful and leads one to the lower 
realms (b) Do not rely on the company of child[-like 
people] and the difficulty of doing so 
(c) One does not obtain any benefit from it 
but rather receives harm   
(2) Synopsis 
b’’ The way to abandon them 
b' Outer: Abandoning attachment to gain and honor 
3' The disadvantages of bustle 
4' The benefits of relying on isolation  
b) Abandoning erroneous conceptions  
3)  How to cultivate calm abiding 
b The chapter's name 
D. The way to train in wisdom - the nature of insight 
a' Instructions on abandoning attachment  
(8, 3 cd)  
Therefore I should entirely forsake these things, 
For this is the way in which the wise behave. 
 
The instructions on abandoning attachment are to abandon attachment to both inner (sentient 
beings) and outer phenomena. We are encouraged to reflect on the instructions of the great 
scholars who were expert in what is  to be abandoned and cultivated.  
b' Identifying the antidotes that act to abandon attachment  
(8, 4) 
Having understood that disturbing co nceptions are completely overcome 
By superior insight endowed with calm abiding, 
First of all, I should se arch for calm abiding. 
This is achieved through the genuine jo y of those unattached to worldly life. 
 Through habituation to the concentration that is able to place the mind single-pointedly on a 
c h o s e n  v i r t u o u s  o b j e c t  o f  o b s e r v a t i o n ,  w e  w i l l  d e f i n i t e l y  b e  a b l e  t o  o v e r c o m e  l a x i t y  a n d  excitement. This is done through the nine mental  states. We achieve calm abiding through these 
(nine mental states) as a preliminary. When we achieve the bliss of phys ical and mental pliancy 
we have reached fully qualified calm abiding.   When our analysis is engaged within such a state o f  c a l m  a b i d i n g ,  w e  w i l l  b e  a b l e  t o  i n d u c e  
pliancy; that is when we can achieve special insi ght - the tool that enables us to destroy all the 
afflictions of the 3 realms together with their seeds.  Without the special insight focusing on emptine ss, we cannot abandon self-grasping, attachment, 
etc. Prior to achieving this special insight we mu st achieve the realization of calm abiding.  To 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program               CHAPTER VIII - CONCENTRATION  
 
171  
achieve calm abiding, we must give up attachme nt to the external and internal worlds (i.e. 
sentient beings, our bodies and enjoyments). Then within this state of mind, we generate a mind 
aspiring to achieve this calm abiding. Attachment has to be abandoned; if not, our mind will fall 
under the influence of  laxity or excitement. 
 
2' The methods for developing the antidote 
a' Inner: Abandoning attachment to sentient beings  
1" The disadvantages of attachment 
a" Not encountering what one wants 
b" Lack of discrimination in regards to sensory objects 
c" Not being content despite the fact that one has obtained [what one sought] 
d" It acts to hinder liberation e" It causes one to waste the leisures and endowments  
a" Not encountering what one wants 
(8, 5) 
Because of the obsession one transient being 
Has for other transient beings, 
They will not see their beloved ones again 
For many thousands of lives. 
 
We ourselves and the objects of our attachment i. e. our loved ones are, by nature, impermanent 
and, therefore, not stable and everlasting. Therefor e, it is inappropriate for us to be attached to 
them. The problem with bein g attached to others is that we su ffer in this life and in the future 
for countless lifetimes. We will never meet with wh at we desire; we will be reborn in unpleasant 
places and will encounter unpleasant situations. Th ese are the fruitional effects of attachment.    
b" Lack of discrimination in regards to sensory objects   
(8, 6)  
Not seeing them , I am unhappy 
And my mind cannot be settled in equipoise; 
 This outline could refer to the host ility that is induced by the obje cts of desire. Wh en we see only 
unpleasant objects or encounter unpleasant situat ions, it gives rise to mental unhappiness, which 
causes our minds to be distracted and makes it  difficult to achieve the meditative equipoise 
required to develop calm abiding. When this outl ine becomes clearer, I will explain it again as to 
how these 2 lines go with the outline.  
c" Not being content despite the fact that one has obtained [what one sought]   
(8, 6 cd) 
Even if I see them, there is no satisfaction 
And, as before, I am tormented by craving. 
 Craving remains even when we meet people we like and suffering comes from this lack of 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program               CHAPTER VIII - CONCENTRATION  
 
172  
satisfaction. The suffering we experience having  met such people is ex actly the same as the 
suffering we experience before meeting them. This is also presented in the Lamrim Chenmo  in the 
section on the eight types of suffering.62 
d" It acts to hinder liberation 
(8, 7) 
Through being attached to living beings, 
I am completely obscured from the perfect reality, 
My disillusionment (with cy clic existence) perishes 
And, in the end, I am  tortured by sorrow. 
 
“Being attached to living beings, I am comp letely obscured from the perfect reality ”: Attachment to people 
is a hindrance to our direct realisation of the na ture of reality (emptiness) and prevents us from 
being disheartened with cyclic existence. We destroy whatever  disillusionment with cyclic 
existence we may have developed with atta chment and we will not achieve liberation. 
Furthermore, it is only a matter of time before we will be separated fr om them and when that 
happens, we will be overcome by sorrow.   
e" It causes one to waste the leisures and endowments 
(8, 8) 
By thinking only of them, 
This life will pass without any meaning. 
 
Due to our attachment to our loved ones, we thin k of them all the time and end up wasting our 
                                              
62 (v) The suffering of encountering what is unpleasant 
1) Merely encountering your enemies, fo r example, causes pain and anguish.  
2) You dwell in fear of being punished by them.  
3) You fear they will speak mali ciously, without kind words.  
4) You dread death. 
5) You worry that you will go to a miserable realm after de ath for having acted in ways contrary to the teaching.  
 (vi) The suffering of separati on from what is pleasant  
Again, there are five points to cont emplate. When you are separated from a very dear relative, for example:  
1) In your mind, sorrow arises.  2) In your speech, you lament.  3) You bring harm to your own body. 4) You are saddened, recalling and missing the good qualities of what you have 5) Recourse is no longer avai lable for what you have lost.  
 
(vii) The suffering of not getting what you want: Again, th ere are five points, similar to separation from what is 
pleasant. Seeking but not getting what you want means, for example, farming a field but reaping no harvest, or 
engaging in business but receiving no profits. The pa in of disappointment comes from working hard to get 
something that you long for, and then not getting it. (Lamrim Chenmo, Vol. 1, pg. 278) 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program               CHAPTER VIII - CONCENTRATION  
 
173  
entire  lives without engaging in any virtue that wi ll benefit us in our future lives. We accumulate 
many negativities instead. 
  
We can look at attachment from the perspective of either: 
(1) the object of attachment (the objective aspect), or  (2) the person who is attached (the subjective aspect).   
W e  h a v e  b e e n  l o o k i n g  s p e c i f i c a l l y  a t  t h e  f a u l t s  o f  a t t a c h m e n t  t o  s e n t i e n t  b e i n g s   f r o m  t h e  
subjective aspect. We will now discuss the faul ts of attachment from the objective aspect.  
 
2" Abandoning them by knowing the disadvantages  
a" Reflecting on the disadvantages  
(1) An extensive explanation 
(a) It destroys what could otherwise be very meaningful and leads one to the 
lower realms 
(b) Do not rely on the company of ch ild[-like people] and the difficulty of 
doing so 
(c) One does not obtain any benefit from it but rather receives harm 
(a) It destroys what could otherwise be very meaningful and leads one to the lower realms 
(8, 8 cd) 
(Furthermore,) impermanent friends and relatives 
Will even destroy the Dharma (which leads to) permanent (liberation) 
 
(8, 9) 
If I behave in the same way as the childish, 
I shall certainly proceed to lower realms, 
And if 1 am led there by those unequal (to the Noble Ones), 
What is the use of entrusti ng myself to the childish? 
 
When we are attached to sentient beings who ar e by nature as unstable as rainbows, even the 
holy Dharma, which enables us to achieve the stat e of liberation, will be destroyed. The last two 
lines of verse 8 can be seen as the subjecti ve aspect of the faults of attachment.   
 
There are many different ways of interpreting the word, childish , depending on the context. It can 
refer to:  
(1) ordinary beings as opposed to superior beings,  (2) the foolish ones who are ignorant of what is  to be abandoned and cultivated as opposed to 
the wise ones who know this, or  (3) youngsters.  
Here, childish  refers to the second meaning. Those unequal (to the Noble Ones),  means those who 
are unwise. When our behaviour is childish and we engage in childish activities, we will go to the 
lower realms. An intelligent person does not a llow himself to follow after the childish. We are 
now discussing the faults of attachment from its objective aspect. What are the faults of 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program               CHAPTER VIII - CONCENTRATION  
 
174  
associating with the foolish or childish? We will not accomplish our desires or goals and 
undesirable things will increase. Therefore, we must  not entrust ourselves to the childish.       
(b) Do not rely on the company of child[-like people] and the difficulty of doing so  
(8,10) 
One moment they are friends, 
And in the next instant they become enemies. 
Since they become angry ev en in joyful situations, 
It is difficult to please ordinary people. 
 
(8, 11) 
They are angry when something of benefit is said, 
And they also turn me away  from what is beneficial. 
If I do not listen to what they say, 
They become angry and henc e proceed to lower realms. 
 
The childish ones are those people  who are ignorant of what is to be abandoned and cultivated.  
In an instant, they can become our friends but at  the slightest change of behaviour or manner of 
speaking, they can instantly become our enemies.  When we advise these people on what is to be 
abandoned and cultivated, they do not li sten and become angry at us instead. 
 We may have a friend who possesses many good qualities and great wealth and possessions, for 
which we should rejoice. However, we are jealou s and unhappy about this instead. Therefore, it 
is difficult to please the childish. When we tr y to help them practise the Dharma, which will 
benefit them in this and their future lives, not on ly do they not listen, saying, “I have no time,” 
but they also become  angry at us. If we seriousl y want to practise the Dharma well and correctly, 
such childish people will create obstacles for us  with their remarks, “Why are you so serious? 
Why can’t you be like other people and be more  normal?” When we tell them not to say such 
things, they get angry and create the causes  for their rebirth in the lower realms.  
Lesson 32   Chapter VIII - verse 12-19 
1)  Instructions on cultivating concentration 
2)  Abandoning the class of things incongruous with calm abiding 
a) Abandoning the bustle of the world 
i)  Identifying the causes of attachment to the world  ii) The way to abandon these 
1' Identifying the antidote 
2' The methods for developing the antidote 
a' Inner: Abandoning attachment to sentient beings  
1" The disadvantages of attachment 
2" Abandoning them by knowing the disadvantages  
a’’ Reflecting on the disadvantages 
(1) An extensive explanation 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program               CHAPTER VIII - CONCENTRATION  
 
175  
(a) It destroys what could otherwise be very meaningful 
and leads one to the lower realms 
(b) Do not rely on the company of child[-like people] and 
the difficulty of doing so 
(c) One does not obtain any benefit from it but rather 
receives harm   
(2) Synopsis 
b’’ The way to abandon them 
b' Outer: Abandoning attachment to gain and honor 
1" The subject's faults 
a" The disadvantages of pride  
b" The disadvantages of  attachment 
2" The object's faults 
3' The disadvantages of bustle 4' The benefits of relying on isolation  
b) Abandoning erroneous conceptions  
3)  How to cultivate calm abiding 
(c) One does not obtain any benefit from it but rather receives harm   
(8,12) 
They are envious of superiors, competitive with equals, 
Arrogant towards inferiors, conceited when praised, 
And if anything unpleasant is said, they become angry. 
Never is any benefit derived from the childish. 
 
(8,13) 
Through associating with the childish, 
There will certainly ensue unwholesomeness, 
Such as praising myself, belittling others 
And discussing the joys of cyclic existence. 
 
The childish , refers to those who are not knowledgeable of what is to be abandoned and 
cultivated. The harms of associating with the childish are as follows: 
They are jealous of associates who are of hi gher status or have superior qualities  
They are competitive when amongst their peers an d often end up quarrelling and fighting with 
them  
They feel superior to those who have lower or inferior status to  themselves and develop pride   
Arrogance and conceit arise easily wh en they are slightly praised   
They become angry when their faults are pointed out.  What is the benefit of keeping comp any with such childish people?  
 As this verse points out, when the childish a ssociate with other childish people, they praise 
themselves, belittle others and only indulge in  meaningless chatter and gossip. These are non-
virtuous actions. The advice is that association wi th the childish is not beneficial and only results 
in the creation of negative actions. It is an entirely different matter when we associate with 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program               CHAPTER VIII - CONCENTRATION  
 
176  
superior beings. 
(2) Synopsis 
(8, 14) 
Devoting myself to others in this way 
Will bring about nothing but misfortune, 
Because they will not benefit me, 
And I shall not benefit them. 
 
When we associate with the chil dish non-virtuous actions will increase and our virtue will 
degenerate. So, there is neither benefit to the ot her party nor ourselves; it will only lead to 
suffering in this and future lives for everyone concerned. 
b" The way to abandon them  
(8, 15) 
I should flee far away from childish people. 
When they are encountered, though, I should please them by being happy. 
I should behave well merely out of courtesy, 
But not become greatly familiar. 
 
(8,16) 
In the same way as a bee takes honey from a flower, 
I should take merely (what is necessary) for the practice of Dharma, 
But remain unfamiliar, 
As though I had neve r seen them before. 
 Our goals and the goals of others will not be fulf illed through association with the childish. Since 
association is not beneficial, we should di stance ourselves and go into isolation.  
 
This is a quotation from the great yogi Milarepa’s Collection of Songs :  
 
By staying in this mountain hermitage, even if I, called Milarepa, fall ill, 
No one will ask after my welfare, “How are you?” If I die in this mountain hermitage, ther e will be no one to cry and wail for me. 
If I, Milarepa, die in this mountain hermitag e, the wishes of the yogi will be fulfilled. 
 We cannot talk about helping to subdue the minds of others when our own minds are uncontrolled. Trying to help others when we are in this condition will not benefit them; likewise, 
the other party also cannot benefit us.   The teachings therefore encourage us to go into so litary retreat. In retreat, we can stabilise our 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program               CHAPTER VIII - CONCENTRATION  
 
177  
practice through the attainment of realisations an d with these stable realisations we will then be 
able to really benefit others in a meaningful way. Otherwise, without the stable practice and 
realisations we acquire through isolated retrea t, we cannot benefit - we only end up harming 
others. Likewise, others will be unable to benefit us – they only harm us in return.  
 There is no greater benefit than staying alone in  retreat, working to subdue our own minds. In 
isolation, we do not harm others and we have the opportunity to subdue the mind. Going into 
isolation to do retreat is the best advice. Those who can do so are rare an d those who want to do 
so are also rare.  When we stay in isolation in the mountains, we m ay need to go into town occasionally to get our 
provisions; (Sangha go alms seeking.) We may meet  our friends or loved ones in town. If so, we 
should behave respectfully towards them, speak po litely and adopt a pleasant disposition.  We 
should not spend too much time wi th them and get caught up in their chatter. After getting our 
necessities, we should return to our retreat pl ace without feeling any attachment for what we 
have left behind, like bees extracting the essenc e from flowers. They take whatever is necessary 
and leave without remembering the shape or colour of the flower. We may even have a meal with our loved ones but we should leave that happy feel ing behind and return to the retreat place. It 
should be as if we had not seen them at all.   
Question from student : The earlier chapter on patience emphas ised treating others well and seeing 
them as being very precious. But here we are aske d not to associate with th e childish and go into 
solitary retreat. This seems to be contradictory. Geshe-la:  This is a question to which you have to find an answer. 
 
What we have been discussing so  far has been dealing with the fa ults of attachment to sentient 
beings from the perspective of the object of one’s  attachment. The faults are also presented from 
the perspective of the subject, the person  who is experiencing that attachment. 
 
2' The methods for developing the antidote 
a' Inner: Abandoning attachment to sentient beings  
b' Outer: Abandoning attachment to gain and honor 
1" The subject's faults 
a" The disadvantages of pride  
b" The disadvantages of  attachment 
2" The object's faults 
a" The disadvantages of pride  
(8, 17) 
"I have much material we alth as well as honor, 
And many people like me." 
Nurturing self-importance in this way 
I shall be made terrified after death. 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program               CHAPTER VIII - CONCENTRATION  
 
178  
 
I shall be made terrified after death,  refers to the fear of going to the lower realms after death. 
 
When we are proud of our material wealth an d honour, we become attached to them, which 
then becomes a condition for us to become conceite d and arrogant. This attitude will lead us to 
commit non-virtuous actions which, in turn, wi ll lead us to the lower realms after death. 
b" The disadvantages of  attachment 
(8,18) 
So, you thoroughly confused mind, 
By the piling up of whatever objects 
You are attached to, 
Misery a thousand fold will ensue. 
 
(8, 19) 
Hence the wise should not be attached, 
(Because) fear is born from attachment. 
 
Due to our thoroughly confused minds attaching to  and grasping at this “I” and “mine,” we are 
distracted by different kinds of objects of desi re and attachment. That attachment becomes very 
strong and the result can only be suffering. Even if the attachment is weak, it can still lead to 
powerful suffering results since it is one of the general characteristics of  karma to magnify. The 
wise, i.e. those who are knowledgeable about what  is to be abandoned and cultivated, are not 
attached to material gain or honour because they know they will suffer in this and future lives if 
they fall under the influence of attachment. 
Lesson 33   Chapter VIII - verse 19-28 
The main cause for rebirths in cyclic existence is the afflictions in our ment al continua making us 
create the karma that brings us back to samsara.  The only way to stop this from happening is to 
stop its cause i.e. to destroy the afflictions, which is achieved through special (or superior) 
insight, focused on emptiness, the true nature of reality.  
 We must achieve calm abiding prior to attain ing special insight. Although calm abiding 
suppresses manifest afflictions, this realisation alone cannot cut the root of samsara. Rebirth in 
the form and formless realms can be achieved thro ugh the attainment of ca lm abiding. But when 
the karma of these beings is exhausted, they have  to take rebirth again in one of the six realms. 
This is evidence that the realisation of calm abid ing alone is insufficient to cut the root of cyclic 
existence. Only calm abiding conjoined with spec ial insight can completely destroy the negative 
emotions in our minds.    
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program               CHAPTER VIII - CONCENTRATION  
 
179  
We are now looking at ways to attain calm abiding.  The main obstacle is di stractions arising from 
anger or attachment. Different methods of dealin g with anger were explained in the chapter on 
patience.  
 
In the case of attachment, we are attached to  either sentient beings or gain and honour. 
Attachment to other sentient beings can be coun tered by contemplating the faults of attachment 
from the perspective of the object of our attachme nt and from the perspective of the subject, the 
person experiencing the attachment. This method can also be applied to attachment to material 
gain and honour.   
3 Explaining the way to train in the remaining four perfections 
A The way to train in patience 
B The way to train in joyous effort 
C The way to train in the concentrations included in the common and uncommon calm abidings  
a Explaining the chapter's material 
1) Instructions on cultivating concentration 2) Abandoning the class of things incongruous with calm abiding 
a) Abandoning the bustle of the world 
i)  Identifying the causes of attachment to the world  
ii) The way to abandon these 
1' Identifying the antidote 
2' The methods for developing the antidote 
a' Inner: Abandoning attachment to sentient beings  
b' Outer: Abandoning attachment to gain and honor 
1" The subject's faults 
2" The object's faults 
a" Objects of desire are not reliable 
b" There is neither benefit nor harm in praise and belittling  
3' The disadvantages of bustle 
a' As it is difficult to keep company with child [-like people] do not be 
attached to their preoccupations  and diversions [lit. bustle]  
b' Stating the proof for that 
4' The benefits of relying on isolation 
a' Companions 
b' Place 
c' A point on livelihood  
d' A point on discernment 
e' A point on non-distraction 
b) Abandoning erroneous conceptions  
3) How to cultivate calm abiding  
b The chapter's name 
D The way to train in wisdom - the nature of insight 
a" Objects of desire are not reliable 
(8, 19 cd) 
With a firm mind understand well 
That it is the nature of th ese things to be discarded! 
 
(8, 20) 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program               CHAPTER VIII - CONCENTRATION  
 
180  
Although I may have much material wealth, 
Be famous and well-spoken of, 
Whatever fame and renown I have amassed 
Has no power to accomp any me (after death). 
 
Even if we get the things we desire, these object s of attachment are, by nature, impermanent and 
will have to be discarded in time. No matter ho w much wealth or fame we may have, they are 
unstable and cannot last for long before they disi ntegrate. We cannot take any of the good things 
of this life with us into our next life. Therefore, ther e is no reason to be attach ed to these things.     
b" There is neither benefit nor harm in praise and belittling  
(8,21) 
If there is someone who despises me, 
What pleasure can I have in being praised? 
And if there is another who praises me, 
What displeasure can I have in being despised? 
 We become attached to words of praise and beco me happy; we are angry when we are criticised. 
In either case, our minds are distracted by attachment or anger. This verse is advising us against these types of responses.   When we are praised, there is no justification fo r conceit and attachment because there is always 
someone who dislikes and criticises us. In the sa me way, there is no reason to be unhappy and 
angry when we are criticised because there is al ways someone who likes us. Whatever qualities we 
possess do not increase or decrease in dependence  on praise and criticism. For example, getting 
angry at  a rich man and calling him a beggar wi ll not make him poor nor will telling a beggar, 
“You are so rich,” make him so.  We need to understand that there is neither bene fit nor harm in receiving praise or criticism. 
Understanding this, we can weaken our attachment or anger when we receive praise or criticism.    
 
3' The disadvantages of bustle 
a' As it is difficult to keep company with child [-like people] do not be attached to their 
preoccupations and diversions [lit. bustle]  
b' Stating the proof for that 
a' As it is difficult to keep company with ch ild [-like people] do not be attached to their 
preoccupations and diversions [lit. bustle]  
(8, 22) 
If even the Conqueror was unable to please 
The various inclinations of different beings, 
Then what need to mention a malicious person such as I? 
Therefore, I should give up the inte ntion (to associate with) the worldly. 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program               CHAPTER VIII - CONCENTRATION  
 
181  
 
(8, 23) 
They scorn those who have no material gain 
And say bad things about those who do; 
How can they, who are by nature  so hard to get along with, 
Ever derive any pleasure (from me)? 
 
Qualm:  If I please everyone, no one will harm or  criticise me. I will then experience only 
happiness and when I am always happy, I can work to benefit others.  
 
Reply:  It is impossible to find two living beings with exactly the same kind of karma. Everyone’s 
karma is different. Due to this diversity of karma,  each sentient being obtains a different kind of 
rebirth and body with different dispositions an d interests, etc. If even the Buddha – the 
Omniscient One who knows exactly the diverse disp ositions, interests and mental abilities of all 
living beings – is unable to please everyone, what need is there to talk about ourselves who do 
not even know the dispositions or abilities of ou r long-time friends? Therefore, we should forsake 
any intention to associate with worldly or childi sh people and go into isolation to work on 
developing concentration.   ‘ T h e  c h i l d i s h ’  r e f e r s  t o  p e o p l e  w h o  d o  n o t  k n ow what to abandon and cultivate. When the 
childish see the destitute, they criticise them, sayi ng, “This is the result of  their bad karma. They 
did not do virtue. That is why they are in this st ate.” When they see rich people, they say, “They 
are so rich because of their illega l activities.” We should not associ ate with these difficult childish 
people. 
b' Stating the proof for that63 
(8, 24) 
It has been said by the Tathagatas 
That one should not be friend the childish 
Because, unless they get their own way, 
These children are never happy.30 
 
The Buddha advises us in various sutras not to befriend the childish as these people are never 
happy unless they get their own way. Gyal tsab Je’s commentary quotes the source64 as the Moon 
Lamp Sutra . 
 
When we say something beneficial to ordinary be ings, such as the Dharma, they are disinterested 
                                              
63 Footnote Text pg 174, 30 De-bzhin gsbegs-pa thams-cad kyi yul-la 'jug-pa, Thog. p. 157, 
'Just as wild animals are never happy in a crowd, there is no satisfaction in involvement with the childish.' 
 
64 There are also other sources such as  the King of Concentration Sutras.  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program               CHAPTER VIII - CONCENTRATION  
 
182  
and may even become angry with us. No matter how long our association with them has been, 
they are never happy with us and may even harm us. It is the nature of the childish to behave in 
this way. Therefore, the wise ne ver associate with the childish. 
The sutra says that, just as we are never happy when we are surrounded by many dangerous wild 
animals, so we are never happy as long as we a ssociate with the childish. It continues, “Those 
who are intelligent should never associate with th e childish who are ignora nt of what is to be 
abandoned and what is to be cultivated. Instead, th e wise rely on physical isolation to attain calm 
abiding and special insight.”  
 
Question from student : On the one hand, the text teaches us  how precious others are and how we 
must cherish them. But, on the other hand, it says  here that we have to abandon these childish 
people and go into isolation. Is this not a contradiction?  
 Geshe-la’s reply : When we are living with someone, can this person benefit our Dharma practice 
by contributing to the development of our minds?  Since we both have afflicted minds, it is 
unrealistic to expect any benefit from one another. Fo r most of us, it is very difficult to be of real 
benefit to others. We are like someone without ha nds, trying to pull out someone, who also has 
no hands, from quicksand. There is a danger of ourselves being pulled in and then both of us 
perishing. In the same way, when  we try to do help others, we may be drawn into their problems 
and, as a result, we suffer.   Until our qualities and attainments are stable, we will not be able to truly benefit others. 
Therefore, we must first develop ourselves. When  we are overwhelmed by the hustle and bustle 
of this life and all its distractions, we spend our whole lives engaging in meaningless activities. In 
the end, neither we nor others benefit.   The advice given in earlier chapters was to please  and benefit all sentient beings by remembering 
their kindness and developing and stabilising our minds to such an extent that we will never 
forsake sentient beings, regardless of whatever co nditions we meet. While doing so, we must keep 
in the depths of our heart, the motivation, “I mu st do something beneficial for others.” This is 
done on the mental rather than the physical level.  
 We recognise we will not accompli sh anything by being attached to the hustle and bustle of life. 
This being the case, we should rely on isolat ion, motivated by the thought never to forsake 
sentient beings and determined to accomplish the welfare of others.  
 There is no contradiction because we are encourag ed to go into isolation to develop our minds 
in order to benefit others, since we are Mahayana practitioners.  It would be wrong to go into 
isolation for our own benefit. When we are able to subdue our minds and develop the 
realisations of bodhicitta and emptiness by  depending on solitude, we then become a 
bodhisattva. When we reach this level, we are ad vised to come out of isolation and work for the 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program               CHAPTER VIII - CONCENTRATION  
 
183  
benefit of others.  
 
4' The benefits of relying on isolation  
a' Companions 
b' Place 
c' A point on livelihood  
d' A point on discernment 
e' A point on non-distraction 
 
We need to be prepared to go into isolation. Be fore going into retreat, we must have heard many 
teachings on our meditation topic and, only af ter having gained correct understanding of the 
subject matter, do we then forsake association with  worldly people and go into solitary retreat. 
a' Companions 
(8, 25) 
When shall I come to dwell in forests 
Amongst the deer, the birds and the trees, 
That say nothing unpleasant, 
And are delightful to associate with? 
 
If we dwelt in the forest, our companions would be  the birds, deer, trees, etc.  These companions 
would never make us unhappy or say unpleasant thin gs to us. We would be delighted by this very 
pleasant environment.   It is very difficult to find such happiness in worl dly life with worldly people. Even if we do find 
some happiness from our friendships, these experi ences transform into suffering very quickly. 
How is it possible to experience any mental pe ace when we are caught up with praise and 
criticism? The mind can only remain constantly ha ppy if we dwell in physical isolation away from 
the bustle of life.  
b' Place 
 
(8, 26) 
When dwelling in caves, 
In empty shrines and at  the feet of trees, 
Never look back- 
Cultivate detachment. 
 
(8, 27) 
When shall I come to dwell 
In places not clung to as "mine", 
Which are by nature wide and open, 
And where I may behave as I wish, without attachment? 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program               CHAPTER VIII - CONCENTRATION  
 
184  
 
The place for our retreat may be a cave, empty ho use or the foot of a tree. Having chosen our 
retreat place, we should be determined to turn our backs on the attachments we have 
abandoned. We must be detached from those things and think, fr om the very beginning, that we 
will remain in that frame of mind  for the duration of our retreat. 
 
The place for our solitary retreat should be: very  pleasant; unowned (so that there will be no 
danger of being evicted during our retreat); open  and spacious (as small and narrow spaces will 
disturb the mind) and; somewhere that we can do whatever we wish without worrying about 
what others might think or needing to ask perm ission. When we have found such a place, we 
generate the aspiration, “How wonderful it would be if I could remain here fo r as long as I wish,” 
without developing, at the same time, any attachment to the chosen spot.  
c' A point on livelihood  
(8, 28) 
When shall I come to  live without fear, 
Having just a begging bowl and a few odd things, 
Wearing clothes not wanted by anyone, 
And not even having to hide this body? 
 We should live with little food, have few posse ssions and wear clothes not wanted by thieves and 
robbers. Otherwise, if we are not careful, we may develop attachme nt to the necessities of life 
e v e n  t h o u g h  w e  a r e  i n  r e t r e a t .  If  w e  h a v e  m a n y  p o s s es s i o n s  o r  go o d  t h i n g s , w e  l i v e  i n  f e a r  o f  thieves and robbers and with our minds so distur bed, there will be no benefit to staying in 
retreat. We must also give up attachment to ou r bodies. We should develop the aspiration, “How 
wonderful it would be if I could live in isolatio n with just simple food and clothes.” If we are 
serious about going into retreat in the future to  w o r k  o n  d e v e l o p i n g  c a l m  a b i d i n g ,  w e  m u s t  
prepare ourselves now by reducing our desires and learning to live in contentment, instead of 
leaving it at the level of aspiration.      
 
Question from student : Am I right in saying that, in order to develop other realisations, we first 
need concentration acquired through solitude, beca use we will not be able to perfect the other 
bodhisattva trainings when our minds are not stable?  
 
Geshe-la’s reply : Here, we are talking about concentration in general, not the perfection of 
concentration. This also applies to the earlier prac tices we have discussed: joyous effort, patience, 
ethics, and generosity. 
 To develop concentration, we must be stable in our practice of joyous effort for, without it, we cannot go into isolation. In order to have stable joyous effort, patience is needed. In order to develop patience, we must have ethics. In order to  have good ethics, we must have practised the 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program               CHAPTER VIII - CONCENTRATION  
 
185  
three kinds of giving. There is a specific order in terms of the practices and this is the way to train 
our minds.  
 
But when we look at the six perf ections in relation to the bodhis attva grounds, then there is the 
perfection of generosity on the 1st ground, the perfection of ethics on the 2nd ground, the 
perfection of patience on the 3rd ground and so forth. That is the fixed order with regard to the 
perfections.  
 
In the case of someone engaging in solitary re treat to develop calm abiding, he must have 
practised generosity, ethics, patience , and joyous effort and so forth. 
Lesson 34   Chapter VIII - verse 29-39 
1) Instructions on cultivating concentration 
2) Abandoning the class of things incongruous with calm abiding  
a) Abandoning the bustle of the world 
i)  Identifying the causes of attachment to the world  
ii) The way to abandon these 
1' Identifying the antidote 
2' The methods for developing the antidote 
3' The disadvantages of bustle 4' The benefits of relying on isolation  
a' Companions 
b' Place 
c' A point on livelihood  
d' A point on discernment 
1" Discerning the antidotes to being attached to body  
2" Discerning the antidotes to being attached to those dear to you  
a" Attachment to those dear to you is unreasonable  
b" The reasons for that 
c" Thinking of oneself as a guest who spends one night in each place  
e' A point on non-distraction 
1" Wise ones' reliance upon isolation is reasonable 
2" The benefits of relying upon isolation 
a" There is none of the torment of mourning and so forth  
b" The virtuous side of one's life does not deteriorate but rather flourishes 
c" Therefore, [think] "It is reasonable for me to rely in isolation" 
b) Abandoning erroneous conceptions  
i) Cultivating weariness for desire 
1' Reflecting on how the effect of honing one's desires involves fear  
a' Instructions on exerting effort in virtue 
b' Reflecting on the disadvantages of desire  
2' Reflecting on the unclean nature of the body and so forth 
3' Reflecting on how [desire] produces all sorts of unwanted [consequences]  
ii) Cultivating a joy for isolation 
1" Discerning the antidotes to being attached to body  
(8,29) 
Having departed to the cemeteries, 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program               CHAPTER VIII - CONCENTRATION  
 
186  
When shall I come  to understand 
That this body of mine and the skeletons of others 
Are equal in being subject to decay? 
 
(8, 30) 
Then, because of its odor, 
Not even the foxes 
Will come close to this body of mine; 
For this is what will become of it. 
 
The antidote to overcoming our attachment to ou r bodies is to reflect on their impermanence 
and to recall that they are, by nature, unpleasant  and unclean. When we are very attached to our 
bodies, we should visit the cemetery, where we ca n see both fresh and decaying corpses.  Seeing 
them, we understand that our bodies, which we gr asp to as permanent and stable, are actually no 
different in nature from these corpses. When we die, our bodies will be the same as the corpses 
before us. Remembering this, we reflect on impermanence.   Verse 29 points out how the impermanent nature of  our bodies is like the corpses found in the 
cemetery. Verse 30 deals with the attachment to our bodies through the reflection on their dirty 
and unpleasant nature.    We should understand that when we die, our bodies  will be exactly the same as the corpses in the 
cemetery. When a corpse is not a ttended to, it begins to decay giving off a foul smell. If the 
corpse is placed in the forest, even meat-eating animals like foxes and wolves are repelled by the 
stench of the rotting body.   
By reflecting on these points, we can overcome our attachment to our bodies. 
 
2" Discerning the antidotes to being attached to those dear to you  
a" Attachment to those dear to you is unreasonable  
b" The reasons for that 
c" Thinking of oneself as a guest who spends one night in each place  
a" Attachment to those dear to you is unreasonable  
(8, 31) 
Although this body arose as one thing, 
The bones and flesh with  which it was created 
Will break up and separate. 
How much more so wi ll friends and others? 
 This verse contains the instructio ns to deal with our attachment to our loved ones. We came into 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program               CHAPTER VIII - CONCENTRATION  
 
187  
this world from our mother’s womb, unaccompanied by our friends and relatives. We were only 
accompanied by our bodies, made of flesh and bone s. When it is time for us to die, the bones 
and flesh that make up our bodies will break up an d go their separate ways. In a similar way, we 
will have to be separated from our loved ones. The Lamrim talks about how birth always ends in 
death and gathering always ends in dispersal. We have to reflect on these points to dispel our 
attachment to our loved ones. 
b" The reasons for that 
(8, 32) 
At birth I was born alone, 
And at death, too, I shall die alone; 
As this pain cannot be shared by others, 
What use are obstacle-making friends? 
 
We often think that it is good to live with our parents and relatives and be close to our friends so 
that we can support each other and go throug h good and bad times together. We may then 
think, “I do not want to be separated from my parents/spouse/close friend so I am not going to 
go into isolation.”   Verse 32 is the response to such wrong thinki ng. When we live together, attachment to one 
another is inappropriate.  When we were born, we were not born with our loved ones. When we 
die, our loved ones will not follow us. Due to the attachment to our loved ones in our previous lives, we accumulated all sorts of negativities on  their behalf for which we are experiencing the 
fruitional effects in the form of suffering, proble ms and sicknesses in this life. We are the ones 
experiencing these difficulties, not our loved ones. When we are sick, our loved ones cannot 
experience the sickness on our behalf. If we create  the cause to be possessed by spirits, we have to 
experience the spirit harms on our own.  When it comes to engaging in virtuous actions such as studying the Buddhadharma or going into retreat,  our loved ones often create obstacles that 
interfere with our practice. What is the point then of being attached to them?  
c" Thinking of oneself as a guest who spends one night in each place 
(8, 33) 
In the same way as travellers on a highway 
(Leave one place) and reach (another), 
Likewise, those travelling on the path of conditioned existence 
(Leave) one birth and reach (another). 
 There are different ways to interpret this verse.  Travellers on a highway often stop at a rest statio n, where other travellers gather, on their way to 
their destination.  These travellers are not interested or attached to one another.  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program               CHAPTER VIII - CONCENTRATION  
 
188  
 
We take rebirth in cyclic existence under the powe r of our karma and delusions. In this life, we 
are born as human beings in this world togeth er with many other human beings, who share a 
similar karma with us. In the same way, we meet wi th our parents and loved ones of this life.  We 
are like the traveller meeting other travellers at the rest station.  
  
Just as travellers go their separate ways after havi ng rested, it is only a matter of time before we 
have to move on to our next life, leaving ev erything behind and going our separate ways. 
Remembering this, there is no need for us to be so possessive of or attached to our loved ones 
and friends. When it is time for us to die and go on to the next life, even if we do not wish to go, we have no choice as death will definitely take place. Therefore, there is no point in us being so attached to our loved ones.  We can reduce our attachment to our loved ones  b y  r e f l e c t i n g  o n  t h e  three points under the 
outline, Discerning the antidotes to being attached to thos e dear to you. 
  
4' The benefits of relying on isolation  
a' Companions 
b' Place 
c' A point on livelihood  
d' A point on discernment 
e' A point on non-distraction 
1" Wise ones' reliance upon isolation is reasonable 
2" The benefits of relying upon isolation 
1" Wise ones' reliance upon isolation is reasonable 
(8, 34) 
Until the time comes for this body 
To be supported by four pall-bearers 
While the worldly (stand arou nd) stricken with grief, 
Until then, I shall retire to the forest. 
 Once we are born, we will definitely have to die. At the time of death, we will be surrounded by our loved ones who will wail and cry with great sorrow and we will also suffer and feel sad. Our bodies will become corpses and will be taken out of the house. Before this happens, we should 
retire to the forest and go into isolation. The wi se ones go into isolation and retreat before being 
stricken by grief, where they can then strive in virtue.   
2" The benefits of relying upon isolation 
a" There is none of the torment of mourning and so forth  
b" The virtuous side of one's life does not deteriorate but rather flourishes 
c" Therefore, [think] "It is reasonable for me to rely on isolation" 
a" There is none of the torment of mourning and so forth  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program               CHAPTER VIII - CONCENTRATION  
 
189  
(8,35) 
Befriending no one and begrudging no one, 
My body will dwell alone in solitude. 
If I am already counted as a dead man, 
When I die there will be no mourners. 
 
When we are in solitary retreat in our mountain  hermitage, attachment and hatred will not arise 
as we will be separated from our objects of atta chment and anger.  After some time, due to not 
hearing from us, our parents or loved ones will lose hope, thinking we have died and give up 
their attachment to us. If we continue our solitary life, at the actual time of death, there will be 
no one to mourn us. If we are surrounded by wail ing relatives at the time of death, they will 
disturb our minds and make us sorrowful.  But wi th no one to mourn us, we will not encounter 
such problems. Since we have few necessities and belongings, we are less attached to these things, 
which also help to make our death more comfortable.   
 
This was mentioned in an earlier lesso n with a quotation from Milarepa’s Collection of Songs :  
By staying in this mountain hermitage, even if I, called Milarepa, fall ill,  
no one will ask after my welfare, “How are you?” If I die in this mountain hermitage, th ere is no one to cry and wail for me.  
If I, Milarepa, die in this mountain hermitag e, the wishes of the yogi will be fulfilled. 
b" The virtuous side of one's life does not deteriorate but rather flourishes 
(8, 36) 
And as there will be no one around 
To disturb me with their mourning, 
Thus there will be no one to distract me 
From my recollection of the Buddha. 
 Living in solitude, we will not be harmed by ou r enemies or disturbed by the wailing of our loved 
ones at the time of death. Due to the absence of  our loved ones, our minds will be at peace and 
not distracted. We will be able to remember the Three Jewels and die in a virtuous state of mind. 
It is mentioned in many texts and sutras that  the best way to die is while remembering the 
Buddha, which we can do easily due to the lack of distraction at the time of death. If we die with that mind of faith in the Buddha, there is hope of securing a good rebirth in the next life.   The wise remember the different points mentione d here and abandon the bustle of life and go 
into isolation. As mentioned in the outline, when  one lives in isolation, one’s virtuous activity 
does not deteriorate but flourishes instead.  
c" Therefore, [think] "It is reasonable for me to rely on isolation" 
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program               CHAPTER VIII - CONCENTRATION  
 
190  
(8,37) 
Therefore, I shall dwell alone, 
Happy and contented with few difficulties, 
In very joyful and beautiful forests, 
Pacifying all distractions.  
 
The advice then is to live in the forest, which acts as a condition for one’s mental and physical 
happiness to increase. The qualities of the retr eat place are mentioned in the Lamrim Chenmo. 
Sustenance should be easily obtainable and as mentioned in the Or nament of the Mahayana 
Sutras, the place should not induce sickness and one’s friends should be virtuous. One should 
live in a place where there are no thieves, robbers  or wild animals. If we stay in such a special 
p l a c e  t o  w o r k  o n  d e v e l o p i n g  c a l m  a b i d i n g ,  t h e r e  w i l l  b e  f e w e r  p r o b l e m s  a n d  o u r  v i r t u e  w i l l  
increase. 
 
b) Abandoning erroneous conceptions  
i) Cultivating weariness for desire 
1' Reflecting on how the effect of honing one's desires involves fear  
a' Instructions on exerting effort in virtue 
b' Reflecting on the disadvantages of desire  
2' Reflecting on the unclean nature of the body and so forth 
3' Reflecting on how [desire] produces all sorts of unwanted [consequences]  
ii) Cultivating a joy for isolation  
a' Instructions on exerting effort in virtue  
(8, 38) 
Having given up all other intentions, 
Being motivated by only one thought, 
I shall strive to settle my mind in equipoise (by means of calm abiding), 
And to subdue it (with superior insight). 
 
Having given up all other intentions,  refers to going into isolation after giving up all thoughts of 
living in the hustle and bustle of worldly life and its distractions. Gyaltsab Rinpoche mentions 
when we go into isolation, we work on cultivating our minds and meditating on a specific 
subject, hence, Being motivated by only one thought.  We generate the intention, “I am going to 
meditate to develop the two types of bodhici ttas; conventional bodhicitta and ultimate 
bodhicitta.” With this motivation , we strive to develop the concentration that is able to focus 
single-pointedly on any chosen virtuous object. Ba sed on that, we go on to  develop the realisation 
of special insight, which is the an tidote to our negative emotions.  
 Another commentary says, Look at your own mind and then aim to subdue  it. With the thought of 
subduing our minds, we proceed to develop calm abiding followed by special insight and then we 
go on to develop the union of calm abiding and special insight.  
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program               CHAPTER VIII - CONCENTRATION  
 
191  
One sutra suggests that the ordained bodhisattvas  should ask themselves, “What is the purpose 
of staying in the monastery? Why live in isolatio n and what is the purpose of doing retreat?” The 
ordained bodhisattvas question themselves in this  way because there is no guarantee that they are 
necessarily engaging in virtue simply by physically  living in the monastery or retreat hermitage.  
The Buddha points out that physical isolation does not necessarily equate with engaging in 
virtue, since thieves and robbers also live secretly in isolation as do the wild animals that roam in 
the forest.  The purpose of staying in isolation is to remain in virtue and develop and conjoin 
calm abiding and special insight and meditate on developing the two types of bodhicitta.  
 
These are questions we should ask ourselves when we  go into retreat, “What is this for? Why am 
I doing this?”  We should go into isolation out of fear of the anger, attachment, ignorance and 
the distractions that come with our normal worldly lives.  We should go into isolation to engage in virtue. 
b' Reflecting on the disadvantages of desire  
(8,39) 
Both in this world and the next, 
Desires give rise to great misfortune: 
In this life killing, bondage and flaying, 
And in the next, the existence of the hells. 
 All sorts of discursive thoughts arise in our minds due to the three mental poisons: anger, 
attachment and ignorance. The chapter on patience  contains the antidotes to discursive thoughts 
arising from anger; the antidotes to discursive th oughts arising from ignorance will be studied in 
the ninth chapter on wisdom.   Chapter 8 gives the instructions for dealing wi th our desire and attachment for people and 
material things. Now, we are talking about attach ment to sentient beings. The next few verses 
deal with the attachment and desire for sex. Sh antideva had a different audience and he spoke 
from the perspective of a man, i.e. a man’s desire  for a woman but it applies equally to a woman’s 
desire for a man.  All the problems of this life arise from attach ment. We experience many problems and hardships 
and engage in all sorts of activities to fulfil our desire for wealth and possessions, respect and 
honour. We work enthusiastically and happily to achieve these goals. But as we engage in these 
actions out of attachment, we have to take rebirt h in the lower realms. When it becomes time to 
experience the results of our action s, then all we can do is cry. 
Lesson 35   Chapter VIII - verse 40-53 
1) Instructions on cultivating concentration 
2) Abandoning the class of things incongruous with calm abiding  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program               CHAPTER VIII - CONCENTRATION  
 
192  
a) Abandoning the bustle of the world 
b) Abandoning erroneous conceptions  
i) Cultivating weariness for desire 
1' Reflecting on how the effect of honing one's desires involves fear  
2' Reflecting on the unclean nature of the body and so forth 
a' Reflecting on the disadvantages by considering what one finds in 
   cemeteries  
1" There are no effects of acting to experience a corpse 
2" In the end, [our bodies] do not pass beyond the cemetery  
3" It is unreasonable to stingily guard one's own and others' bodies  
4" The silliness of wearing ornaments  
5" The reasonableness of feeling extreme trepidation  
6" The silliness of being attached to the wearing of clothes  
b' Reflecting on aspects of those who are still alive 
1" Attachment [is seen to be] unreasonable once the lack of cleanliness 
becomes apparent 
a" The unreasonableness of being attached to physical sensations 
b" Arresting the conception [of things] as clean  
c" Individually, the body and mind are nothing to be attached to  
d" Reflecting on those faults in relation to oneself 
e" Physical appearance [lit. shape] is nothing to be attached to 
2" By ascertaining the [characteristics of the] sexual organs, 
     attachment [is seen to be] unreasonable 
3" Thus, arrest this grasping [at the body and things as being] clean 
3' Reflecting on how [desire] produces all sorts of unwanted [consequences]  
ii) Cultivating a joy for isolation  
1" There are no effects of acting to experience a corpse 
(8,40) 
For the sake of (women), many requests 
Are first of all made through go-betweens, 
All forms of transgressio n and even notoriety 
Are not avoided for their sake. 
 
(8, 41) 
I engage in fearful deeds for them, 
And will even consume my wealth. 
But these (very bodies of theirs), 
Which I greatly enjoy in the sexual embrace, 
 
(8, 42) 
Are nothing other than skeletons, 
They are not autonomous  and are identityless. 
Rather than being so desiro us and completely obsessed, 
Why do I not go to the state beyond sorrow (instead)? 
 
(This outline may also be translated as, There are no results/effects that come from experiencing the 
taste of desire.  In Tibetan, the word for ‘corpse’ is the same as the word for ‘taste.’ ) 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program               CHAPTER VIII - CONCENTRATION  
 
193  
 
According to ancient custom, a family with a so n of marriageable age send a matchmaker to the 
family of a prospective bride, to request th e hand of their daughter in marriage. These 
matchmaking activities are for the purpose of fulf illing the young man’s desire for the opposite 
sex.  
 When our desire and attachment for the other party is  very strong, we may   engage in all sorts of 
negative actions to achieve our goal, including killi ng the parents of our prospective partner, etc. 
We discard the vows and commitments we have take n, not caring that our reputation will be 
ruined in the process. We are able to bear any kind of difficulties, be it hunger or thirst or even giving up our lives. Our negativities will propel us to the lower realms in our next life. This is the result of our strong desire and attachment.   We have no qualms about wasting the wealth an d resources that we have amassed over a long 
period of time, for the sake of this meaningless goal instead of using them to create virtue by 
making offerings to the Three Jewe ls.  We do this because we wa nt to experience the pleasure 
that comes from sexual intercourse. Yet, if we anal yse the nature of the body  of our partner, it is 
no different from embracing a skeleton . What is pleasurable about that?   
 
They are not autonomous and are identityless : They are not autonomous, means that they are not 
established from their own side but are merely labe lled on a collection. Since these bodies do not 
exist from their own side, they are without self or, identityless . Why then do we grasp at these 
bodies as possessing a self, as if they existed from their own side? Why do we not aspire to 
achieve the state beyond sorrow instead? 
 
Autonomous,  can also refer to the fact that if our obje ct of desire belongs to someone else, then 
he/ she is not ours. Again, why do we cling to someone who is not available to us?  
 Sexual desire is an obstacle to achieving liberation. To achieve liberation, we must engage in the three higher trainings of which the training in ethi cs is the basis for the other two trainings. It is 
not possible to engage in the training in ethics  when we have strong attachment and desire; 
without this preliminary,   it is impossible to co mplete the three higher tr ainings. Therefore, we 
must abandon our desire for both inner and outer phenomena, i.e. sentient beings and objects. 
Without abandoning, at the very least, manifest desire for these phenomena, it is difficult to 
achieve concentration. Without achieving concentr ation, there is no way we can achieve special 
insight. Without special insight, we will continue to  be bound to cyclic existence, because we will 
not be able to overcome the afflicti ons of the Peak of Cyclic Existence
65 – the highest rebirth that 
                                              
65 Cyclic existence includes three realms: the desire, fo rm, and formless realms. The form realm includes four 
progressively higher levels of meditative stabilization, and the formless realm includes four meditative absorptions 
(Lamrim Chenmo, Vol. 3 pg 397 endnote 65). The Peak of Cy clic Existence is the highest of the four meditative 
absorptions in the formless realm, also called, “neither  discrimination nor non-discrimination” (Lamrim Chenmo, 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program               CHAPTER VIII - CONCENTRATION  
 
194  
we can attain in samsara even though below this level, afflictions can be temporarily suppressed if 
we have calm abiding. In essence, the advice give n here is that to achieve the state of liberation, 
we must give up attachment and desire.  
 
I said earlier that this outline can be translated as, There are no results from experiencing the taste of 
desire. Taste  here is not as gross as the taste included in the five objects of desire: form, sound, 
smell, taste and touch. When we ar e attached to the ‘taste’ of thes e forms of desire, it blocks our 
achievement of liberation and brings no results be cause it does not benefit us either in this or 
our future lives.  
 This is my own point of view, because it is much  easier to explain the Tibetan word as ‘taste’ 
rather than ‘corpse.’ But we can also explain the verse according to the original translation; there 
are no results that come from embracing the sexual  object that is no different from a skeleton. 
2" In the end, [our bodies] do not pass beyond the cemetery  
(8, 43) 
In the first place, I made efforts to lift (her veil), 
And when it was raised she bashfully looked down. 
Previously, whether anyone looked or not, 
Her face was covered with a cloth. 
 
(8, 44) 
Yet now, why do I run away 
Upon directly beholding 
This face, which disturbs the mind 
As it is being revealed to me by the vultures? 
 When a man, out of desire and attachment, wants to look at the face of the girl he is attracted to, 
he does not see it because the girl, being shy, looks down.   
In verse 43, Previously,  means, before going to a cemetery . According to ancient custom, at the time 
of marriage, the bride’s face is covered up. Unab le to see her face, the eager groom suffers. Due 
to some misfortune, the bride passes away and the bo dy is brought to a cemetery. Once there, the 
body is fully exposed, especially when the vultures arrive to tear it apart.  At that time, the groom 
sees everything but why is there so much fear then?  
 
                                                                                                                                                          
 
Vol. 3, pg 402 endnote 214). The four meditative stabiliz ations of the form realm are the first concentration (3 
levels), the second concentration (3 levels), the third co ncentration (3 levels), and the fourth concentration (3 
levels + 5 pure places). The four meditative absorpti ons of the formless realm are Limitless Space, Limitless 
Consciousness, Nothingness, and Peak of Cyclic Existenc e (Ref: “Cyclic Existence / Samsara: The Three Realms” – 
Handout from Basic Program, Module 1).  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program               CHAPTER VIII - CONCENTRATION  
 
195  
Some commentaries mention that Shantideva taught this text to (his audience of mainly fully-
ordained) monks to remind them of  the faults of attachment.   The face of the woman one longs 
to see when she is alive is the same face she ha s when she is lying in the cemetery. What is the 
reason then for being so desirous of one and fear ful of the other? And why be attached to that 
face when it is alive and not so when it lies at the cemetery? 
3" It is unreasonable to stingily guard one's own and others' bodies  
(8, 45) 
(Previously) I completely protected (her body) 
When others cast their eyes upon it. 
Why, miser, do you not protect it now, 
While it is being devoured by these birds? 
 
When we have strong attachment to our partners, we get jealous when others look at them. We 
do everything to guard and protect them. But why do we not protect them in the same way when 
the vultures are devouring their corpses in the cemetery? And if we do not protect them then, 
why do we protect our obje cts of attachment now? 
 
Question from student : Where is the mention of guarding one’s  own body as stated in the outline? 
Geshe-la’s reply:  Although the outline says, It is unreasonable to stingil y guard one’s own and others’ 
bodies , the verse mentions explicitly the bodies of others. But we can explain the outline in this 
way: Just as we are very attached to and protective of the bodies of others, so we are attached to 
and protective of our own bodies.   
4" The silliness of wearing ornaments  
(8, 46) 
Since vultures and others are eating 
This pile of meat that I behold, 
Why did I offer flower garlands, sandalwood and ornaments 
To that which is now the food of others? 
 Although the bodies of our objects of attachment are, by nature, unclean, we see them as being 
clean and pleasant and adorn them with perfumes, flower garlands, ornaments, etc. These bodies 
are, in fact, piles of meat  that will become the food of jackals , vultures, maggots and the like. Since 
we do not adorn corpses with ornaments, there is al so no need to do so wh en they are alive.   
5" The reasonableness of feeling extreme trepidation    
(8, 47) 
If I am frightened by the skeletons I see, 
Even though they do not move, 
Why am I not frightened by walking corpses 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program               CHAPTER VIII - CONCENTRATION  
 
196  
Which are moved around by a few (impulses)? 
 
When bodies are brought to a cemetery for crematio n, what remains at the end is a pile of bones 
and ashes. We are scared at the sight of thes e remains even though they do not move.   
 
Inside a living body are the wind energies, the mind and the afflictions. If we are terrified of a pile of bones and ashes, we should be even more  afraid of the walking corpses who are controlled 
by their three mental poisons and more likely to harm us. There is, therefore, no reason to be 
attached to these people.  
6" The silliness of being attached to the wearing of clothes  
(8, 48) 
Although I am attached to it wh en it is covered (with skin), 
Why do I not desire it when it is uncovered? 
Since I have no need for it then, 
Why copulate with it when it is covered? 
 When desire is very strong, the mere sight of a woman’s body, even when fully clothed, can be 
exciting. But why are we not attached to that very  same body lying naked in the cemetery? This is 
because we see the corpse as being very unpleasant , dirty and unclean, even though this was also 
its nature when it was alive.   
Question from student : The root text says, when it is covered (with skin ). Does this refer to skin or 
clothing? Geshe-la’s reply : It refers to clothing. 
 
b' Reflecting on aspects of those who are still alive 
1" Attachment [is seen to be] unreaso nable once the lack of cleanliness becomes 
apparent 
a" The unreasonableness of being attached to physical sensations 
b" Arresting the conception [of things] as clean  
c" Individually, the body and mind are nothing to be attached to  
d" Reflecting on those faults in relation to oneself 
e" Physical appearance [lit. shape] is nothing to be attached to 
a" The unreasonableness of being attached to physical sensations  
(8, 49) 
Since both excrement and saliva 
Arise solely from food, 
Why do I dislike excrement, 
And find joy in saliva? 
 
(8, 50) 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program               CHAPTER VIII - CONCENTRATION  
 
197  
Cotton, too, is soft to the touch, 
But while I find no (sexual) delight in a pillow, 
I think that (a woman's body) does not emit a putrid odor. 
Lustful One, you are confused  as to what is unclean! 
 
(8,51) 
Thinking that they cannot  sleep with this cotton, 
Although it is soft to the touch, 
Confused, negative and lustful people 
Become angry towards it (instead). 
 
If we enjoy the saliva of a woman/man, why do we not have the same desire for their excrement 
and urine which is also produced from the food they eat? Why are we a ttached to one and not 
the other?  
 
We say that we like to touch a woman because he r skin is soft and smooth. In that case, we 
should be even more delighted to touch cotton wh ich is far softer than a woman who is no more 
than a filth-making machine. Due to our mistaken  conceptions, we grasp at that which is by 
nature unclean as clean. Those with these mistak en conceptions would say, “How can I have sex 
with cotton? Where is the sexual pleasure in touching cotton?” and become angry towards it. This shows that they are not at tached to the pleasant sensat ion of touching cotton but are 
actually attached to the unclean body.   
b" Arresting the conception [of things] as clean  
(8, 52) 
If I am not attached to what is unclean, 
Then why do I copulate with th e lower parts of others' bodies, 
Which are merely cages of bones tied together with muscles, 
Plastered over with the mud of flesh? 
 
(8, 53) 
I myself contain many unclean things 
Which I constantly have to experience; 
So why, because of an obsession for uncleanliness, 
Do I desire other bags of filth? 
 We claim we are not attached to dirty and unplea sant things. But the bodi es we are attached to 
are cages of bones tied together with joints an d muscles and plastered over with flesh. These 
bodies that we embrace are, by nature, unclean. The body is full of filth: phlegm comes from the throat, snot comes from the nose, and urine and excrement from the lower orifices. Everything 
that emerges from our nine orifices is dirty and unclean. This is the kind of body we have. Not 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program               CHAPTER VIII - CONCENTRATION  
 
198  
satisfied with living with one dirty body, we look  for the bodies of others, which are equally dirty 
and unclean. Why are we so attached to the bodi es of others when we have a body of our own?   
Lesson 36   Chapter VIII - verse 54-64 
We discussed the outline, Arresting the conception  [of things] as clean,  in the last lesson. This 
conception that perceives phenomena to be clean needs to be corrected.  
In the Four Noble Truths, the first truth, the Truth of Suffering, has four characteristics; 
impermanence, suffering (or dhukka ), empty, and selfless. 
 
The opposite of these four are the wrong conc eptions (or erroneous views) of grasping at 
impermanent phenomena to be permanent, grasping  a t  t h a t  w h i c h  i s   u n c l e a n  t o  b e  c l e a n ,  
grasping at things which are in the nature of  suffering to be pleasurable and grasping at 
phenomena that are selfless to have a self.  All phenomena are, by nature, selfless but we gras p at them as existing in the opposite way. 
Because of that, we engage in all sorts of negati ve actions and  accumulate karma, the results of 
which we have to experience.    
We also grasp at things that are, by nature, uncl ean to be clean and pleasant and once again, we 
get into trouble and suffer. An example of ou r attachment to unclean phenomena is sexual 
desire. Our strong desire for the bodies of others  is due to our erroneous conception grasping at 
them as clean when, in reality, they are unclean.  Once we understand th e filthy nature of the 
body, there is no basis for the arising of attachment.   
 
Verses 52 and 53 deal with stopping the erroneou s conception of phenomena that are unclean as 
clean. The Buddha mentions in th e sutras that our bodies are fi lth-making machines. We know 
t h i s  i s  t r u e  w h e n  w e  a n a l y s e  t h i s  f u r t h e r .  O u r  w h o l e  b o d y  i s  f i l l e d  w i t h  s o  m a n y  u n c l e a n ,  unpleasant substances that it se ems to be no more than a filth- producing factory. Yet, we have 
strong  attachment to our own bodies. We need to  meditate on this and when done well, it can 
definitely reduce our attachment to our bodies.   The sutras mention that the childi sh, grasping at unclean things to  be clean, will even eat snot, 
pus, etc., just like maggots who consume pus produced by the body  due to their attachment,. The 
sutras also mention that, if we left our bodies alone – if we didn’t wash our bodies - they would stink. Yet we remain attached to our bodies as bees to honey.  One of the commentaries says that it is one of the greatest signs of our confusion and ignorance 
that we are attached to the bodies  of others. This attachment is li ke someone taking refuge at the 
foot of a tree at night. In the darkness, he cannot  see that the tree is surrounded by piles of dirty 
things and he may even sleep on top of this filth. At sunrise, when he can see clearly what he had 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program               CHAPTER VIII - CONCENTRATION  
 
199  
slept on, he will be disgusted at the sight.  In the same way, when we reflect and meditate on and 
realise the unclean nature of our bodies and the bodies of others, we will also be repelled and 
disgusted. Our attachment will be then be reduced.   
 
If we want to develop concentration, we must give up attachment and desire. Otherwise, our 
minds will remain distracted and there will be no  way to develop concentration. In order to stop 
attachment, we have to know its faults and we mu st stop it from arising in the first place. How 
does attachment arise? It is due to grasping at unclean phenomena as clean. The way to stop 
attachment is to first understand how our  object  of attachment is, by nature, unclean. That is 
why we study these verses.  
1) Instructions on cultivating concentration 
2) Abandoning the class of things incongruous with calm abiding  
a) Abandoning the bustle of the world 
b) Abandoning erroneous conceptions  
i) Cultivating weariness for desire 
1' Reflecting on how the effect of honing one's desires involves fear  
2' Reflecting on the unclean nature of the body and so forth 
a' Reflecting on the disadvantages by considering what one finds in 
   cemeteries  
b' Reflecting on aspects of those who are still alive 
1" Attachment [is seen to be] unreasonable once the lack of cleanliness 
becomes apparent 
a" The unreasonableness of being attached to physical sensations 
b" Arresting the conception [of things] as clean  
c" Individually, the body and mind are nothing to be attached to  
d" Reflecting on those faults in relation to oneself 
e" Physical appearance [lit. shape] is nothing to be attached to 
2" By ascertaining the [characteristics of the] sexual organs, 
     attachment [is seen to be] unreasonable 
a" Reflecting on their lack of cleanliness in light of the fact that they are  
the point at which unclean things exit the body 
b" Reflecting on their lack of cleanliness in light of the fact that the are the 
 effects of those 
c" Illustrating the body's lack of cleanliness by means of an example 
d" Reflecting on the lack of cleanliness of one's own body 
3" Thus, arrest this grasping [at the body and things as being] clean 
3' Reflecting on how [desire] produces all sorts of unwanted [consequences]  
ii) Cultivating a joy for isolation  
c" Individually, the body and mind are nothing to be attached to  
(8,54) 
-But it is the flesh that I enjoy- 
If this is what I wish to touch and behold, 
Why do I not desire it in its natural state, 
Devoid of any mind? 
 
(8,55) 
Furthermore, any mind that I may desire 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program               CHAPTER VIII - CONCENTRATION  
 
200  
Is unable to be touched or beheld, 
And whatever I am able to  touch will not be mental; 
So why indulge in this meaningless copulation? 
 
Verse 50 talks about the desire for the pleasure th at comes from touching the soft, smooth body 
of a woman and questions why we do not have the same desire to touch cotton wool.  The 
response may be, “I am not attached to cotton w ool! What I enjoy is the pleasant sensation of 
touching a woman.” Because of ou r attachment to that pleasurable experience, the desire and 
wish to touch a woman’s body ar i s e .  I t  s h o u l d  f o l l o w  t h e n  t h a t  w e  s h o u l d  a l s o  e n j o y  t h e  
sensation of touching a female corpse.  
 
Student : Geshe-la a corpse and a woman are not the same. A woman is warm and moves.  
Geshe-la :  If the corpse moved, you would be scared. Why? 
 
What is it that  we actually desire?  Is it the body or the mind? A person exists by depending on the collection of the body and mind. We should iden tify precisely the object of our desire – is it 
the body or mind?  If our attachment is to the body , touching a woman’s corpse would also be  pleasurable. But as 
the student said, it is not so beca use the body no longer moves.  
So it seems we are attached to the mind of th e person, thinking, “This woman is great. She is 
kind, good-hearted and she showers me with affect ion and love.” If we are attached to the mind 
of the person, that consciousness is formless and cannot be seen or touched. What is the point then of engaging in sex with that person?  As mentioned earlier, we can reduce our attachme nt by reflecting on th e unclean nature of the 
body. This is another way to counter our attach m e n t  b y  r e f l e c t i n g  o n  w h a t  w e  a r e  a c t u a l l y  
attached to - the body or the mind. 
d" Reflecting on those faults in relation to oneself 
(8, 56) 
It is not so strange that I do not understand 
The bodies of others to be of an unclean nature, 
But it is indeed strange that I do not understand 
My very own body to be by nature unclean. 
 
We may not understand that the bodies of others are unclean. But what is really amazing is that 
we do not realise the unclean nature of our own bodies even though daily we see the products 
that emerge from our nine orifices. When we re alise the unclean nature of our own bodies, we 
will be able to understand how the bodies of others are also unclean, thereby stopping our 
attachment to them. 
e" Physical appearance [lit. shape] is nothing to be attached to 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program               CHAPTER VIII - CONCENTRATION  
 
201  
(8,57) 
Having forsaken the young lotus flower 
Unfolded by beam s of sunlight free from cloud, 
Why, with a mind craving for what is unclean, 
Do I revel in a cage of filth? 
 
We may argue that it is not the body or mind that  we are attached to but rather we are attracted 
by the body’s shape and colour. If that is so, why are we not attach ed to the beautiful lotus flower 
that blooms in the sunlight? Why are we desirous  of the shape and colour of others’ bodies, 
which are receptacles for filth, instead of adorin g the shape of a beautiful flower? Reflecting in 
this way, we can stop attachment to the shape and colour of others’ bodies. 
 
2" By ascertaining the [characteristics of the] sexual organs, attachment [is seen to be] 
unreasonable 
a" Reflecting on their lack of cleanliness in light of the fact that they are the point at which 
unclean things exit the body 
b" Reflecting on their lack of cleanliness in light of the fact that the are the effects of those 
c" Illustrating the body's lack of cleanliness by means of an example 
d" Reflecting on the lack of cleanliness of one's own body 
 
The Tibetan word, dag means sign and in certain contexts, it also refers to the sexual organs of 
men and women. But this does not seem to a pply here. This outline can be translated as, Through 
the ascertainment that is derived from reas on, attachment is seen to be inappropriate.  Although I am not 
completely certain about this, this whole section seems to talk about how our attachment will be 
reduced once we come to the ascertainment of th e unclean nature of the body by depending on 
the correct reasoning. 
a" Reflecting on their lack of cleanliness in light of the fact that they are the point at which 
unclean things exit the body  
(8,58) 
Since I do not wish to touch 
A place that is smeared with excrement, 
Then why do I wish to touch the body 
From which that (excrement) arose? 
 
We will not sit on a cushion that is smeared wi th excrement, urine or vomit. Why are we then 
attached to the bodies of othe rs, which are the sources of such  filthy substances? How can we 
bear to touch the very source of these substances  when we would not even go near anything that 
is stained by them? This is looking at the unclea n nature of the body from the perspective of it 
being a cause for filthy substances.  
b" Reflecting on their lack of cleanliness in light of the fact that they are the effects of those   
(8, 59) 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program               CHAPTER VIII - CONCENTRATION  
 
202  
If I am not attached to what is unclean, 
Why do I copulate with the lower parts of others' bodies, 
Which arise from the unclean field (of a womb) 
And are produced by the seeds within it? 
 
(Geshe-la : It is possible that there is a different ed ition of the root text, but the one I am using 
does not have the words, lower parts ; it only mentions others’ bodies .) 
 
We claim we dislike unclean things. But when we examine our bodies, they came from the unclean 
field, referring to our mothers’ wombs and are prod ucts of the union of the sperm and eggs of 
our parents. The previous verse examined the uncl ean nature of the body from the perspective of 
it being a cause of unclean substances. This vers e examines the unclean na ture of the body from 
the perspective of it being an effect or the result of unclean substances.    
c" Illustrating the body's lack of cl eanliness by means of an example 
(8,60) 
I have no wish for a small, dirty maggot 
Which has come from a pile of filth, 
So why do I desire this body, whic h by nature is grossly unclean, 
For it too was produced by filth? 
 
(8,61) 
Not only do I not disparage 
The uncleanliness of my own body, 
But, because of an obsession for what is unclean, 
I desire other bags of filth as well. 
 
Gyaltsab Je’s commentary talks about Verse 60 from  the perspective of it being an analogy to 
illustrate how unclean the body is. Some other commentaries consider this verse under the 
outline, Reflecting on the unclean nature of the body fr om the perspective of it being a cause and effect . 
 
We are disgusted at the sight of a single maggo t or worm in our food, because we know they 
come from dirty things. Why then do we desire the body which is  the product of and completely 
full of filthy  substances?  
 
When we have very strong desire for the bodies of others, we need to reflect on how our objects 
o f  d e s i r e  i s  b y  n a t u r e  u n c l e a n  f r o m  t h e  p e r s pective of it being the causes, results and the 
combination of both causes and effects of dirty substances as shown in the above analogy.  Our 
own body is completely filled with unclean and unpleasant substances and, realising this, we 
should be disenchanted with it. Instead, we ge nerate desire for other dirty, unclean bodies. 
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program               CHAPTER VIII - CONCENTRATION  
 
203  
d" Reflecting on the lack of cleanliness of one's own body 
(1) Reflecting on the body's lack of cleanliness 
(2) If one is attached to that, then one ought to be attached to the bodies in a cemetery 
(1)Reflecting on the body's lack of cleanliness 
(8, 62) 
Even attractive things such as savoury foods, 
Cooked rice and vegetables, 
Make the ground dirty and unclean, 
Should they be spat out af ter being in the mouth. 
 
The food we eat may look very nice before it goes into our mouths. But once it goes into our mouths and is spat out, it change s into something disgusting. This is  a sign that the body is dirty. 
If we vomit on our clean clothes, we quickly chan ge our outfit. Why then do we not consider the 
source of the vomit – our body – to be dirty as well?    
(2) If one is attached to that, then one ought to be attached to the bodies in a cemetery 
(8, 63) 
Although such uncleanliness is obvious, 
If I still have doubts I should go to the cemeteries 
And look at the unclean bodies (of others) 
That have been thrown away there. 
 
(8,64) 
Having realized that, when their skin is rent open, 
They give rise to a great deal of fear, 
How will such things as these 
Ever again give rise to joy? 
 
If, in spite of having reflected on all the above poin ts we still have doubts, we are advised to go to 
the cemeteries and observe how the decaying bodies are rotting and being eaten by maggots. When the body is cut open, we see blood, mucus,  pus, excrement, urine, etc. and we will be 
terrified at such a sight. The insides of rotting corpses are no different from our own insides. We 
can  reduce attachment for our own bodies by re lating what we see in the corpses to our own 
bodies.  
Question from student : How do we relate these teachings to th e practice of deity yoga where we are 
supposed to see ourselves as the deity?  Reply from Geshe-la: The purpose of meditating on the unclean nature of the body is to stop 
attachment and desire. When we practise deity yo ga, we visualise ourselves as the deity and our 
environment as the celestial mansion. This is al so done to stop attachment. So there is no 
contradiction.     
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program               CHAPTER VIII - CONCENTRATION  
 
204  
Lesson 37   Chapter VIII - verse 65-79 
1) Instructions on cultivating concentration 
2) Abandoning the class of things incongruous with calm abiding  
a) Abandoning the bustle of the world b) Abandoning erroneous conceptions  
i) Cultivating weariness for desire 
1' Reflecting on how the effect of honing one's desires involves fear  
2' Reflecting on the unclean nature of the body and so forth 
a' Reflecting on the disadvantages by considering what one finds in 
   cemeteries  
b' Reflecting on aspects of those who are still alive 
1" Attachment [is seen to be] unreasonable once the lack of cleanliness becomes 
apparent 
2" By ascertaining the [characteristics of the] sexual organs, attachment [is seen to 
be] unreasonable 
3" Thus, arrest this grasping [at the body and things as being] clean 
a" Contrived ornaments cannot make the body clean 
(1) Perfumes such as sandalwood do not have the capacity to render an 
unclean body clean 
(2) Being attached to other scents th at are [actually] unrelated to the 
[object of attachment] is not a suitable reason [for being attached to 
another's body and so forth] 
b" The body does not pass beyond its perishable nature  
c" Reflecting on it as a thing of revulsion 
3' Reflecting on how [desire] produces all sorts of unwanted [consequences]  
a’ Presentation 
b' Explanation 
1" Not obtaining what one desires 
a" There is no opportunity for enjoying one's desires  
b" Due to the suffering of exhaustion, one is not capable of enjoying one's 
desires 
c" Due to the object's intermittence, it is difficult to come upon the object of 
one's desire 
d" Due to being controlled by others, one receives many unwanted 
[consequences] 
2" It is connected to the fault of numerous unwanted [consequences]  
ii) Cultivating a joy for isolation  
(1) Perfumes such as sandalwood do not have the capacity to render an unclean body clean 
(8, 65) 
The scents with which some one's body is anointed 
Are sandalwood and the like, but not that of the other's body. 
So why am I attached to others' (bodies) 
Because of scents that are other (than theirs)? 
 
(8, 66)  
Since the body has a naturally foul odour, 
Isn't it good to be unattached to it? 
 
In the earlier lessons, we proved that our bodies ar e, by nature, dirty. Some people think that the 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program               CHAPTER VIII - CONCENTRATION  
 
205  
body can be made pleasant by anointing it with  p e r f u m e .  W e  c a n  d e v e l o p attachment to this 
fragrant, perfumed body.  
 
Whatever perfume we use will not be the original  natural smell of the body. The perfume is not 
related in any way to the body to which it is applied. Why do we still have desire for that body? 
We confuse the smell of the perf ume on the body with the natura l scent of the body, forgetting 
that our natural body odour is foul and smelly. If  we claim to be attached to the smell of the 
body, then we are attached to some thing that actually stinks. In th is case, will it not be better not 
to be attached to the body so that we will not de velop attachment for its foul odour? So, when we 
are attached to someone’s body because of its nice smell, we have to check whether we are 
attached to the natural smell of that person’s body  or the perfume or fragrance that person uses.  
 
If we are attached to the smell of the perfume or  fragrance used, that has no relationship to the 
person’s body and there is no reason then for ou r attachment. If we are attached to the natural 
smell of the person, that is actually something fo ul and disgusting. Again, there is no reason to 
be attached to the body.  
 Gyaltsab Je says that the attachme nt that we have for our bodies is the condition for us to suffer 
and to experience unhappiness. When we are attached to our bodies, we will be worried all the 
time about our appearance and experience all th e problems and unhappiness that arise from this 
attachment.  Therefore, it is inappr opriate to be attached to the body. 
(2) Being attached to other scents that are [actually] unrelated to the [object of attachment] is not 
a suitable reason [for being attached to another's body and so forth] 
(8, 66 cd)  
Why do those who crave for the meaningless things of the world 
Anoint this body with pleasant scents? 
(8, 67) 
 
And furthermore, if it is the pleasant scent of sandalwood, 
How can it come from the body? 
So why am I attached to others' (bodies) 
Because of scents that are other (than theirs)? 
 
We perfume our bodies to make it smell nice du e to our attachment to our bodies. That nice 
smell is not a quality of or related in any way to the body itself.  Why are we then still attached to the body? 
b" The body does not pass beyond its perishable nature  
(8, 68) 
Since the naked body, (left) in its natural state, 
Is very frightening due to its long hair and nails, 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program               CHAPTER VIII - CONCENTRATION  
 
206  
Its yellowish foul-smelling teeth 
And it’s being coated with the odour of dirt, 
 
(8, 69)  
Why do I make such an effort to polish it, 
Like (cleaning) a weapon that will cause me harm? 
 
Our bodies and the bodies of others are the objects of our attachment. If we leave our bodies alone, our nails and hair will grow long and filt hy, our teeth will decay and our bodies will stink. 
If someone like that stood naked before us, we wo uld be repulsed by the sight. So, the body, our 
object of attachment, becomes the source of repulsion and perhaps even fear when left 
unattended.  It is like a weapon that will eventually harm us.   When we put in all that effort into grooming our bo dies, applying perfume and so forth, it is like 
someone polishing a weapon that will ultimately harm oneself. We need to meditate on these points. When we are attached to someone’s body, by imagining it 
in its unwashed, unattended state and thinking how unattractive it becomes will help us to 
reduce our attachment.   
c" Reflecting on it as a thing of revulsion 
(8, 69 cd) 
Hence this entire world is disturbed with insanity, 
Due to the exertions of those wh o are confused about themselves. 
 
(8, 70) 
When my mind rises (above worldly concerns), 
Through having beheld nothing but skeletons in the cemetery, 
Will there be any joy in graveyard cities 
Which are filled with moving skeletons? 
 
Due to the misconceptions of grasping at that wh ich is selfless by nature as having a self, and 
grasping at that which is unclean by nature as clean, we become attached to our own and others’ 
bodies. Due to this attachment, we perfume our bo dies to keep them attractive and pleasant. We 
are like someone who has drunk the wa ter that makes us lose our minds. 
 
Geshe-la : There is a kind of drink that driv es one insane when one drinks it. 
 
We are like crazy people, mad with desire and attachment. Everyone is like that. When the 
bodhisattvas look at us sentient beings, they ge nerate compassion and see us as the objects of 
compassion.  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program               CHAPTER VIII - CONCENTRATION  
 
207  
We are either mad with attachment or anger. Du e to our attachment, we cling to our loved ones 
and friends, those whom we consider to be on ou r side. Due to our anger, we generate hostility 
towards those who are against us and not on ou r side.  On top of that, we also generate 
competitiveness, jealousy and so forth. This is how everyone conducts their entire lives. 
 
When we examine our own actions and the actions of others, we see that everything we do is 
motivated by self-interest. If we look deeply into our hearts, even those supposedly altruistic 
activities carried out for the benefit of others ar e tainted with this self-interest and concern. We 
will not do anything if we do not stand to gain  something for ourselves. Gyaltsab Je says that 
when the bodhisattvas see us in such a st ate, they only feel compassion for us. 
 Relationships between spouses and partners are plagued with problems due to attachment and 
desire. When something happens to one’s partner, there is so much sorrow, anguish and fear of 
losing him/her. There is suffering again when on e has to be separated from one’s partner or one 
loses one’s partner to someone else.   When one’s partner dies, there is so much grie f and sadness at this permanent separation. One 
even adorns the dead body of the loved one with  flowers and beautiful clothes to make it look 
nice. These are the actions of crazy people.   We are usually afraid of corpses but when it co mes to the dead bodies of our loved ones, we 
cannot bear to leave them and cling on to them. Due to our strong attachment, our minds become disturbed and, due to our grief and pain, we behave like walking zombies. Yet, there is 
no difference between the corpses of others and the corpses of our loved ones.  When we walk into a cemetery, we are repulsed by the sight of the rotting corpses. The earlier 
verses mention how the world is filled with walking corpses i.e. people whose minds are 
completely full of the three mental poisons and whose bodies are merely sustained by the subtle 
wind energies in them. In the same way, we shou ld also reflect on how we and others are like 
walking skeletons, beneath our layers of skin and fl esh. These reflections will help us to generate 
disenchantment and reduce our attachment.  
3' Reflecting on how [desire] produces all sorts of unwanted [consequences] 
a' Presentation 
b' Explanation 
a' Presentation 
(8, 71) 
Furthermore, these unclean (female bodies) 
Are not found without paying a price. 
In order to obtain them, I exhaust myself 
And (in future) will be injured in the hells. 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program               CHAPTER VIII - CONCENTRATION  
 
208  
 
This verse points out that we need to pay a pric e to get our object of desire. We need money to 
sustain and beautify our bodies. We have to work hard and put up with all sorts of difficulties in 
order to earn this money and no matter how much we earn, it will never be enough.  
 
The main point is that in order to acquire the happiness and worldly goals of this life, we need to 
work for money. In the process, we engage in ne gative actions such as lying, divisive, harsh or 
offensive speech, competing with ot hers in a negative way, jealousy and so on, for which we have 
to experience the karmic resu lts in our future lives.  
 In summary, desire and attachment for our bodies  and the bodies of others cause problems for 
us in this and our future lives.  
b' Explanation 
1" Not obtaining what one desires 
a" There is no opportunity for enjoying one's desires  
b" Due to the suffering of exhaustion, one is not capable of enjoying one's desires 
c" Due to the object's intermittence, it is difficult to come upon the object of one's desire 
d" Due to being controlled by others, one receives many unwanted [consequences] 
a" There is no opportunity for enjoying one's desires  
(8, 72) 
As a child, I am unable to increase my wealth, 
And as a youth, what can I do (bei ng unable to afford a wife)? 
At the end of my life, when I have the wealth, 
Being an old man, what good will sex be then? 
 
To get what we want, we need resources and mo ney. When we are young, we have no money. 
When we grow up, we experience the unhappiness of  not being able to find our objects of desire, 
our life partners.  Even when we are able to find the right person, we need money to protect and 
k e e p  t h e m  s o  t h a t  t h e y  w i l l  n o t  l e a v e  u s .  T h e n  w e  h a v e  t o  w o r k  v e r y  h a r d  i n  t h i s  l i f e  t o  
accumulate wealth. It is not uncommon nowadays  to see couples separating due to financial 
problems. By the time we have accumulated enough  wealth, we will be quite old and no longer 
able to accomplish what we set out to do. 
b" Due to the suffering of exhaustion, one is not capable of enjoying one's desires 
(8,73) 
Some malicious and lustful people 
Wear themselves out by working all day 
And, when they return home (in the evening), 
Their exhausted bodies lie prostrate like corpses. 
 This verse is referring to the desire for sex. We  spend the whole day working hard at our jobs or 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program               CHAPTER VIII - CONCENTRATION  
 
209  
businesses, returning home exhausted in the evenin gs.  Due to our tiredness, we can barely hold 
a proper conversation with our partners. When we  do talk, we may end up  arguing. We are too 
tired to even have sex. When we wake up th e next day, the whole cycle starts again.  
 
In Singapore, many people come to see me ab out their relationship problems. Due to their 
attachment and desire for one another, they are willing to put up with the problems and 
difficulties to earn a living in order to keep thin gs going and remain togeth er. They hope to earn 
money so that they can go home to enjoy a good relationship with their lo ved ones. This is what 
they want and what they hope will happen. But th ings do not work out that way in spite of all 
their efforts. This is the source of all the pr oblems, quarrels, unhappiness and disharmony in the 
family. 
c" Due to the object's intermittence, it is difficult to come upon the object of one's desire 
(8, 74) 
Some have the suffering of being disturbed with travel 
And having to go a long way from home. 
Although they long for their spouses, 
They do not see them for years at a time. 
 One of the reasons we get into relationships is fo r the physical intimacy it offers. Due to work 
commitments and in order to advance our businesses or careers, we may need to travel and leave our partners behind. Sometimes, these separations can last for years. Then our original motive 
for staying together is not fulfilled. Couple s who are separated because of work commitments 
suffer because of their attachment for one anot her and missing seeing each other. No such 
suffering will arise if there is no attach ment for one another in the first place. 
d" Due to being controlled by others, one receives many unwanted [consequences] 
(8,75) 
And some who wish for benefit 
Due to confusion, even sell themselves for the sake of (women and the like): 
But not attaining what they wish, 
They are aimlessly driven by the winds of others' actions. 
 Due to our self-interest and the wish to accumula te wealth, we have to do many things. We may 
become confused, even selling ourselves into slaver y to be fully controlled by others, losing our 
independence and freedom in the process. We may be cheated of the salary that we were 
supposed to receive. As a result of our negative actions, we experience problems both in this and our future lives.   This section deals with the problems of desire. Du e to the attachment that we have for ourselves 
and others, we never get what we want at the end of the day. 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program               CHAPTER VIII - CONCENTRATION  
 
210  
 
3' Reflecting on how [desire] produces all sorts of unwanted [consequences]  
a’ Presentation 
b' Explanation 
1" Not obtaining what one desires 
2" It is connected to the fault of numerous unwanted [consequences]  
a" Lacking independence and quickly throwing away one's life  
b" Being under the control of others and constantly besieged by various sufferings 
c" It acts to hinder liberation and puts to waste the leisures and endowments 
d" Developing the mind that strives for liberation by reflecting on its disadvantages 
e" Reflecting on how attachment to desires is the source for all disadvantages 
a" Lacking independence and quickly throwing away one's life  
(8,76) 
Some sell their own bodies 
And, without any power, are employed by others. 
Even when their wives give birth, 
Their children fall at the feet of trees and in lonely places. 
 
(8, 77) 
Some fools who are deceived by desire and, 
Wishing for a livelihood, think, “I shall earn my living (as a soldier)”; 
Then, although afraid of losing their lives, they go to war. 
Others become slaves for the sake of profit. 
 
Some people become slaves or servants for the sake of money, losing their freedom and 
independence and having to do as they are told . Sometimes they end up in relationships with 
their masters and become their mistresses. This happens in Singapore when the employer has an 
affair with the family maid. As a mistress, she cannot be kept at home but has to be housed 
elsewhere or even sent home. The employer has to continue supporting her and this creates 
additional problems for him. From the perspect ive of the maid, she had come to Singapore to 
work for money. As a mistress, her original goal  is not fulfilled and she also gets additional 
problems.   Some people become robbers and thieves because of  their desire for wealth and their attachment 
to themselves. When thieves or robbers are doing thei r work, they live in fear of losing their lives 
and worry about getting into trouble with the law. But they have to continue their work in order 
to earn a living.   
We may have encountered situatio ns where we had no choice but to part with our money, e.g. 
when we had to bribe an official or we were blackmailed, or asked for protection money. For 
example, people in Nepal are harassed by the Maoists and are forced to give them money.  
 
All these points highlight the fact that we get in to so much trouble because we have to do so 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program               CHAPTER VIII - CONCENTRATION  
 
211  
many things to survive, due to our strong  attachment for ourselves and our bodies.  
b" Being under the control of others and constantly besieged by various sufferings 
(8, 78) 
Some lustful people even cut their bodies, 
Others impale themselves on the points of sticks, 
Some stab themselves with daggers, 
And others burn themselves—such things as these are quite apparent. 
 
(8, 79)   
Due to the torment involved in collecting  it, protecting and finally losing it, 
I should realize wealth to be fraught with infinite problems. 
 
Out of attachment and desire for the good things in life, people end up stealing and robbing. In the process, they are harmed or injured. They al so accumulate negative karma that will ripen in 
the form of suffering and problems in their future lives.  The main point is that out of our attachment for the objects of desire, we have to suffer all sorts 
of negative consequences in this life. We are li ke a butterfly attracted to the light of the butter 
lamp. We fly towards the light and get burnt and killed in the process.   
 There is also a certain kind of deer that is atta ched to sound. When they hear beautiful sounds, 
they are mesmerized and loose awareness of th eir surroundings. The hunter then takes this 
opportunity to kill them. 
 
When people go fishing, they usually use worms as  bait on the hook. The fi sh is attached to the 
smell or taste of the worm. Due to its ignorance and not knowing what will happen when it takes 
the bait, the fish is hooked and loses its life.  From the above examples, we see how, out of igno rance due to our attachment and desire, we get 
into problems and suffer. At the beginning, when  we do not have any possessions or wealth, 
because of our desire for these things, we work  to accumulate them. We suffer when we are 
working.  Having accumulated wealth and possessions, we ha ve to suffer to protect them and to maintain 
the status quo. At the end, we suffer again wh en we have to be parted from these things. 
Therefore, in relation to the acquisition, retention, and se paration from our wealth and 
possessions, there will be suffering in the beginning, middle and end.    All the hard work and effort we put into our da ily lives is to acquire something that is only 
relevant for this life alone. All our wealth and possessions cannot benefit us in our future lives. 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program               CHAPTER VIII - CONCENTRATION  
 
212  
We need to think seriously about this.   
 We have no contentment. Even when we have en ough, we are not satisfied, only wanting more. 
When we have sufficient resources to live on, that is the time for us to sit back and do something 
that will be beneficial and meaningful for our futu re lives, such as studyi ng the Dharma or going 
for retreat. It is a different case if we do not be lieve in or accept the existence of future lives. 
 
I n  o r d e r  t o  a c c o m p l i s h  s o m e t h i n g  b e n e f i c i a l  f o r  o u r  f u t u r e  l i v e s ,  w e  h a v e  t o  g i v e  u p  o u r  
attachment to this life. If our focus is on th e happiness of this life, there is no way we can 
accomplish anything beneficial fo r our future lives. We have to switch our emphasis from the happiness of this life to the happ iness of our future lives. We need to develop renunciation of 
samsara. We can do this by reflecting on the ad vice given above that deals with attachment and 
desire to the good things in this life.   
If we are attached to this life, then we are not practitioners at all. Our goal is to destroy the 
negative emotions through the realisation of specia l insight focusing on emptiness. Before we can 
achieve special insight, we first must develop calm  abiding. In order to develop calm abiding, we 
need to stop all the manifestations of attachment , without which, there is no way to develop calm 
abiding. So if we are intent on develop calm abid ing, we have to start doing all these things. But 
if we are not interested in developing calm ab iding, then we do not need all this advice.  
Lesson 38   Chapter VIII - verse 79-83 
Gyaltsab Je says that, for those of us interested in seeking liberation, we need to develop joyous 
effort in order to enter into the path and bring it to completion. Entering the path alone is not 
enough as, once we embark on the path, we need  to apply joyous effort to bring the path to 
completion. In order to develop that joyous e ffort, we need to rely on the four powers: 
• the power of aspiration 
• the power of stability (or steadfastness) 
• the power of joy and  
• the power of relinquishment 
 
The reason that joyous effort does not come easy  for us and we are unable to develop the four 
powers is due to our lack of clarity with regard  to what we really want. We are not clear about 
our own goals. We are stuck in a confusing situatio n.  Therefore, joyous e ffort does not arise in 
us.  In order to develop joyous effort, first we need to have stable faith of conviction in karma. This is what the first power, the power of aspiration, means. This power is developed on the basis of 
having this stable faith of convic tion in karma. We have to reflec t on karma: its nature, its causes 
and its effects and generate a stable faith in it s workings. Only then will we have the basis for 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program               CHAPTER VIII - CONCENTRATION  
 
213  
developing joyous effort.  
 Deep inside our hearts, we should always be as king ourselves, “What am I looking for? Am I 
looking for the happiness of this life alone or am  I concerned with the happiness of my future 
lives?” This is a very important question that we  must ask ourselves. If we find that we have 
placed more emphasis on the ha ppiness of this life, then whatev er Dharma practices we have 
engaged in have not been pure, since the mind  was under the control of the three mental 
poisons (anger, attachment and ignorance).  
 When we wake up everyday we need to ask ours elves, “What matters to me most now? Am I 
more concerned with the happiness of this life or am I more co ncerned with the happiness of my 
future lives?”   If the emphasis is on our future happiness, then we have to investigate what we can do now that 
will benefit us in our future lives. We have  to examine this carefully and in detail.   
  
If we are really honest with ourselves and we look deeply into our hearts, we find that we 
instinctively put more emphasis on the happiness of this life than the happiness of our future 
lives. When we really check our minds, we see we instinctively look for the happiness of this life 
alone. This is our motivation regardless of what  we do. Due to our grasping to the happiness of 
this life alone, everything we do is influe nced by anger, attachment or ignorance.  
 Whatever we do - whether we ar e reciting our daily prayers, listening to teachings, taking 
initiations, consulting our guru or meeting the la mas - we are instinctively doing all this for the 
happiness of this life alone. Wh y - because this is our motiva tion deep inside our hearts. 
Everything we do is the manifestation of our desi re to achieve the happiness of this life, due to 
our goal of wanting to be happy in this life.   Because of this attitude, the Dharma practices th at we engage in may look like Dharma but in 
reality they do not become Dharma. These practices will not benefit us in our future lives. What 
we need to do now is shift our emphasis / goal to placing greater importance on the happiness of 
our future lives rather than just focusing on this life alone.   There is a reason for changing our minds in this way. As we consider ourselves to be Buddhists, we should accept the law of karm a.  We need to see how many more years we have left in this 
life.  Maybe, we can live till we are 60 years old. Compared to the lifespan of our future lives to come, we have to take rebirths for many eons to come. Based on the length of that time, the 
happiness of our future lives becomes far more important.    As we will be taking innumerable rebirths in the future, whether we end up with good or bad 
rebirths will depend on what we are doing in this present life. If we end up with bad rebirths in 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program               CHAPTER VIII - CONCENTRATION  
 
214  
our future lives, we have to suffer for eons. When  we consider the amount of suffering we will 
have to endure in our future lives compared to the suffering we experience in this life, this life’s 
suffering is nothing and is  so important any more.  
 
We can definitely experience happiness in our fu ture lives if we create the cause now by doing 
something beneficial. The amount of happiness we can enjoy in our future lives is much more 
important than our lifespan in this life.  
 
I f  o u r  g o a l  i s  t h e  h a p p i n e s s  o f  o u r  f u t u r e  l i v e s ,  t h e n  w h a t e v e r  w e  d o  –  b e  i t  d o i n g  o u r  d a i l y  prayers, listening to teachings, ta king initiations, consulting the gurus or meeting the lamas - will 
all become Dharma. Once it becomes Dharma, then these actions will definitely benefit us in our 
future lives.    Therefore it is extremely important that we sit do wn, reflect and ask ourselves in whatever we do: 
“Am I doing this for this life or for my future lives?” Whatever our answer may be, we then have 
to ask, “Why am I doing this for this life? Why am I doing this for my future lives? Is this life 
more important or are my future lives more import ant?” We should consider this very carefully.  
 If our emphasis shifts to placing more importance  on the happiness of our future lives, then we 
have to think; “What can I do that will definitely  benefit me in my future lives?” As Buddhists, 
this is the minimum kind of attitude we need to have, i.e. placing gr eater emphasis on the 
happiness of our future lives than this life.   We need to be confident to have the type of a ttitude that thinks: “What I am looking for is the 
happiness of my future lives.” What do we stand to  gain by having this attitude? By placing more 
importance on the happiness of our future lives,  the three mental poisons will naturally be 
weakened and, as a result, we will have more mental peace and happiness.   If our life goals are focussed on the happiness of this life, the three mental poisons will become 
stronger in our minds. Then, there will only be more unhappiness, problems and suffering. All 
these difficulties are the result of our motivation focussed on this life alone.  From my side, it is my responsibility to tell you this. But whether this will benefit you or not depends on you. Just listening to this will not benefit you.  You need to think about this. Not 
just once but you need to think about this every day until you have some feeling or experience in 
your heart.   
Gyaltsab Je’s message is: “If you are someone wh o seeks liberation or en lightenment, you need 
joyous effort especially when you have this huma n life of leisure and en dowments; your faculties 
are complete; you are free of obstacles to your  Dharma practice; and you have the necessary 
conditions for your spiritual development. Having  found this opportunity, you should not waste 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program               CHAPTER VIII - CONCENTRATION  
 
215  
it but use it to engage in something beneficial fo r your future lives. You need to develop joyous 
effort by generating the four powers.” 
 
Our problem is that we do not integrate the Dhar ma into our minds. We have listened to many 
teachings on, e.g., the topic of  the precious human rebirth. Although we have heard these 
teachings countless times, our minds remain unch anged. We do not reflect on the subject but, 
instead, we feel bored, thinking “I have heard this so many times.” We have no feeling for this 
subject and have little interest in it. It is impo rtant that we do not end up with this type of 
attitude. It is up to us whether we end up in this state or not.  
 It is important to avoid externally looking like a practitioner doing the commitments, reciting the 
prayers, engaging in the practices - but empty insi de. If our minds do not change, we will meet 
with many problems and much suffering when it  comes to the time of death. It would be 
ridiculous if we finally ended up in the lower realms. Therefore, whatever Dharma we may be 
engaged in, make sure it becomes Dharma. Whatever  virtuous actions we do, make sure they are 
virtue. This will only happen if we constantly recall; we need to be careful and check our minds all the time. If we do this, there will be nothin g to worry about; whatever we do will become 
Dharma.  Looking at the faults of desire and attachme nt, we can ask why attachment arises. Why do 
problems arise due to attachment? All this is due to the attitude of grasping to the happiness of 
this life. When attachment arises, it leads us to pr oblems in this life; it also leads us to suffering 
in our future lives. That is why we need to stop attachment from arising. We need to make a firm 
decision in our minds that our future lives are more important than the happiness of this life. 
Then, naturally, we will have fewer problems and difficulties in this life. When our goal is the happiness of our future lives, our disturbing emot ions will become weaker and we will experience 
more happiness and peace.   We all want to be happy and we do not want to suffer. Although we want to be happy, we do not create the causes that lead to happiness. Although we do not wa nt suffering, we keep on running 
after the causes of suffering. When we think abou t this seriously, we can see we are like crazy 
people. We want to be happy, yet we do not create the causes for happiness. We do not want to suffer, yet we keep on creating the causes for suffering. We are really quite mad.  
3' Reflecting on how [desire] produces all sorts of unwanted [consequences]  
a’ Presentation 
b' Explanation 
1" Not obtaining what one desires 
2" It is connected to the fault of numerous unwanted [consequences]  
a" Lacking independence and quickly throwing away one's life  
b" Being under the control of others and constantly besieged by various sufferings 
c" It acts to hinder liberation and puts to waste the leisures and endowments 
d" Developing the mind that strives for liberation by reflecting on its disadvantages 
e" Reflecting on how attachment to desires is the source for all disadvantages 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program               CHAPTER VIII - CONCENTRATION  
 
216  
c" It acts to hinder liberation and puts to waste the leisures and endowments 
(8, 79 cd)  
Those who are distracted by their attachment to it 
Have no opportunity to gain freedom from  the misery of conditioned existence. 
 
(8,80) 
In the same way as animals drawing carriages 
Are only able to eat a few mouthfuls of grass, 
Likewise, desirous people 
Have many disadvantages such as  these, and little (profit), 
(8,81) 
And since even animals can obtain this (little profit), 
Those who are pained by their (previous) actions 
Waste these leisures and endowme nts, so difficult to find, 
For the sake of something triv ial that is not so scarce. 
 
When we are attached to wealth and possessions, we live our whole lives distracted by them. Due 
to this distraction, it will be impossible for us to  put the three higher trainings into practice. We 
will continually take rebirth in cyclic existence and there will be no opportunity for us to achieve 
liberation.    We can consider this from another perspective mentioned in the beginning of this chapter. 
When we are attached to our wealth and possessi ons, our minds are distracted and unable to 
achieve calm abiding. Without achieving calm abidin g, we will never be able to generate special 
insight and without special insight, we wi ll not be able to achieve liberation.  
 When we are only concerned with the happiness of this life, we will work very hard to 
accumulate wealth, property and possessions. Alon g the way, we will encounter difficulties and 
problems and we will not be happy. The gain then is very small despite getting what we wanted.   
 When we acquire these objects, the pleasure we experience is fleeting in nature but many 
problems arise from this acquisition. This is li kened to the carriage horse managing to eat only a 
few mouthfuls of grass along the road. For an instant, the horse may experience the pleasure of eating the grass but it is nothing compared to th e suffering that it has to endure the whole day. 
When we pursue wealth and possessions, driven by  our attachment to the happiness of this life, 
we are no different from the carriage horse.    As human beings, we always look down upon an imals, thinking that they are ignorant and 
stupid. But when it comes to looking for food and looking after themselves, animals are very capable.     
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program               CHAPTER VIII - CONCENTRATION  
 
217  
If we human beings with our brains, intelligenc e and our ability to discriminate between right 
and wrong concentrate only on the happiness of this life by looking for wealth, food and 
possessions, then we are more foolish than these animals. This is something important for us to 
think about.  
 We work very hard in our careers or businesses for the happiness of this life thinking we have 
achieved something fantastic. However, what we are doing is no better than animals that also 
have the ability to look after themselves , finding food when they are hungry.  
 Sometimes, human beings are worse than animals.  T i g e r s  o r  l e o p a r d s  h u n t  o t h e r  a n i m a l s  f o r  
food but when they are full, they leave other animal s alone. Even if animals such as deer walk in 
front of them, they do not hunt for enjoyment.  We human beings do not have this sense of 
contentment. We always want to have more and we harm others in the process. In this sense, we are worse than animals. 
 
Animals have the mental poisons of jealousy and competitiveness but it is by no means certain 
that they are worse than us in th ese respects. Sometimes, it seems that we have more anger, more 
attachment, more ignorance and mo re jealousy than animals. When we look at sexual desire, 
animals have sex only during their mating season s. However, human beings are not like that and 
can experience sexual craving at any time and place.   The main advice is that we should be better than animals. As we are superior to them, we should start to work for the happiness of our future live s. Since we have now obtained a human life of 
leisure and opportunities, we should extract the essence of this life. If we just focus on the 
happiness of this life alone, then we are no bette r than animals. We have to switch our emphasis 
to looking for the happiness of our future lives.   On the positive side, human beings are definitely superior to animals in many ways. There are many things we can do but animals cannot. It is  up to us whether we want to use our human 
intelligence well. We can meditate on   developi ng bodhicitta and calm abiding, meditate on 
exchanging self for others etc. Only human beings  can do this. There is no way that animals can 
meditate on these topics.  
d" Developing the mind that strives for liberation by reflecting on its disadvantages 
(8, 82) 
The objects of desire will certainly perish, 
And then I shall fall into hellish states. 
However, Buddhahood itself is attained 
With just one millionth of the difficulty 
 
(8, 83) 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program               CHAPTER VIII - CONCENTRATION  
 
218  
Involved in continually exhausting myself 
For the sake of what is not very great. 
(Hence) the desirous experience greater misery th an (those following) th e Awakening way of life— 
But (for them) there is no Awakening. 
 
We have to reflect on the nature of the thing th at we are attached to. Our objects of desire are 
unstable, will disintegrate over time and are no t trustworthy. Attachment to these objects will 
only bring us problems in this and our future li ves. We will take rebirth in the lower realms and 
may even end up in hell. If this is the result of having attachment and running after wealth and 
possessions, then this goal does no t become worthwhile after all.  
  
Since time without beginning, we worked so hard  to achieve the happiness of our current life 
alone. If we exerted a fraction of that effort towards achieving enlightenment, we would probably 
be enlightened by now!   We could have achieved the ultimate happiness of  enlightenment in much less time and with far 
less difficulty but this is something that we did no t do. What did we do instead? We spent all our 
past lives working to achieve the happiness of thos e lives alone. Now we are left with nothing, 
still stuck in samsara. We did not get any happine ss or pleasure, only problems and suffering. It 
is really meaningless.  
 
Rather, we should work to achieve enlightenm ent - the ultimate happiness when all kinds of 
suffering are exhausted. This is what we should really want. The result of enlightenment will be 
far more meaningful.   For countless eons, since beginningless time, in ou r innumerable samsaric existences in the past, 
we only worked to achieve the happiness of those lives alone. However, there is a time limit to 
achieving enlightenment - only three countless grea t eons. It may seem a long time but at least 
there is a definite duration compared to the limitless eons we have already wasted.  If we reflect on what we do in our daily lives - working for 8, 10, 12 ho urs a day to achieve the 
happiness of this life – if we devoted just an ho ur every day to creating the causes to achieve 
enlightenment, then there would be  great profit in the future.  
 What we have discussed so far boils down to this : “What are we looking for in this life? What is 
our goal? Is this life more important or are our fu ture lives more important?”  If we are not clear 
about this, then everything else becomes difficult. 
Lesson 39   Chapter VIII - verse 84-90 
In the previous lesson, we studied the outline, “Developing the mind that strives for liberation 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program               CHAPTER VIII - CONCENTRATION  
 
219  
by reflecting on its disadvantages,” which had 3 main points:  
• Understanding that all the objects of our desire  are by nature impermanent and unstable.   
• When we are motivated by attachment to acquire  our objects of desire, we engage in actions 
that create negative karma that pr opels us to the lower realms.   
• The results of our desire do not bring us any benefit. 
 
We have been stuck since beginningless time pursuing our objects of desire and attachment, 
incurring many faults and receiving very little bene fit in the process. The state of enlightenment, 
on the other hand, is stable and unchanging; it do es not entail any faults whatsoever and offers 
us great benefit. Furthermore, the amount of effort that we need to put into achieving 
enlightenment is only a fraction of what we have spent running af ter our objects of desire. Yet, 
it seems that we do not want to or are not inte rested in enlightenment.  We do not create the 
causes for it.   
Considering the problems and unhappiness that we have to endure in our pursuit of our objects 
of desire, what we get is of minimal benefit. If we put in less effort and yet were able to achieve 
something very beneficial, we would be considered  intelligent and wise. We  discover the faults 
of attachment by reflecting on the above points. Disillusionment with cyclic existence will then 
arise and we will develop the aspiration  for liberation and enlightenment. 
 
1) Instructions on cultivating concentration 
2) Abandoning the class of things incongruous with calm abiding  
a) Abandoning the bustle of the world 
b) Abandoning erroneous conceptions  
i) Cultivating weariness for desire 
1' Reflecting on how the effect of honing one's desires involves fear  
2' Reflecting on the unclean nature of the body and so forth 
3' Reflecting on how [desire] produces all sorts of unwanted [consequences]  
a’ Presentation 
b' Explanation 
1" Not obtaining what one desires 
2" It is connected to the fault of numerous unwanted [consequences]  
a" Lacking independence and quickly throwing away one's life  
b" Being under the control of others and constantly besieged by various sufferings 
c" It acts to hinder liberation and puts to waste the leisures and endowments 
d" Developing the mind that strives for liberation by reflecting on its disadvantages 
e" Reflecting on how attachment to desires is the source for all disadvantages 
(1) Reflecting on the disadvantages of desire 
(2) Cultivating joy in isolation 
(a) Presentation 
(b) Explanation 
(i) A point on the excellences such as that of place 
(ii) The qualities of having obtained independence  
(iii) The qualities of contentment 
ii) Cultivating a joy for isolation  
(1) Reflecting on the disadvantages of desire 
(8,84) 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program               CHAPTER VIII - CONCENTRATION  
 
220  
When one has contemplated the miseries of hell, 
(It will be clear that) there is nothing comparable 
To the harm caused to desirous beings, 
Even by weapons, poison, fire, ravines and foes. 
 
Motivated by our attachment to various objects of  desire, we look for material gain, respect, 
fame, etc. To achieve these goals, we engage in many negativities in our daily lives. As a result, we 
have to take rebirth in the lowe r realms. Once there, we are unable to cultivate virtue but we 
continually commit more negative actions. Therefor e, getting out of the lower realms is extremely 
difficult. The sufferings there are also far greate r than the worst suffering we can encounter in 
this life.    Thinking about the dangers we can experience in th is life frightens us. But, when we think about 
the consequences of our desire and attachment in our next life, we are not afraid at all! If we 
know how to achieve long-term happiness, we can discern between the suffering of this life and 
the suffering of the lower realms in our next li fe. Being killed by weapons or being poisoned 
cannot send us to the lower realms, whereas nega tive karma accumulated through our desire and 
attachment can do so.  
 When we reflect on this, we see that we are terrifi ed by things we need not be afraid of and we 
are not scared of the things we should be worried about.  Having obtained a human life of leisure 
and opportunity, as practising Buddhists we must not allow ourselves to fall into the lower realms. Otherwise, our human rebirth will have been completely meaningless.  
(2) Cultivating joy in isolation 
(a) Presentation 
(b) Explanation 
(a) Presentation 
(8, 85) 
Having in this way develope d disillusionment with desire, 
I should generate joy for solitude. 
 By seeing how attachment to sentient beings and/ or external possessions is the source of all our 
problems, we develop disillusionment with cyclic existence and these objects of desire. We begin 
to reflect on the benefits of living in isolat ion and we develop joy in living in solitude. 
 
(b) Explanation 
(i) A point on the excellences such as that of place 
(ii) The qualities of having obtained independence  
(iii) The qualities of contentment 
(i) A point on the excellences such as that of place 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program               CHAPTER VIII - CONCENTRATION  
 
221  
(8, 85 cd)  
The fortunate ones stro ll in peaceful forests, 
Devoid of disputes and disturbing conceptions. 
(8, 86) 
(They live) in joyful houses of vast flat stones, 
Cooled by the sandal-scented moonlight, 
Fanned by the peaceful, silent forest breeze, 
Thinking of what is of benefit for others. 
 
Once we are living in solitude, there is no o pportunity for disputes to arise with regard to 
relationships or ownership of property. There are also no internal disputes, i.e. no arising of 
afflictions because our minds are at peace.  
 
The fortunate ones live in a peaceful place in the forest that is cool and bathed in moonlight and 
where there are no unpleasant sounds. They work on developing bodhicitta in their meditation 
sessions and between sessions they retain the wish to benefit others. When we are in such blessed 
places, our three mental poisons naturally beco me weaker and we become happier. This also 
benefits us in our future lives.     
(ii) The qualities of having obtained independence  
(8, 87) 
They dwell for as lo ng as they wish 
In empty houses, at the feet of trees and in caves. 
Having abandoned the pain of clingi ng to and guarding (possessions), 
They abide independent, free of care, 
 
A meditator can remain in physical isolation for as long as he wishes. He does not possess any 
property, or objects. He does not rely on his relationships with others and he is not worried 
about being disturbed or harmed by hi s enemies; so he is at peace.  
 O n  t h e  o t h e r  h a n d ,  l i v i n g  i n  s o c i e t y  m e a n s  w e  h a v e  n o  c h o i c e  b u t  t o  d e p e n d  o n  o t h e r s .  T o  achieve our goals, we have to deal with the rich and powerful and do as they say. We look down on our subordinates and are harmed by them in return. This dependence on others means we 
are not free, unlike someone who is living in solitude.  
 The benefit of going into retreat is freedom from  our daily problems. The main purpose of going 
into retreat is to develop our minds to benefit others. All the points discussed so far in this 
chapter relate to the development of calm abiding.  If we want to develop calm abiding, we must 
go into isolation.  
 
A rich businessman, who is married with three kids, told me his own happiness is not good 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program               CHAPTER VIII - CONCENTRATION  
 
222  
enough. He needs to make his wife  and children happy. He ends up with so much suffering. His 
wife constantly nags him about his business trips to  China. He resorts to drinking to forget his 
problems. Now he has become an alcoholic. This is the kind of unhappiness he has. 
(iii) The qualities of contentment 
(8, 88) 
Living as they choose, desireless, 
Having no ties with anyone— 
Even the powerful have difficulty finding 
A life as happy and content as this. 
 
When we live in isolation, our contentment comes from being able to live on minimal 
necessities. It is important that we  are not attached to our retreat place. Living in solitude, there 
is no contact with the outside world and there are no ties to people. It is said that those who 
adopt this kind of lifestyle experience a special ki nd of happiness that is out of reach for even the 
most powerful worldly gods like Indra.   
 Once we have found the necessary conditions such as an appropriate place and accessibility of 
provisions, we go into isolation and engage in the yoga of the four se ssions. Gradually, as we 
adjust to the rhythm of our new life, it is said that we will start to experience this special kind of 
happiness. Without going into isolation, there is no way that we can experience this happiness 
and we have no idea how special this kind of feeling can be.   By reflecting on and understanding the faults of desire and attachment and the benefits of 
relying on isolation, we make a firm decision, “This is what I am going to do. Even if I die soon 
after going into retreat, I will have no regrets, ” because all our time would have been spent on 
virtue. On the other hand, it is pointless to live  to even a hundred amidst the hustle and bustle 
of worldly life, as those years would have been  spent in accumulating nonvirtuous karma.  
 
These three verses discuss the benefits of living  in isolation which we covered earlier in this 
chapter. Earlier in this chapter, there was a discu ssion on the benefits of living in solitude, which 
is meant to generate enthusiasm and delight in our minds for physical and mental isolation. Why 
is there a need then to mention these benefits again? Suppose we went into isolation on the basis of having reflected on these benefits and the fa ults of desire and attachment. After being in 
retreat for six months or a year, boredom may set in and we start to think, “Maybe I should not 
be doing this.” In order to maintain our enthusia sm for remaining in retreat, we have to reflect 
again on these points. This reason is explained in some commentaries.     
ii) Cultivating a joy for isolation 
Geshe-la will check with another text as his present text does not have this outline. 
3) How to cultivate calm abiding 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program               CHAPTER VIII - CONCENTRATION  
 
223  
a) The way to meditate on the equality of self and other 
i)  A brief presentation 
ii) An extensive explanation 
b) The way to exchange self and other 
i) A brief presentation 
(8, 89) 
Having in such ways as these 
Thought about the excellences of solitude, 
I should completely pacify distorted conceptions 
And meditate on the Awakening Mind. 
 
(8,90) 
First of all, I should make an effort 
To meditate upon the equali ty between self and others. 
I should protect all be ings as I do myself 
Because we are all equal in (wanting ) pleasure and (not wanting) pain. 
 
Having in such ways as these thou ght about the excellences of solitude : What are the benefits of isolating 
ourselves from the external bustle of life? What are the benefits of isolating our minds from all 
discursive thoughts once we are in isolation? Wh at are the benefits of isolating our minds from 
the self-cherishing thought (the meaning of isolatio n when it is explained on the secret level)?  
 
When we are living in isolation, our bodies, speech and minds stay in isolation. By isolating 
them, we create the causes of happiness for both this life and our future lives. Externally, we 
isolate ourselves from the bustle of worldly life. Internally, we turn our minds inwards, isolating 
them from all our discursive thoughts - our emot ional roller coasters. We also isolate the mind 
on the secret level by distancing the mind  from our usual self-cherishing thoughts.  
 When we are able to live in isolation in thes e ways, the discursive thoughts and afflictions 
gradually become weaker and are then pacified. Af terwards, we are able to develop bodhicitta. In 
isolation, we repeatedly recall the faults of follow ing after desire and living in the midst of people 
while constantly remembering the benefits of remain ing in isolation.  Reflec ting in this way, we 
abandon any thoughts of giving up and keep ou r enthusiasm for staying in isolation alive.  
 B y  l i v i n g  i n  i s o l a t i o n  i n  t h e s e  w a y s ,  w e  s t r i v e  t o  d e v e l o p  c a l m  a b i d i n g .  W h e n  w e  a r e  a b l e  t o  achieve calm abiding, our bodies and minds beco me serviceable so that  w e  c a n  d i r e c t  t h e m  
towards any virtue at will. Developing bodhicitta is  easy with this serviceability of body and mind. 
Lama Tsongkhapa mentions that when calm abiding is achieved, we can place and fix our minds 
on any chosen object of virtue at any time an d place. Once our minds are fixed on the chosen 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program               CHAPTER VIII - CONCENTRATION  
 
224  
object of virtue, they remain as immovable as the king of mountains66. 
 
Our main meditation is to develo p bodhicitta. The way to develop bodhicitta is to meditate on 
exchanging self and others. However, in order to produce the attitude that cherishes others more 
than ourselves, we first must meditate on and realis e the equality of self and others. It is equal in 
the sense that all beings equally want happiness and do not want suffering. 
Lesson 40 (new term for ABC)   Chapter VIII - verse 89-90 
The prayer we have just recited states: 
 Understanding that the precious freedom of this rebirth is found only  once,  
Is greatly meaningful, and is  difficult to find again, 
Please bless me to generate the mind that unceasingly, 
Day and night, takes its essence.  
We should reflect on this regularly and, day an d night, strive to take  the essence of this 
meaningful opportunity we have. Not only have we obtained a human body but our faculties and 
senses are all complete. We have the opportunity to listen to and study Dharma teachings. When 
we reflect deeply on this, we will be amazed and rejoice in our good fortune.   While all the conditions for us to study and practise exist, it remains up to us whether we want to 
study or practise the teachings. But th e opportunity to do so is there.  
 It is questionable whether we will obtain such a rebirth again in our next lives. As the prayer says, 
The precious freedom of this rebirth is foun d only once and is difficult to find again . Since we have 
obtained such a rebirth, it is important that we do something meaningful with it. We already 
find it difficult to practise with all the conduciv e conditions we have. There is no guarantee that 
our faculties or senses will be complete or pe rfect even if we were to obtain another human 
rebirth. Practice becomes even more difficult then . So, we need to study and practise right now.  
 
I know many of you recite this prayer, The Foundation of All Good Qualities,  on a daily basis but 
you should not leave it simply at that level. You should reflect on the meaning of the verses, 
especially the one dealing with the precious huma n rebirth. By doing so, it encourages you to 
practise the Dharma.  
 
Every day, we can see for ourselves the instabil ity of this human life. We are not immune to 
                                             
 
66 Lama Tsongkhapa says in his Song of Experience  (stanza 19a-d): Concentration is a king ruling the mind; When placed 
in it, [the mind] is as immovable as the king of mountains. Wh en employed, it engages all virtuous objects of observation, and 
induces the great bliss of serviceable body and mind . 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program               CHAPTER VIII - CONCENTRATION  
 
225  
sickness. Many people are well one day and sick the next and within a short time, they die and 
move on to the next life. While we are still heal thy, we should not postpone our Dharma studies 
and practice, as it will be too late to do so when we suddenly fall ill. We may wish to practise the 
Dharma then but it will be too late as our bodies will not allow us to do so.  The same applies to 
our studies. They should not be postponed. When we have the time, it is good to continue to come to class to listen to the teachings and to apply and put into practice, as much as we can, 
whatever we have learnt.  
  
All of you already know this so I am just remi nding you of these points. The classes stopped for 
three months. Whatever you did during that peri od, good or bad, that time is gone and can 
never return. We need to reflect and focus on how we are going to make this opportunity we now have meaningful and what we plan to do in the future.  
C. The way to train in the absorptions included in the common and uncommon calm abidings 
a. Explaining the chapter’s material 
1) Instructions on cultivating absorption 
2) Abandoning the class of things incongruous with calm abiding 
3) How to cultivate calm abiding 
2) Abandoning the class of things incongruous with calm abiding 
We will not be able to achieve our goals when ou r minds are distracted.  To  stop distraction, we 
have to stop the class of things that is discor dant with the concentrated mind and hinders the 
development of concentration.  
 
Attachment to inner and outer phenomena is th e major cause of mental distraction.  Outer 
phenomena refer to things like wealth, reputa tion and possessions. Inner phenomena refer to 
our desire for other people.  We are never satisfied with our objects of desire and we constantly 
crave to be with them. Blinded in this way, we  are unable to understand the true nature of 
phenomena (emptiness) and the workings of cause and effect. There is no disenchantment with 
cyclic existence when there is strong attachment in our minds. Even if there is some sense of 
renunciation, when desire arises strongly, that  slight disenchantment quickly disappears.  
 
Separation from the object of attachment brings suffering, unhappiness and sorrow. Due to our 
attachment, our minds are completely distracted. Th is is how we lead our lives, wasting them and 
making them meaningless.   If we want to achieve calm abiding, we have to rely on contentment and isolation. In isolation, there are fewer obstacles to the development of the concentrated mind. As long as we remain 
living in the hustle and bustle of worldly life we will have obstacles. 
3) How to cultivate calm abiding 
a) The way to meditate on the equality of self and other 
i) A brief presentation 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program               CHAPTER VIII - CONCENTRATION  
 
226  
ii) An extensive explanation 
b) The way to exchange self and other 
i) A brief presentation 
(8, 89) 
Having in such ways as these 
Thought about the excellences of solitude, 
I should completely pacify distorted conceptions 
And meditate on the Awakening Mind. 
 
(8, 90) 
First of all, I should make an effort 
To meditate upon the equali ty between self and others. 
I should protect all be ings as I do myself 
Because we are all equal in (wanting ) pleasure and (not wanting) pain. 
 
Having in such ways as these, Thou ght about the excellences of solitude,  refers to our having 
contemplated the benefits of isolation and genera ting the determination henceforth to leave our 
worldly lives and rely on isolation.  In isolation,  we strive to develop calm abiding and meditate 
on bodhicitta. 
 How do we do this? First, we reflect on the equa lity of self and others and on this basis, we 
meditate on exchanging self and others.  We do many things to achieve happiness and to el iminate suffering for ourselves. We should do 
likewise for others and help them to achieve happiness and remove their suffering. Why do we 
need to do this? Because we are all equal in wanting to be happy and in wishing to avoid 
suffering. 
Lesson 41   Chapter VIII - verse 90-96 
This is advice from the Kadampa masters: Wh en our minds are virtuous and our motivation 
positive, then our physical and verbal actions will  naturally be virtuous and positive. We will not 
harm but instead benefit others. Conversely, when our minds are in negative, non-virtuous 
states, it is very difficult to ge nerate positive behaviour. We are most likely to give problems to 
others and be harmed by them in return. The Kadampa masters are advising us to generate a 
good heart and develop a positive mind and motivation.  
 
We are now studying the practice of exchanging ourselves for others and developing bodhicitta, 
the main point of which is to develop the virtuous, positive mind. A positive state of mind leads 
to positive and beneficial behaviour that helps us  to become good-hearted, virtuous people. It is 
v e r y  d i f f i c u l t  t o  c h a n g e  o u r  m i n ds  o v e r n i g h t .  W e  h a v e  t o  s t a r t  r e du c i n g  n e g a t i v e  p h y s i c a l  a n d 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program               CHAPTER VIII - CONCENTRATION  
 
227  
verbal actions by reducing our negative states of  mind. While we may not be able to completely 
remove such negativities, we can work towards reducing them.  
 
What are the benefits to being good-hearted peop le? We will be protected by the worldly gods 
who delight in virtue and receive blessings from  the buddhas and bodhisattvas. Temporal goals 
are easily achieved. When death comes, we will move on easily to the next life and achieve 
enlightenment very quickly.  
 
C. The way to train in the concentrations included in the common and uncommon calm abidings  
a Explaining the chapter's material 
1)  Instructions on cultivating concentration 
2)  Abandoning the class of things incongruous with calm abiding  
3)  How to cultivate calm abiding 
a) The way to meditate on the equality of self and other 
i) A brief presentation 
ii) An extensive explanation 
1’ Explaining the purpose of meditating on the equality of self and other 
2’ The way to meditate on the equality of self and other 
a’ Abandoning the [position that holds that] it is unreasonable to equate 
discarding 
pleasure and taking on suffering 
b’ Explaining the reasons why it is reasonable to meditate on such an 
equation 
1’’ An extensive explanation 
a’’ Stating the reason 
b’’ Establishing the pervasion 
(1) The actual established pervasion 
(2) Dispelling hindrances to that 
c’’ Dispelling the hindrance of thinking that it is unsuitable to      meditate on the equality of self and other 
2’’ Synopsis 
3’’ Abandoning objections 
3’ The benefits of such meditations 
4’ One can develop such [an attitude ] is one familiarizes oneself with the 
equality of self and other  
b) The way to exchange self and other 
b The chapter's name 
1’ Explaining the purpose of meditating on the equality of self and other 
(8, 91)  
Although there are many different part s and aspects such as the hand, 
As a body that is to be protected, they are one. 
Likewise, all the different sentient beings , in their pleasure and their pain, 
Have a wish to be happy th at is the same as mine. 
 
In the brief presentation on this particular poin t covered in the last lesson, we were advised to 
meditate on bodhicitta on the basis of equalisi ng ourselves with others. We recognise that we 
want to be happy and we strive to achieve ha ppiness for ourselves. We should likewise seek 
happiness for others. Just as we work to eliminate our own suffering,  we are advised to generate 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program               CHAPTER VIII - CONCENTRATION  
 
228  
the same wish in relation to others and to help them remove their sufferings. This is illustrated 
in the last 2 lines of Verse 90:  
 
(8,90) 
I should protect all be ings as I do myself 
Because we are all equal in (wanting ) pleasure and (not wanting) pain. 
 
Qualm : There are too many sentient beings in the 6 realms – in the hells, as hungry ghosts, 
animals, human beings, demi-gods and gods and each  realm has different types of sufferings. If I 
focus on this limitless number of  sentient be ings, there is no way I can equalise myself and 
others as I cannot see others as equal to my self since their sufferings are so varied.   
 Answer : Let us apply this analogy: Our bodies have various parts – arms, legs, heads, etc. Each 
bodily part is different but when it comes to prot ecting ourselves, we see them all as one entity, 
‘our body.’   
 In the same way, there are many different type s of sentient beings, with their own kinds of 
suffering and problems. Like us, however, they wa nt to be happy and do not want to suffer. In 
this sense, we are the same. By focusing on the suffering of these beings, we generate the thought 
to eliminate their  suffering and to help th em to achieve the happiness they are seeking. 
 
2’  The way to meditate on the equality of self and other 
a’ Abandoning the [position that holds tha t] it is unreasonable to equate discarding 
pleasure and taking on suffering 
b’ Explaining the reasons why it is reasonable to meditate on such an equation 
a’ Abandoning the [position that holds that] it is unreasonable to equate discarding pleasure and 
taking on suffering 
(8, 92) 
The suffering that I experience 
Does not cause any harm to others. 
But that suffering (is mine) because of my conceiving of (myself as) "I"; 
Thereby it becomes unbearable. 
 
(8,93) 
Likewise, the misery of others 
Does not befall me. 
Nevertheless, by conceiving of (others as) "I," their suffering becomes mine; 
Therefore, it too should be hard to bear. 
 
Qualm : Others people's problems and suffering cannot hurt me and my  suffering does not affect 
them. How can eliminating our suffering and the   suffering of others be the same?  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program               CHAPTER VIII - CONCENTRATION  
 
229  
 
Answer : When we suffer from physical pain, it is true  that that pain does not affect other people 
and remains our problem. Why do we experience th at suffering? This is because of our grasping 
at the “I” and labelling it, “This is my suffering.” We conceive of our bodies as being “mine” and 
belonging to the “I”. When the body is hurt , the mind cannot bear the pain and suffering 
ensues. We need to remove that suffering, to be free of it.  
 When others suffer, although their problems ca nnot directly affect us and their pain cannot 
become our pain, we still need to remove their su ffering if we are  bodhisattvas. Why?  Because a 
bodhisattva cherishes all sentient beings just as he cherishes himself. It is unbearable for the 
bodhisattva to see others suffer.   Therefore, once we see that we and others ar e equal in not wanting suffering and equal in 
wanting happiness, then it is appropriate to stri ve to eliminate the sufferings of others and to 
help them to find happiness.  When our children fall sick, why do we find it so unbearable? Because we see  our children as 
being “mine.” We are not so agitated when other pe ople’s children fall ill because we do not have 
this notion of seeing their children as our own.   The same attitude applies to our possessions such as  our cars, homes or  watches. We get so upset 
when our watches get scratched. Why does this disturbance occur? Because we hold on to the 
concept of ownership, that this watch is “min e.” So, when someone accidentally scratches our 
watch, we become so unhappy.  Once we offer our watch as a gift to someone else , what happens to that watch no longer bothers 
us. Our feelings towards our watch before and afte r we give it away are completely different as 
our attitude towards it has changed. But it is th e same object. The ownership of the object does 
not come from the object's side. The object doesn't say, “I belong to you,” or, “I belong to him.” 
The whole idea of the “I” comes from oneself an d grasping at that “I” makes one think, “It 
belongs to me.”   
The Lamrim Chenmo  refers to the example of the two moun tains: the one on this side and the 
one on the other side. How do we posit the mountain  that is nearer to us as being “near”? It is 
dependent on the relationship between the two mountains with us. Whether this mountain is 
nearer to or further away from us depends on  us. It does not depend on the mountain.  
 
The “I” does not exist independently, is not self -sufficient and cannot stand on its own. Others 
exist in the same way. When we refer  to  the co ncept of “others,” this is  not something that is 
autonomous or independent. This shows that ph enomena exist through the force of conception 
or mental labelling and do not exist independently.  They do not exist by themselves but rather by 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program               CHAPTER VIII - CONCENTRATION  
 
230  
dependence on others.  
 Just as we cherish ourselves through the force of familiarity, by cultivating the sense of others 
being equal to ourselves, we can become familiar with cherishing others.  
 For example, the very first time  we met the person that is to  become our friend, we did not 
consider him as a friend. But after more encoun ters and through familiarity, he becomes our 
“friend” and we find it unbearable when something bad happens to him.  That friend did not exist independently from his own side. In the same way as our friends’ problems become 
unbearable for us, it is possible to equalise ou rselves with others and to become motivated to 
help them overcome their difficulties.   
b’ Explaining the reasons why it is reasonable to meditate on such an equation  
1” An extensive explanation 
a” Stating the reason  
b” Establishing the pervasion 
c” Dispelling the hindrance of thinking that it is unsuitable to meditate on the equality of self and other 
2” Synopsis 
3” Abandoning objections 
a” Stating the reason 
(8, 94) 
Hence I should dispel the misery of others 
Because it is suffering , just like my own, 
And I should benefit others 
Because they are sentient be ings, just like myself. 
 
Why is it appropriate to eliminate the suffering of  other sentient beings? Because it is suffering, 
and that suffering is meaningless. Just as we el iminate thirst and hunger for ourselves, it is 
appropriate to do likewise for others.  It is also appropriate to accomplish the welf are and happiness of others. Why? Simply because 
they are sentient beings like ourselves.  We and others are equal in the sense in wanting happiness.  We and others are equal in  not wanting to suffer.  
We and others are equal in being selfless (i.e . lacking an inherently existent “self”). 
 Having said that, we can check whether it is po ssible to apprehend others as ourselves and vice 
versa. Is it possible to conceive of another sentie nt being as being oneself?  Is there any fallacy in 
holding such a conception?   
b” Establishing the pervasion 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program               CHAPTER VIII - CONCENTRATION  
 
231  
(1) The actual established pervasion 
(2) Dispelling hindrances to that 
 
(8, 95) 
When both myself and others 
Are similar in that we wish to be happy, 
What is so special about me? 
Why do I strive for my happiness alone? 
 
(8, 96) 
And when both myself and others 
Are similar in that we do not wish to suffer, 
What is so special about me? 
Why do I protect myself and not others? 
 
There is no reason whatsoever to justify simply accomplishing happiness for ourselves and 
eliminating our own suffering and not helping others to do the same. So when we work for our 
own happiness and strive to remove our suffering, we should do likewise for other living beings. 
Lesson 42   Chapter VIII - verse 97-102 
Whether the outcome of a course of action is po sitive or negative depends on the originating 
intention or motivation. A virtuous intention produces positive results and a negative intention 
produces bad results. Therefore, we should always  rely on mindfulness and vigilance to keep our 
minds in a virtuous state. We assert that attend ing teachings is a virtuous act. However, if the 
motivation for listening to the teachings is not virtuous, then being present and listening to the 
teachings is not necessarily virtuous.  
 
A beneficial motivation would be thinking, “Wha tever knowledge I get in class, I am going to 
blend it with my mind and try to  practise it as much as possibl e.” When we make the effort to 
practise, we can have positive experiences that wi ll give us the understanding and confidence that 
the Dharma we are studying and practising really  works. What is the result of such positive 
experiences? Faith in the Dharma will naturally arise and faith in our virtuous friend and guru 
will be generated from the depths of our hearts. 
 
The problem is that people attend but do not a pply the teachings in thei r daily lives. When the 
teachings we hear remain simply at an intellectual level for us, without practising them, it is very 
difficult for us to generate faith in the Dhar ma. We do not taste the Dharma. Without such 
faith, it becomes very difficult to talk about generating faith in our guru who gives us the 
teachings. But when we blend the teachings with our minds and try to practise them, then over 
time, the quality of our minds will improve; we become more good-hearted and so forth. Our 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program               CHAPTER VIII - CONCENTRATION  
 
232  
faith in the Dharma and our guru also increase.  
 Therefore, it is important that before engaging in any action, we should ask ourselves, “Am I 
motivated by a positive or negative state of mind?”   
 Kyabje Zopa Rinpoche has mentioned several time s that his desire to start Amitabha Buddhist 
Centre was so powerful, it was akin to the urge  to  vomit. We should  understand that, from 
Rinpoche’s side, such a special and powerful urge to  start a centre does not apply to all centres.  
 In the case of ABC, however, Rinpoche had this very strong wish to start the Centre. He must 
have seen the great benefit of doing so. Since the existence of ABC is so beneficial, as its 
members, it is our responsibility to help improve and sustain the Centre.  We should keep this in 
mind. You should feel that this is your Centre. If you are not from this Centre, this advice may 
not apply to you. But, for the members, it is  our job to at least not allow the Centre to 
degenerate, to remember Rinpoche’s origin al purpose in starting the centre.   
 We are all human and disagreements will arise. This is to be expected but ultimately, we should not do anything that is not beneficial for the Centre. That is not good. I have mentioned this 
before and we should always keep this in mind.   The responsibility for sustaining and improving the Centre does not rest only with the five or six 
people in the Executive Committee,  but with all of us. We should always think about how we 
can  improve the Centre.  I am not saying that we  are not doing this but we need to constantly 
improve our Centre, which benefits so many people. Our programme is so full of activities almost every day, except Mondays.    For myself, I was personally selected by Rinpoc he to come here, although he had originally 
planned to send me to Japan. Maybe the vegetarian food here is nicer (laughter ).  
 Since Rinpoche sent me here, whether I am capable or not, I am here to serve the Centre. That’s 
how I see my role here. When anyone needs help , from my side, if I can help, I do so. But 
anyone in need of help must let me know. If they  do not tell me, I won’t know they need help. It 
is not my nature to initiate this  type of assistance, like “I can do this and that for you.” Some 
people may have the mistaken notion that I am he lping some people and not others. It is not like 
that but if people need help, they have to tell  me. To date, I don’t recall having turned down a 
request for help if I have been able to be of assistance.    Whether we are the teacher or students of this Centre, we should think of ways and means to help improve the centre. We can help bring inte rested friends here and introduce them to the 
Dharma provided they are interested. Every time  we bring somebody to the Dharma, it is an 
improvement. If that person is not interested, there is not much we can do but, at least, we tried.  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program               CHAPTER VIII - CONCENTRATION  
 
233  
 
W e  s h o u l d  a l l  s t r i v e  t o  b e  k i n d  a n d  g o o d - h e a r t e d ,  t o  h a v e  v i r t u o u s  m i n d s  a n d  v i r t u o u s  intentions.  When our actions are motivated by the good heart, the results will be virtuous. 
When our motivation is negative, then we may be doing many prayers, sadhanas, daily 
commitments, prostrations and circumambulations, but it is very difficult  for these actions to 
yield positive results.  
 
The collection of precepts and the advice give n by the great Kadampa ma sters of the past is 
always the same, “Be a good-hearted person.” All their instructions can be condensed into this 
single piece of advice.   
 When we are good-hearted, it does not matter if we do not do a lot of extensive practices.  It is 
alright because the benefit of being good-hearted is that we will  enjoy temporal happiness and, 
ultimately, gain  enlightenment. We will not have  any difficulties at the ti me of death and we will 
move on to a good rebirth in our next life. That is why the Kadampa masters advise us to practise 
with a good heart at all times.  
3)  How to cultivate calm abiding 
a) The way to meditate on the equality of self and other 
i) A brief presentation 
ii) An extensive explanation 
1’ Explaining the purpose of meditating on the equality of self and other 2’ The way to meditate on the equality of self and other 
a’ Abandoning the [position that holds that] it is unreasonable to equate discarding 
pleasure and taking on suffering 
b’ Explaining the reasons why it is reasonable to meditate on such an equation 
1’’ An extensive explanation 
a’’ Stating the reason 
b’’ Establishing the pervasion 
(1) The actual established pervasion 
(2) Dispelling hindrances to that 
c’’ Dispelling the hindrance of thinking that it is unsuitable to meditate on 
the equality of self and other 
2’’ Synopsis 
3’’ Abandoning objections 
a’’ It is not valid [to say that] a bodhisattva himself falls prey to suffering by reflecting on the suffering of sentient beings 
b’’ The need to reflect upon suffering 
3’ The benefits of such meditations 4’ One can develop such [an attitude] is on e familiarizes oneself with the equality of self 
and other
 
b) The way to exchange self and other 
(2) Dispelling hindrances to that 
The text mentions that we need to  eliminate the suffering of others  by meditating on the equality 
of self and other.  
 
Qualm : Since the suffering of others does not harm me  directly now, it is not necessary for me to 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program               CHAPTER VIII - CONCENTRATION  
 
234  
protect others from their suffering.   
 
Answer : Based on this argument, then it is also ina ppropriate for us to make preparations in this 
life to avoid suffering in our future lives since th at future suffering does not affect us now. There 
is no need for us to make any preparations now for our future happiness. 
 
Similarly, we need not take any preventive meas ures now to forestall problems we may encounter 
in our old age since we are young and those difficult ies do not affect us now.  We need not make 
any preparations to counter problems  we ma y experience tomorrow since tomorrow’s problems 
cannot harm us today. 
 
(8, 97) 
Why should I protect them, 
If their suffering does not cause me any harm?- 
Then why protect myself against future suffering, 
If it causes me no harm now? 
 
Why protect myself against future suffe ring/If it causes me no harm now?:  We apply this reasoning in 
order to stop thinking that the suffering of othe rs is not our concern since we are not personally 
affected by it.   
 
Qualm : I understand that the suffering of others and my own future suffering in my old age and 
future lives are similar in that they do not harm  me now. But they are not the same because my 
own future suffering will definitely happen to me.  
  
Answer : The response to this qualm appears in Verse 98.  
 
(8,98) 
It is a mistaken conception to think 
That I shall experience (the suffering of my next life). 
For it is another person who dies, 
And another that will be reborn. 
 
We plan for our retirement and old age because we  do not want to suffer when we are old. Such 
preparations are made because we conceive of our present self and our future self to be one and 
the same, just as we feel that the person we were  this morning is the same as the person we are 
this evening.  But such apprehension of the “I” is , in fact, an erroneous or mistaken  conception.  
 
The reason that this conception is mistaken appears in the last line of the same verse: For it is 
another person who dies,/And another that will be reborn.  
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program               CHAPTER VIII - CONCENTRATION  
 
235  
For example, someone who is presently a human being but destined for a rebirth in the hells in 
his next life has the consciousness of a human bein g now and when he is reborn as a hell being, 
he will have the consciousness of a hell being.  These two selves of the person are the same. 
 
We discussed in an earlier module whether the inhe rently existent “I” is one with the aggregates 
or different from the aggregate. All phen omena are necessarily  one or different.  
 
We instinctively feel that the present “I” and the “I” that will exist tomorrow to be one entity.  
Because of that, the “I” that exis ts in the morning works very hard to avoid the suffering that will 
be experienced at night. We cannot see that the present “I”  and the future “I”  are, in fact, 
separate and different.   
 
(8,99) 
-Surely whenever there is suffering 
The (sufferers) must protec t themselves from it- 
Yet the suffering of the foot  is not that of the hand, 
Why then does one protect the other? 
 
Qualm : My suffering is mine and mine alone and can only be experienced by myself. No one else 
can experience my suffering for me so I have to  protect myself from this  suffering. Likewise, 
other people’s problems are their own business an d they should be responsible for solving their 
own problems. Their problems are not my problems. Surely whenever there is suffering, the (sufferers) 
must protect themselves from it, refers to this line of reasoning.   
 Answer : Yet the suffering of the foot is  not that of the hand,/Why th en does one protect the other  ? 
 
Since the one experiencing the suffering is differen t (i.e. I and other), the suffering of others is 
not my concern. But if we assert this, then when our foot steps on a thorn, there is no reason for our hand to pull the thorn out since it is the foot  that is experiencing the pain and not the hand. 
The pain of the foot need not be the concern of the hand.   
 We will come up with many reasons and justificatio ns to argue against  equa lising self and other, 
“I don’t need to do that because……..” We have  to eliminate them one by one by applying the 
various counter-arguments in this text.  
(8, 100) 
-Although this may not be justified, 
It is done because of grasping at a self- 
Yet surely whatever is not justified for myself or others 
Should at all costs be rejected  
 Although it is the foot that is  experiencing the pain, the hand instinctively pulls the thorn out. 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program               CHAPTER VIII - CONCENTRATION  
 
236  
This is due to our familiarity with grasping at the self as “I” since beginningless time. We 
apprehend our bodies as belongin g to the self, as being “mine”. 
 
Here, we are using self-grasping as justific ation for our actions. This is rebutted: Yet surely whatever 
is not justified for myself or othe rs,/Should at all costs be rejected. The apprehension of ourselves and 
others as being independent entities is a mistaken  conception that leads only to unpleasant and 
undesirable things. 
c” Dispelling the hindrance of thinking that it is unsuitable to meditate on the equality of self and 
other 
(8,101) 
Such things as a continuum and an aggregation 
Are false in the same way as  prayer beads and an army. 
There is no (real) owner of suffering, 
Therefore who has control over it? 
 
(8, 102) 
There being no (inherent) owner of suffering, 
There can be no distinction at all be tween (that of myself and others). 
Thus I shall dispel it because it hurts. 
 
Qualm : While the present person and the person of  the future are not the same, nevertheless 
they are of the same continuum. I accept my foot and hand are different but they belong to the 
same collection as they are all  parts of the same body. 
Lesson 43   Chapter VIII - verse 101-106 
The Kadampa masters point out, “The purpose of  all the Buddha’s teachings and all the great 
treatises and commentaries that clarify the meanin g of those teachings is to help us transform 
our minds for the better. When the mind does not improve, then even if we strive to accumulate 
virtue with our bodies and speech for eons, it is very difficult for those practices to become the 
cause for liberation.”  
 This advice reminds us of the purpose for coming to class and listening to the teachings, i.e., to 
improve the quality of our minds. Regardless of th e nature of our virtuous activities, we should 
always ask ourselves, “How can doing this help me to improve my mind?”  
W e  s h o u l d  r e l y  o n  m i n d f u l n e s s  a n d  v i g i l a n c e  w h e n  w e  e n g a g e  i n  o u r  D h a r m a  p r a c t i c e .  W e  
should check to see if the practice acts as a co ndition for us to change and improve our minds, 
whether it is beneficial for our minds or not.  When the mind does no t change, it is like 
immersing a stone in water. No matter how long  it remains in the water, the stone doesn't 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program               CHAPTER VIII - CONCENTRATION  
 
237  
change.  
 It is important to generate a pure and the corre ct motivation for attending these classes. We 
should always remind ourselves why we are here , that we are here to learn how to better our 
minds. The purpose of studying the Dharma is no t to use it to check the minds and actions of 
others. The Dharma is for checking our own mind s and trying to improve ourselves. Using the 
Dharma against other people is a mistake.  That is not why we study the Dharma.  
 
Qualm : Since others’ suffering does not affect us di r e c t l y ,  w e  d o  n o t  n e e d  t o  d o  a n y t h i n g  t o  
eliminate their suffering.  
Answer : If that is the case, then there is also no  need for us to prep are for and prevent the 
suffering of our old age since that suffering does not affect us now.  
 Qualm : But we will be experiencing the suffering of  old age ourselves. Since we will have to 
endure that future suffering, it is valid for us to try to prevent that suffering as much as we can.  
Answer : We feel that way because we think that ou r current “I” and our future “I” when we are 
old are one and the same person. Because of ou r  mistaken conception of holding these two 
persons to be one, we strive to eliminate the suffe ring we anticipate will befall us in our old age.  
 
Qualm : Our suffering is ours alone and has to be experienced by ourselves. We cannot 
experience other people’s suffering. Since the ‘experie ncer’ of the suffering is separate in this way, 
the suffering of others need not be my concern  
Answer : Then, why is it that our hand instinctivel y move to remove the thorn in our foot? The 
‘experiencer’ of the suffering is the foot and not the hand.  
 
a) The way to meditate on the equality of self and other 
i) A brief presentation 
ii) An extensive explanation 
1’ Explaining the purpose of meditating on the equality of self and other 2’ The way to meditate on the equality of self and other 
a’ Abandoning the [position that holds that] it is unreasonable to equate discarding 
pleasure and taking on suffering 
b’ Explaining the reasons why it is reasonable to meditate on such an equation 
1’’ An extensive explanation 
a’’ Stating the reason b’’ Establishing the pervasion 
c’’ Dispelling the hindrance of thinking that it is unsuitable to meditate on 
the equality of self and other 
2’’ Synopsis 
3’’ Abandoning objections 
a’’ It is not valid [to say that] a bodhisattva himself falls prey to suffering 
by 
reflecting on the suffering of sentient beings 
b’’ The need to reflect upon suffering 
3’ The benefits of such meditations 
4’ One can develop such [an attitude] is on e familiarizes oneself with the equality of self 
and other  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program               CHAPTER VIII - CONCENTRATION  
 
238  
b) The way to exchange self and other 
c” Dispelling the hindrance of thinking that it is unsuitable to meditate on the equality of self and 
other 
Qualm : The person now and the person of the future  may not be one, but they belong to the 
same continuum. Our feet and hands are also diffe rent but they belong to the same collection, 
our body. Therefore, our action is justified.  
 
(8, 101) 
Such things as a continuum and an aggregation 
Are false in the same way as  prayer beads and an army. 
There is no (real) owner of suffering, 
Therefore who has control over it? 
 
(8, 102) 
There being no (inherent) owner of suffering, 
There can be no distinction at all be tween (that of myself and others). 
Thus I shall dispel it because it hurts. 
 
We think of the “I,” who experiences the passage of time, as the same, un changing person as the 
present “I”. When we consider our collection of a ggregates, we also think of them as existing very 
solidly and independently.  Such conceptions ar e refuted by the first two lines of Verse 101: Such 
things as a continuum and an aggregation/Are false in the same way as pray er beads and an army.  
 
We conceive of the “I” as existing inherently an d independently. In the same way, we think of 
our bodies and minds as being solid and real, exis ting independently and inherently. But that is 
not how they truly exist. E.g. A rosary (or mala) is made up of many prayer beads. When all the 
prayer beads are strung together, the result is a rosary. We impute  the collection of prayer beads to 
be a rosary. 
 How does an army exist? It exists in dependence on a group of soldiers. When a group of soldiers come together, we impute and label it as an army. This is how an army exists.  
The rosary does not exist inherently and independently other than being merely imputed  upon the 
collection of prayer beads. Why is this so? When  we search for the inherently existent rosary 
amongst the individual prayer beads, we will  not be ab le to find it there. If there is an inherently 
existent rosary,  when we look amongst the bead s, we should find the rosary there. But after 
checking and setting aside each and every single prayer bead, we do not end up with a rosary. We 
apply this reasoning to the army . When we look for the army am ongst the group of soldiers, we 
will not be able to find the army. 
 We can relate this to our physical and mental aggregates, which form the bases for the label “I” 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program               CHAPTER VIII - CONCENTRATION  
 
239  
the person. Some tenet systems assert that the “I ” is the continuum of th e physical aggregates 
while others assert that the “I” is found within the mental consciousness. Yet others claim that 
the person is the mere collection of the aggregates. 
 
The analogy of the rosary and army helps us  to eliminate the wrong consciousness which 
apprehends any continuum or collection as being inherently existent. Using the same logic and 
applying it to the person, we eliminate the possibi lities of the person being (1) the continuum of 
the physical aggregates (2) the mental consciousne ss or (3) the mere collecti on of the aggregates.  
 Since the person does not inherently exist, the pain, happiness or suffering experienced by that 
person cannot possibly exist inherently as well. As  there is no inherently existent continuum and 
collection, the “I” that we imputed cannot exist inhe rently either. Since this is the case, then the 
suffering that this “I”  experien ces also cannot exist inherently. Conversely, when there is no 
inherently existent suffering, there cannot be an  inherently existent “I” experiencing  it.  
 Understanding the above argument helps us understand selflessness. Proponents of the first tenet system, the Great  Exposition  school, assert that the person  is the mere collection of the 
aggregates.  If such a person exists, then we should  be able to find this person amongst either the 
physical or mental  aggregates. But such a pers on cannot be found. Nor can such a person be 
found within the continuum of the aggregates. This  shows that the person is not a collection or 
continuum of the aggregates.  This means that the inherently existent “I” does  not exist. How about the suffering experienced 
by such an “I”? We grasp at our suffering as real and solid. But in the absence of an inherently or 
independently existent “I,” how can the suffering  e x p e r i e n c e d  b y  s u c h  a n  “ I ”  b e  i n h e r e n t l y  
existent'?  Since there is no independently existent “I,” ther e is no independent owner of one's suffering. As 
there is no independent owner of the suffering,  in the same way, there is no independent 
“other.” When there is no in dependent “other,”  they cannot experience an independent 
suffering.   Neither the “'I” nor “other” exists inherently. Ne ither does the suffering of oneself nor others 
exists inherently. So whether we are talking abou t the “I” or “other,” one's suffering or other's 
suffering, they are all equal in the sense of be ing not existent independently or inherently. 
 The essence of this argument is to show that there is no independent owner of suffering. It is 
precisely this wrong conception that a fflicts us, the thinking that, “It is my problem. I  have to 
endure this . I  have no choice.” When we look at the suffering of others, we are afflicted by the 
conception of the independent “other” owning  that independently existent suffering.  
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program               CHAPTER VIII - CONCENTRATION  
 
240  
The conclusion must be that there cannot be an y suffering that is owned by the independently 
existent “I” and there cannot be a suffering that  is independently owned by others. That being 
the case, we should work to eliminate the suffering of others as well. 
2” Synopsis 
(8, 102 cd) 
Why am I so certain (that I shouldn't eliminate the suffering of others)? 
 
(8, 103) 
-But (since neither the suffering no r the sufferer truly exist), why should  I turn away the misery of all?- 
This is no ground for argument, 
For if I prevent my own (sufferings), surely I should prevent the (s ufferings) of all. 
If not, since I am just like (other) sentient beings , (I should not prevent my  own suffering, either). 
 
The main obstacle that prevents us from generati ng any interest in the problems and suffering of 
others is our conception  of the inherently existe nt “I” and the inherently existent “other,” seeing 
them as totally unconnected, separate  enti ties. This mistaken conception (or wrong 
consciousness) prevents us from having any wish to help to eliminate the suffering of others.  
 
Qualm : Since there is no inherently existent person , therefore suffering cannot affect that person. 
If the suffering is not being experienced by an yone, then there is no need to eliminate the 
suffering.  
 
Answer : Ultimately, there is no person experiencing suffering as there is no inherently existent 
suffering. But, conventionally, there is a person and there is suffering, so the suffering is being 
experienced by someone. At a conventional level, others suffer as we do. Therefore, just as we 
work to eliminate our own suffering, we should do likewise for others.  
3” Abandoning objections 
a” It is not valid [to say that] a bodhisattva hi mself falls prey to suffering by reflecting on 
the suffering of sentient beings 
b” The need to reflect upon suffering 
a” It is not valid [to say that] a bodhisattva hims elf falls prey to suffering by reflecting on the 
suffering of sentient beings 
Some people believe that  reflecting on the suffering of others only serves to increase their own 
problems and unhappiness.  There seems to be an  internal contradiction. On the one hand, we 
want to eliminate suffering. On the other hand, we  have to generate compassion, but doing so by 
reflecting on the sufferings of others only serv es to increase our own suffering. How then can 
suffering be eliminated? 
 
(8,104) 
-Since this compassion wi ll bring me much misery, 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program               CHAPTER VIII - CONCENTRATION  
 
241  
Why should I exert myself to develop it?- 
Should I contemplate the suffe ring of living creatures, 
How could the misery of compassion be more? 
 
Qualm :  In order to generate compassion, we have to  reflect on the suffering  of others. When we 
do this,  we also suffer. We are not abandoning suffering then but creating more suffering. This 
advice appears to be teaching us to generate, not eliminate, suffering.  
 There are different answers to this qualm.  
Answer #1: 
When we are reflecting on the suffering of the lowe r realms and, specifically,   on the suffering of 
the hell beings, anguish and unhappiness may ar ise. But that suffering cannot compare in 
intensity to the actual suffering of beings in the hell realms.   
 
Answer #2 
When the bodhisattvas reflect on  the suffering of others, their own suffering does not increase. 
Through the power of their reflection, the bodh isattvas destroy their own suffering from the 
root.   
 It is mentioned in the first chapter on the benefits  of generating bodhicitta, that we accumulate a 
vast amount of merit by doing so. The collection  of merit accumulated over time serves as the 
condition for us to develop the wisdom realisin g selflessness which is the sole antidote for 
eliminating the root of the self- grasping conception.   In this way, our compassion actually serves to pa cify our own suffering from the root, rather than 
increasing it. By developing compassion for othe rs, we increase our collection of merit. When 
this happens, we are brought  closer to buddhahood, which reduces our own suffering.  
b" The need to reflect upon sufferings 
 
(8,105) 
If, by one person's suffering, 
The suffering of many would be destroyed, 
Surely kind-hearted people would accept it 
For the sake of themselves and others? 
 
(8,106) 
Thus the Bodhisattva Supushpa Chandra, 
Although aware of the harm the king would cause him, 
 
Accepted his own suffering 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program               CHAPTER VIII - CONCENTRATION  
 
242  
In order to eradicate the miseries of many.67 
 
When we meditate on compassion, we develop the thought to remove the suffering of all 
sentient beings. By meditating on compassion, it only serves to eliminate our own suffering 
rather than increase it. Even if our meditation on compassion were to bring us great anguish, 
that suffering is meaningful. The  suffering we experience through developing compassion will 
enable us to work to eliminate the suffering of others. 
 
For example, in order to recover from a serious il lness, we are willing to bear the pain of going 
through an operation.  In the same way, it is me aningful for us to experience small suffering in 
order to be able to eliminate greater suffering.  There was once a bodhisattva by the name of Supushpa Chandra who had  clairvoyant powers.  
He could see that if he were to go to the king's  palace alone to teach the Dharma, his life would 
be in danger. He also saw, however, that his teachings would benefit countless sentient beings, 
helping them to achieve a good rebirt h, liberation and enlightenment.  
 Disregarding the danger to his life, therefore, he  went to the palace an d stayed there for 7 days. 
During the day, he would teach the Dharma and at  night, he would circumambulate the relics of 
the Buddha.  The king was angry and, instigated by his ministers, he ordered Supushpa Chandra 
to be killed in a particularly brutal way. He wa s tortured and his limbs were cut off one by one. 
But when his limbs were cut, rainbows emitted from them and instead of blood, milk flowed out from his body.   The king generated great regret when he realised  what he had done so he enshrined Supushpa 
Chandra’s remains in a stupa and made many offerings to it.  
You can find this account in the Samadhiraja Sutra  (meaning  The Flower Adorned by the Moon ) in 
the King of Meditative Stabilisation Sutra  taught by the Buddha. The mora l of the story then is that 
it is appropriate to endure a smaller suffering in  order to be able to eliminate greater suffering. 
                                             
 
67 Pg 174 Root text footnote; Samadhiraja Sutra, Thog. p. 176: 'At the time of the decline of the doctrine of the 
Tathagata Rinpoche Pad-ma'i Da-wa Ngon-par phag-pa'i gyal-po there lived a monk called Supushpachandra. At 
one time, while dwelling in the Sama ntabhadra Grove together with seven thousand Bodhisattvas, he perceived 
with his heightened awareness that if he were to go to the jewelled palace of Ki ng Viradatta and reveal the 
Dharma, many living creatures would obtain  higher states of existence and liberation, but if he were not to reveal it 
they would not obtain these states. In addition, he knew th at if he went, the king woul d kill him, but nevertheless 
(he decided) to go there. Upon his arrival he spent seven days without partaking of any food; during the night he 
would circumambulate a reliquary containing the fingernails of the Tathagata, and during the daytime he would go to the palace and reveal the Dharma. After many million living beings had been led to Enlightenment through his 
teachings, the King then killed him. After a while, though, the King regretted what he had done and subsequently enshrined his bones in a reliquary and worshipped them.' 
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program               CHAPTER VIII - CONCENTRATION  
 
243  
 
In summary,  1. When we meditate on compassion, it will not in crease our suffering but rather it will reduce 
our suffering and ultimately remove them completely from the root.  
2. Even if some suffering is felt when meditating on compassion, this  suffering is meaningful.  
These are the two reasons why it is appropriate to  meditate on compassion. In order to meditate 
on compassion, we need to exchange ourselves fo r others. Before we can do that, we need to 
equalise self and others.
 68 
                                              
68 3' The stages of meditating on how to exchange self and other 
The phrases "exchanging self and other" and "making oneself others and others oneself" do not indicate a training 
in an attitude which thinks "I am others" or "Others' eyes , etc., are mine." They indicate  a change in the orientation 
of the two states of mind of cherishing yourself and neglecting others, wherein you develop the attitude of 
cherishing others as you presently do yourself an d neglecting yourself as you presently do others. 
 Therefore Shantideva’s st atement above that you must "exchange yo ur own happiness for others' suffering" 
means to view cherishing yourself as the enemy and then  to stop emphasizing your own happiness. In addition, 
y o u  m u s t  v i e w  c h e r i s h i n g  o t h e r s  a s  a  g o o d  q u a l i t y ,  s t o p  neglecting others' sufferin g, and instead emphasize the 
removal of their suffering. In brief, this statement means that you remove others' suffering while disregarding your 
own happiness. 
 There are two obstacles to training in this  attitude of exchanging self and other: 
 1. You make a categorical differentiation between people  who are happy or suffering—yourself and others—making 
them as different as blue and yellow. Then, you accomplish your happiness and remove your suffering because you 
think of them as "mine," and you negl ect others' happiness and suffering beca use you think of them as "belonging 
to others."  Therefore, the remedy for this is not to make a ca tegorical distinction between self and other as being 
essentially different. Rather, understand that self and ot her are mutually dependent such that when you are aware 
of self, you are aware of other; and when you are aware of ot her, you are aware of self. It is like being aware of near 
mountains and distant mountains, for ex ample. Relative to your being here, you think of a mountain then- in the 
distance as being a distant mountain, yet when you go to this distant mountain, you think of it as a near 
mountain. So the awareness of self and other is not like the awareness of a co lour, for, regardless of what colour 
blue is related to, you are aware of just blue and are not aware of some other colour. Moreover, Shantideva’s 
Compendium of Trainings  states: 
By becoming accustomed to the equality of self and other, 
The spirit of enlightenment becomes firm. 
Self and other are interdependent. Like this side and the other side of a river, they are false. The other bank is not in itself "other"; In relation to someone else it is "this bank."  Similarly, "self" does not exist in its own right;  In relation to someone else it is "other." 
Thus Shantideva indicates that self and other are merely po sited in relation to a particular reference point and do 
not essentially exist.  2. You must remove the obstacle of thinking, "I will not make an effort to dispel others' suffering because others' suffering does not harm me." It would be like not accumulating wealth in your youth out of fear of suffering in 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program               CHAPTER VIII - CONCENTRATION  
 
244  
Question  from a student : What is the significance of milk, instead of blood, flowing out from the 
body of the bodhisattva Supushpa Chandra? 
Answer : We can infer that he was probably a su perior bodhisattva. This is because for 
bodhisattvas on the first ground, they no longer have contaminated aggregates but, instead, their 
aggregates are in the nature of the mind – a ‘mental’ body.   
Lesson 44   Chapter VIII - verse 107-114 
It is mentioned in the collection of advice by  the great Kadampa masters that we should check 
the state of our minds three times a day. “Thr ee times” means in the morning, afternoon and 
night. It also refers to  the past, present and future.  
 
We are advised to continuously check the stat e of our minds. Without doing so, it will be 
difficult for us to determine whether our physical an d verbal actions are positi ve or not. As I have 
mentioned before, when our physical and verbal actions originate from a good intention and a 
good heart, then these actions will be positive. If  we are motivated by a negative intention, then 
our  actions will be negative. When we check our minds and find that our motivation is negative, 
we should try to replace it with a positive intentio n. The advice is to live with a good heart at all 
times.   The Kadampa masters also advise that we should always look at our own mistakes and never seek 
out the faults of others. We should treat our fa ults as our enemies. Before we can positively 
influence and change others, we first have to ch ange ourselves. Without changing our minds for 
the better, it is very difficult for us to change other people in a positive way.  
 We need to correct ourselves first, i.e. identi fying our faults and removing them. “The faults” 
refer to our three mental pois ons and our physical and verbal  negativities. When we find 
                                                                                                                                                          
 
your old age because you think that your suffering in old ag e does no harm to you in your youth. Or, as stated in 
Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds ,67 it would be like not alleviating the pain in your foot with your hand, because 
your foot is "other." Old age and youth (or similarly, former and future lives) are just illustrations; this principle 
applies also to morning and evening, former and later days, and so forth.  
Qualm : But old age and youth are one continuum and the foot and hand are one collection ; therefore they are not 
the same as self and other. 
 
Response : "Continuum" and "collection" are designated to many  moments and to many parts; they do not have a 
self-sufficient essence. The "self" of yourself and the "self" of others must be posited to a collection and a 
continuum, so self and other are not established by wa y of an essence that can be posited independently. 
However, since beginningless time you have found your  own suffering unbearable because you have been 
conditioned to self-cherishing. Therefore, if you become conditioned to cherishing others, you will give rise to an attitude of finding others’ suffering unbearable. ( Lamrim Chenmo,  Vol. 2, pg. 53-54)  
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program               CHAPTER VIII - CONCENTRATION  
 
245  
ourselves doing things that are inappropriate and not beneficial, we should correct ourselves by 
remembering, “This is not good and no t productive. I should not do this.” 
  
We should not look for the faults of others beca use there is no benefit to  doing so and it does 
not fulfil our own purpose. It only causes our an ger and negative mind to increase.  We may have 
been in a positive state of mind but once we start fault-finding, our minds becoming unhappy 
and more negative.   We are harming ourselves an d, in the process, hurting others as well. We 
cannot change other people by looking at their fa ults and we cannot influence them in a positive 
way until we have improved ourselves.   When we point out their faults, people may get i rritated and angry. They may respond, “Who are 
you to correct me? I can do whatever I want.” We  hurt people by instigating their anger and we 
also harm ourselves in the process. It is a no-win situation and there is no benefit.   
 
The masters also advised that we should hide wh atever good qualities we have and we should 
praise the good qualities of others. Hiding ou r good qualities means that we should not be 
boastful about our qualities, e.g.  telling others,  “I have studied for so many years; I am good-
hearted; I have clairvoyance, you know.” Why sh ould we hide our qualities? Because boasting 
about them will only increase our arrogance, co nceit, pride and attachment. When the mind is 
conceited, it is under the influence of a negative emotion so we are the ones that are hurt. Again, 
there is no benefit. 
 We should praise and concentrate on the good qu alities of others instead of looking at their 
faults.  If that person has a good heart, we shou ld say so, “That is a good-hearted person.”  We 
should also proclaim those qualities for, by doing so, we will be able to see and recognise those good  qualities more clearly ourselves. This bene fits us in our developmen t of bodhicitta and the 
good heart. There is a connection; the more we ar e able to see the good qualities of others, the 
easier it will be for us respect them and deve lop the mind that cherishes them. These are the 
benefits.  When we consider the advice of the great Kadamp a masters, we find it is really wonderful and 
beneficial. We are supposed to check our minds co ntinuously day and night, but we do the exact 
opposite. Day and night, we appear to be practising virtue and physically doing recitations but we do not check our minds. This is a mistake that must be changed. 
 Regarding seeing our faults as our enemies, agai n we do the exact opposite; we always think we 
are in the right and we pick at the faults of others. In the sa me way, instead of hiding our 
qualities and praising others, we are boastful an d we forget to promote the qualities of others, 
only seeing their faults instead.   We should remember this collection of advice and remind ourselves of them  from time to time.  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program               CHAPTER VIII - CONCENTRATION  
 
246  
 
3)  How to cultivate calm abiding 
a) The way to meditate on the equality of self and other 
i) A brief presentation 
ii) An extensive explanation 
1’ Explaining the purpose of meditating on the equality of self and other 
2’ The way to meditate on the equality of self and other 
3’ The benefits of such meditations 
a’ Singly applying oneself to the welfare of others is not [in itself] great suffering b’ As the bliss of that is supreme, one engages in [working for] others’ welfare 
c’ One’s own arrogance comes to be pacified 
d’ [The pleasure and benefits of such meditations] do not depend on reciprocation 
and fully-ripened [effects] e’ It is due to such reasons that meditating on the equality of self and others is 
[said to be] reasonable 
4’ One can develop such [an attitude] is one familiarizes oneself with the equality of 
self and other
 
b) The way to exchange self and other 
i) A brief presentation 
1’ The way to exchange self and other 2’ The reasons it is appropriate to fa miliarize oneself [with such attitudes]  
ii) An extensive explanation 
a’ Singly applying oneself to the welfare of others is not [in itself] great suffering 
(8, 107) 
Thus, because they love to pacify the pains of others, 
Those whose minds are attuned in this way 
Would enter even the deepest hell 
Just as a wild goose plunges into a lotus pool. 
 
When we think of benefiting others, we often thin k that it is something t oo difficult to do. This 
is due to obstacles in our practice of equalising  ourselves and other. When we are accustomed to 
the reflection of equalising ourselves with other,  we can actually derive great joy from doing so. 
When our minds are attuned to seeing ourselves an d  o t h e r s  a s  e q u a l ,  w e  w i l l  b e  d e l i g h t e d  t o  
work for others and constantly look for ways to help them. We will do this  joyfully and happily, 
Just as a wild goose plunges into a lotus pool .  E v e n  w h e n  w e  h a v e  t o  g o  t o  t h e  A v i c i  h e l l  t o  h e l p  
others, we will do so happily because we will have developed the courage and determination to 
do so with great delight. Needless to say, we will be  able to do less difficult tasks as well. It is said 
that the bliss we experience from working for th e benefit of others is special and exalted.  
b’ As the bliss of that is supreme, one engages in [working for] others’ welfare 
(8, 108) 
Will not the ocean of joy 
That shall exist when all beings are free 
Be sufficient for me? 
What am I doing wishing fo r my liberation alone? 
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program               CHAPTER VIII - CONCENTRATION  
 
247  
Another hindrance to our meditation on the equa lity of self and other is the thought, “The 
happiness and bliss that come from working for othe rs is not the highest bliss. The highest bliss 
is overcoming suffering and achieving liberation . That is the real happiness, not the happiness 
that comes from helping others.”  
 The supreme happiness is to liberate all living beings from their problems and suffering; this 
happiness is said to be immeasurable. For a bodhis attva, achieving the liberation of all sentient 
beings is the most perfect and exalted form of bliss and the bodhisattva continually strives to 
achieve this goal. When all beings are liberated, his wishes are accomplished and he will be very happy to have  achieved his goal. This is the mo st exalted goal as opposed to thinking about our 
own happiness alone and wishing to achieve only self-liberation.  
c’ One’s own arrogance comes to be pacified  
(8, 109) 
Therefore, although working for the benefit of others, 
I should not be conceited or (consider myself) wonderful. 
 We may also think, “If I equalise myself with  others, there will be nothing in it for me. 
Benefiting others in this way will not benefit me.”  This is not true becaus e by benefiting others 
on the basis of equalising self and others, ou r  pride and arrogance will be pacified and the 
thought, “I did this for her,” will be banished.  
d. [The pleasure and benefits of such meditations] do not depend on reciprocation and fully-
ripened [effects] 
(8, 109 cd)  
And because of the joy there is in solely doing this, 
I should have no hope for any ripening-effect. 
 
When we do something sincerely and unconditionall y for the benefit of others, we do not expect 
any favour or good karma in return: I should have no hope for any ripening effect.   
 We encounter difficulties in helping others becaus e of our expectations of  the other party. When 
those expectations are not met, problems arise and we experience unhappiness and suffering. We 
also tend to focus on the difficulties of helpin g others, anticipating problems and worrying that 
there will be nothing in it for oneself. But, in fact, the opposite is true . When we help others 
sincerely, there will only be happiness and none of the difficulties.  
e. It is due to such reasons that meditating on the equality of self and others is [said to be] 
reasonable 
(8,110) 
Therefore, just as I protect myself 
From unpleasant things however small, 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program               CHAPTER VIII - CONCENTRATION  
 
248  
In the same way I should act towards others 
With a compassionate and caring mind. 
 
Therefore,  refers to the appropriateness of meditati ng on the equality of self and other and 
working for the benefit of others, because, Just as I protect myself/From unpleasant things however 
small,/In the same way I should act towards others/With a compassionate and caring mind. 
 
When someone criticises us, we are quick to defend  ourselves. In the same way, when others are 
criticised and we are in a position to do so, we should defend them too. At the very least, we can generate compassion towards them.  
4’ One can develop such [an attitude] if one familiarizes oneself with the equality of self and 
other  
(8, 111) 
Although the basis is quite impersonal, 
Through (constant) familiarity 
I have come to regard 
The drops of sperm and blood of others as “I”. 
 
(8,112) 
So in the same way, why should I be unable 
To regard the bodies of others as "I"? 
Hence it is not difficult to see 
That my body is al so that of others. 
 
Qualm : How is it possible for me to consider others  as myself, to see them  as equal and protect 
them in the same way I would myself ? I can’t do this. It is difficult  for me to see myself as equal 
with others, because I find it difficult to  see others to be the same as myself.  
 Answer : This verse reminds us that our bodies are th e products of our parents’ eggs and sperm. 
Our consciousness entered the union of egg and sperm during the process of rebirth and we were 
born with these bodies. Through  familiar ity, we see our bodies as, “my body”. 
In the same way therefore, through familiarity,  w e  s h o u l d  b e  a b l e  t o  a p p r e h e n d  o t h e r s  a s  
ourselves and cherish them. We should practise a pprehending other sentient beings as “I”. Just 
a s  i t  i s  p o s s i b l e  t o  c o n s i d e r  o u r  b o d i e s  w h i c h  b e l o n g e d  t o  o t h e r s  a s  “ I , ”  i t  i s  a l s o  p o s s i b l e  t o  conceive of others as “I”.  To meditate on bodhicitta, we begi n with the  meditation  on the equality of self and other before 
we proceed with exchanging self and other.  
b) The way to exchange self and other 
i) A brief presentation 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program               CHAPTER VIII - CONCENTRATION  
 
249  
1’ The way to exchange self and other 
2’ The reasons it is appropriate to fa miliarize oneself [with such attitudes]  
ii) An extensive explanation 
1’ The way to exchange self and other 
(8,113) 
Having seen the mistakes in (cherishing) myself 
And the ocean of good in (cherishing) others, 
I shall completely reject all selfishness 
And accustom myself to accepting others. 
 
The self-cherishing attitude is th e source of all our problems and we should work at removing it. 
Cherishing others is the source of all good and desirable things. Therefore, we should eliminate 
our self-cherishing attitude and adopt the attitude of cherishing others.  Exchanging self and other does not mean that we  become other and other become us. Rather, we 
shift our focus from ourselves to others. Presentl y, because we see ourselves as more important, 
we are accustomed to cherishing ourselves and neglecting others. Exchanging self and other 
entails reversing this attitude. Instead of cher ishing ourselves and being concerned only about 
our own welfare, we cherish others instead.   
2’ The reasons it is appropriate to fa miliarize oneself [with such attitudes] 
(8,114) 
In the same way as the hands and so forth 
Are regarded as limbs of the body, 
Likewise, why are embodied creatures 
Not regarded as limbs of life? 
 
Qualm : I cannot exchange myself with others because there are too many of them. This is similar 
to the earlier qualm we had during the di scussion on equalising self and other. 
 
Answer : Just as we apprehend different  parts of our body – the hands,  limbs and so on – as parts 
o f  a  s i n g l e  e n t i t y ,  i n  t h e  s a m e  w a y ,  w e  s h o u l d  see all sentient beings as parts of the group of 
sentient beings. On that basis, we develop th e thought to benefit them and free them from 
suffering.   
 
Answer to student’s question : It is said that when it comes to making aspirational prayers, we should 
make them as extensive as possible, regardless of whether our wishes can be accomplished or not. 
The most extensive dedication is to achieve enli ghtenment to liberate all sentient beings from 
suffering. Similarly, there is no motivation more positive than the thought,  “I am doing this to 
benefit others.”  
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program               CHAPTER VIII - CONCENTRATION  
 
250  
The best of all motivations is bodhicitta, the al truistic intention. The best dedication is the 
dedication of all our virtues towards achieving enlightenment for the benefit of all sentient 
beings. These are the supreme motivation and dedication. 
 
There are different levels of motivation and de dication depending on the level of our minds – 
small, medium or big. Based on our aspiration and our inclination, we can make the relevant 
level of dedication prayer.  
 
Those who are able to practise the best motivati on and best dedication are very rare. It is 
important for each individual within the same ce ntre to help one another as much as possible. 
This depends on the individual level of ability. 
Lesson 45   Chapter VIII - verse 115-118 
It is important that we transform our actions of listening to and studying the Dharma into 
Dharma by generating the motivation, “I am partic ipating in this session so that I can  learn to 
develop a good heart.”   
3)  How to cultivate calm abiding 
a) The way to meditate on the equality of self and other 
b) The way to exchange self and other 
i) A brief presentation 
ii) An extensive explanation 
1’ Explaining the way to exchange self and other 
a’ An extensive explanation 
1” Familiarizing oneself with cherishing others 
a” The capacity to exchange self and other and the pacification 
of conceit 
b” Instructions on making effort in this meditation without looking to the fully-ripened [effect] 
c”  Doing more for the sake of others 
d” One will be able to develop [such an attitude] if one 
familiarizes oneself with it 
e” One should meditate on exchanging self and others with the 
desire to free both self and others from suffering 
2” Making effort to abandon self-cherishing 
3” Reflecting on the faults and benefits of primarily cherishing self 
and other [respectively] 
b’ Synopsis 
2’ The way to practice after having reflected on this exchange 3’ The way to practice application [of this attitude] 
 
Qualm : There are limitless sentient be ings, each with different wishes . It is, therefore, impossible 
for me to protect them all in the same way I protect myself. 
 
Answer : Our bodies are made up of many separate parts yet we conceive them all as parts of our 
bodies and protect them. In the same way, although  there are so many sentient beings, it should 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program               CHAPTER VIII - CONCENTRATION  
 
251  
be possible for us to see them all as one and protect them.  
a” The capacity to exchange self and other and the pacification of conceit  
(8,115) 
Through acquaintance has th e thought of “I” arisen 
Towards this impersonal body; 
So in a similar way, why should it not arise 
Towards other living beings? 
 
(8,116) 
When I work in this way for the sake of others, 
I should not let conceit or (the f eeling that I am) wonderful arise. 
 
Qualm : We may think, “It is impossible for me to exchange myself with others because I cannot 
conceive of others as myself.” 
 
Answer :  We cannot find the “I” on the basis of ou r bodies, which are the products of the union 
of eggs and sperm of our parents. Our bodies do no t really belong to us yet. Through familiarity, 
our minds conceive of our bodies as “mine.”  
 
When the body is healthy and feeling good, we say, “I feel good.” But when the body is in bad 
shape and suffering, we say, “I am in pain and suffering.” Someti mes, we have the feeling that the 
“I” is the body and the body is the “I”. But when we analyse this carefully, we find that this is not 
possible.  
 Just as we come to conceive that the body belong s to “me” through familiar ity,  in the same way, 
through familiarity, we can conceive of others as  being similar to ourselve s. On that basis, it 
becomes possible to generate the thought of cherishi ng others. With familiarity, it is possible to 
conceive of the bodies of others as belonging to myself.  
Answer to student’s question :  When we refer to exchanging self and other, it does not mean that I 
become someone else and someone else becomes me. We normally cherish only ourselves and 
not others, neglecting their welfare. Exchanging  self and other means switching our focus from 
cherishing ourselves to cherishing others. 
 Is it possible to conceive of myself as others  and for others to conceive of me  as them?  
 
The Lam Rim Chenmo points out that “I” and ot her are not like blue and yellow but rather like 
the mountain on this side and the mountain on the other side. 
When we posit that “I” can be other and vice versa, it is same as saying that there is no difference 
between the two colours, blue and yellow.  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program               CHAPTER VIII - CONCENTRATION  
 
252  
 
The “I” and other both have different bases of designation. They are not independent entities 
but are relative to one another and posited in  dependence on one another. There is no 
autonomous “I” who inherently exists. The “I” is  not “I” from the perspective of others. To 
others, we become the “other”. In  the same way, the mountain on this side is not inherently so. 
When we stand on the other moun tain, the mountain on this side  will become the mountain on 
the other side. 
Through familiarity, we have come to conceive  o f  o u r  b o d i e s ,  w h i c h  a c t u a l l y  c o m e  f r o m  o u r  
parents, as belonging to us. If that is the case , there is no reason wh y we cannot conceive of 
others as belonging to this “I” as well. 
 After all, whether something belongs to the self  or not simply depends on our mental outlook. 
For example, before we buy an object, there is no apprehension of that object as belonging to us. 
However, after it is purchased, we see that object as ours. That sense of ownership does not come 
from the object’s side, but our mental attitude towards it. When we give this object away to 
someone else, we also give up the thought, “This belongs to me.”  
 It seems extremely difficult to conceive of others’ bodies as belonging to us but it is achievable 
through the power of familiarity.   
Question:  Is it possible to conceive of others’ bodies in the same way as we conceive of our own 
body? 
 
Reply : Using the above arguments, the answer is “yes ”. It becomes possible for us to cherish and 
to work for the benefit of others and to do so wi thout pride. When the affl iction of pride arises, 
it immediately disturbs our mental peace. When we  have the ability to exchange self and other, 
our arrogance and pride will be pacified. 
b”  Instructions on making effort in this medita tion without looking to the fully-ripened [effect] 
(8,116 cd) 
It is just like feeding myself- 
I hope for nothing in return. 
 
(8, 117) 
Therefore, just as I protect myself 
From unpleasant things, however slight, 
In the same way, I should habituate myself 
To have a compassionate and caring mind towards others. 
 
These verses are self-explanatory. 
c”  Doing more for the sake of others 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program               CHAPTER VIII - CONCENTRATION  
 
253  
(8,118) 
It is out of his great compassion 
That the Lord Avalokiteshvara has (even) blessed his name 
To dispel the nervousness 
Of being among other people.69 
 
Just as we protect ourselves from the slightest ha rm from others, we should protect others in the 
same way by generating the mind of compassion towards them.  We should strive to eliminate 
even the smallest harm experienced by others. Mo tivated in this way, Avalokiteshvara blessed his 
name so that its mere mention would dispel mise ry and suffering. Even the nervousness of being 
a m o n g s t  o t h e r  p e o p l e  i s  d i s p e l l e d .  W h e n  h e  first developed bodhicitta, he dedicated his 
achievement to the happiness of sentient beings, so that by just remembering his name, the eight 
fears would be removed. This is why Avalokiteshv ara can benefit sentient beings so extensively. 
Following Avalokiteshvara’s example, when we si ncerely dedicate everything we do with our 
bodies, speech and minds for the benefit of others, we  should also be able to benefit them in the 
same way. 
Lesson 46   Chapter VIII - verse 119-130 
Guntang Rinpoche advises, “If we want to make  our days and nights meaningful, we should 
always check the state of our minds.” No beneficial  actions can result from a mind that is under 
the control of the three mental poisons (ignorance , anger and attachment). Therefore, we should 
always strive to keep our minds in a positive state, thinking constantly of how to benefit others. 
When our actions are motivated by a negative mind , it is questionable whether those actions can 
be beneficial.   
It is important to set a proper motivation before  we begin any virtuous ac tivities, such as doing 
our daily commitments. We are advised in the teac hings to always begin with the meditation on 
the breath to bring the mind to a state of equilibrium, especially when we find that our minds 
are agitated by anger or attachment.  Otherwise, it is difficult to generate a positive state of mind 
while doing the practices.  
 When the mind is in a state of equilibrium, it is easier to prevent negative thoughts from arising, 
even though we may not yet be able to elimin ate our attachment or anger from the root. It 
becomes possible for us to consider those we normal ly think of as enemies or objects of aversion 
as pleasant and as friends.   
                                             
 
69 Text note 32 
 Gandavyuha Sutra, Thog.p.180 
“By recollecting my name three times, may the fear  of being embarrassed among people be dispelled .’ 
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program               CHAPTER VIII - CONCENTRATION  
 
254  
 
When engaged in virtuous activities, we should pay heed to the objects of desire/attachment and 
the objects of aversion/anger. We should sincer ely dedicate the merit we accumulate from our 
practices to their welfare from the depths of ou r hearts. It is easy to habituate ourselves to 
dedicating our merit in this way compared to gi ving away material things such as our bodies.  
 
When we dedicate all the roots of our virtue to our enemies, does that mean there is nothing left 
for us, that we are not going to experience the bene ficial effects of those virtues? I don’t think so. 
So, don’t worry.  When we dedicate our roots of virtue sincerely in this way, it is difficult to say how much benefit will actually be received by the objects of our de dication but, without a doubt, we will benefit and 
see the improvement in our minds. We will defini tely benefit because we can see that all our 
problems and sufferings arise from attachment and/or anger in our lives.  
 
When we neglect checking the state of our mind s, then no matter how profound or extensive 
our prayers may be, it is difficult for those practices to be beneficial even for ourselves. When we do not benefit from our practices, then it  is difficult for us to benefit others. 
 If you wish, however, to make your life mean ingless and empty, then by all means, please 
continue to spend your whole life being conceite d and arrogant  and spend your time partying, 
gossiping and shopping.  
So to reiterate the advice  from Guntang Rinpoche – If you want to make your life meaningful day and 
night, always check the state of your  mind. If you wish to make your li fe meaningless and empty, then you 
can spend your time in  meaningless activi ties and abide in arrogance and so forth. We should always 
remind ourselves of this advice. 
  
3)  How to cultivate calm abiding 
a) The way to meditate on the equality of self and other 
b) The way to exchange self and other 
i) A brief presentation 
ii) An extensive explanation 
1’ Explaining the way to exchange self and other 
a’ An extensive explanation 
1” Familiarizing oneself with cherishing others 
a” The capacity to exchange self and other and the pacification of 
conceit 
b” Instructions on making effort in this meditation without looking to 
the fully-ripened [effect] c”  Doing more for the sake of others 
d” One will be able to develop [suc h an attitude] if one familiarizes 
oneself with it 
e” One should meditate on exchanging self and others with the 
desire to free both self and others from suffering 
2” Making effort to abandon self-cherishing 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program               CHAPTER VIII - CONCENTRATION  
 
255  
a” Self-cherishing is the cause of all fear 
b” Reflecting on how [self-cherishing] act to encourage one into all 
negative conduct  
3” Reflecting on the faults and benefits of primarily cherishing self and 
other [respectively] 
a” A list of the disadvantages and benefits of cherishing self and other [respectively] 
(1) An extensive explanation 
(a) In terms of giving 
(b) In terms of harming 
(c) In terms of praise and renown 
(d) In terms of application to activities (e) In terms of benefit and bliss 
(2) Synopsis 
b” Thus, the reasonableness of discarding self-cherishing  
b’ Synopsis 
2’ The way to practice after having reflected on this exchange 3’ The way to practice application [of this attitude] 
d” One will be able to develop [such an a ttitude] if one familiarizes oneself with it  
(8, 119) 
I should not turn away from what is difficult; 
For by the power of familiarity, 
I may be made unhappy even when someone 
Whose name once frightened me is not around. 
 
Qualm : Exchanging self and other, cherishing othe rs and so forth – these practices are very 
beneficial but they are too difficult.  
 
Answer : Even if we think like this, we should not stop ourselves from wanting to train in these 
practices because all we need is familiarity. Once we are familiar with the practice, it definitely 
becomes possible. 
 Think of someone we dislike or someone we are af raid of. It is possible that, over time, that 
person may become a friend, even a good friend . It can happen. When that person becomes our 
c l o s e  f r i e n d ,  w e  w i l l  f e e l  l o n e l y  a n d  u n h a p p y  w h e n  h e  i s  n o t  a r o u n d .  O u r  a t t i t u d e  m a y  completely change.   Shantideva says that just as it seems impossib le to us now that an enemy can become a close 
friend, through familiarity, that change can come about. In the same way, although we may think 
now, “It is difficult to see myself as other,” it is  possible, through practice and familiarity, for our 
attitude to change.  The point here is not to tu rn away from the practice because we deem it to 
be too difficult. When we do nothing, then nothing positive can be accomplished.  
e”   One should meditate on exchanging self and others with the desire to free both self and 
others from suffering 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program               CHAPTER VIII - CONCENTRATION  
 
256  
(8,120) 
Thus whoever wishes to qu ickly afford protection 
To both the self and other beings 
Should practice that holy secret: 
The exchanging of self for others. 
 
Since it is possible to develop the attitude of ex changing self and other through  familiarity, we 
who seek protection (i.e. to fr ee ourselves from the extremes of  nirvana and samsara), should 
practise this holy secret - the instru ction of exchanging self and other. 
 Why is this instruction secret? Because it shou ld not be revealed to someone whose Mahayana 
lineage has yet to  awaken. In other words, thos e who are of the Hearers and Solitary Realizers 
lineages are not suitable vessels for these instructions.   
Why is this instruction holy? Because the practice of exchanging self and other  is the ultimate 
practice of the Mahayana or the Great Vehicle. 
 
2” Making effort to abandon self-cherishing 
a” Self-cherishing is the cause of all fear 
b” Reflecting on how [self-cherishing] act to encourage one into all negative conduct  
a” Self-cherishing is the cause of all fear 
(8,121) 
Because of attachment to my body, 
Even a small object of  fear frightens me. 
So who would not revi le, as an enemy, 
This body that gives rise to fear? 
 
We develop strong attachment towards our bodies  due to our self-grasping. As a result, even 
small problems can cause great mental suffering for us. For example, we are afraid of tiny 
mosquitoes and insects, worrying about how they can harm us.  When a fly lands on our food, 
we fret over how we will get sick if we eat the food so we throw the food away. These worries and 
fears arise from our strong attachment to our bo dies. When we are afraid of small things, it 
stands to reason that we will be even more  afraid of  sickness, old age and death.  
Since it is our self-grasping that gives rise to this  strong attachment, self-grasping is the cause of all 
our fears and problems in this life and our future lives.   Due to our attachment to the body, all sorts of proble ms arise. If the body is the source of all our  
fears and suffering, then why would a wise person  want to remain attached to it? Instead of 
cherishing our bodies, we should  see them as our enemies.  
b” Reflecting on how [self-cherishing] act to encourage one into all negative conduct  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program               CHAPTER VIII - CONCENTRATION  
 
257  
(8,122) 
By wishing for a means to remedy 
The hunger, thirst and sickness of the body, 
I might kill birds, fish and deer 
And loiter by the sides of roads (to rob others). 
 
(8,123) 
If, for the sake of its profit and comfort, 
I would kill even my father and mother, 
And steal the property of the Triple Gem, 
Then I would undoubtedly proceed to burn  in the flames of the deepest hell. 
 
(8,124) 
Therefore what adept would desire, 
Protect and venerate this body? 
Who would not scorn it 
And regard it as an enemy? 
 
In order to stop ourselves from experiencing the sufferings of hunger, thirst and sickness, we may 
do many negative things such as even killing our parents, stealing from the Triple Gem and other non-virtuous actions.   To satisfy the attachment to our bodies, we engage in negative actions that will lead us only to a 
rebirth in the Avici hell. If that is the case, what wise person would venerate this body, which is 
the source of all our difficulties?    
Who is the adept  mentioned here?  It is someone who want s to achieve the happiness of this and 
future lives, not someone who only focuses on temporal happiness.  
 We must work at stopping the self-cherishing attitu de, because it is the cause of all our faults and 
it will only bring us problems in this  life and our future lives to come.  
 
Question from student: How do we tell the difference between caring for and being attached to our 
bodies?  
 
Reply : We need to check whether taking care of ou r bodies brings us problems or leads to the 
creation of negative karma.  When we fuss over and are totally preoccupied with the care of our 
bodies, then that’s a sign that we are attached to our bodies.  
There is a need to take care of our bodies, espe cially when we are using  it to practise the 
Dharma. When we take care of th e body with that motivation, does  that increase our attachment 
or not? If it increases our attachment, it defeats the purpose of our Dharma practice.  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program               CHAPTER VIII - CONCENTRATION  
 
258  
 
When the attachment becomes stronger, the self-c herishing and self-grasping attitudes will also 
become stronger.  When self-cherishing increases,  we forget about exchanging self and other. 
That is the problem. 
 In examining the instructions of exchanging self and other, we have to see the faults of the self-cherishing attitude, the cause of all our problems . In order to stop this attitude, we have to 
reduce our attachment to ourselves and to our bodies. When our attachment is reduced, it 
becomes easier for us to embark on the pr actice of exchanging self and  other. 
 
3” Reflecting on the faults and benefits of primarily cherishing self and other [respectively] 
a” A list of the disadvantages and benefits of cherishing self and other [respectively] 
(1)  An extensive explanation 
(a) In terms of giving 
(b) In terms of harming (c) In terms of praise and renown 
(d) In terms of application to activities 
(e) In terms of benefit and bliss 
(a) In terms of giving 
(8,125) 
“If I give this, what shal l I (have left to) enjoy?” 
Such selfish thinking is the way of ghosts; 
“If I enjoy this, what shall I (have left to) give?” 
Such selfless thinking is a quality of the gods. 
 
We are unable to part with our wealth and posse ssions because of miserliness, thinking we will 
become poor or we won’t have anything left for ourselves. Miserliness is an affliction which can only lead to unpleasant fruitional results, such as  a rebirth in a fearful place and is therefore not 
beneficial.   Instead, we should think, “If I use up everything myself, I will have nothing to give others.” This way of thinking leads only to happiness from life to life, leading us to good rebirths, ultimately, 
to enlightenment and, is a quality of the gods . 
 Miserliness and generosity are mental attitudes an d do not depend on whether we actually give 
something away or not. If one is unable to part  with one's possessions, then even if one has 
plenty to spare, that is miserliness. If one has the mental willingness to give away everything one 
owns, that is generosity. So it does not depend on the actual giving.  
(b) In terms of harming 
(8,126) 
If, for my own sake, I cause harm to others, 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program               CHAPTER VIII - CONCENTRATION  
 
259  
I shall be tormented in hellish realms; 
But if, for the sake of othe rs, I cause harm to myself, 
I shall acquire all that is magnificent. 
 
We harm the bodies and possessions of others because of our self-importance, cherishing 
ourselves and putting our own intere sts first. These actions will only lead us to bad rebirths and 
suffering. 
 
On the other hand, it is not a problem if our bo dies or possessions are harmed in the course of 
our working to free others from suffering and placing them in happiness because such actions 
will only lead to good rebirths and, ultimately, enlightenment.  
(c) In terms of praise and renown 
(8,127) 
By holding myself in high esteem 
I shall find myself in unpleasant realms, ugly and stupid; 
But should this (attitude ) be shifted to others, 
I shall acquire honors in a joyful realm. 
 Cherishing ourselves and being interested solely in  our own welfare, desiring good looks, wealth 
and possessions, fame and high status – all these lead only to rebirth in the lower realms. Once 
there, we will be stupid and ugly and be  surrounded only by unpleasant things.  
 Shifting this attitude towards others – wishing th em to have wealth, fame and material comforts 
– will lead us to a good rebirth, endowed with wealth and     fame.  We can see from the above verses the different results of different states of mind. One is 
beneficial. The other is not. As we always have  our own interests at heart, thinking only of 
ourselves, we continue to circle in cyclic existence.   
(d) In terms of application to activities 
(8,128) 
If I employ others for my own purposes, 
I myself shall experience servitude; 
But if I use myself for the sake of others, 
I shall experience only lordliness. 
 When we treat others like slaves or servants to do our bidding, we are only creating the cause to 
experience the same fate ourselves in the future.   However, when we place ourselves in the service of  others, working only for their benefit, we will 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program               CHAPTER VIII - CONCENTRATION  
 
260  
experience a good rebirth, be born in a family of good lineage and high status, be endowed with 
a pleasant appearance and wield power and influence as a king or minister.  
(e) In terms of benefit and bliss 
(8,129) 
Whatever joy there is in this world 
All comes from desiring others to be happy, 
And whatever suffering there is in this world 
All comes from desiring myself to be happy. 
 
All the happiness of this worldly life and all futu re lives come from our wish for others to be 
happy. Desiring happiness for ourselves leads only to problems, difficulties and suffering in this 
and future lives.  We should check and analyse whether what the text says makes sense or not. We need to 
investigate this at an individual level. When we think only of ourselves, does this generate profit or loss for us? When we think only of others, do we stand to lose or profit from this? We need to figure this out for ourselves.  As mentioned earlier, when we look at the meanin g of the adept or wise person, it does not refer 
to someone who concentrates on only a very sm all profit (or temporary happiness) but rather 
someone who focuses on the long-term view, the ha ppiness of all the future lives to come. Such a 
person is not someone who considers only the ha ppiness of a single hour, days or even months. 
A wise person is not like that. 
(2) Synopsis 
(8,130) 
What need is there to say much more? 
The childish work for their own benefit, 
The Buddhas work for the benefit of others. 
Just look at the diffe rence between them 
 Verse 130 is the summary of our discussion so fa r. Day and night, without break, even when we 
are sleeping, we have been harbouring this self-cherishing attitude. We think only of 
accomplishing our own purposes.   What have we achieved so far and what is the result? The outcome is that we only engage in 
negative thoughts that lead to negative actions,  the fruitional results of which are only suffering 
and problems. We go through life experiencing one problem after another, without break. Our 
selfish mental attitude leads to this kind of result.   
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program               CHAPTER VIII - CONCENTRATION  
 
261  
The buddhas and bodhisattvas, the great holy bein gs, spend their days and nights working only 
for the welfare of others. They do not experi ence any suffering or problems regardless of 
whatever form they may choose to manifest as or  whatever rebirth they take. They experience 
continuous happiness,  not only in that particular  life but also in all their future lives, because 
they only cherish others. 
 The advice here is for us to discard our self-int erest and  work solely for the benefit of others. 
The number of problems we experience depend s on whether we are narrow- or broad-minded. 
When we are narrow-minded, we will be unhappy  and have more problems. When the mind is 
vast and big, it will be more relaxed, happy and pe aceful. The advice in the above verses is to help 
us broaden our mental perspective beyond focusing  on just ourselves but to include all living 
beings, to working for their benefit. 
70 
Lesson 47   Chapter VIII - verse 131-139 
I was twelve years old when I went to Kopan mona stery. Lama Thubten Yeshe was still alive then. 
He taught us by writing out questions and their answers, pasting them on the wall and making us 
                                              
70 2' The ability to exchange self and other if you accustom yourself to the thought of doing so 
Take the example of your enemy becoming a friend. At firs t, when you heard even the name of your enemy, fear 
arose. Later you were reconciled and became such close friends that when this new friend was absent you were very 
u n h a p p y .  T h i s  r e v e r s a l  r e s u l t e d  f r o m  f a m i l i a r i z i n g  y o u r  m i n d  w i t h  a  n e w  a t t i t u d e .  S o  l i k e w i s e ,  i f  y o u  b e c o m e  habituated to viewing yourself as you pr esently view others [with an attitude of neglect] and to viewing others as 
you presently view yourself [with a cherishing a ttitude], you will exchange self and other.  
Do not turn away from this difficulty. 
Although you were frightened upon hearing someone's name, 
Now, due to the power of conditioning, You dislike that person's absence. 
And also: 
It is not difficult to consider my body With the perspective I have toward another's body. 
Qualm : Since someone else's body is not your body, how can you develop the same attitude that you hove toward 
your own? 
Reply : Your body was produced from your father's semen and your mother's blood. Even though it was produced 
from portion of someone else's body, you conceive it to be your own by the influenc e of previous conditioning. 
Similarly, if you become accustomed to cherishing another' s body as you presently do yo ur own, you will view it 
with the same perspective that you now have toward your own body.  
Therefore just as you conceived ‘I’ 
With respect to the drops of semen And blood of others, so you can be conditioned To cherishing others as you do yourself. 
Reflect thoroughly on the benefits of being other-centered  and the faults of being self-centered. Thereby you will 
produce from the depths of your heart a great delight in  m e d i t a t i n g  o n  t h e  e x c h a n g e  o f  s e l f  a n d  o t h e r .  T h e n  
recognize that you can actually generate it once you have become habituated to it. ( Lamrim Chenmo , Vol. 2, pgs. 51-
53) 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program               CHAPTER VIII - CONCENTRATION  
 
262  
memorise them. There were many questi ons. One I can still remember was, W hy do we need to 
practise the Dharma?  The questions were in Tibetan, and at that time, I was more familiar with my 
native dialect, Sherpa. Still, I memorised the question even though I did not understand its 
meaning. The answer to this question was: We all desire happiness and do not want suffering. The only 
way to abandon all suffering is the practice of the Dharma. Therefore, we have  to practise the Dharma. 
 
Another question was, Just beating the drum, ringing the bell and performing the rituals – are these 
actions Dharma?  The answer to that was, Beating the drum, ringing the be ll and reciting mantras alone 
are not necessarily Dharma. Why? Because you can also teach animals to do these things.  
 
At that age, we young monks were all preoccupi ed with games and playing but since we had to 
pass our examinations and memorisation tests, we had to memorise the questions and their 
answers even though we did not fully understand their content.    I am telling you this story to emphasise that Dh arma practice is performed primarily with our 
minds and not our bodies or speech. Reciting mantras, doing our daily commitments and prayers, knowing how to do some rituals -  these things are not necessarily Dharma.  
 Practising the Dharma means improving the mind and weakening our afflictions. The nature of 
afflictions is to disturb our minds, which le ads to suffering and unhappiness so, until the 
afflictions are eliminated, we will continue to ex perience problems and difficulties. The Dharma 
is the only way to get rid of  afflictions.   
 When we say, Dharma, we have to understand wh at that means. Dharma is that which enables 
us to transform our minds for the better.   There are many different kinds of instructions for training and developing our    minds. Here, we 
are focusing on the instructions for exchanging self and other through examining the faults of 
cherishing ourselves and the benefit of cherishing others. In order to practise these instructions, 
you must first listen to these teachings. Yo u should set this important motivation for 
participating in this session.    I have mentioned many times before the importance  of listening to the teachings with a correct 
motivation. It is very important to ad just our  motivation to en sure it is a proper one.  Our 
motivation should be: we are attending these te achings so that we can learn to transform our 
minds for the better. You will definitely benefit from  this session if you main tain this motivation.  
 Let us summarise the faults of cherishing ours elves and the benefits of cherishing others. 
Looking at ourselves, we can see that, day and night, we think only of ourselves and our own 
welfare. We spend our entire lives with this self -absorbed mental attitude. And what is the result? 
We are continually experiencing problems, suffering and unhappiness.  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program               CHAPTER VIII - CONCENTRATION  
 
263  
 
The buddhas, on the other hand, abide in perpet ual bliss and happiness. Why?  Because they 
work solely for the benefit of others.  
  
Since continuous happiness comes from continually  working for and  cher ishing others, day and 
night, we too should concern ourselves with the welfare and happiness of others. 
 
1’ Explaining the way to exchange self and other 
a’ An extensive explanation 
1” Familiarizing oneself with cherishing others 
2” Making effort to abandon self-cherishing 
3” Reflecting on the faults and benefits of primarily cherishing self and other [respectively] 
a” A list of the disadvantages and benefits of cherishing self and other [respectively] 
b” Thus, the reasonableness of discarding self-cherishing  
(1) The unseen disadvantages 
(2) The visible disadvantages 
(3) A presentation of the disadvantages in brief (4) The reasonableness of discarding self-cherishing 
b’ Synopsis 
1” The way to exchange self and other 2” Arresting misapplication [of the principle] once one has exchanged 
3” Practicing unerringly 
2’ The way to practice after having reflected on this exchange 
3’ The way to practice application [of this attitude] 
(1) The unseen disadvantages 
(8, 131) 
If I do not actually exchange my happiness 
For the sufferings of others, 
I shall not attain the state of Buddhahood 
And even in cyclic existence shall have no joy. 
 
This verse is reminding us that we should exch ange self and other and work for the benefit of 
others, by switching our focus from cherishing ou rselves to cherishing others.  When we do not 
engage in such an exchange and neglect the welfare of others,   we cannot achieve happiness for 
ourselves in our future lives.  Enlightenment is also not attainable. Without exchanging self and  
other, there is no way we can achieve the enlightened state.  
 
Qualm : But I do not mind not becoming a Buddha. I am happy to remain as I am in samsara.  
 Reply : The response to this qualm appear s in the last line of verse 131, Even in cyclic existence, you 
shall have no joy. 
 
It is impossible to experience lasting happiness as  long as we remain in cyclic existence. The 
temporal happiness experienced in samsara does no t last and is unstable and unreliable.  That 
being the case, it is then inappropriate to assert  remaining in samsara as an acceptable option.  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program               CHAPTER VIII - CONCENTRATION  
 
264  
 
Permanent, everlasting happiness comes only when we achieve the state of full enlightenment. In 
order to achieve such a state, we need to exchange self and  other. 
(2) The visible disadvantages 
(8, 132) 
Let alone what is beyond this world. 
Because my servants do no work 
And because my masters give me no pay, 
Even the needs of this life will not be fulfilled. 
 
Even the happiness of this life cannot be achieved  when we have a selfish attitude, paying no 
attention to the welfare of others. For example, due to miserliness of the employer, his workers 
will not perform their jobs well. From the workers’  side, they get no pay. Both sides lose out.  
(3) A presentation of the disadvantages in brief 
(8, 133) 
(By rejecting the method that) establishes both foreseeable and unforeseeable joy, 
I cast magnificent delight completely aside 
And then, because of inflicting misery on others, 
In confusion I seize hold of unbearable pain. 
 
Exchanging self and other is the cause for the happi ness of this life (which is foreseeable) and the 
happiness of future lives (which is unfore seeable). Choosing however to ignore these 
instructions, we harm other people instead.  As  a result, we accumulate negative karma, the 
consequences of which will have to be experienced in the future. 
(4) The reasonableness of discarding self-cherishing 
(8, 134) 
If all the injury, 
Fear and pain in this world 
Arise from grasping at a self, 
Then what use is that great ghost to me? 
 
(8, 135) 
If I do not completely forsake it 
I shall be unable to pu t an end to suffering, 
Just as I cannot avoid being burned 
If I do not cast aside the fire (I hold). 
 
We blame our enemies when problems and harm s befall us. “Harms” here encompasses harm 
from human as well as non-human sources, such as  spirits and animals. All these problems, fears 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program               CHAPTER VIII - CONCENTRATION  
 
265  
and harms ultimately come from our  self-cherishing attitude. The problems and suffering 
associated with birth, aging and death have their  roots in the self-grasping conception and the 
self-cherishing attitude. 
 
The self-grasping conception and the self-cherishin g attitude cause our  downfall in this and all 
our future lives to come, preventing us from ac hieving liberation and enlightenment. This is the 
great ghost  who, until it is destroyed, brings on a ll the samsaric problems  and sufferings of the 
three realms.  Our hand is burnt when it is placed in fire. The only way to prevent this is to put out the fire 
which causes the burning. This analogy can be applied to the self-cherishing and self-grasping 
attitudes.   
Question from a student : If we refer to the self -cherishing attitude as the great ghost,  then have the 
hearers, the solitary realizers, arhats and foe destroyers abandoned self-cherishing? Have they 
abandoned cyclic existence? 
 
Answer :  
We are now looking specifically at the instruction of  exchanging self and other. To do this, we 
must get rid of the self-cherishing attitude and th e way to do this is to look at its faults.  
 In this context then, the self-che rishing attitude is described as the great ghost , the source of all our 
unhappiness and problems and is the root of cyclic  existence.  Accepting th is, we can then assert 
that until we get rid of this attitude, there is no way we can be freed from cyclic existence.  
 
In the twelve links of dependent origination, the fi rst link is ignorance, wh ich refers to the self-
grasping conception and this is clearly established as the root of cyclic ex istence. The two links of 
craving and grasping are essentially attachment of different intensities.    But here, we are examining the instructions on ho w to develop concern for the welfare of and to 
cherish others. The main obstacle to doing this is our self-cherishing attitude so to eliminate this 
attitude, we have to look at all its faults and disadvantages. Since it is the basis for all our 
samsaric difficulties, in this context, it is a sserted to be the root of  cyclic existence.   
 The hearers, solitary realizers and foe destroyers are liberated from suffering and cyclic existence. 
But it is questionable whether they have  abandoned the self-cherishing attitude.  
 
If I do not completely forsake it,/I shall be unable to put an end to suffering: 
Think if these two lines can be interpreted as: “I f I do not completely forsake my self-cherishing 
attitude, I will be unable to put an end to the suffering of all other sentient beings.” 
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program               CHAPTER VIII - CONCENTRATION  
 
266  
b’ Synopsis 
1” The way to exchange self and other 
2” Arresting misapplication [of the principle] once one has exchanged 
3” Practicing unerringly 
1” The way to exchange self and other71 
(8, 136) 
Therefore, in order to allay the harms inflicted upon me 
And in order to pacify the sufferings of others, 
I shall give myself up to others 
And cherish them as I do my very self. 
 
(8, 137) 
"I am under the control of others," 
Of this, mind, you must be certain; 
Now, except for benefiting every creature, 
You must not think of anything else. 
 
Therefore,  in Verse 136, refers to all the earlier reason s given for asserting that the self-cherishing 
attitude is the source of all undesirable things. In order to stop harming ourselves and others, we 
need to discard this attitude and cherish others instead. 
I shall give myself up to others:  T h i s  i s  d o n e  a t  a  m e n t a l  l e v e l ,  d e d i c a t i n g  o u r   e x i s t e n c e  t o  t h e  
happiness of others. This means that we belong to and are owned by others and we must always 
remember that, except for benefiting  othe rs, we are not to consider anything else. 
 
                                              
71 Thus, neither be self-centered nor support self-centered tendencies. You must train again and again in the 
attitude of freely giving to all beings your own body, resources, and roots of virtue, and you must work for the 
welfare of those to whom you give these things. It is wrong to do the opposite, so stop the attitude which sees your 
own body, resources, and roots of virtue as being for your own purposes: 
"I am controlled by others"; 
You, O mind, know this for certain. Now do not think of anything Other than the welfare of all beings.   It is wrong to achieve my own aims  With my eyes, etc. that are under others' control.  Therefore, it is incorrect to do wrong to others  With my eyes, etc. that are for their welfare. 
Similarly, when you repeatedly reflect on the benefits of cherishing others, you produce powerful enthusiasm from 
the depths of your heart. Discontinue your present atti tude of disregarding others and keep your potential 
disregard of others from arising. Through affectionately viewing others as dear and beloved as much as you can, 
develop an attitude that cherishes others to the degree to which you previously cherished yourself - "Cherish others 
as you do yourself.” ( Lamrim Chenmo , Vol. 2, pg. 55-56) 
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program               CHAPTER VIII - CONCENTRATION  
 
267  
Once we have dedicated ourselves to others, we completely exchange self and other. Henceforth, 
whatever we do, we should do only for others. Whatever we think, we should only consider the interest of others. 
2” Arresting misapplication [of the principle] once one has exchanged 
(8,138) 
For my sake, I should not do anything 
With these eyes and so forth, which I have left at the disposal of others. 
It is quite incorrect to  do anything with them 
Which is contrary to the benefit (of others). 
 
Having exchanged self and other, other sentient  beings become our bosses and  we become  
servants at the service of all other living bein gs. Whatever we do with our bodies, speech and 
minds, we should never disturb or harm other li v i n g  b e i n g s .  W h e n  w e  f i n d  t h a t  w h a t  w e  a r e  
about to do contradicts this principle, we sh ould immediately put a stop to such  wrong 
behaviour. 
3” Practicing unerringly 
(8,139) 
Thus sentient beings should be my main (concern). 
Whatever I behold upon my body 
I should rob and use 
For the benefit of others. 
 
Having dedicated ourselves to others, we work on ly to benefit them. “Robbing” ourselves of our 
possessions means that, instead of being attached an d grasping at them with the attitude,  “This 
is mine,” we should replace that attitude with the thought: “I am now the servant of others. I 
shall henceforth use my wealth and possessi ons only for the benefit of others.”  
 Having dedicated our possessions, virtues, merit, et c. to the benefit of others, these things belong 
to them.  At the same time, we still need to us e our possessions. How do we go about doing this? 
We should do so like a servant using the belongin gs of the master e.g., staying in the master’s 
home, eating his food and so forth. The servant does this in order to be able to do his master’s work.  
 
When we dedicate sincerely our  possessions in this way, our sense of ownership of and our 
attachment to them will weaken as will our self -cherishing attitude. When this happens, there 
will less suffering for ourselves. 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program               CHAPTER VIII - CONCENTRATION  
 
268  
Lesson 48   Chapter VIII - verse 140-150 
The great Kadampa masters said: “All sentient be ings possess buddha nature, but when they do 
not make the effort to awaken it, there is no way th ey  can obtain a higher rebirth,  liberation or 
enlightenment.” 
 
Butter comes from milk but simply staring at the pot of milk will not turn it into butter. The 
milk must be churned. The same  applies to our aspiration to higher rebirth, liberation and 
enlightenment for the sake of sentient beings. Although we have the potential to achieve all 
these, we must put in the effort to awaken that potential by practising the Buddhadharma. 
Otherwise, nothing happens..   
1’ Explaining the way to exchange self and other 
2’ The way to practice after having reflected on this exchange 
a’ Presentation 
b’ Explanation 
1” The way jealousy for those higher than oneself is cultivated] 
a” The way it is cultivated b” How it is practiced once it has been cultivated 
2” The way competitiveness is cultivated between those equal to oneself 
a”   Competing over material gain and honor 
b”   Competing over the reputation of one’s qualities 
c”   Competing over the list of one’s goodnesses d”   Developing a like for dispensing harm 
3” The way pride over those lower than oneself is cultivated 4” The effects of cultivation 
3’ The way to practice application [of this attitude] 
a’ Presentation 
 (8,140) 
Considering lesser beings and so forth as myself, 
And considering myself as the other, 
(In the following way) I shou ld meditate upon envy,  
competitiveness and self-importance, 
With a mind free of distorted concepts:72 
 
After we have reflected on the exchange of self and other, how do we practise? 
 
There are three kinds of sentient beings: (1) thos e whom we deem inferior to us  (2) those who 
have equal status as us and (3) th ose who have superior qualities.  
                                              
72 From stanzas 141 to 154 inclusive, as a practice of exchanging  self for others, the role of ‘I’ and ‘other’ is literally 
reversed. Thus ‘I’ should be understood as all other sentie nt beings and ‘he’ should be understood as oneself. The 
meditation on envy is covered in stanzas 141-146, comp etitiveness in stanzas 147-150 and self –importance in 
stanzas 151-154. (Shantideva, Gu ide to the Bodhisattva’s Way of Life, Notes, pg. 175) 
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program               CHAPTER VIII - CONCENTRATION  
 
269  
W h e n  w e  e n c o u n t e r  p e o p l e  w e  c o n s i d e r  i n fe r i o r  t o  u s , w e  a r e  p r o u d  a n d  a r r o g a n t .  W h e n  w e  
meet those who are equal to us, we develop a sens e of competitiveness and we generate jealousy 
towards those who have superior qualities.  Th ese are our usual reactions when we come into 
contact with these three different groups of people.  
 When we exchange self and other, we reverse roles. We take them as “I,” and we become “other.” 
For example, we take our object of jealousy to  be “I” and that person to be ourselves.  
 Usually, we neglect the welfare of others. Not only  do we not work for their benefit, we do our 
best to ensure that we are protected from undesi rable things while wishing such things to befall 
others.   What we usually do is cherish ourselves, workin g only to accomplish happiness for ourselves and 
eliminating our own problems and suffering.  No matter how many good qualities we may 
cultivate, it does not stop us from developing jealousy towards others. Also, our acquisition of 
wealth and reputation leads to the generation of pride and a sense of competitiveness when 
others out-perform us, leading to more jealousy. As a result, we accumulate the different kinds of 
negative karma.   Verse 140 points out we need to cultivate a stable  realisation of the need to exchange self and 
other, With a mind free of distorted concepts .  O n  t h e  b a s i s  o f  t h a t  s t a b l e  r e c o g n i t i o n  o f  t h e  “ I ”  
becoming  “other” and the “other” becoming onesel f,  we meditate on jealously, competitiveness 
and pride. The benefit of this practice is that it  helps us to understand the suffering of others. 
 
Exchange between a student and Geshe-la : (Geshe-la’s remarks are in italics) 
 Is the mind that apprehends “I ” as “other” a valid cognizer? No.  
 
Is that mind a mistaken consciousness? Yes. 
 Can we accomplish anything positive by me ditating on exchanging self and others?   Yes.  
 Is the mind that views all sentient be ings as buddhas a wrong consciousness?    Yes. 
 Is there any benefit in seeing all sentient beings as buddhas?   Yes. 
 Geshe-la continues : The consciousnesses that apprehend sunlig ht as the sun or the light of a butter-
lamp as the sun are both wrong consciousnesses. When  we are looking for the sun, even though 
apprehending sunlight as the sun is a wrong cons ciousness,  depending on that, we will be able 
to find the sun. However, we will not  find th e sun by apprehending th e light from the butter 
lamp as the sun. Therefore, although both are wrong consciousnesses, one consciousness leads us 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program               CHAPTER VIII - CONCENTRATION  
 
270  
to our goal while the other does not.   
 Similarly, we can apply this reasoning to the self  grasping conception and the attitude that holds 
“I” as “other.” Both are wrong consciousnesses bu t the former has been established as a mistaken 
consciousness and an object of abando nment while the latter benefits us.  
 
b’ Explanation 
1” The way jealousy for those higher than oneself is cultivated] 
a” The way it is cultivated 
b” How it is practiced once it has been cultivated 
2” The way competitiveness is cultivated between those equal to oneself 
3” The way pride over those lower than oneself is cultivated 
4” The effects of cultivation 
a”   The way it is cultivated 
(8,141) 
"He is honoured, but I am not; 
I have not found wealth such as he. 
He is praised, but I am despised; 
He is happy, but I suffer. 
 
(8,142) 
"I have to do all the work, 
While he remains comfortably at rest. 
He is renowned as great in th is world, but I as inferior, 
With no good qualities at all 
 
(8, 143) 
"But what do you mean I have no good qualities? 
I have all good qualities. 
Compared to many, he is inferior, 
And compared to many, I am high. 
 
(8, 144)  
"The deteriorated state of my morals and views 
Is not due to me, but due to my disturbing conceptions, 
 
This particular meditation is done by switching  roles with someone whom  we see as lower than 
ourselves. We become that person, who is now re ferred to as “I” and the other party becomes us 
– the “other” (or “he”).   The “I” then cultivates jealousy towards the “oth er,” thinking, “He has everything while I have 
nothing. He is praised but I am despised. I wo rk like a dog but he just hangs around, doing 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program               CHAPTER VIII - CONCENTRATION  
 
271  
nothing.  
 “He has all the qualities but I, being the inferior on e, has no qualities whatsoever. But surely, it is 
relative whether one has qualities or not. Yes, he has more qualities than me but compared to 
some other people, I am superior.  
What right does he have to look down on and behave so arrogantly towards me? 
 
“Yes, I may be a less ethical a person than he is. I am definitely poorer than him. On that basis, 
he feels justified in his contempt.  
“But this is not my fault. I didn’t choose to be  a bad person. I did not choose to be poor. These 
circumstances were caused by my strong nega tive emotions like anger, attachment and 
ignorance.”    Having cultivated this attitude by reflecting in this way, how do we put it into practice?  
b” How it is practiced once it has been cultivated 
(8144 cd) 
In whatever way he is able, he should heal me, 
Willingly I shall accept an y discomfort involved. 
 
(8,145) 
"But I am not being healed by him, 
So why does he belittle me? 
What use are his good qualities to me? 
(Although) he has good qualit ies, (he does not benefit me) 
 
(8,146) 
"With no compassion for the beings 
Who dwell in the poisonous mouth of harmful realms, 
Externally he is proud of his good qualities 
And wishes to put down the wise. 
 The meditation continues with the “I” addressing th e “other”: “He is  rich and thinks of himself 
as a good person. He should then help and support me in overcoming my difficulties.  
 “But he does no such thing.  On top of that, he treats me with such contempt and arrogance and puts me down at every opportunity. What is the use of his good qualities when he does not use 
them to help me?”  “ I f  h e  c l a i m s  t o  h a v e  c o m p a s s i o n ,  w h y  i s  h e  n o t  u s i n g  i t  t o  h e l p  u s   s e n t i e n t  b e i n g s  w h o  a r e  moving closer and closer to the lower realms? Where is his compassion then?” 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program               CHAPTER VIII - CONCENTRATION  
 
272  
 
“Actually, he is the one with all the faults since he has no compa ssion and he does not help other 
people. He should recognise his faults and stop pretending to have good qualities.” 
 
Question from a  student: (inaudible) 
Answer:  We know that we are jealous of those who ha ve superior qualities. By exchanging self 
and other, we understand how those at the top look down on those of lower qualities. By 
generating jealousy in this way, we will come to  understand how we suffer when people look 
down on us. Knowing this, we will no longer be have in an arrogant and proud manner towards 
others, even if they have lesser qualities than ourselves.  
 
2” The way competitiveness is cultivated between those equal to oneself 
a” Competing over material gain and honor 
b” Competing over the reputation of one’s qualities c” Competing over the list of one’s goodnesses 
d” Developing a like for dispensing harm 
a” Competing over material gain and honor 
(8,147) 
"In order that I may excel 
He who is regarded as equal with me, 
I shall definitely strive to attain material gain and honor for myself, 
Even (by such means as) verbal dispute. 
b” Competing over the reputation of one’s qualities 
(8,148) 
"By all means, I shall make clear to the entire world 
All the good qualities I have, 
But I shall not let anyone hear 
Of any good qualities he may have 
c” Competing over the list of one’s goodnesses 
(8,149) 
"Also I shall hide all my faults; 
I will be venerated, but not he; 
I will find a great deal of material gain; 
I will be honoured, but he shall not. 
d” Developing a like for dispensing harm 
(8,150) 
"For a long time I shall look with pleasure 
At his being made inferior; 
He will become the laughing-stock of all, 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program               CHAPTER VIII - CONCENTRATION  
 
273  
Regarded among everyone as an object of scorn and derision. 
 
When we associate with those of equal status or those who are only slightly better than ourselves, 
we develop a sense of competitiveness. Here, we switch roles with our ‘competitor,’ (now referred 
to as ‘I’)  and meditate on our competitiveness over material gain and honour, how we hide our 
faults and promote our own good qualities and how we gloat when unhappy things befall the 
others.  
 
This meditation helps us recognise our faults and is  the antidote to our engaging in such negative 
competitiveness. Instead, we will want to try to help our “competitor.”   
Lesson 49   Chapter VIII - verse 151-158 
There is a saying by the great Kadampa masters:  “The difference between cyclic existence and 
nirvana comes from whether we have realised the nature of our minds or not.” 
 
Liberation may seem external, like a distant place. But it is not like that. We can achieve it on the 
basis of our minds. In the same wa y, cyclic existence is not an ex ternal phenomenon. It abides in 
our minds. As long as our minds are   under the control and bondage of the afflictions, we 
remain in cyclic existence. We achieve liberation  at that very moment when our minds are freed 
from the control of our afflictions. So liberation  is not something far away or external and once 
liberated, we will experience everlasting bliss and happiness. 
 With reference to the paths and grounds - from th e path of accumulation through to the path of 
preparation, followed by the path of seeing, the ten bodhisattva grounds, the path of no more 
learning and, finally, enlightenment – the diffe rence between each level and each ground is 
primarily based on the qualities of the mind an d its development. We assert that someone has 
achieved and is abiding in a specific path on the basis of their mental development, not their 
physical transformation. How do we differentiate  between a bodhisattva and a non-bodhisattva? 
The difference lies not in their external appearan ces but on the basis on whether that person has 
developed bodhicitta or not.   Another way of interpreting the quotation is this: As  soon as we have realised the ultimate nature 
of the mind, its lack of true existence, then we have achieved liberation.  As long as we have not reached this realisation, we remain imprisoned by our afflictions.   Engaging in physical and verbal virtues (or positive actions) contributes to our mental 
development and this helps us one day, to realis e the emptiness of our minds. When we achieve 
the wisdom realising emptiness, we destroy cyclic existence. This is one of the benefits of realising 
emptiness. 
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program               CHAPTER VIII - CONCENTRATION  
 
274  
When our self-cherishing attitude is very strong, it  is very difficult for our actions to be virtuous. 
Furthermore, during the course of engaging in virtue, other afflictions such as competitiveness 
(in a negative sense), jealousy and pride arise.  
 
For example, arrogance and conceit may arise when we are doing retreat, “ I am in retreat and 
they are not.” Also, during the course of this 5-year Basic Pr ogram, we have acquired some 
knowledge and understanding of the Dharma. That  knowledge can be the condition for us to 
feel superior to others, thinking, “ I know more than you do.”  
 
It is important that our actions do not become the conditions for the development of jealousy, 
competitiveness and pride. These afflictions are harmful and therefore, we must learn how to 
apply the antidotes to overcome them.   In the context of exchanging self and other, we exchange roles with the other party and once we 
have done that,  we meditate on jealousy, competitiveness and pride. The purpose of the 
meditation is to reduce the self-cherishing attitu de, which we should always regard as the enemy. 
 
1’ Explaining the way to exchange self and other 
2’ The way to practice after having reflected on this exchange 
a’ Presentation 
b’ Explanation 
1” The way jealousy for those higher than oneself is cultivated] 
2” The way competitiveness is cultivated between those equal to oneself 
3” The way pride over those lower than oneself is cultivated 
a” The aspect of cultivated pride 
b” The qualities of cultivation 
c” The way to practice by means of application once cultivation has taken place d” Reflecting on the disadvantages of being separated from such pride 
4” The effects of cultivation 
a” Reflecting on the disadvantages of self-cherishing b” The proof that the benefits of cherishing others are limitless 
c” Explaining just the benefits and qualities 
d” Instructions on making effort to cherish others 
3’ The way to practice application [of this attitude] 
a” The aspect of cultivated pride 
(8, 151) 
"It is said that this deluded one 
Is trying to compete with me, 
But how can he be equal with me 
In learning, intelligence, form, class or wealth? 
 
In this meditation, we switch roles with someon e who has more qualities than us and who looks 
down on us because of his pride. That person now becomes the “I” and the “other” is the party 
who is being looked down upon. 
  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program               CHAPTER VIII - CONCENTRATION  
 
275  
The “I” then addresses the “other” in these term s, “How can you hope to compete with me who 
is superior to you in intelligence, knowledge, looks and wealth? There is no way you can even 
come close to what I have achieved.”   
b” The qualities of cultivation 
(8,152) 
"Thus, upon hearing of my good qualities 
That have been made well-known to all, 
I shall thoroughly enjoy the satisfaction 
Of the pleasant, tingling sensation that occurs. 
 
“I” continues, “Others rejoice and are happy to kn ow of my good qualities. They experience a 
special happiness and bliss through understanding how I am better than others in so many ways. 
You and other sentient beings should also feel happy in the same way.” 
c” The way to practice by means of application once cultivation has taken place 
 
(8, 153) 
"Even though he has some possessions, 
If he is working for me, 
I shall give him just enough to live on, 
And by force I'll take (the rest). 
 The “I” continues to address the “other,” “This pe rson will do what I want and I will give him 
only enough for him to survive.”   In summary, these meditations are done on the basi s of having exchanged self and other, without 
which the meditation cannot be pe rformed. As mentioned in verse 140, we need to meditate 
with, a mind free of distorted concepts,  with a stable attitude of havi ng exchanged self and other.  
 Once we understand this, we apply this  meditation in the following way:  
• For those we consider inferior or lower  than  us, we switch places with them and meditate 
on jealousy.  
• For those we consider equal to us, we swi tch places with them  and meditate on 
competitiveness.  
• For those we consider superior to us, we switc h places with them and meditate on pride.  
 Other commentaries use the terms: the old “I” and the new “I”. The old “I” is the self-cherishing 
“I,” who is totally absorbed with one’s own we lfare and completely disregards the welfare of 
others. The new “I” is the person who cherishe s others and disregards his own well-being.  
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program               CHAPTER VIII - CONCENTRATION  
 
276  
In verse 153, the new “I” is telling the old “I,” “You ’d better listen to what I say. If you follow my 
orders, I will give you just enough food to keep you alive and I will  keep the rest for myself.” Why 
are we meditating in this way? So that  we can subdue our self-cherishing.  
d” Reflecting on the disadvantages of being separated from such pride 
(8, 154)73 
"His happiness and comfort will decline 
And I shall always cause him harm, 
 
The old “I” will suffer: His  happiness and comfort will decline. 
 
This meditation on exchanging self and other he lps us understand the difficulties and suffering 
experienced by other people. Knowing this, we wi ll no longer look down on others, compete 
with them or be jealous of them.  
 It is said in the commentary: 
• Through cultivating jealousy, it will act as an antidote to pride.   
• Through cultivating competitiven ess, it will act as an antidote to competitiveness. 
                                             
 
73 After you have eliminated the obstacles to exchanging self and other in this way, the actual way to meditate is as 
follows. Out of attachment to self, your self-cherishin g attitude has produced all sorts of undesirable things 
throughout the beginningless time of cyclic existence up to  now. Although you wanted to make things perfect for 
yourself, you emphasized your own welfare and engaged in  improper methods. You have spent countless eons at 
this, but have not at all accomplished your own or others ' aims. Not only have you not achieved these, you have 
been tormented only by suffering. If  you had replaced concern for your own welfare with concern for others' 
welfare, you would certainly have already become a budd ha long ago and would have completely and perfectly 
accomplished your own aims as well as those of others. As  you did not do this, you have spent your time uselessly 
and laboriously. 
 Make a firm determination by thinking, "Now I understa nd the faults of self-cherishing and the benefits of 
cherishing others. With great effort, relying on mindfu lness and vigilance, I will discontinue the present self-
cherishing, my greatest enemy, and I wi ll not allow any potential self-cherishin g to arise." In this way frequently 
stop self-cherishing. Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds says:  
Self-cherishing has harmed me in all My myriad lifetimes in cyclic existence. 
 
You, O mind, though you spent countless eons 
Wanting to accomplish your own welfare, Through such great hardship You have accomplished only suffering. 
 
And also: If formerly you had acted for others' welfare,  
This condition which lacks  
The perfect happiness of buddhahood  
Could not possibly have occurred.   ( Lamrim Chenmo , Vol. 2, Pg. 55)  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program               CHAPTER VIII - CONCENTRATION  
 
277  
• Through cultivating pride, it will act as an antidote to jealousy.  
•  
4” The effects of cultivation 
a” Reflecting on the disadvantages of self-cherishing 
b” The proof that the benefits of cherishing others are limitless 
c” Explaining just the benefits and qualities 
d” Instructions on making effort to cherish others 
a” Reflecting on the disadvantages of self-cherishing 
(8,154 cd) 
For hundreds of times in this cycle of rebirth 
He has caused harm to me." 
 
(8, 155) 
Because of desiring to benefit yourself, O mind, 
All weariness you have gone through 
Over countless past aeons 
Has only succeeded in achieving misery.  
 
All the problems and sufferings that we have been  experiencing since beginningless time till now 
can be attributed to our self-cherishing attitude.  Surely then, we should ask ourselves why are we 
still harbouring this self-cherishing attitude which only brings us problems and suffering?  
b” The proof that the benefits of cherishing others are limitless 
(8,156) 
Therefore, I shall definitely engage myself 
In working for the benefit of others, 
For since the words of the Mighty One are infallible, 
I shall behold its advantages in the future.  
 Since working for ourselves brought us only prob lems and suffering, henceforth we shall apply 
ourselves to working enthusiastica lly for the welfare of others. If we can do this, the result is 
happiness in this and all our future lives. The Bu ddha said this and his words are infallible. The 
b e n e f i t s  o f  c h e r i s h i n g  o t h e r s  b e c o m e  a p p a r e nt when we enter the paths and achieve the 
bodhisattva grounds. 
c” Explaining just the benefits and qualities 
(8, 157) 
If, in the past, I had practiced 
This act (of exchanging self for others), 
A situation such as this, devoid of th e magnificence and bliss of a Buddha, 
Could not possibly have come about. 
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program               CHAPTER VIII - CONCENTRATION  
 
278  
Qualm : We may work for others for a long time but we don’t see the results.  
 
Reply:  It is not like that. In the past, if we had exchanged self and other and worked for the 
benefit of others, we would definitely have achi eved everlasting happiness and the state of full 
enlightenment. It is because we had failed to meditate on bodhicitta and exchanging self and 
other that we remain stuck in sa msara and continue to experience all its attendant problems and  
difficulties. 
 
By understanding the faults of self cherishing, we generate regret for having such a harmful 
attitude and become determined to focus on exchanging self and other and meditate on 
bodhicitta. 
d” Instructions on making effort to cherish others 
(8,158) 
Therefore, just as I have come to hold as "I" 
These drops of sperm and blood of others, 
Likewise, through acquaintance 
I should also come to regard all others . 
 With familiarity, we can definitely exchange self and other, just as we grasp at our bodies, which 
actually comes from the egg and sperm of our pare nts, as “I.” We have become habituated to 
seeing our bodies as belonging to us.   That being the case then, with familiarity and with effort, it is conceivable that we can also come 
to regards others as “I” as well.  
Lesson 50   Chapter VIII - verse 159-166 
It is said, “One needs the lamp of hearing to remove the fog of the da rkness of ignorance.” Why 
is this so? Without listening to the teachings, we would not know what should be abandoned and 
cultivated and how to go about doin g  this.  It is imperative, therefore, for us to listen to and 
study the teachings.  Gungtang Rinpoche said, “In order to understand wh at it is that we should abandon and what it 
is that we need to cultivate, before we can begin to  engage in these activities, we need to listen to 
the teachings.”   We should not let whatever we have heard or le arnt in the teachings and our studies be carried 
away by the wind, going in one ear and out the ot her. When we do not re late the teachings and 
apply them to our minds, we will not experience any improvement, just as a rock sitting in a pond remains unchanged.  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program               CHAPTER VIII - CONCENTRATION  
 
279  
 
At the end of Gungtang Rinpoche’s collection of advice, he says: “It is ju st something that comes 
from the mouth when, without any experience of the Dharma, I ask others to study and practise 
when I have not done so myself. It becomes very  difficult to encourage others to practise.” 
 
He continues, “Without my practising, it is hard  to inspire others to do so and to follow my 
advice.  However, if there is any virtue that may have been accumulated by my repeating these 
words that came from the holy speech of the trul y qualified spiritual masters, may this virtue 
become the cause for all migrators to achieve enligh tenment.” This is his dedication at the end of 
the text.   I find this last verse applicable to myself. I te ach different subjects but since I do not have any 
experience, it is difficult for my teachings to in spire and to persuade you to practise the Dharma. 
Nonetheless, I am repeating what is in the text pertaining to the instructions on exchanging self 
and other. That is beneficial for me. 
  Likewise, if there is any virtue or merit that co mes from my teaching this  text, then I also pray 
and dedicate them that they may be of use an d benefit to others. For those of you who are 
listening to these teachings, if there is any virtue  that comes from your doing so, you should also 
dedicate that virtue to the enli ghtenment of all living beings. 
 
1’ Explaining the way to exchange self and other 
2’ The way to practice after having reflected on this exchange 
3’ The way to practice application [of this attitude] 
a’ The actual 
1” Applying all of one’s entire collection of goodness to others 
a” The actual 
b” The reasonableness of [others] being jealous of you 
2” Devoting oneself to [taking] the lower position for the sake of others 
a” Examining one’s own faults b” Confessing wrongs one has done to others 
c” Devoting oneself to [taking] the lower position 
3” A presentation of he way to practice application in brief 
b’ When practicing the application of excha nging self and other, one should exert control 
over one’s mind 
a” The actual 
(8,159) 
Having thoroughly examined myself (to see 
Whether I am really workin g for) others (or not), 
I shall steal (seize) whatever appears on my body and use it for the  benefit of others. 
 
The earlier outline, The way to practise after having reflected on this exchange , refers to the kind of 
mental perspective we should develop. In this se ction, having developed that mental attitude, we 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program               CHAPTER VIII - CONCENTRATION  
 
280  
put exchanging self and other into actual practice. 
 This verse advises us to spy on ourselves to chec k what we are up to. Ar e we harming or are we 
benefiting others with our actions? We should  snatch away whatever we have – our bodies, 
enjoyments and possessions – and offer them to  others who are deprived of these things, 
reducing our sense of ownership and our conception that, “These are my things.” Imagining that 
we are bodhisattvas, we tell ourselves: "Whatever I have, I want to dedicate everything to others." 
When we need to use our possessions, we should al ways do so with the thought that we are using 
them for the benefit of others. 
 
I shall steal (seize ): With relation to our possessions, we al ways have the strong concept that, “This 
is mine and not yours. I am the owner.” By “sei zing” our possessions from ourselves, they no 
longer belong to us but to someone else and, in this way, we eliminate our sense of ownership of 
these objects. What makes it so difficult for us to dedicate our things to others? It is this grasping 
at those things as belonging to “me.” When this sense of ownershi p is weakened, we will be able 
to dedicate and give our possessions to others easily. 
b” The reasonableness of [others] being jealous of oneself 
(8,160) 
"I am happy but others are sad, 
I am high though others are low, 
I benefit myself but not others." 
Why am I not envious of myself? 
 
This outline should be amended to, The reasonableness of being jealous of oneself, referring to 
how we should be jealous of ourselves, rather  than other people being jealous of us.   
 
Here, we reflect on how much we have in term s of possessions, good things, reputation and 
status. Those who are in lower posi tions, have inferior qualities, are destitute and so forth have 
none of these things. 
 
I benefit myself but not others , can be  explained in different ways:  
(1) I have the opportunity to engage in virtue because I know how to do so and I know what 
good karma means. Other people, on the other hand , have no idea of how to engage in virtue. 
As a result, they only engage in negative ac tions that will ultimately harm them; or  
(2) There are so many people who are helping to  benefit me. But other people have no one to 
help them. 
 
The purpose of generating jealously towards oursel ves is to realise that we are not equal with 
others. We have many good things which others lack. Other people have many problems and are 
suffering. This becomes completely unacceptable to us and we realise we must do something 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program               CHAPTER VIII - CONCENTRATION  
 
281  
practical to equalise the situation.  
 This meditation on the cultivation of jealousy is  different from the earlier one we had learnt. The 
earlier meditation was done on the basis of ou r having switched roles with someone else. Here, 
we are meditating on cultivating jealousy towards ourselves. 
 
We should relate verses 159 and 160 back to the broader outline of Applying all of one’s entire 
collection of goodness to others the idea that we should give all our good things to others. This is one 
of the great benefits of having an outline. Some times reading the root text alone may not give us 
a clear idea of its essential meaning. By relati ng the text to the outline, we get a clearer 
understanding of the main message it is trying to convey.  
 
2” Devoting oneself to [taking] the lower position for the sake of others 
a” Examining one’s own faults 
b” Confessing wrongs one has done to others 
c” Devoting oneself to [taking] the lower position 
a” Examining one’s own faults 
(8,161) 
I must separate myself from happiness 
And take upon myself th e sufferings of others. 
“Why am I doing this now?” 
In this way, I should examine myself for faults. 
 
In the past, we were happy while others were be set with problems and suffering. Henceforth, we 
will separate ourselves from the happiness that comes from the enjoyment of our possessions, 
giving them instead to others, fo r their enjoyment and happiness.   
 Others will then be happy. Bereft  of our possessions, we will no longer experience the happiness 
associated with their enjoyment and we would ha ve to endure whatever pain and suffering may 
arise from this separation. It is as if we had given away our happiness to others. We bring 
happiness to others and we take upon ourselves their suffering.   In the past, we had always scrutinised the faults  of others and not our own. Henceforth, having 
exchanged self and other and havi ng studied this text which is like a mirror for our own minds, 
we will see our own shortcomings instea d of looking for the faults of others. 
 All our studies and practices and whatever teaching s we have received, they  all act as mirrors for 
our minds, helping us to look at our own faults. They  are not tools to help us look at the faults of 
others. We should always examine the faults of our bodies, speech and minds. What are we 
thinking? What are we saying? How are we behavi ng physically? We need to always check up.  
b” Confessing wrongs one has done to others 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program               CHAPTER VIII - CONCENTRATION  
 
282  
(8, 162) 
Although others may do something wrong, 
I should transform it into a fault of my own; 
But should I do something even slightly wrong, 
I shall openly admit it to many people. 
 
(8, 163) 
By further describing the renown of others, 
I should make it outshine my own. 
 
When we do something wrong, we usually push the blame to someone else, “He did it,” hiding 
w h a t e v e r  f a u l t s  w e  h a v e .  S o  n o w ,  w h e n  o t h e r s  m a k e  m i s t a k e s  o r  c a u s e  u s  s o m e  h a r m  o r  inconvenience, instead of blaming them, we shou ld see them as our faults and mistakes, as 
results of our own negative karma. Furthermore,  we voluntarily accept and even pray for the 
fruitional result of that mist ake to ripen on us alone.  
 When it comes to our own faults and mistakes, we should confess and admit them openly to 
many people even if the mistake we made was a very small one. The point is to own up to our 
mistakes, to admit and confess them. I am not su r e  w h e t h e r  w e  h a v e  t o  d o  t h i s  b e f o r e  m a n y  
people though.   Our usual behaviour is always to put down and cr iticise others, picking out their faults while we 
only praise ourselves. Rather than criticising othe rs and praising ourselves, we should now do the 
opposite. When we hear of others’ good qualities,  we should promote them, saying, "That is true. 
He is very good.”    When we are praised, we should make it known that there are many  others  who are far superior 
to ourselves in terms of qualities, renown and re putation, so that the good qualities of others 
outshine our own: I should make it outshine my own. 
 
Some commentaries on the verse 163 say, “We shou ld make the renown or qualities of others 
outshine my own," which means that we should hide our good qualities and not promote them 
in any way.  
 In summary, this verse is advising us to see the harm s, faults and mistakes done to us by others as 
our own faults and karma. But we are to confe ss openly and admit to whatever mistakes or 
wrongs we have done to others.   
c” Devoting oneself to [taking] the lower position 
(8, 163 cd) 
Just like the lowest kind of servant, 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program               CHAPTER VIII - CONCENTRATION  
 
283  
I should employ myself for the benefit of all. 
 
(8, 164) 
I should not praise my naturally fault-ridden self 
For some temporary good quality it may have, 
I shall never let even a few people know 
Of any good qualities I may possess. 
 
In the past, we had always treated others as lowe r than ourselves, using them as servants for our 
benefit. Now, we do the reverse. We act humb ly as servants, working for their benefit and 
happiness.     We should always see our own faults. We should not think highly of ourselves even if we have 
some small good qualities (e.g., having heard some teachings, understood and studied a little 
Dharma and doing a few retreats).  We should not be arrogant or proud nor should we promote these qualities to others. We should keep them secret.    According to the outline, this is how we put ours elves in the lower position. We see ourselves as 
servants and others as our bosses or powerful peop le. As servants, we work for the benefit of our 
employers.  When we see ourselves as lower than ot hers, it makes it easier for us to work for and 
to serve them. The inability to see ourselves in th is way is one of the obstacles that prevents us 
from helping others. “This is too menial for me ,  f o r  s o m e o n e  o f  m y  h i g h  s t a t u s . ”  S u c h  a n  
attitude prevents us from helping others. 
3” A presentation of he way to practice application in brief 
(8, 165) 
In brief, for the sake of living creatures, 
May all the harms 
I have selfishly caused to others 
Descend upon me myself. 
 
(8, 166) 
I should not be dominating and aggressive, 
Acting in a self-righteous, arrogant way; 
Instead, like a newly married bride, 
I should be bashful, timid and restrained 
 From time without beginning, we had made use of and harming others to acquire possessions, 
wealth and respect. Henceforth, may all the harm s that I had caused descend upon myself alone 
in order that I may benefit others.  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program               CHAPTER VIII - CONCENTRATION  
 
284  
Verse 166 says that we should not be domineerin g and aggressive and behave in a bossy, arrogant 
way. An example of a newly married bride is used because it was customary for her to be bashful, 
timid and restraint.  
 
We are usually proud, arrogant and selfish. We sh ould be afraid of such attitudes and behaviour 
and learn to restrain our three doors (bodies, sp eech and minds) so that we do not think and act 
in these ways. 
 
We should not look for the faults  of others but rather at our ow n faults.  We should proclaim 
the qualities of others and hide our own qualitie s. We should not be je alous of those who are 
better off than us nor should we despise and disr egard those inferior to us. At all times, we 
should admit and proclaim our mistakes.   
Answer to a student’s question : 
In verse 159, we literally steal our own possession s and give and dedicate them to others. The 
purpose is to reduce our grasping at things as belonging to “me.”  
 
Verse 161 is similar to the practice of tongle n (giving and taking), where we dedicate our 
happiness to others and we voluntarily take on the suffering of others.   Giving away our enjoyments or possessions means we  will no longer be able to experience the 
bliss or happiness that comes from having or usin g them. The  absence of that bliss or happiness 
is a form of suffering that we would have to endure.  
Lesson 51   Chapter VIII - verse 167-176 
Gungtang Rinpoche advises, “Eve n if you owned mountain-high piles of gold, enough to cover 
the entire country, at the time of death, you will not be able to bring along a single atom of it 
with you. On the other hand, by reciting a mant ra like ‘Om Mani Padme Hum’ just once, that 
can open the door to a good rebirth in your fu ture life. Simply reciting ‘Om Mani Padme Hum’ 
is very beneficial. ”  
We can understand, when we analyse our situat ion more deeply, that material wealth cannot 
really benefit us, even in future lives. In fact, th e more we own, the more we grasp at these things. 
It increases our self-cherishing thoughts, atta chment and so forth which only create more 
negative karma that will not benefit us in our future lives.  
 Sometimes, we think, “I will definitely achi eve something and I will be happier and more 
satisfied if I am rich in this li fe.” But if we profess to attach greater importance to the happiness 
of our future lives, then having this kind of worldly goal is incorrect. If we are concerned with 
this life alone, then that is a different matter.  Otherwise, our goal should not be like that.  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program               CHAPTER VIII - CONCENTRATION  
 
285  
 
Reciting “Om Mani Padme Hum” is just an ex ample. We should engage in our meditation 
practice and daily prayers or a single recitation  of “Om Mani Padme Hum”  with the conviction 
and single-pointed faith that we will definitely ac hieve happiness in our future lives. We need to 
generate that faith of conviction and be happy wi th whatever we are doing. Rejoice that we are 
doing this wonderful practice. It would be very good if we can do this.  
 
The whole point of practising the Dharma is to remove suffering and misery. Some people think 
like this: “I am just a nobody in this life. I am poor and will probably stay that way. I will never 
amount to anything.” Thinking like  that only brings unhappiness.  
 
Practising the Dharma is to increase whatever happy thoughts we may ha ve. We need to know 
h o w  t o  b e  h a p p y .  W e  s h o u l d  t h i n k :  “ E v e n  i f  I  do not become rich, at least now I have the 
opportunity to study and practise  the teachings and I am creating  the causes for happiness in my 
future lives.” We need to generate this belief, to  have this faith of conv iction and to feel happy 
doing our  practices by seeing the purpose in what we are doing. In his advice, Gungtang 
Rinpoche is telling us to practi se the Dharma because it creates the cause for our happiness. As 
the Lamrim says, at the time of death, only the Dharma helps.  
 
1’ Explaining the way to exchange self and other 
2’ The way to practice after having reflected on this exchange 
3’ The way to practice application [of this attitude] 
a’ The actual 
b’ When practicing the application of excha nging self and other, one should exert control 
over one’s mind 
1” The way to annihilate brazenness 
2” The disadvantages of sticking solely to one’s own benefit 
a” Ceasing to act solely for one’s own benefit by reflecting on the disadvantages 
b” Applying oneself to the welfare of others c” A presentation in brief 
3” Examining the faults of the body 
a” The shortcomings of not knowing contentment 
(1) The disadvantages of craving after the body 
(2) The reasonableness of cultivating a non-attachment to body 
b” The shortcomings of being inanimate (immovable) 
c” The shortcomings of delusion 
4” Exerting control over the mind 
1” The way to annihilate brazenness 
(8, 167) 
Thus, O mind, you should (think) and abide in this way 
And not act (selfishly) as (before). 
If, under the control (of self-cherish ing) you transgress (this code), 
Your (selfishness) will be your end. 
 
(8,168) 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program               CHAPTER VIII - CONCENTRATION  
 
286  
However, mind, although you have been advised, 
If you do not act in a like manner, 
Then since all misfortunes will entrust themselves to you, 
You will only be destined to destruction. 
 
We should always work for the benefit of others , both in thought and in action. When we find 
ourselves working for our own benefit alone, we should stop doing so. Since our bodies are controlled by our minds, we need to learn to  control our minds by subduing them with the 
appropriate antidotes. In particular, we need to apply the antidotes to overcome the self-
cherishing attitude in our minds and to rely on mindfulness and vigilance to check  whether our  
minds are controlled by selfish thoughts.  If we are unable to subdue our self-cherishing a ttitude, it is our minds that are harmed. It won’t 
affect our bodies since that is matter. But when we are controlled by selfish thoughts, the mind 
will generate negative actions and accumulate ne gative karma leading to problems in this and 
future lives that will throw us into the lower realms. 
 It is as if we are holding a conversation with our minds, separating  the “I” from the mind and 
telling it, “If you don’t do this, this is what yo u will become. Your body won’t be harmed but you 
will be annihilated by the self cherishing attitude.”  
2” The disadvantages of sticking solely to one’s own benefit 
a” Ceasing to act solely for one’s own benefit by reflecting on the disadvantages 
b” Applying oneself to the welfare of others c” A presentation in brief 
a” Ceasing to act solely for one’s own benefit by reflecting on the disadvantages 
(8, 169) 
That previous time when you could overcome me 
Is now past; 
Now I see (your nature and your faults), 
And wherever you go I shall destroy your arrogance. 
 
(8, 170)   
I should immediately cast aside all thoughts 
Of working for my own sake. 
 
In the past, not realising the faults of the self-che rishing attitude, we had allowed ourselves to fall 
under its control and, as a result, were led do wn the wrong path. We will never allow that to 
happen again. Now that we recognise the disadvan tages of the self-cherishing attitude, we will 
destroy our arrogant attitude in order th at we can cherish and benefit others.  
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program               CHAPTER VIII - CONCENTRATION  
 
287  
Verse 170 states that we will not even allow the thought that wishes to benefit ourselves alone to 
arise in our minds. If such a thought should come, we will  immediately cast it aside.  
b” Applying oneself to the welfare of others 
(8.170 cd) 
By having sold you to others, 
I shall not become discouraged, but shall offer up all your  
strength (to others). 
 
(8,171) 
If, having become unconscientious, 
I do not give you to all living beings, 
It is certain that you will deliver me 
To the guardians of the hells. 
 
Having exchanged self and other, we have, in effe ct, “sold” ourselves to all sentient beings. Since 
we now belong to sentient beings, we should alw ays work solely for their welfare, without being 
discouraged.    Why should we give ourselves to others in this way? Because if we don’t, we will persist in 
thinking only of ourselves. We will create non-vi rtuous and non-beneficial actions that will bring 
us to the hell realms where we will  experience unbearable pain and misery. Therefore, we have 
to discard our self-cherishing attitude and apply ourselves to cherishing and benefiting others. 
c” A presentation in brief 
(8,172)74 
                                              
74 If you lose the thought that your body, etc. are for othe rs' welfare and think that they are for your own benefit, 
o r  i f  y o u  s e e  t h e m  a s  a g e n t s  o f  p h y s i c a l ,  v e r b a l ,  o r  m e n t a l  h a r m  t o  o t h e r s ,  t h e n  s t o p  t h i s  w a y  o f  t h i n k i n g  b y  
contemplating how this previously brought you limitless ha rm and how you are still mistaken with regard to its 
appearance of helpfulness, which is false. If you are controlled by this wrong way of thinking, it produces only 
unbearable suffering. Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds  says: 
When you [self-cherishing] ruined me before,  
That was another time.  Now I recognize you; where will you go?  I will destroy all your arrogance.  Dispel the thought, "I still have my own welfare." I have sold you [my mind] to others. Do not be dispirited; offer your energy.  
If I become careless  And do not give you to beings,  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program               CHAPTER VIII - CONCENTRATION  
 
288  
For ages have you dealt with me like this 
And I have suffered long; 
But now, recalling all my grudges, 
I shall overcome your selfish thoughts 
 
(8,173) 
Likewise, if I wish to be happy, 
I should not be happy with myself; 
And similarly, if I wish to be protected 
I should constantly protect all others. 
 
In the past, because of our self-cherishing atti tude, we had done innumerable negative actions 
and, as a result, we ended up in the hell realms  where we experienced great suffering and misery 
for a very long time. Recollecting now how our self -cherishing attitude had harmed us, we direct 
our resentment towards it and we generate the de termination to destroy it once and for all.  
 If we wish to experience everlasting real happine ss, we need to get rid of our attachment to and 
preoccupation with achieving our own goals alone an d take delight in working for others. Just as 
we would protect ourselves from suffering, from  now on, we will constantly protect others. 
 As His Holiness always says, “If you want to be selfis h, at least be wise in your selfishness (i.e., the 
way to truly cherish ourselve s is to cherish others).” 
 
3” Examining the faults of the body 
a” The shortcomings of not knowing contentment 
(1) The disadvantages of craving after the body 
                                                                                                                                                           
You will certainly give me over  
To the guardians of hell.  Thus you gave me over To long periods of suffering. 
Now I remember my grudges; I will destroy your selfish thoughts. 
Similarly, when you repeatedly reflect on the benefits of cherishing others, you produce powerful enthusiasm from 
the depths of your heart. Discontinue your present atti tude of disregarding others and keep your potential 
disregard of others from arising. Through affectionately viewing others as dear and beloved as much as you can, 
develop an attitude that cherishes others to the degree to  which you previously cherished yourself "Cherish others 
as you cherish yourself.” To produce the attitude that cherishes beings in this way,  you must remember their kindness or recognize that they 
help you. For example, once farmers see that through so wing healthy seeds they will reap a good and abundant 
harvest, they value a fertile field. Li kewise, once you are certain that you will accomplish all temporary and final 
well-being through sowing the seeds of generosity and so fo rth in the field of living beings, you will cherish others. 
(Lamrim Chenmo , Vol. 2, pg. 56-57)  
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program               CHAPTER VIII - CONCENTRATION  
 
289  
(2) The reasonableness of cultivating a non-attachment to body 
b” The shortcomings of being inanimate (immovable) 
c” The shortcomings of delusion 
(1) The disadvantages of craving after the body  
(8,174) 
To whatever degree 
I take great care of this body, 
To that degree, I shall fall 
Into a state of extreme helplessness. 
 
(8,175) 
Having fallen in this way, if my desires 
Are unable to be fulfilled 
Even by everything upon this earth, 
What else will be able to satisfy them? 
 
(8,176) 
(Being) unable (to fulfil them, though) desiring (to do so), 
Disturbing conceptions and a dissatisfied mind will ensue. 
 
We may think, “Since I do have the  wish to bene fit others, it is all right for me to sustain my 
body out of my attachment to it.” This is not so  because when we are attached to our bodies, we 
will have to do many things to take care of it, giving it food, clothing, jewellery, ornaments and so 
forth. When there is self-cherishing, it becomes unbearable when the smallest of desires is not 
fulfilled.  The greater the self-che rishing, the greater the craving fo r the body, the more difficult it 
becomes for us to put up with discomforts, suffe ring or unhappiness. The greater the desire and 
attachment, the greater the level of discontentment and dissatisfaction. 
 
What happens when the self-cheri shing attitude increases? Our desires and needs increase to the 
point that we will not be satisfied with anything that is found in this wo rld. Even if the whole 
world is filled with our objects of desire, we will still not be happy. It is impossible to fulfil the 
wishes and desires of our self-cherishing attitude . Then, when our wishes are not fulfilled, our 
anger and afflictions increase. Not only that. Ou r virtuous thoughts will also weaken, including 
the thought to benefit others. We will cease to work for others and the thought to harm them 
instead will increase to the point where we will ac tually act to hurt other people. Therefore, it is 
inappropriate to guard and protect our bo dies out of craving or attachment.  
 Generally speaking, we have to protect the body to practise the Dharma. We have to distinguish 
between protecting the body for the purpose of pr actising the Dharma and protecting it out of 
attachment. The latter has no benefits whatsoever , only serving to increase our afflictions, 
weaken if not destroy our virtuous thoughts an d actions and lead to increasingly negative 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program               CHAPTER VIII - CONCENTRATION  
 
290  
thoughts and behaviour that will only bring us problems and suffering. 
Lesson 52   Chapter VIII - verse 176 cont’d 
Gungtang Rinpoche says that the three principal aspects of the path -  renunciation, bodhicitta 
and the correct view of reality - are the e ssence of all the scriptures of the buddhas. 
 
Having obtained this human life with its leisure and opportunities, when our senses are complete 
and favourable conditions for study and practice pr evail, we must ensure that we place imprints 
of these three principal aspects of the path in our minds as it may be extrem ely difficult for us to 
do so in the future.  
 
Gungtang Rinpoche says that it would be excellen t if we are able to reflect  and meditate on 
these three principal aspects of the path in our dail y lives. At the very least, we should always pray 
and aspire to actualise them in our minds.    
I have given this advice before. We cannot simply  do nothing and expect these  three aspects to 
be actualised in our minds. Rather, we need to move our minds towards the three principal 
aspects of the path. It is too unrealistic, too gr eedy and arrogant to simply sit there and expect 
things to happen, on their own, without any effort on our part.  
 
Therefore, whenever we engage in  the activities of listening to and trying to understand the 
teachings, we must make sure that we place very  strong imprints on our mental continua. We are 
now examining the topic, bodhicitta or practisi ng the good heart. We should meditate and 
familiarise our minds with whatever we have ascertained from these teachings. 
 Whether the teachings will benefit us or not does  not depend on the teachings. It depends on 
how we apply them, whether we reflect on them  and mix the teachings with our minds.  We 
cannot expect the teachings, from their side, to ch ange our minds if we do not do anything with 
them. There are some people who think, “What is  the use of coming for teachings? The Dharma 
is not benefiting me.”  This is not the fault of the teachings but rather reflects their failure to 
relate the teachings to their minds.  His Holiness the Dalai Lama often mentions th at there is a noticeable difference between 
someone who accepts and practises the Dharma and someone who does no t. Why? The person 
who practises the Dharma is a happier person w h o  i s  m o r e  a b l e  t o  h a n d l e  d i f f i c u l t i e s  a n d  
problems when they  arise, as compared to someone who has no faith or Dharma. Someone who 
accepts the teachings should have the ability to apply the teachings for a  beneficial purpose and 
to use them to deal with problems and difficulties. 
 
I had been requested to talk a little bit on the Nyung Nay practice, especially on how to mix it 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program               CHAPTER VIII - CONCENTRATION  
 
291  
with whatever we have learnt so far about genera ting the altruistic intention. Gungtang Rinpoche 
says that if someone were to ask this question: “If there is a very evil person who has done a lot of 
bad things and accumulated a great deal of negati ve karma, what is the best and fastest way for 
this person to create the cause for and to achi eve enlightenment?” His reply would be, “The best 
practice for such a person would be the Nyung Nay.”  
 It was mentioned in the previous lesson that a single recitation of “Om Mani Padme Hum” 
definitely becomes a cause for us to experience happiness in our future lives.   Gungtang Rinpoche says that of all the different kinds of mantras and dharanis, the best one is 
the six-syllable mantra “Om Mani Padme Hum.” He  says that doing the Nyung Nay practice and 
reciting “Om Mani Padme Hum”  has inconceivable benefits like the sky.   His Holiness often says that reciting “Om Mani Padme Hum” is a very good practice. When we 
recite the mantras of Medicine Buddha, White Tara or Dzambala, our motivation for doing so is 
somehow always connected to  the affairs of this  life. We recite the Medicine Buddha mantra for 
good health or to get rid of sicknesses, we recite  the White Tara mantra to  clear life obstacles and 
for longevity and we recite the Dzambala mantra for wealth.   But when we recite “Om Mani Padme Hum” we do so with the motivation to benefit others and 
to develop a good heart. His Holiness said that it  is a very good thing to recite “Om Mani Padme 
Hum” because the motivation is very good and that is why we can say that “Om Mani Padme 
Hum” is probably the best of all the mantras.   Whatever we do, when it is mixed wi th the affairs of this life, it is  difficult for these activities to 
be Dharma. For anything to be Dharma, it canno t be mixed with grasping at the happiness of 
this life. All the valid texts say the same thing.   In the Nyung Nay sadhana, there is the practice  of self-generation as the deity and the front 
generation of the deity. If you have received the Great Chenrezig initia tion, on the basis of 
holding divine pride, you generate yourself as Chenrezig with clear appearance and you proceed 
with the rest of the practice.  The most important things to do in a Nyung Nay practice are:  
 (1) Generating divine pride of oneself as the deity with clear appearance.  (2) One should also be able to see one’s fellow participants in the Nyung Nay as the deity one has 
self-generated.   In this way, there is no basis for jealousy, competit iveness, pride, anger and so forth to arise. That 
is the ideal way of doing Nyung Nay.  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program               CHAPTER VIII - CONCENTRATION  
 
292  
 
The motivation for doing the Nyung Nay is to have  the thought of benefiting and helping others. 
The motivation should not be purely to purify sickne sses or spirit harms or should it be to fulfil a 
commitment, so that one is only doing the Nyung Nay out of obligation. Rather, the motivation 
for doing the Nyung Na should be to purify ou r minds of obscurations and negative karma in 
order to quickly achieve enlightenment for the benefi t of others. We usually do not  think in this 
big way but only consider limited goals such as ge tting rid of ill health and so on. Actually, there 
is no need to think of these small things. We simp ly focus on the big picture. When we have that 
kind of motivation, then all the small things, the obstacles and illn esses will be eliminated along 
the way, without our having to think about them.  
 Since the Nyung Nay is a Mahayana practice, it has to be done with the Mahayana motivation of 
benefiting others, without any self-interest. When we have the thought, “I am doing this to get 
rid of my obstacles,”  that is a selfish motiva tion. When the Nyung Nay is done with such a 
motivation, it is questionable whether the practi ce is Dharma or not. When the motivation is 
insincere and does not come from the heart, the whole practice is no longer  Dharma. Not only 
is it not Dharma, you have to spend two or three days suffering with no food and water, feeling 
tired and, perhaps, even generating anger.   So it is very important to try, as far as possi ble, to have the correct motivation for doing the 
practice. Of course, that  is not easy because our self-cherishing is very st rong. But the point is to 
try to have a good motivation as far as possible.   Relating the Nyung Nay to what we have studie d so far, you should take the opportunity to 
reflect on the faults of the self -cherishing attitude. You should investigate from every angle how 
your self-cherishing attitude is the source of all your  unwanted experiences, problems and 
suffering. You should also examine how cherishi ng others is the source of happiness.  
 During the Nyung Nay, you can star t by practising with the persons sitting on your left and right, 
thinking how you are all equal in the sense of  wanting happiness and not wanting suffering. 
Even if there had been some misunderstanding or conflict in the past with these people, think: 
“That person wants to be happy just like me. Like  me, that person does not want to suffer.”  On 
that basis, try to remove those feelings of rese ntment and aversion and try to help one another. 
 When you engage in the Nyung Nay practice, you do so with your body, speech and mind. 
Physically, you will probably be making many prostrations. You will be using your speech to 
recite the prayers and mantras. When you are reciti ng the mantras, it is not like ordinary speech. 
You should remember the power and the benefits of reciting the dharan i of Chenrezig. With 
your mind, you ward off the arising of anger and attachment for the durati on of the Nyung Nay.  
The essential thing is to do the practice, as far as possible, always with the thought to benefit 
others and to try to minimise the thoughts of jealousy, competitiveness and so forth. 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program               CHAPTER VIII - CONCENTRATION  
 
293  
 
Generating yourself as the deity and also seeing  the other participants as deities during the 
retreat means there should be no basis for anger to  arise, as anger should not be directed at a 
deity. Instead, you should cultivate  mutual resp ect and consideration for one another. If you can 
do this, then the practical benefit will be that yo u can continue to be fr iends with that person 
even after finishing the Nyung Nay. 
 
We had examined ways to cultiv ate jealousy, competitiveness an d pride after we had exchanged 
self and other.  
 We can meditate on a situation where there is a person we dislike, an enemy who is lower than 
us but who always wants to compete with us. Wh en that person competes with us out of his 
jealousy, we feel uneasy and unhappy.   
Another scenario is where the other party is equal to us and is competing with us. How does that 
makes us feel?  
 Finally, meditate on an enemy who is superior to us in terms of qual ities and status and who 
treats us with contempt and arro gance. How do we feel then?  
 These are the three different meditation methods put forth by some scholars:  
a) How do we feel when someone who is lower than us is jealous of us? 
b) How do we feel when someone who is equal to us competes with us? 
c) How do we feel when someone who is higher than us looks down on us? 
 On the basis of experiencing the feelings in these three different situations,  we  conclude, “I 
should not behave like that towards other people . I should not look down on or compete with 
them nor should I be jealous of them. I should no t do these things because I realise now that it 
will not make them feel good.” This is the conclusi on we should arrive at from these meditations.  
 Recognising that we are all the same in wa nting happiness and not wanting suffering, we 
generate this determination that we will not look  down on, compete in a negative way with or 
behave arrogantly towards others. This is a good  way of cultivating jeal ousy, competitiveness and 
pride.  By doing this,  it will reduce our nega tive actions of harming others and increase our 
beneficial actions.  Another alternative meditation approach is this:  
We take as the old “I”  the person who cherishes only himsel f i.e., the way we are now. In the 
context of the meditation from the text, this is the “I.”  
 
The “other” then refers to the new “I,”  the one who thinks only of the welfare of others and who 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program               CHAPTER VIII - CONCENTRATION  
 
294  
has abandoned all self-interest. This new “I” abides amongst  sentient beings. 
 On the basis then of exchanging “I” with “other,”  (i.e., the old “I” becomes the new “I”), the new 
“I”:  generates jealousy towards the old “I”,  
 generates pride towards the old “I” and  
 generates competitiveness toward the old “I” 
 
The new “I” is examining the faults of the old “I” from different angles. This is a method to see 
the faults of self cherishing because when a pers on who is devoid of self-cherishing sees someone 
who has self-cherishing, he will be able to see clea rly all the faults of that self-cherishing person. 
This meditation is another way of we akening the self-cherishing attitude.  
 
This way of cultivating jealousy, pride and compet itiveness is different from the earlier method. 
The earlier method will help us to stop harmin g others. This latter method will help us to  
“harm” (or reduce) our  self-cherishing attitude . But ultimately, both methods will produce the 
same results. 
Lesson 53   Chapter VIII - verse 176-187 
Gungtang Rinpoche reminds us that our bodies are like hotel rooms which we book and we stay 
in for a limited period of time. Yet, for the sake of this “borrowed” body, we do many things to 
protect, improve and make it happy. At the end of th e day, what does this  “I,” the guest of this 
hotel room that we cherish so much, get in return? How much real happiness has this guest 
experienced? What about the suffering and the pr oblems encountered by this “I”? We need to 
think about this.  
We grasp at the body as being the “self” or belo nging to the “self.” Based on these conceptions, 
we engage in many activities to ensure its happiness and freedom from suffering. But the 
suffering and problems persist and we never expe rience any everlasting ha ppiness. Therefore, by 
understanding  that our bodies are like hotel rooms, we should overco me our attachment to 
them.   
1’ Explaining the way to exchange self and other 
2’ The way to practice after having reflected on this exchange 3’ The way to practice application [of this attitude] 
a’ The actual 
b’ When practicing the application of exchanging  self and other, one should exert control over 
one’s mind 
1” The way to annihilate brazenness 
2” The disadvantages of sticking solely to one’s own benefit 
3” Examining the faults of the body 
a” The shortcomings of not knowing contentment 
(1) The disadvantages of craving after the body 
(2) The reasonableness of cultivating a non-attachment to body 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program               CHAPTER VIII - CONCENTRATION  
 
295  
b” The shortcomings of being inanimate 
c” The shortcomings of delusion 
(1) Being deluded about right and wrong 
(2) Being deluded about praise and defamation (3) Abandoning objections to that 
(4) Though craving after the body is the source of much wrongdoing, one 
must guard it in order to take the essence of the leisures and endowments 
4” Exerting control over the mind 
a” Turning back obstacles to virtue 
b” Developing the strength of effort in the antidote 
c” Placing oneself in one-pointed equipoise upon a virtuous focus 
(2) The reasonableness of cultivating a non-attachment to body 
(8,176 cd) 
However, if I do not depend on any (material) things, 
The exhaustion of my good fortune will be unknown. 
 
(8,177) 
Therefore, I shall never create an opportunity 
For the desires of the body to increase. 
For whatever I do not grasp as attractive, 
These are the best of all possessions. 
 
It is said that when we are able to live withou t any expectations or dependence  on our bodies 
and possessions, we will experience all excellen t things and our happiness will be inexhaustible. 
The point is to have few wants and de sires and to cultivate contentment. 
We are attached to our bodies, possessions, clot hing, food, jewellery and ornaments. When our 
desire for these things is not countered with  antidotes, our desire will only increase. 
 When we do not have the concept of grasping at  these things as valuable, desirable, rare and 
wonderful, then we will be easily contented. Re lying on a few simple possessions, we are less 
likely to be so attached to them  and we worry less about losing them. Even when they are lost, we 
will not be overly upset and at the time of  death, we will not cling to these things. 
 When we hanker after objects of rarity and great value, there is the suffering that comes from not 
being able to acquire them. Even when we manage to acquire these objects, protecting them is a 
problem and there is the attendant worry about lo sing them. At the time of death, we cannot 
depart peacefully because we cling to these th ings. There are accounts of people who take 
rebirths as snakes and cannibal spirits as a resu lt of their powerful clinging and attachment. 
 
What we need is less desire and more contentme nt. When we are able to live our lives by 
depending on things that make us contented easily  and that we have little attachment to, we will 
then experience real happiness and less mental turmoil. 
b” The shortcomings of being inanimate 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program               CHAPTER VIII - CONCENTRATION  
 
296  
(8.178) 
In the end (my body) will turn to dust; 
Unable to move (by itself), it wi ll be propelled by other (forces). 
Why do I grasp this unbearable 
And unclean form as "I"? 
 
(8,179) 
Whether it lives or whether it dies, 
What use is this  machine to me? 
How is it different from a clod of earth? 
O why do I not dispel this pride (of it being "I" and "mine")! 
 
We may agree that it is inappropriate to be atta ched to our possessions and  wealth but we may 
feel that it is acceptable to be attach ed to our bodies. This is not so. Why?  
 Because no matter how well we take care of the body, at the time of death, the body will be 
discarded in various ways, such as by cremation or burial where it will be consumed by vultures, worms or maggots. In the end, the body turns to  dust. We spend so much time and effort to 
pamper and sustain the body but at the time of death, it is of absolutely no use to us.  
 When we investigate further, we realise the body   is matter which cannot move  by itself. The 
agents that move the body is the subtle wind energy and the consciousness that rides on that 
wind. Without these agents, the body is immobile, like a rock or tree.   We had seen earlier how the body is actually made up of many filthy substances but we still hold 
the mistaken conception of seeing it as clean and pure and we develop many worries and fears 
with relation to its well-being. Whether we are dead  or alive, this filth-making machine is of no 
benefit to us.  It is, therefore, inappropriate to develop attachment to our bodies. Why is it like a 
machine? Because it cannot move on  its own. The body is like a piece of wood so there is no 
reason to be proud of it, thinking this is “my” body. Such pride should be dispelled. 
 
c” The shortcomings of delusion 
(1) Being deluded about right and wrong 
(2) Being deluded about praise and defamation 
(3) Abandoning objections to that 
(4) Though craving after the body is the source of much wrongdoing, one must guard it in order to take the essence of the leisures and endowments 
(1) Being deluded about right and wrong 
(8,180) 
Having accumulated suffering for no purpose 
Because of my honouring and serving this body, 
What use is attachment and anger 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program               CHAPTER VIII - CONCENTRATION  
 
297  
For this thing that is similar to a piece of wood? 
 
(8,181) 
Whether I am caring for my body in this way, 
Or whether it is being eaten by vultures, 
It has no attachment or ha tred towards these things— 
Why then am I so attached to it? 
 
Out of attachment for our bodies, we work to ac quire things like food and clothing, developing 
attachment for those we consider to be pleasant and attractive and on our side while generating 
hatred and anger towards those who oppose us. If that is the case, why ar e we attached to our 
bodies which are the bases for the generation of afflictions such as anger and attachment and the 
source of our problems and suffering in this and our future lives?   
From the side of the body, it will not show any a ppreciation or gratitude for the care we give it. 
And even when it is being fed to vultures or maggo ts, it  does not get angry.  Why then are we so 
worked up over this body that is apparently indi fferent to whether it is treated well or badly?  
(2) Being deluded about praise and defamation 
 
(8,182) 
If (my body) knows no anger when derided 
And no pleasure when praised, 
For what reason 
Am I wearing myself out like this? 
 
When people criticise our bodies for being too fa t or too skinny, the body  itself does not feel 
upset or angry. When someone praises the beauty of our bodies,   the body itself feels no delight.  
Since the body is matter, it cannot tell what is praise and what is criticism. It is, therefore, 
pointless for us to get so attached to winning pr aise for and avoiding criticism of our bodies.  
(3) Abandoning objections to that 
(8,183) 
-Yet I want this body of mine, 
Both it and I are friends- 
Since all beings want their bodies, 
Why do I not find joy in theirs? 
 
Even though we recognise that the body, from its own side, feels neither delight nor unhappiness 
nor understand the meaning of praise and criticism, we still feel, “This is my body. It is like a good friend and therefore, it is all right to protec t it, out of attachment.” Th is is how we think.   
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program               CHAPTER VIII - CONCENTRATION  
 
298  
 
If that is our justification, then everyone is th e same as us in cherishi ng their own bodies. Why 
are we not doing anything to protect the bodies o f  o t h e r s ,  t h i n k i n g  o f  t h e m  a s  “ o u r  b o d i e s ” ?  
Since the concept of “I” and “others” do not exis t from their own sides, when we analyse and try 
to find the “I” and the “other” we will not be ab le to do so. Therefore, we should protect the 
bodies of others as we do our own.  
(4) Though craving after the body is the source of much wrongdoing, one must guard it in order to 
take the essence of the leisures and endowments 
(8,184) 
Therefore, in order to benefit all beings 
I shall give up this body  without any attachment. 
Although it may have many faults, 
I should look after it while experiencing  (the results of my  previous) actions. 
 
We have established many reasons why it is inappropriate to be attached to our unclean bodies, which only cause us to create many negative action s in the course of taking care of and protecting 
it. Instead, we should dedicate our bodies to th e service of others and only protect them because 
we need to use them to help and benefit other sentient beings.  Just as a  carpenter or blacksmith takes great care of his tools because he relies on them for his work, likewise we should protect and take care of our bodies because we need to  use them to work for the benefit of others.  
 
It is said in Aryadeva’s Four Hundred Stanzas  that the body should be regarded as an enemy 
because it is the basis upon wh ich attachment and all unpleasant  things arise. True suffering 
refers to the appropriated physical and mental a ggregates, i.e., the body. But there is a need to 
protect the body because we use it to practise  the Dharma and to observe the vows we have 
t a k e n .  I f  w e  a r e  a b l e  t o  h a v e  a  l o n g  l i f e ,  w e  are able to use our bodies to accumulate a vast 
amount of merit.  
 
4” Exerting control over the mind 
a” Turning back obstacles to virtue 
b” Developing the strength of effort in the antidote c” Placing oneself in one-pointed equipoise upon a virtuous focus 
a” Turning back obstacles to virtue 
(8,185) 
So enough of this childish behaviour! 
I shall follow in the steps of the wise, 
And having recalled the advice concerning conscientiousness, 
I shall turn away sleep and mental dullness. 
 
I n  o r d e r  t o  d e v e l o p  c o n c e n t r a t i o n ,  w e  h a v e  t o  abandon the afflictions. From time without 
beginning, we had engaged in the “childish beha viour” of only caring for our friends and 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program               CHAPTER VIII - CONCENTRATION  
 
299  
supporters, working against enemies and foes and be ing absorbed in acquiring fame and fortune.  
 
Despite our “hard work,” no significant results ha ve been achieved and we have not attained any 
everlasting happiness. Enough is enough. Hencefor th, we should follow the instructions of the 
Buddha and be skilful and wise by adopting a lifestyle where we abandon non-virtue and 
cultivate virtue instead. We should also ensu re that our bodies, speech and minds are always 
abiding in conscientiousness by relying on mindfulness and vigilance. We should remember the 
advice given in Chapter 4 on conscientiousness and Chapter 5 on vigilance. Chapter 8 focuses 
on achieving concentration. To do that, we have  to abandon the five obstacles to meditative 
stabilization one of which is mentioned here - sleep and mental dullness (the others being 
excitement and regret, desire and attachment, anger and doubt). 
b” Developing the strength of effort in the antidote 
(8,186) 
Just like the compassionate Children of the Conqueror, 
I shall patiently accept what I have to do; 
For if I do not make a con stant effort day and night, 
When will my misery ever come to an end? 
 
We are exhorted here to develop the kind of co urage and determination the bodhisattvas had as 
we strive to develop concentratio n day and night. Liberation from suffering and misery cannot be 
achieved without such effort.   
c” Placing oneself in one-pointed equipoise upon a virtuous focus 
(8,187) 
Therefore, in order to dispel the obscurations, 
I shall withdraw my mind from mistaken ways 
And constantly place it in equipoise 
Upon the perfect object. 
 We need special insight to eliminate both the seeds of our afflictions (the obstructions to 
liberation) together with their predispositions (t he obstructions to omniscience). Before we can 
develop special insight, we need to realise calm abiding. In order to achieve calm abiding, we 
must first isolate our minds from all discursive  thoughts and distractions. In order to stop 
distractions, we have to isolate ourselves physic ally by abandoning the hustle and bustle of 
worldly  life. We must also isolate the mind by abandoning the five faults.  In the earlier module on the Lamrim, we had l ooked at the development of calm abiding by 
abandoning the five faults and cultivating the eigh t antidotes and the nine stages of calm abiding. 
These instructions and the need to achieve calm abiding are common to all the vehicles. What is 
uncommon here, in this text, is the way to cu ltivate calm abiding through the method of 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program               CHAPTER VIII - CONCENTRATION  
 
300  
exchanging self and other. This is uncommo n and is a feature of the great vehicle. 
b. The chapter’s name 
The name of the chapter is Teachi ng Absorption (or Concentration) 
 
The next chapter on wisdom is going to be challenging. In order to study this topic, we should 
generate the courage and determination to study it. If  we  leave it because it is difficult, then it 
will always remain so and it will never become easier by our avoiding the subject. We should 
remember the advice from the text itself, There is nothing whatsoever/Tha t is not made easier through 
acquaintance  (6, 14).  
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
301  
The Ninth Chapter: The Perfection of Wisdom 
Lesson 54   Chapter IX - verse 1 
3. Explaining the way to train in the remaining four perfections 
A The way to train in patience 
B The way to train in joyous effort 
C The way to train in the concentrations included in the common and uncommon calm 
    abidings 
D The way to train in wisdom- the nature of insight 
a Explaining the chapter’s material  
1) Teaching that one who wants to attain liberation must develop the wisdom 
    realizing suchness 
a) The topic in general  
b) The branch topics 
2) The methods by which one develops the wisdom realizing suchness 
3) Instructions on making effort to de velop that (realization of emptiness) 
b The chapter’s name 
 
In the prayer, Dependent Arising – A Praise of the Buddha  Lama Tsongkhapa says:  
Of the suffering existing in the world, 
its root is none other than ignorance. 
The understanding to kill this root 
you said is none other than dependent arising   
 
All our problems, misfortunes and the suffering of  birth, aging and death have their roots in 
ignorance. If ignorance is the root  of all our suffering, how do we rid ourselves of this ignorance? 
We must realise dependent origination, thro ugh which we recognise the emptiness of all 
phenomena.   
 
When we look at the four Buddh ist tenets, each of the tenets has their own way of explaining 
dependent origination at different levels of subtlety.  
 The subtlest explanation of dependent originatio n is the one taught by the Consequence Middle 
Way School (Prasangika-Madhyamika). According to th at school, all things are merely labelled or 
designated and arise through the force of conceptu ality. This is the subtlest level of dependent 
origination. Without understanding this level of dependent origination, we would not be able to 
get rid of the ignorance which is at the root of all samsaric suffering and we will continue to 
experience problems and difficulties.   What exactly then is ignorance? Each of the Buddhist tenets have their own way of positing what 
this is. Again, the lower tenets have a coarser w ay of looking at ignorance compared to the more 
subtle positions of the higher tenet systems.    
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
302  
When we look at ignorance at its subtlest level as  posited by Prasangika, this ignorance refers to 
the grasping at the self of pers on and grasping at the self of phenomena. By applying logic and 
reasoning, we arrive at this conclusion that  this is the subtlest level of ignorance.  
We conclude that that ignorance refers to the se lf-grasping ignorance. Its antidote then is a new 
kind of mind, a wisdom which realises how self  and  phenomena do not exist inherently. There 
is no way to uproot this self-grasping ignorance an d achieve liberation without this realisation. In 
order to generate this realisation, we have to  depend on studying the unmistaken treatises, 
scriptures and texts that teach the development of this wisdom. 
 
In Tenets, we learnt that the proponents of the Autonomous Middle Way School (Svatantrika-
Madhyamika) and the Mind Only Sc hool (Cittamatra) assert that one does not need to realise 
the lack of inherent existence of phenomena to achieve liberation. The proponents of the lower 
tenet systems - the Great Exposition School (Vai bhasika) and the Sutra School (Sautrantika) - 
assert that, in order to achieve li beration, it is sufficient to realise the absence of a self-sufficient 
substantially existent person.   Why do they assert that we do not have to real ise the lack of  inherent existence in order to 
achieve liberation? This is due to the way they posit the self-grasping ig norance. For them, the 
self-grasping ignorance is a conception grasping at  the self-sufficient substantially existent person. 
Unlike Prasangika, these proponents are unable to  posit an ignorance which is subtler than that 
and therefore, they cannot posit how phenomen a lack true existence, unlike Prasangika. 
Therefore, they assert that as long as we realise that the self-sufficient substantially existent person 
does not truly exist, then we have eliminated th e self-grasping ignorance and achieved liberation.  
 The final and highest tenet syst em asserts that realising the absence of the self-sufficient 
substantially existent person alone is insufficient fo r us to achieve liberation .  In order to achieve 
liberation, we need to generate the wisdom whic h realises how self and phenomenon do not exist 
inherently, because the level of ignorance posite d by the higher school is subtler than that 
posited by the lower tenets. Since the ignorance is subtler, a more powerful antidote is needed to 
overcome it.    Developing this wisdom which realises the lack of inherent existence of self and phenomena is 
extremely difficult.   We can look at the life story of  Lama Tsongkhapa. In reality, La ma Tsongkhapa is a buddha, the 
manifestation of the protectors of the three line ages, Avalokiteshvara, Manjushri, and Vajrapani. 
But, to the common appearance of his disciples, he  displayed applying great effort and hard work 
into realising the correct view of  emptiness. He made continuous  requests to Manjushri for all 
the scriptures and texts that he had studied to arise as instructions. In  particular, he made 
continuous, fervent, heart-felt requests to Manjushr i for blessings to be able to realise emptiness.  
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
303  
At one time, during a puja in a monastery, Lama  Tsongkhapa was reflecting on the meaning of 
the verse in the Heart Sutra , Form is empty; emptiness is form. Empti ness is not other than form. Form is 
also not other than emptiness. At that time, he was apprehending neither form nor emptiness. What 
appeared was just mere nothingness. He ente red into meditative equipoise on that mere 
nothingness. Someone had to come and inform  him when the puja ended. Arising from his 
meditative equipoise, he felt good and thought th at he had realised the correct view so he was 
very happy. Because he had the ability to co mmunicate freely with Manjushri, he asked 
Manjushri, “The view of emptiness that I had realised – is it according to the view of Prasangika 
or Svatantrika-Madhyamika?” Manjushr i answered that it was neither.  
  
Lama Tsongkhapa then asked Manjushri, “What should I do to realise emptiness?” Manjushri 
then advised Lama Tsongkhapa, “In order to real ise emptiness, you have to study continuously 
the Mahayana teachings, paying close attentio n particularly to the treatises composed by 
Nagarjuna and Chandrakirti.” 
 
Some people put great store in being able to see a deity.  That is not correct. In the case of Lama Tsongkhapa, he could talk to Manjushri at anyt ime but what did Manjushri tell him? His advice 
was simple: If Lama Tsongkhapa  wanted to realise emptiness, he had to study the great 
Mahayana treatises, especially the texts by Na garjuna and Chandrakirti. So, even for Lama 
Tsongkhapa, the advice was to study.   We should remember this particular advice given by Manjushri to Lama Tsongkhapa as it applies 
to us as well. It shows how important studying is. So, whenever we have  the time, we have to 
study.  Lama Tsongkhapa then engaged in both extens ive and intensive study of the great Mahayana 
treatises, especially the texts composed by Nagarj una and Chandrakirti, for a very long time. Yet, 
he still could not realise the correct view of emptiness. He thought, “I have no choice but to go to India to request instructions on realising th e correct view of emptiness from the two great 
masters, Maitripa and Nagabodhi.”   This was not a casual decision. By that time, his activities of preserving and spreading the 
Dharma were already very extensive. He had thousands of disciples who looked to him for 
guidance. Despite these responsibilities, he de cided he must go to India to receive these 
instructions.   Before he left for India, he met the great Maha siddha Lodrag Namkha Gy altsen from whom he 
received Lamrim teachings and who learnt of hi s plans to leave for India. He could not stop 
Lama Tsongkhapa from going since he had a very special relationship with and could 
communicate with Vajrapani di rectly,  he asked Vajrapani what would happen if Lama 
Tsongkhapa were to go to India. 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
304  
 
Vajrapani replied that Lama Tsongkhapa would a rrive in Bodhgaya and become an abbot there. 
The teachings would flourish like the sun rising in  the sky but if he left for India, he would not 
be able to return to Tibet, which would then be come a land of darkness. Vajrapani told Lodrag 
Namkha Gyaltsen to tell Lama Tsongkhapa not to worry about re alising emptiness as he would 
b e  a b l e  t o  s o  v e r y  q u i c k l y .  L o d r a g  N a m k h a  Gyaltsen conveyed Vajrapani’s message to Lama 
Tsongkhapa. This shows the working of karmic connection. Lama Tsongkhapa had connections 
with Manjushri but not with Vajrapani, so it shows that seeing one deity doesn’t necessarily 
mean seeing everyone.  
Lama Tsongkhapa wanted to go into retreat so  he asked Manjushri which was more beneficial: 
To go into solitary retreat or to bring all his di sciples with him? Manjushri said that it would not 
be beneficial to bring everyone along for the retr eat and gave him a list of eight pure disciples 
who should accompany him into retreat.   
Lama Tsongkhapa then travelled to Wolka in Ti bet with those eight disciples and engaged in 
retreat.  They practised intensely, day and night.  In particular Lama Tsongkhapa did purification 
practices such as prostrations to the 35 Buddhas an d so forth. When they were in retreat, they 
lived on juniper berries and endured great hard ship. One night, during the retreat, Lama 
Tsongkhapa dreamt of a fully ordained monk who told him, “I am Buddhapalita , a great Indian 
master.” He took a text and blessed Lama Tsongk hapa on the head three times. When he woke 
up the next day, someone gave him a text  co mposed by Buddhapalita, which Lama Tsongkhapa 
duly read.  
 When he reached chapter 18, which explained the nature of time, how it was   also merely 
imputed. Upon further examination, Lama Tson gkhapa  suddenly  realised how all phenomena 
are merely labelled (or imputed or designated) and how that does not contradict the presentation 
of cause and effect.   On the basis of this realisation - that while all phenomena are merely labelled by the mind, yet it 
is still valid to posit actions and effects - an unbelievable  faith in the Buddha arose in Lama 
Tsongkhapa. Having gained this ascertainmen t of the Buddha’s teaching, he was moved to 
compose the prayer, Dependent Arising – A Praise of the Buddha .  
 While we have some faith in the Buddha, in orde r to develop a very deep stable faith requires 
analysis and study of the Buddha’s teachings. Once  we  are able to ascertain the teachings, we 
will see the Buddha in a different light and reco gnise how amazing he is.  Without studying his 
teachings deeply, such faith is impossible.   When we examine the life story of Lama Tson gkhapa and the example he set, we see how 
important it is to make requests to one’s personal  deity. But that alone is not enough. It is also 
important to engage in purification practices and endure difficulties in order to purify the mind 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
305  
of its obscurations. But even doing this is no t enough. We need to ex amine continuously and 
study the Great Treatises, especially the teaching s on emptiness. Still, this is not enough. We 
need a practice that combines all these three ac tivities. When we can fo llow the example of Lama 
Tsongkhapa, there is some hope that  we can realise emptiness one day. 
 
Dependent Arising – A Praise of the Buddha  which Lama Tsongkhapa comp osed after he ascertained 
the meaning of dependent origination is a very  special prayer which bestows great blessings. 
Amongst the many treatises and texts on emptiness, this is a short presentati on on the subject. In 
conjunction with studying Chapter 9 on wisdom, I propose to examine also a few lines from this 
prayer so that by the time we complete Chapter 9,  we will also complete studying this prayer. 
 It is challenging and difficult to study empt iness and wisdom. The most important thing to 
remember is not to be discouraged. If we give up studying this because it is too difficult, then we 
will never complete these studies. It is impo rtant to pray for success but prayers alone cannot 
help if we do not study hard. When we understand  the importance of and how essential it is to 
study hard, we will put in the effort.   
1) Teaching that one who wants to attain liberation must develop the wisdom realizing suchness 
a) The topic in general 
(9,1) 
The Muni taught all these branches 
For the purpose of wisdom. 
 Some people may have the mistak en notion that one needs to re alise emptiness only to achieve 
enlightenment in order to pacify the suffering of  others. However, the realisation of emptiness is 
unnecessary for the purpose of pacifying one’s ow n suffering. This is refuted by Prasangika.  
 Ignorance is asserted to be the root of cyclic existence. Its su btlest form is the conception 
grasping at phenomena as inherently existent (o r established by way of their own character). To 
rid ourselves of this ignorance, we need to generate the mind that realises that self and 
phenomena do not exist inherently.  This was taught by Nagarjuna.  
There are different ways of explaining the word branches  in the first line of Verse 1: 
(1) “Branches” refers solely to the preceding Ch apter 8 on teaching absorption as a branch to 
developing special insight focussing on emptiness.  We can connect absorption and special insight 
because, in order to develop special insight, we need to develop absorption or calm abiding.  
 (2) “Branches” refer to all the previous eight chapters, which are taught as branches to developing 
special insight focussing on emptiness. The text  began with the benefi ts of bodhicitta, the 
methods of developing it and then goes on in to a presentation of the other perfections. 
  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
306  
The question then arises: “Is it necessary to develop bodhicitta and practise all the other 
perfections in order to achieve the wisdom real ising emptiness?” The answer is no. For example, 
arhats and solitary realizers have definitely deve loped the wisdom realising emptiness but they do 
not have bodhicitta.  
 What then is the reason behind asserting that th e “branches” refers to a ll the preceding chapters? 
This is because we need the realisation of bodhici tta together with the practice of the first five 
perfections in order to develop the wisdom realis ing emptiness that has the power to act as the 
antidote to the obstruct ions to omniscience.  
 We need the wisdom realising emptiness to get ri d of both the obstructions to liberation, (the 
afflictions and their seeds) and the obstructions to omniscience. But the former can be overcome 
without the support of a great collection of merit while to eliminate the obstructions to 
omniscience, we need the support of a great accumulation of merit. It is the same realisation of 
emptiness but one has the power to overcome th e obstructions to omniscience and the other 
does not. The difference lies in the collection of merit.  
b) The branch topics 
(9, 1 cd) 
Therefore, those who wish to pacify suffering 
Should generate wisdom. 
 We are not saying that the Buddha and the arha t have the same level of realisation but the 
nature of that realisation is the same – a mind that realises emptiness directly is a mind that 
realises emptiness without the medium of a ment al image. The Buddha can see far distances but 
the arhat cannot. This is because the Buddha ha s abandoned the obstructions to omniscience 
whereas the arhat has not. This is  known as one of as the four ca uses of knowing that is present 
in the Buddha. That is why the arhat are not able to see the same things as the Buddha. 
Lesson 55   Chapter IX - verse 1-4 
3. Explaining the way to train in the remaining four perfections 
A The way to train in patience 
B The way to train in joyous effort C The way to train in the absorptions included in the common and uncommon calm abidings 
D The way to train in wisdom- the nature of insight 
a Explaining the chapter’s material  
1) Teaching that one who wants to attain liberation must develop the wisdom 
realizing suchness 
2) The methods by which one develops the wisdom realizing suchness 
a) A presentation of the two truths 
i) The actual  
1' The division of the two truths  
2' The definitions 
a' Refuting other systems 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
307  
b' Positioning our own systems 
3' Identifying the person who resolves that 
a' Divisions drawn in terms of the persons who want to resolve 
the two truths. 
b' Explaining the feature of intelligence 
ii) Abandoning the objection that the need for emptiness has no power 
b) Establishing that even someone who wants to attain mere liberation must 
realize emptiness 
c) An extensive explanation of the reasoning establishing emptiness 
3) Instructions on making effort to de velop that (realization of emptiness) 
b The chapter’s name 
 
When we look at the example set by Lama Tsongk hapa in his life story, we see how extremely 
important it is to make requests continuously to one’s deity and  to strive in accumulating merits 
and purifying obscurations in order to have some su ccess in our practice, especially if we aspire to 
realise emptiness. Therefore, when we recite the Heart Sutra , the guru yoga of Lama Tsongkhapa, 
the prayer, Dependent Arising - A Pr aise of  the Buddha  and so on, we should recite them with the 
motivation of creating the causes for us to complete our studies and to accumulate merit. 
 
When we make requests to our personal deity, we should do so by seeing the deity as inseparable from our root guru. This supplication should be made with single-pointed devotion as shown in 
the Guru Puja (Verse 53):  
You are my guru, you are my yidam,  
You are the dakinis an d Dharma protectors. 
From now until enlightenment I shall seek no other refuge than you, 
In this life, the bardo and all future lives,  
Hold me with your hook of compassion; Free me from samsara and nirvana’s fears, Grant all attainments, Be my constant friend and gu ard me from interferences. 
 We see here that the supplication to the guru-deity is  not only to be cared for in this life but also 
in the intermediate state and all future lives to come.  In the monasteries we recite many prayers, sometimes doing so for one to two hours. The purpose of doing so many prayers is to accumula te merit for success in our debating and studies. 
Sometimes, we even recite the Praises to 21 Taras  70 to 80 times. By comparison, therefore, what 
we recite in  class is nothing as the duration is very short. I thought it is good to give you some 
perspective. There are some students who may wo nder why we are reciting so many prayers and 
they may feel bored. There are others who think re citing mantras is more beneficial than reciting 
prayers. Reciting prayers are  definitely beneficial . There are only two possi bilities: Recite mantras 
or prayers or doing both. When you hold the posi tion that one does not benefit, then you also 
have to say that the other is also useless. This is my own view on this matter. I think that reciting 
mantras or reciting prayers have the same benefit. 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
308  
 
Dependent Arising – A Praise of the Buddha 
1 
Seeing and speaking of dependent arising, He was wisdom supreme, teacher supreme. 
I bow to him who knew and taught 
the all-conquering dependent arising.  2 
Of the suffering existing in the world, 
its root is none other than ignorance. The understanding to kill this root you said is none other than dependent arising 
 
3 
How could those of intelligence not see 
dependent arising as the heart of your doctrine. 
Where is greater praise  of you, therefore, 
than in praise of dependent arising? 
 
I n  v e r s e  2 ,  L a m a  T s o n g k h a p a  s a y s  i g n o r a n c e  i s  the root of all problems and troubles in this 
world, which can be averted by understanding de pendent origination as taught by the Buddha. 
He then questions how the intelligent can fail to see that dependent origination is the essence of 
the Buddha’s teachings?  The best way of prai sing the Buddha then is through understanding 
that he  was the one who taught dependent origination. 
 We do not like suffering. The root of all undesira ble experiences is ignorance. The Buddha is the 
one who points out, “If you do not remove this ig norance, you will not be able to free yourself 
from suffering.”  Realising this, we develop a very  strong faith in the Buddha because it is very 
rare and difficult to find a teacher who correctly id entifies the root of all our problems as well as 
shows us the antidote to get rid of that root. Wh en we fully understand th is, then a very special 
kind of faith is generated in the Buddha.  In our daily lives, we think of the person who sh ows us how to achieve our goals as very kind and 
our benefactor. In the same way, the Buddha shows us how we can get rid of all our suffering by 
teaching us dependent arising. When we remember  this, we will always recall the kindness of the 
Buddha.    
 
4 
“Whatever depends on circumsta nce is empty of nature.” 
What greater teaching is there than this! 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
309  
The foolish, however, seize on it  
and only tighten chains of extreme views, while for the wise it cuts e ntangled nets of fabrication 
 
5 This teaching is not seen in the works of others,  
the title of Teacher, therefore, is yours alone.  
Given to others it is but the hollow flattery 
of a fox being hailed a lion.  
 
Dependent origination means that all phenomena that have come into existence are dependent 
on causes and conditions. Because all phenomena ar ise in this way, they are “empty” of inherent 
existence. This is the most supreme of all instructions. 
 
Whatever depends on circumstance is empty of nature . These are unbelievably powerful words. Think 
about them. Whatever depends on circumstance :  Whatever phenomena, as long as it arises from 
circumstance (or conditions) are not independen t and are “empty” of inherent existence. The 
words have the power to give us the proper understanding - Whatever depends on conditions is 
empty of inherent existence. It is empty of inherent existence beca use it is a dependent 
origination. Because things are dependentl y originated, they dep end on conditions. 
Therefore, they are empty of inherent existence . One generates a very sp ecial kind of faith in 
the Buddha because he is the one who shows the correct way for establishing the meaning of 
emptiness. 
 Lama Tsongkhapa composed this prayer as an ex pression of his faith in  the Buddha because he 
himself ascertained this teaching of the Buddha -  that whatever is dependently arisen cannot 
exist inherently. Because things cannot exist in herently, that means th ey actually exist by 
depending on other factors -  they are dependent or igination. In the same w ay, in order for us to 
develop any special kind of faith in the Buddha, we also have to understand the importance of 
this statement, Whatever depends on circumstance is empty of nature , and the logic and reasoning 
employed. When we are able to develop some sort  of experience, then at that time we would 
probably develop a strong and special faith in the Buddha.  
(9,1) 
The Muni (the Subduer) ta ught all these branches 
For the purpose of wisdom 
 
In the last lesson, we examined th e two interpretations of the word, branches .  
One version took branches  to refer only to the preceding chap ter on developing concentration as 
an essential preliminary to the developing of special insight focussing on emptiness.   
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
310  
The alternative interpretation was that branches  referred to all the preceding chapters because 
only the practice of bodhicitta  with the five perfections will generate the wisdom realising 
emptiness powerful enough to act as an anti dote to the obstructio ns to omniscience. 
 
(9,1 cd) 
Therefore, those who wish to pacify suffering 
Should generate wisdom (wisdom realizing emptiness) 
 
 
2) The methods by which one develops the wisdom realizing suchness 
a) A presentation of the two truths 
i) The actual  
1' The division of the two truths 
(9,2) 
The conventional ("thoroughly obscuring" ) and the ultimate ("highest meaning") 
Are asserted to be the two truths 
 
The words in brackets are literal translations of the Tibetan terms which are translated in English 
as the  conventional and the ultimate for simplicity’s sake.  
All existent phenomena (or objects of knowledge) ar e either an ultimate or conventional truth.  
 
When we look at the presentation of the basis, the path and the result:  
 on the basis, the two truths are asserted to be on e entity but different isolates.  This means that, 
although by nature they are one entity, concep tually, we can isolate them into two separate 
things.  on the path, the mind that realis es both truths go together.  
at the time of the result, they will achiev e the form and the truth bodies together.  
 
2' The definition (of the two truths) 
a' Refuting other systems 
b' Positioning our own systems 
 
(9,2 cd) 
The ultimate are not the sphere of activity of the intellect 
The intellect is said to be "thoroughly obscuring." 
 
Some scholars assert that the ultimate truth is not an object of and cannot be realised by the 
mind, be it a non-conceptual  or conceptual mind because objects realised by the mind are 
necessarily conventional truths. This is how they explain, The ultimate are not the sphere of activity 
of the intellect,  – because the mind is thoroughly obscuring , which means that any object realised by 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
311  
the consciousness has to be a conventional truth. The intellect  refers to the mind (or 
consciousness) with dualistic appearance. 
 
Our own system does not accept this viewpoint. Inst ead, it asserts that the  ultimate truth is the 
object of the wisdom of the meditative equipoise of  the superior beings, i.e., the ultimate truth is 
what the superior beings realise when they are in  meditative equipoise focussing on emptiness.   
 
An illustration of an ultimate truth would be (1 ) the emptiness of the tr uly existent person and 
(2) the emptiness of the truly existent aggregates. Why are they not within the sphere of activity 
of the intellect (keeping in mind the intellect here  refers to the mind with dualistic appearance)? 
This ultimate truth, such as the two illustrations,  can only be directly realised by a consciousness 
that do not possess any dualistic appearance. They  are directly realised by the valid cognizer 
through the subsidence of all dualistic appearances, i.e., without any duality. 
 
On the other hand, conventional truths are directly  realised by a consciousness that has dualistic 
appearance. Illustrations of conventional truths  will be (1) the person and (2) the aggregates. 
They are conventional truths because they are dire ctly realised by a mind that possesses dualistic 
appearance. They are directly realised by a vali d cognizer without the subsidence of dualistic 
appearance, i.e., the object realised appears separate from the subject. 
 
As long as the phenomenon that  w e  a r e  c o n c e r n e d  w i t h  i s  a  c o n v e n t i o n a l  t r u t h ,   w h e n  t h a t  
object is realised, it is always realised with duality and because  duality remains, that phenomenon is called a conventional truth.  On the other hand, when a valid cognizer directly realises an ultimate truth, he does so without 
any duality. When an ultimate truth is realised, there is no  feeling of the object and subject 
being separate. This does not mean they become one,  but it is like water being mixed with water.  
 
3' Identifying the person who resolves that  
a' Divisions drawn in terms of the persons who want to resolve the two truths 
 (9, 3) 
With respect to them, worldly beings are seen 
To be of two types: yogis and common people. 
 
Worldly being  is the translation for the Tibetan term, jig ten , which literally means dependent on the 
transitory  and, in this context, refers to the person.  Jig means disintegrating (or transitory) and 
refers to the five aggregates. Ten means dependent.  
 
When jig and ten are put together, the words have the powe r to  help us  understand the nature 
of the self, that the self is merely  designated upon the 5 aggregates. 
 
Jig ten means person which is divided here in to two types - the yogis and the common people. 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
312  
The yogis refer to those who have realised the em ptiness of true existence. They have achieved 
the concentration which is the union of calm abid ing and special insight focusing on emptiness. 
Common people refer to those wh o expound that phenomena are tr uly existent. This is one way 
of differentiating between yogis and the common people.  
 In some other commentaries, the yogis refer to th ose who have achieved the wisdom arising from 
hearing, reflection and meditation on the absence of inherently existence. 
 By analysing the root text and Gyaltsab Je’s commentary on it, the common people here would 
refer to all the non-Buddhists who assert true exis tence and  includes the proponents of the three 
lower tenet systems who assert that phenomena exist truly. 
 
b' Explaining the feature of intelligence  
 
(9, 3 cd) 
Among them, worldly common people 
Are harmed by worldly yogis. 
(9,4)  
Also yogis, due to differences in their intellect. 
Are respectively harmed by the higher 
 
 Among them, worldly common people  are harmed by worldly yogis : Worldly common people  refers to those 
proponents who expound that phenomena exist trul y. The yogis refer to those who expound that 
phenomena do not exist inherently. That is how common people are harmed by the yogis. 
 There are proponents of non-Buddh ist tenets who assert that ther e is a permanent, unitary and 
independent self or person. That assertion ca n be discredited by the logic and reasoning 
employed by the Buddhist tenets. In real ity, such a self does not exist.   
 When we look at the assertions  of the Great Exposition Sch ool (Vaibhasika) and the Sutra 
School (Sautrantika), they assert external object s and partless particles. The assertion of partless 
particles is refuted by the reasoning of the next higher school, the Mind Only School 
(Cittamatra).  Cittamatra, in turn, assert that  other powered (or impermanent) phenomena truly 
exist. That assertion, in turn, is “harmed” by th e logic and reasoning employed by the next higher 
schools, the Middle Way schools (Madhyamika).  When a yogi looks at the assertio n of the lower tenets, he sees many problems and faults. This is 
what it means when we say, W orldly common people are harmed by worldly yogis.  
  
Amongst the yogis, do they harm each other? Th e answer is yes. This is shown in the first two 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
313  
lines of verse 4, Also yogis, due to differences in their inte llect/Are respectively harmed by the higher. 
 
When someone progresses along the grounds, then  whatever qualities he develops on that 
ground will outshine the qualities of those on the lower grounds. When we compare the person 
on the path of preparation to the person on the path of accumulation, the person on the path of 
preparation “harms” the person on the path of accumulation. “Harm” here means outshining in 
terms of qualities.  
 When  we compare bodhisattvas from the Mahayana path of seei ng up to the seventh ground, 
these bodhisattvas outshine the hearer and  solitary  realiser  arhats by way of their lineage. The 
bodhisattvas on the three pure grounds- 8
th, 9th and 10th grounds - outshine the hearer and 
solitary realiser arhats by way of the strength of their minds and realisations. 
 
In essence, the mind which realises the ultimate truth (or emptiness) is the mind that can harm 
anything. 
 In the future, if we have time, we will see ho w the proponents of Buddhist tenets refute the 
assertion that there is a permanent, unitary, in dependent self. Sautrantika asserts that there is 
such a thing as a partless particle , a collection of which comes toge ther to form coarse objects. 
We have to see how this  assertion is refuted by the proponents of Cittamatra. They, in turn, 
assert that the consciousness is truly existent an d they also assert the existence of self-knowers. 
We also have to see how these two assertions are refuted by the proponents of Prasangika.  
 If we accept the existence of partless particles, does  it necessarily mean that they inherently exist? 
Not necessarily, because Bhavaviveka, a propon ent of the Svatantrika-Madhyamika, asserts 
partless particles but, at the same time, he  asserts that they do not exist truly. 
 If it is a partless particle, does it mean it has to  b e  i n h e r e n t l y  e x i s t e n t ?  I f  i t  i s  a s s e r t e d  t h a t  a  
partless particle is necessarily truly existent, how is that established? 
Lesson 56   Chapter IX - verse 4-5 
D The way to train in wisdom- the nature of insight 
a Explaining the chapter’s material  
1) Teaching that one who wants to attain liberation must develop the wisdom realizing 
suchness 
2) The methods by which one develops the wisdom realizing suchness 
a) A presentation of the two truths 
i) The actual  
ii) Abandoning the objection that the need for emptiness has no power 
1’ The actual  
2’ Abandoning the supposed harm to that 
b) Establishing that even someone who wants to attain mere liberation must realize 
emptiness 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
314  
c) An extensive explanation of the reasoning establishing emptiness 
3) Instructions on making effort to de velop that (realization of emptiness) 
b The chapter’s name 
 
Whenever you deal with more challenging to pics, you must pay attention right from the 
beginning of the class. When you are distracted, you will probably get nothing from the session 
because the material is all inter-connected. Nothin g much can be done if you come to class and 
you are really tired.  But the point is the more you concentrate, the more  you pay attention, the 
more you will learn. At the very least, you should  try to extract the essence of what was taught. 
 
When you have been attending teachings for so me time, especially those who have attended 
many teachings, you may be present physically but th e mind is distracted.  It is like that, isn’t it? 
When you listen to songs, the mind is always co ncentrated but when you listen to the teachings, 
the mind is easily  distracted. Over time, your attitude towards listening to the teachings becomes 
more flippant and that is not good. Sometimes, yo u  may console yourself by thinking: “It is all 
right. It doesn’t matter whether I understand or no t. I will try to be better in the next lesson.” 
This may work but I think most of  the time, things do not really  work out this way. Whenever 
you are at any teachings, you have to make a pledge  to yourself: “I’ll try my best to listen and pay 
attention to what is being said.”   There are also students who have unrealistic expectations. They ex pect to understand everything 
they hear there and now. This is impossible.  Wh at is needed here is perseverance. With those 
expectations, when they do not  understand a fe w words, they get upset and  uptight. This is 
pointless. If you  really want to learn, then you must persevere.  
 I am not going to say this over and over again be cause it is not very pleasant for the ears. It 
probably burns your ears! The point is whenever you are dealing with a difficult topic, please try 
your best to listen and pay attention.  
 
Dependant Arising – A Praise of the Buddha  
4 
“Whatever depends on circumsta nces is empty of nature.” 
What greater teaching is there than this! 
The foolish, however, seize on it and only tighten chains of extreme views, 
While for the wise it cuts e ntangled nets of fabrication. 
 
For some, the teachings on dependent originatio n binds them to cyclic existence while for 
others, these  teachings liberate them from samsara.  The proponents of Vaibhasika and Sautrantika assert: “Phenomena arise from causes and conditions and because of this, they exist inherent ly.” This grasping at phenomena as inherently 
existent is the self grasping ignorance and, under its  power, we take rebirth in cyclic existence. 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
315  
This grasping at inherently existent phenomena bi nds us to and prevents us from getting out of 
cyclic existence. 
 
For the proponents of Prasangika, with the same understanding that phenomena arise in 
dependence on causes and conditions, they conc lude that this means that phenomena do not 
exist inherently, because they are dependently aris en. This understanding of  the lack of inherent 
existence of phenomena (this view of emptiness) helps the proponents of Prasangika to cut the 
entangled nets of extreme views and the root of cyclic existence.  
 
In the previous lesson, we learnt that there we re two types of persons: the common people and 
the yogis. The yogis harmed (refuted) the common people and also harmed one another. We also 
saw how the Buddhist tenets harmed the non-Buddhis t tenets by employing logic and reasoning.  
We are not saying that all the assertions of the non-Buddhist tenets are incorrect. The Buddhist 
tenets seek only to refute thos e assertions which do not accord with reality and are mere mental 
fabrications.    We looked at how one Buddhist tenet system ca n refute another Buddhist tenet system. Again, 
not all the assertions of a tenet system are re futed. For example, Vaib hasika and Sautrantika 
assert that there are coarse objects formed out of  partless particles. This specific assertion is 
refuted by the next higher school,  Cittamatra , by the application of logic and reasoning. 
Cittamatra is not refuting everything that Sautrantik a asserts. In the same way, some assertions by 
Cittamatra, such as their positing that other-po wered phenomena are truly existent, are  refuted 
by the highest school, Prasangika which asse rts that phenomena do not exist truly.  
 The higher Buddhist tenets do no t look down on the lower Buddh ist tenets and try to refute 
every assertion they make. Rather, understanding th e assertions of the lowe r schools helps us to 
understand the assertions of the higher schools.   For example, with regards to the view of 
selflessness, Vaibhasika and Sautrantika refute the non-Buddhist assertion that there is such a 
thing as a permanent, unitary and independent se lf. By using logic and reasoning, they assert 
coarse selflessness as the emptiness of a perman ent, unitary and independent self and subtle 
selflessness as the emptiness of a self-sufficient, substantially existent person. These assertions are 
accepted by the higher tenets. But as long as there is a valid cognizer who realises the faults of an 
assertion, then the higher tenets woul d refute that particular assertion. 
 Regardless of whether one is a Buddhist or non-Buddhist or a proponent of a certain philosophical view or not, it is accepted there is  an “I” “me’’ or “self” that desires happiness and 
does not desire suffering. We do not need to empl oy logic or reasoning to prove the existence of 
such a “self.” Even an insect has a mind that wa nts to be happy and does not want to suffer.  
 Why are there so many varying vie ws of the nature of this “I” th at desires happiness? Basically, 
because there are two groups of people - those who are interested to analyse what is this “I” who  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
316  
wants happiness and not suffering. Then, there is another group who is completely disinterested 
in such analysis and investigation.  
 
When we look at the former grou p, this can be further sub-divi ded into Buddhist tenet holders 
(which again can be divided into different  levels) and non-Buddhist tenet holders.  
 
Let us look at the non-Buddhists who analyse this  “I” who wants to be happy and does not want 
to suffer. To them, applying their logic and reason ing, they conclude that  this “I”/”self”  who 
wants to be happy is permanent, unitary (i.e., do es not depend on parts) and independent (i.e., 
does not arise through the force of causes and conditions). They are unable to come up with 
something more profound than that.    When we look at our own beliefs, our own minds, we are in no position to debunk this assertion 
of the non-Buddhists. How do we look at ourselve s? We think that the “I” of this evening is 
exactly the same person as the “I” of this mo rning. We cannot see the difference between the 
two.   For the non-Buddhists and those of us  who believe that there is a next life, it is the “self” or “I” 
that moves on to the next life. Since this is the ca se, there must be some continuity, so it must be 
the same “I” that moves from one life to anothe r without any significant changes. Therefore, the 
“I” cannot be impermanent. It must be the same “I ” that moves from life to life and that “I” is 
therefore permanent. That is why proponents of non-Buddhist tenets assert that the person/self 
is permanent.  Proponents of Buddhist tenets find this asse rtion unacceptable. When we apply logic and 
reasoning, we can prove that the self/person is necessarily impermanent. The “I” we were this 
morning is different from the “I” we are no w. The “I” therefore is not permanent but 
impermanent. How else can we refute the existenc e of a permanent self/person? This is what we 
have to learn and analyse. This is how yogis ha rm the common people by refuting their beliefs  
through logic and reasoning.  
ii) Abandoning the objection that the need for emptiness has no power 
1’ The actual  
(9, 4 cd) 
By way of analogies accepted by both. 
Because unanalyzed, [one engages] for the sake of the result. 
 
(9, 5) 
Since the worldly see things and 
Conceive them to be perfectly real, 
Not illusion-like; it is here 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
317  
That yogis and worldly beings debate. 
 
What happens when Prasangika refutes the asse rtions of the schools below it (Vaibhasika, 
Sautrantika, Cittamatra and Svatantrika-Madhyam ika) through their logic and reasoning? The 
proponents of the tenets below Prasangika re spond with their counter-arguments against the 
logic used by Prasangika.  
 
Prasangika: Asserts that all phenomena do not exist inherently.  
 
The lower tenets: They have  not proven their case 
 
Prasangika: We have “ by way of analogies accepted by both.”  
 
“Both ” here refers to the proponents of Prasangi ka and the proponents of the lower tenets, 
who assert true existence. Both groups accept that analogies such as dreams and reflections 
are falsities (unreal). 
  
A vase does not exist inherently. It  is a falsity, like a reflection 
in a mirror.  
 The lower tenets:   If phenomena do not exist inhere ntly, there is no purpose to 
practising the perfections because there is no inherently existent Buddha, there is no inhe rently existent enlightenment. 
If something does not inherently exist, it does not exist at all 
and if it does exist, it must exist inherently.  
Prasangika:  Because unanalyzed, [one engages] for the sake of the result . 
When phenomena are left unanalys ed, they still exist  at the 
level of being merely imputed (or designated) by name. We should train in the causes of enlightenment by practising generosity and the other perfec tions in order to achieve the 
goal of enlightenment through understanding that all phenomena are merely labelled by the mind and are mental conceptions. All phenomena are like illusions.  
The lower tenets:  If something arises in dependence on causes and conditions, 
that phenomenon exists inherent ly. For example, fire has the 
ability to and its function is to burn naturally.  From the side of the fire, it has the potential to burn. This is 
not imputed or labelled by the mind. We can directly perceive 
this – that fire burns and has the potential to do so from its 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
318  
own side.     
 
Prasangika:  Since the worldly see things and/ Conceive them to be perfectly 
real,/Not illusion-like; it is here /That yogis and worldly beings debate . 
 
We both can directly perceive (o r cognise) in a valid way that 
functioning things (such as fire) have a potential to perform 
their function (i.e., to burn). This is the common position we 
share. However, you grasp at the fire’s potential to burn as real 
and existing inherently.   This is, in fact, mental fabrication. You are unable to comprehend that the fire’s potential to burn is illusory and does not exist inherently. We real ise that the fire’s potential to 
burn is merely labelled (or designated). From its own side, the fire is “empty” of its potential to burn and because of that, it 
exists like an illusion. We realise that but you do not.  
Lesson 57   Chapter IX - verse 6-7 
D The way to train in wisdom- the nature of insight 
a. Explaining the chapter’s material 
1) Teaching that one who wants to attain liberation must develop the wisdom realizing suchness 
2) The methods by which one develops the wisdom realizing suchness 
a) A presentation of the two truths 
i) The actual ii) Abandoning the objection that the need for emptiness has no power 
1’ The actual 
2’ Abandoning the supposed harm to that 
a’ A general refutation of the proponents of true existence such as the 
Sautrantikas 
1” Refuting the harm by means of direct perception 
2” Refuting the harm by means of scripture 
a” Showing the scriptures that teach compounded phenomena 
and impermanence etc. to be [scriptures of] interpretive 
meaning 
b” Refuting that they are [scriptures of] definitive meaning 
c” Abandoning contradictions to that 
b’ A refutation of the Cittamatra position in particular 
c’ Abandoning the consequence that even the Madhyamaka’s need for the 
path realizing emptiness has no power 
b) Establishing that even someone who wants to attain mere liberation must realize 
emptiness 
c) An extensive explanation of the reasoning establishing emptiness 
3) Instructions on making effort to de velop that [realization of emptiness] 
 
The prayer, Dependent Arising – A Praise of the Buddha , points out that, for some people, the 
teachings on dependent arising become causes fo r them to tighten the ch ains of extreme views 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
319  
and to get stuck in cyclic existence.  For  th e wise, however, the same teachings become the 
causes for them to cut the root of cy clic existence and achieve liberation. 
 
Relating that verse to our root text, we saw ho w people can be divided into  yogis and common 
worldly people. For the latter, dependent arisin g becomes the cause for them to be bound to 
cyclic existence. But the same teachings on dependent arising be come the cause for the yogis to 
free themselves from cyclic existence. Only  the Buddha taught thes e pure teachings on 
dependent arising  and that is why the Buddha should be our only refuge.  
 
5 This teaching is not seen in the works of others,  
the title of Teacher, therefore, is yours alone. Given to others it is but the hollow flattery of a fox being hailed as a lion.   
 
6 Greatest of teacher! Greatest protector! Speaker supreme! Guide supreme! I bow to the teacher of dependent arising.  
 The presentation of dependent arising establishes the lack of inherent ex istence. These teachings 
cannot be found in non-Buddhist traditions. Lama Tsongkhapa has such strong stable faith in 
the Buddha because of his realisation that the Bu ddha is the only one who has taught correctly 
the nature of reality with his faultless presenta tion of dependent arising. That is why Lama 
Tsongkhapa calls the Buddha the perfect teache r and why he accepts the Buddha as his sole 
refuge.    
Just as there are people who may call a fox, a lion, likewise, there are those  who consider 
founders of non-Buddhist traditions to be valid objects of refuge, even though those founders do 
not possess the qualities of a spiritual guide or object of refuge.    The Buddha is the only valid teacher who can sh ow the path to those who desire to achieve 
liberation. Seeing this, Lama Tson gkhapa expresses his great joy: Greatest of teachers! Greatest 
protector! Speaker supreme! Guide supreme!  
 In this context, the Bu ddha is the greatest of teachers  because he is someone who shows the path 
to liberation.   The Buddha is our protector  because he has the power to prot ect us from the sufferings of the 
lower realms and cyclic existence.  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
320  
The Buddha is the speaker supreme  because he has taught the meaning of dependent arising in 
an unmistaken way.    
 
The Buddha is the supreme guide  because he guides us not only in this life but also in the 
intermediate states and all our future lives, i.e., he guides us from life to life.  
 The way to establish that the Buddha is a faultless teacher is to see how his teachings are free of 
mistakes and faults. The more we critically anal yse the teachings, using logic and reasoning, the 
greater the ascertainment we will achieve of thes e teachings. Then, naturally, our faith in the 
teachings will  increase. In particular, we will  develop a very strong faith in the Buddha who 
taught them. Understanding this, you will see how important it is to study the teachings of the 
Buddha.   
 To summarise what we have covered so far in chap ter 9, Verse I points out that all the preceding 
chapters are preliminaries for us to develop the ve ry powerful  wisdom which realises emptiness. 
We have also seen how extremely important it is to develop this wisdom in our minds. In order 
to arrive at the definitive understanding of the me aning of emptiness, we have to understand first 
what is reality (or the objects of knowledge).   The objects of knowledge (or existent phenomena) are divided into conventional truth  or 
ultimate truth . These, in turn, are established by two groups of people: the common worldly 
people  and the yogis . We have seen how the yogis contradict  the assertions of the worldly people. 
The worldly people assert true existence, while th e yogis assert that things do not exist truly or 
inherently.    
In this text, the assertions of the first tw o Buddhist schools of tenets, Vaibhasika and 
Sautrantika, are first refuted. This is followed by  refutation of the assert ions of Cittamatra.  The 
proponents of Vaibhasika, Sautrantika and Cittama tra assert true existence, i.e.,  phenomena 
exist truly. To them, if phenomena did not exist trul y, they do not exist at all. They are unable to 
posit the existence of phenomena like persons wi thout positing true exis tence. However, there 
are complications because of their position. For ex ample, since they assert  true existence, with 
regards to the person or self, there must be some thing that can be posited ultimately to be the 
self (or person). To illustrate a person, some schools say that the person is the five aggregates  or 
continuity of the five aggregates.  Others say that the person is the mental consciousness . 
Ultimately, they assert that  the person is the mind. 
 
They meet with difficulties in positing what is the person. For exampl e, one sub-school of 
Vaibhasika, the Vasiputriyas have such difficulty in asserting whether a person is permanent or 
impermanent that they assert a person is ne ither permanent nor impermanent but is simply 
inexpressible. Only the followers of this sub-school assert that the self is in expressible, that it is 
neither permanent nor impermanent. They are the only exception. All the remaining proponents 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
321  
of Buddhist tenets assert that the person is ne cessarily impermanent. Only proponents of non-
Buddhist tenets will assert that a person is permanent. 
 
Even for proponents of Buddhist tenets who assert  that the illustration of the person is the 
mental consciousness , there is uneasiness with this positi on. There are proponents of Cittamatra 
who assert a collection of eight consciousnesses , as opposed to the usual six, and the “person” is 
posited to be   the mind-basis-of-all .  
 
In short, the proponents of  Vaibhasika , Sautrantika and Cittamatra assert that phenomena exist 
truly  whereas the proponents of Prasangika do not assert true existence . Because of these 
differences, this becomes the basis for further debate.   
2’ Abandoning the supposed harm to that 
a’ A general refutation of the proponents of true existence such as the Sautrantikas 
1” Refuting the harm by means of direct perception 
 
 (9,6) 
Forms and so forth, although directly perceived, 
Are [established] by renown , not by a valid cognizer. 
They are false, just like the unclean and so forth 
That are renowned to be  clean and so forth. 
 The proponents of Sautrantika asserts:  Objects of desire [such as form] are inherently existent.  For example, a visual form appears as inherently existent to the eye consciousness, which is the direct perceiver. 
Therefore the visual form is established by the eye consciousness.  The position of Prasangika is incorrect because the object appears to the eye consciousness as inherently existent and, 
at the same time, the inherently existent form is established by the eye consciousness. It is  wrong to assert that that 
object does not exist inherently.  
 
The rebuttal from 
Prasangika:  Forms and so forth, although direct ly perceived, /Are [established] 
by renown, not by a valid cognizer.  
 
Generally speaking, form, sound, smell, taste and touch are 
established by a valid cognizer. The objects of such establishment are not inherently  existent but are established 
by the valid cognizer as mere worldly conventions, i.e., as 
they are known in the world.   
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
322  
The valid cognizer that realises  form does not establish the 
final mode of abiding  (or the ultimate nature) of that 
object.  To suggest that any va lid cognizer can establish the 
ultimate nature  of the object would imply that ordinary 
beings can also directly realise emptiness. 
 In short, the valid cognizer that realises form are valid with 
respect to form but they are not valid with respect to the 
ultimate nature of form which is emptiness. This is because 
that same valid cognizer is unable to realise the ultimate 
nature of form.  (
Note: In this debate, form can be su bstituted with sound, smell, taste 
or touch ). 
 
The proponents of 
Sautrantika then argue:   If form does not exist inherently, how can it be established by renown? And if it is established by renown, how can it be said that it is false? 
 
Prasangika responds:  They are false, just like the unclean and so forth/ That are renowned to be clean and so forth.  
 
Although the body is unclean by nature, for those who are 
attached to it, the body is seen as (or renowned to be) clean 
and pleasant. In the same way, although the self is impermanent, the ordinary person grasps at it as permanent.  Although, in reality, contaminat ed feelings of pleasure are 
in the nature of suffering, the ordinary person apprehends those feelings to be pleasurable.  Although the self does not exist from its own side , the self is 
renowned to be existing from its own side.  In the same way, although phenomena appear to us to be inherently existent, in reality, it is not so. This is the fundamental disparity between appearance and reality.  
2” Refuting the harm by means of scripture 
a” Showing the scriptures that teach compounded phenomena and impermanence etc. to be 
[scriptures of] interpretive meaning 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
323  
 
(9, 7) 
For the sake of making worldly beings engage, 
The Protector taught things. 
 
The proponents of Sautrantika further argue that it is wrong for Prasangika to assert  that 
phenomena are not inherently exis tent since the Buddha taught in  some sutras that forms are 
inherently existent.  
 
For the sake of making worldly beings engage, The Protector taught things : For the sake of those who 
cling to phenomena as being truly existent, the Buddha taught that phenomena are truly existent 
with the intention of leading them slowly to the Mahayana path and the corre ct view of reality as 
expounded by Prasangika . 
 
When the Buddha was alive, he turned the wh eel of Dharma three times. During the 1st turning 
of the wheel of Dharma, he taught the main di sciples who were predisposed to the tenets of 
Vaibhasika and Sautrantika  that all existent ph enomena, from forms right up to the omniscient 
mind, exist by way of their  own character. Buddh a taught this in accord with the interests and 
dispositions of those disciples at the time. He did not teach that, in reality, things do not exist by 
way of their own character. The sutras which assert that phenom ena are established by way of 
their own character require interpretation and are known as interpretative  sutras. 
 We can relate this with the outline: 
a” Showing the scriptures that teach compounded phenomena 
and impermanence etc. to be [scriptures of] interpretive meaning.  
 
b” Refuting that they are [scriptures of] definitive meaning 
 
(9,7cd) 
In thusness 
They are not momentary. 
 Topics, such as impermanence and so forth, are no t ultimately established. Therefore, scriptures 
teaching these topics are not scriptures of definitive meaning. In the 1
st turning of the wheel of 
Dharma, although the Bu ddha taught that phenomena are trul y existent, in reality, phenomena 
do not exist truly. Therefore, those scriptures that teach that phenomena are truly existent are 
not scriptures of definitive meaning.  Prasangika assert that for a phenomenon to be truly existent, that phenomenon must be either 
inherently one with or inherently different from it. 
For example, a vase, according to Prasangika, does not exist truly. If the vase is truly existent, 
then the vase is either inherently one with or inherently different from it. 
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
324  
All existent phenomena can be divided into two: It  i s  e i t h e r  o n e  o r  d i f f e r e n t   ( o r  s i n g u l a r  o r  
plural). Because of its dependence on parts, form is not inherently one (or singular).  Since form 
is established not to be inherently one, it cannot be established as inherently different (or plural). 
This is because we can only posit “different” in relation to “one.”  If there is no inherently one, 
we cannot posit inherently different.   
Lesson 58   Chapter IX - verse 7-10 
D The way to train in wisdom- the nature of insight 
a. Explaining the chapter’s material 
1) Teaching that one who wants to attain liberation must develop the wisdom realizing suchness 
2) The methods by which one develops the wisdom realizing suchness 
a) A presentation of the two truths 
i) The actual 
ii) Abandoning the objection that the need for emptiness has no power 
1’ The actual 
2’ Abandoning the supposed harm to that 
a’ A general refutation of the proponents of true existence such as the 
Sautrantikas 
1” Refuting the harm by means of direct perception 2” Refuting the harm by means of scripture 
a” Showing the scriptures that teach compounded phenomena 
and impermanence etc. to be [scriptures of] interpretive 
meaning b” Refuting that they are [scriptures of] definitive meaning 
c” Abandoning contradictions to that 
(1) Abandoning [the notion] that is even relatively 
established 
(2) Abandoning [the notion] that gathering the 
accumulations is invalid 
(3) Abandoning [the notion] that conception is invalid 
(4) Abandoning [the notion] th at the classifications of 
virtue and negativity is invalid (5) Abandoning [the notion] that there are separate and 
definite classifications for cyclic existence and nirvana 
b’ A refutation of the Cittamatra position in particular 
c’ Abandoning the consequence that even the Madhyamaka’s need for the 
path realizing emptiness has no power 
b) Establishing that even someone who wants to attain mere liberation must realize 
emptiness 
c) An extensive explanation of the reasoning establishing emptiness 
3) Instructions on making effort to de velop that [realization of emptiness] 
 
Dependent Arising – A Praise of the Buddha  
7 
Benevolent teacher, you taught to help all living beings. 
Emptiness is the essence of those teachings, 
its highest proof dependent arising 
 
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
325  
8 
Those claiming it proves the opposite, those denying its very existence, 
how will they grasp your teachings? 
 
The compassionate one, the Buddha, who works solely to benefit us, bestows upon us the 
medicinal Dharma, like the best of doctors ca ring for his patients. Amongst the Buddha’s 
teachings, the supreme teaching is his presentation  on the meaning of emptiness, the final nature 
of all phenomena. This is the essence of all of  Buddha’s teachings.  Dependent arising is the 
highest proof of and establishes the meaning of emptiness.    
Those claiming it proves the opposite  refers to the proponents of tr ue existence. For them, dependent 
arising cannot be used to establish emptiness as  they assert that if something is dependent 
arising, that phenomenon must exist truly. It is very difficult for them to understand the 
meaning of emptiness. 
 According to the teachings and the position of Prasangika, the best reasoning to establish the 
absence of inherent existence is dependent aris ing. Because phenomena are dependently arisen, 
they cannot exist inherently.   Dependent arising is one of the many different fo rms of reasoning used to establish  emptiness. 
We had looked at the four logical steps to esta blish whether a phenomenon is inherently one or 
inherently different. Form is not truly existent. Form does not exist by way of its own character 
because it is a dependent arising. How do we esta blish that form is not truly existent? This is 
because form is dependently arisen or we can say that it is neither inherently one  or inherently 
different .  
 
For example, we would apprehend a vase as a singular phenomenon and not different. On the 
other hand if we were to compare a vase and a pi llar, we  understand those two are different and 
not the same. 
 One and different or one and many are synonymo us. Anything that exists is either one or 
different. If something is inherently existent, it must be inherently one or inherently different. 
 If the subject matter is, say, form, it would be expressed as:  Form is not inherently existent 
because it is neither inherently one or inherently different.  Why is form not inherently one? This is becaus e form possesses parts. We need to understand 
why something that possesses parts cannot be in herently one. Why is form not inherently 
different? Form is not inherently different  because form is not inherently one. 
 
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
326  
c" Abandoning contradictions to that 
(1) Abandoning [the notion] that is even relatively established 
 
(9,7cd) 
“Is it also contradictory conventionally?” 
 
(9,8) 
For yogis that it is conventional is without fault. 
Compared to worldly beings, they see thusness; 
Otherwise, their definite real ization of women as unclean 
Would be harmed by worldly beings. 
 
 
Qualm from Sautrantika: If it is asserted that composed phenomena are not 
impermanent ultimately, they cannot be established to be impermanent conventionally. Why? This is because 
something which existed in an earlier moment also exists at a 
later time. It is not conventionally known that composed phenomena are impermanent. In fact people believe that composed phenomena are permanent. 
 
Reply by Prasangika: We ordinary people think that things are permanent but, in 
reality, composed phenomena are not permanent. It is 
mentioned in the root text that ordinary beings believe and 
see impermanent things as permanent. However, there are 
minds, such as the conventional  valid perception of the yogis 
that can establish that composed phenomena are impermanent. There is therefore, no contradiction. 
 
Sautrantika then asserts: If composed ph enomenon is established as impermanent 
conventionally, this contradicts what is said in one of the 
sutras: Those who see composed phenomena as impermanent, they 
see emptiness. 
 
Prasangika responds: Verse 8 points out, Compared to worldly beings, they see thusness  
which means that those who see composed phenomena as 
impermanent see thusness (or emptiness).This does not 
mean that, in general, whoeve r sees composed phenomena as 
impermanent also sees the final nature of composed 
phenomena. In general, there are many misconceptions such 
as conceiving the unclean to be clean, suffering to be happiness and the impermanent to be permanent.  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
327  
 
Compared to those adhering to such misconceptions, those who do realise that composed phenomena are impermanent 
are thus much better off in that they see the nature of 
phenomena. It is in this  sense that it is said, they see thusness.  
 
It is widely believed by ordinary people that  things, such as  
forms, are permanent in nature. What is the fallacy in holding such a belief? This sugge sts that the valid perception 
in the minds of ordinary bein gs would necessarily harm the 
valid perception of the yogis.  People who have achieved a certain level of concentration or realisation see phenomena as unclean and unpleasant by 
nature. This understanding harms the mind of a desire being 
who grasps at the body as being very clean.   One is an erroneous mind and the other is a valid mind. There is a difference between the two. If it is a valid perception, it cannot be harmed by its opponent.  The valid perception that realises unclean phenomena to be unclean acts as an antidote against attachment. When a mind of desire sees unclean phenomena as clean, such a mind cannot be a valid mind  that can harm the valid 
perception of the yogis.  
(2) Abandoning [the notion] that gathering the accumulations is invalid 
 
(9, 9) 
Merit comes from an illusory-like conqueror, 
Just as it does from an actually existent one. 
 Qualm from Vaibhasika and Sautrantika: Asserting things do not exist inherently suggests that the 
Buddha also does not exist inherently. If that is so, making offerings or prostrating to the Buddha will not lead to the generation of any merits.  
 
Response from Prasangika: Merit comes from an illusory-like conq ueror, just as it does from an 
actually existent one. There is no contradiction. Making 
offerings and prostrations to an illusion -like Buddha yields 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
328  
illusion-like merits.  
 
Just as it does from an actually existent one : The lower tenet 
systems assert that truly existent merits are acquired by 
making offerings and prostrations to the truly existent Buddha. In the same way, illusi on-like merits are gained by 
making offerings and prostrations to the illusion-like 
Buddha. 
 
(3) Abandoning [the notion] that conception is invalid 
 
Conception here means rebirth. 
(9, 9 cd) 
“If sentient beings are like an illusion, 
Having died, how are they reborn?” 
 
(9, 10) 
For as long as those conditions are assembled, 
For that long will illusions also last. 
Why should sentient beings be truly existent 
Due merely to their continua lasting long? 
 
Qualm from Vaibhasika 
and Sautrantika:    
If sentient beings are not inhe rently existent but exist like 
illusions, how can they take rebirth? The illusory elephant, 
created by the magician, does not take rebirth. In the same way, sentient being who do not exist inherently are unable to take rebirth too.  
 
Response from Prasangika: For as long as those conditions are assembled, for that long will 
illusions also last . 
 Sentient beings take rebirth due to their karma and afflictions. As long as these causes exist and come together, sentient beings will continue to take rebirth just as an illusionist creates his illusions in dependence on mantra 
recitations and special substances .  As long as these causes 
and conditions continue to exist, the illusion continues to 
appear.   When the conditions for taking future rebirth cease, rebirth will no longer happen. In the same way, when the causes and 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
329  
conditions for the creation of the illusion disappear, so will 
the illusion itself.  
 
Objections by Vaibhasika and Sautrantika to this argument:   How can sentient beings be compared with illusions? Sentient beings have existed since beginningless time and since they have been around fo r a very long time, they must 
exist truly whereas an illusion only exists for a short time.  
 
Response from the Prasangika:   Why should sentient beings be truly existent due merely to their continua lasting long?  Time is not the basis for esta blishing whether a phenomenon 
is truly existent or not. If we can use time as a determinant of 
this, it would imply that some longer-lasting dreams and illusions are truly existent whil e shorter ones are not. This 
means that there are some dreams and illusions that are truly existent. 
 
Q: If the Buddha did not teach on emptiness duri ng the 1st  turning of the wheel of Dharma, 
how did some of his disciples become arhats immediately after the teachings? 
A: The first five disciples of the Buddha are not pr oponents of Vaibhasika or Sautrantika. From 
the perspective of Prasangika, the Buddha did teach emptiness during the 1
st turning of the 
wheel of Dharma.  Because of those teachings, th ose five fortunate disciples realised emptiness 
and became arhats. 
 
Q: From the perspective of Prasangika, did the Buddha teach the Four Noble Truths during the 
1st turning of the wheel of Dharma? 
 
A: Yes. The Buddha taught the Fo ur Noble Truths during the 1st turning of the wheel of 
Dharma. The four characteristics or attributes of  the First Noble Truth (the truth of suffering) 
are: impermanent, suffering, empty and selfless.  
 
Therefore, from the perspective of Prasangika, Buddha did teach on selflessness and emptiness in 
the 1st  turning of the wheel of Dharma. But propon ents of the lower tene t systems, even the 
Svatantrika-Madhyamika School, as sert that the Buddha did not teac h the selfless of phenomena  
during the 1st turning of the wheel of Dharma.  
 
In this context, selflessness refers  to the lack of inherent existenc e of true suffering and of self 
and phenomena. Emptiness refers to the emptine ss of a self-sufficient substantially existent 
person. 
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
330  
With reference to the object of negation, what is being negated? We need to posit the coarse 
object of negation and the subtle object of nega tion. There is a difference in the subtlety of the 
object of negation. Therefore, there is also a diffe rence in the subtlety of the level of emptiness or 
selflessness. 
 The 4 attributes of true suffering are in this or der:  Impermanence, suffering, empty, selfless. 
There are 16 aspects to the Four Noble Trut hs with 4 characteristics to each truth. 
Lesson 59   Chapter IX - verse 11-15 
D The way to train in wisdom- the nature of insight 
a. Explaining the chapter’s material 
1) Teaching that one who wants to attain liberation must develop the wisdom realizing suchness 
2) The methods by which one develops the wisdom realizing suchness 
a) A presentation of the two truths 
i) The actual ii) Abandoning the objection that the need for emptiness has no power 
1’ The actual 
2’ Abandoning the supposed harm to that 
a’ A general refutation of the proponents of true existence such as the 
Sautrantikas 
1” Refuting the harm by means of direct perception 2” Refuting the harm by means of scripture 
a” Showing the scriptures that teach compounded phenomena 
and impermanence etc. to be [scriptures of] interpretive 
meaning b” Refuting that they are [scriptures of] definitive meaning 
c” Abandoning contradictions to that 
(1) Abandoning [the notion] that is even relatively 
established 
(2) Abandoning [the notion] that gathering the 
accumulations is invalid (3) Abandoning [the notion] that conception is invalid 
(4) Abandoning [the notion] th at the classifications of 
virtue and negativity is invalid 
(5) Abandoning [the notion] that there are separate and 
definite classifications for cyclic existence and nirvana 
b’ A refutation of the Cittamatra position in particular 
1” Stating their position 
2” Refuting that 
c’ Abandoning the consequence that even the Madhyamikas need for the 
path realizing emptiness has no power 
b) Establishing that even someone who wants to attain mere liberation must realize 
emptiness 
c) An extensive explanation of the reasoning establishing emptiness 
3) Instructions on making effort to de velop that [realization of emptiness] 
 
Dependent Arising – A Praise of the Buddha 
9 
For you, emptiness seen as dependent arising 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
331  
does not render as contradictory  
emptiness of self-nature an d ability to function.  
 
10 
To hold to the opposite, however –  that with emptiness there can be no function and with function, no emptiness –  
is to fall into a dangerous trap.  
 
As seen in the previous lesson, there are peop le who are unable to understand how dependent 
arising is the rationale for proving th at things do not exist inherently.  
 
For you  means the Buddha himself critically analysed  how phenomena  exist and how they finally 
abide. He discovered that the ultimate natu re of all things and events is emptiness. 
 
When the Buddha critically analysed how the pers on (“self” or “I”) exists, he discovered the 
inherently existent person cannot be found on th e basis of designation, the five aggregates. At 
the same time, that same realisation led him to th e ascertainment that the person does exist as a 
dependent arising. He understood immediately that  things and events do not exist inherently but 
exist as dependent arising, i.e., in dependence on other factors.   Based on the understanding that when somethin g is dependent arising, it does not exist 
inherently and because it does not exist inherently , it is a dependent arising, Buddha was able to 
establish cause and effect – that cause leads to effect and the existence of a functional 
agent/object/action.   For those who do not understand these realisat ions of the Buddha, they see emptiness and 
dependent arising as contradictory. When th ey talk about emptiness, they cannot posit 
dependent arising. When they talk about depend ent arising, they cannot establish the emptiness 
of inherent existence. 
 
For them, when things do not exist inherently, then cause and effect does not exist and their 
views fall into the extreme of existence or  th e extreme of non-existence. For the former, if 
something is dependent arising, it cannot be empt y of inherent existence.  For the latter, when 
something does not exist inherently, then that th ing does not exist at a ll. They are unable to 
establish dependent arising on the basis of things not existing inherently.  
 
For you, emptiness seen as dependent arising/ does not render as contradictory/ emptiness of self-nature and 
ability to function  is similar to the line, Form is empty, emptiness is form  in the Perfection of Wisdom 
Sutra . 
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
332  
(4) Abandoning [the notion] that the classifications of virtue and negativity is invalid 
 
(9,11) 
When a being who is an illusion kills and so forth, 
There is no negativity because it is without a mind. 
For one who possesses an illusory mind, 
Merit and negativity arise. 
 
(9,12) 
Mantras and so forth, because they lack the ability, 
Do not give rise to illusory mind. 
The illusions that arise from 
Diverse conditions are also various. 
 
(9,13) 
Nowhere does there exist 
One condition that is able [to give rise] to all. 
 
Qualm from Vaibhasika and Sautrantika :  
If sentient beings are like illusions (as asserted by  Prasangika), then when such a person kills, that 
person does not accumulate negative karma. This is akin to asserting that the action of killing 
will not have negative consequences.  
 
Response from Prasangika:  
This is because the illusory person, the vi ctim, does not possess mind and the karma is 
incomplete so the karma of killing is not incurred.  
 A complete karma has four factors:  the basis the intention the action the completion of the action.  For example, in the case of killing, th e life of the victim must be stopped. 
 
However, when we harm or benefit a human being with an illusion-like mind, we will create 
negative karma or accumulate virtue accordingly.   
The illusory person and the human bein g who has an illusion-like mind are similar  in that they 
do not exist inherently. However, they are not the same because the illusory person does not 
possess a mind.   
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
333  
Qualm from Vaibhasika and Sautrantika :  
If they are similar because they do not exist inherently then why does the human being who 
possesses an illusion-like mind have a mind and the illusory person does not? 
 
Response from Prasangika :  
The answers appear in verses 12 and 13. 
 An illusory person  is an illusion created by the illusionist by reciting mantras and using special 
substances. These mantras and subs tances do not have the power to produce a person possessing 
a mind. The illusionist, the mantras and th e substances are necessary for producing an illusion  
of a person but they are not powerful enough to  produce a mind. Therefore, the illusory person 
does not possess a mind.  In the case of the human being with an illusory-like mind,  he arose from the combination of 
ignorance and compositional activities (or karma) . These two factors have the power to produce a 
human being with a mind and are referred to as “true origins”.   So, whether there is a mind or not depends on wh ether the causes have the potential to produce 
a mind. Different causes produce different effect s. Many causes are needed to produce a whole 
variety of effects. The conclusion then is that we will not be able to get a variety of effects from a single cause.   For example, the production of an illusory pers on requires an illusionist and the mantras and 
substances he uses. The illusion can only come about with the coming to gether of these three 
conditions.  To produce a different illusion, say,  an illusory horse, the illusionist will use 
different mantras and substances, i.e., different causes need to be used. 
 Applying this understanding to consciousness, the substantial (or main) cause of consciousness 
has to be consciousness. It cannot be something el se, like form, which do not have the ability to 
produce consciousness.  Based on this understand ing, we can establish past lives. When we can 
establish past lives, we can establish future live s. This is how we can establish reincarnation. 
 
(5) Abandoning [the notion] that there are separate and definite 
 
(9, 13 cd) 
“If ultimately they are nirvana and 
Conventionally, cyclic existence, 
 
(9,14) 
Since even a buddha would be a cyclic existence, 
What use would the bodhisattva conduct be?” 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
334  
If the conditions are not interrupted, 
Also illusions are not turned back. 
 
(9,15) 
Since the conditions are interrupted, 
[A buddha] does not aris e even conventionally. 
 
For Prasangika, there is no ultimate production  and ultimate cessation because neither exists 
inherently. The fact that events and phen omena do not exist inherently is called natural nirvana.  
If we take natural stain  to mean true existence, then the stat e, which is free of this natural stain, 
is called natural nirvana ( or the state beyond sorrow). All phenomena are, by nature, in the state 
beyond sorrow. 
 
What is samsara to Prasangika? Cyclic existence  refers to having to take rebirth in samsara under 
the power of karma and afflictions. 
 
Qualm from  Vaibhasika  and  Sautrantika:  
Asserting all phenomena are by nature in the st ate beyond sorrow means that all phenomena are 
nirvana. At the same time, asserting samsara is taking rebirth under the power of karma and 
afflictions means that both samsara and nirvana are equal and not different. It means we are in 
samsara and nirvana at the same time.   If that is the case, not only sentient beings but al so the buddhas are circling in samsara. If this is 
so, then the hard work the bodhis attvas put into their practice to stop birth and death in cyclic 
existence becomes meaningless.  
Response from Prasangika : 
This argument is based on an inability to differentiate between naturally abiding nirvana  and 
the nirvana which is the thorough purification of  all the adventitious defilements (or faults).   
 
Naturally abiding nirvana has existed since beginningless time and its existence does not depend 
on factors like generating a path or cult ivating antidotes. However, whatever is a naturally 
abiding nirvana  is not necessarily nirvana .  
 The nirvana  attained after the thorough purification of all the adventitious  defilements  comes 
from abandoning the objects of abandonment of the path of seeing and the objects of 
abandonment of the path of meditation. By doing that, cyclic existence is stopped and nirvana is 
achieved. This nirvana  comes about through the cultivation of antidotes and is achieved by 
meditating on the path, which is the antidote to  ignorance and karma. On  the path, when one is 
applying the antidotes to ignorance and karma, one will not achieve nirvana until one has put a 
stop to the continuance of ignorance and karma (e ven though things are, by nature, in the state 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
335  
beyond sorrow). Otherwise, one continues to take  rebirth again in the future under the power of 
ignorance and karma. 
 
Just as the illusion is produced as long as al l the conditions are present (the illusionist, the 
mantras and substances), in the same way, until we have put a stop to the causes of samsara 
(ignorance and karma), cyclic existence will cont inue to exist. When we  meditate on the path, 
which is the antidote to ignorance and karma, and we stop these causes, we will achieve the 
nirvana which is the thorough purification of all adventitious defilements. When that nirvana is 
achieved, cyclic existence at both the ultimate  and conventional levels ceases to exist.  
b’ A refutation of the Cittamatra position in particular 
Sautrantika asserts: 
That coarse objects are formed from the aggreg ation of partless particle s, which then act as 
observed object conditions realised by the sens e consciousness. The sense consciousness realising 
an object is produced in dependence on the prior existence of the external object, i.e., the object 
exists first followed by the co nsciousness that realises it.  
 
Cittamatra asserts : 
That the appearance of an object and the consci ousness to which it is appearing are established 
simultaneously.   There is no object which is of a differe nt substance from the mind, i.e., there are 
no external objects but everything  is in the entity of mind an d objects arise when the mental 
predisposition is awakened. 
 
Sautrantika asserts:  
External objects exist truly. 
 
Cittamatra asserts : 
There are no external objects and,  therefore, they do not exist tr uly. There are no truly existent 
external objects because they cannot be found when we look for them. This shows that, in reality, 
there is no such thing as external objects. 
 On the other hand, other-powered phenomenon, su ch as the mind (consciousness) exists and 
exists truly because it can be experienced.  As the mind is truly existent, there is another mind 
that realises it known as the self-knower. (T his is the peculiar assertion of Cittamatra). 
 Consciousness can be classified in different ways , one of which is: other knower and self-knower. 
The consciousness that realises form is an other knower  because it realises something other than 
itself. The consciousness that experiences itself is a self-knower . 
 Understanding the assertion of Cittamatra – that everyt hing is in the entity of  mind - is useful for 
understanding the assertions of  the higher school, Prasangika  that things exist by mere 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
336  
designation. 
 A Cittamatrin can be defined as the proponent of  Mahayana tenets who does not assert external 
objects and asserts self-knower as truly existent. 
 
1” Stating their position 
(9,15 cd) 
[Cittamatra ]: 
If even a mistaken [consciousness] does not exist, 
What is it that will observe the illusory? 
 Qualm by Cittamatra: 
Prasangika  asserts that both internal and external object s do not exist truly but are like illusions. 
If that is the case, then the consciousness that re alises those illusion-like phenomena must also be 
illusion-like. Since such a consciousness does not ex ist, illusion-like objects also do not exist, i.e., 
neither object nor subject exist.  
 To Cittamatra, mind (consciousness) truly exists. If  the mind does not exist truly, then the mind 
does not exist at all. So to Cittamatra, an illusi on-like mind does not exist. When that mind does 
not exist, then there cannot be  objects which are realised by  that mind. To Cittamatra, 
Prasangika is falling into the trap of asse rting that neither object nor subject exists. 
 
Answer to question from a  student: The definition of an existent is that which is established by a 
valid cognizer. Anything that is not establis hed by a valid cognizer  does not exist. 
 
Buddha turned the 1
st wheel of Dharma to the five disciples.  They were Hinayana arhats but that 
does not mean they were necessarily proponents of Hinayana tenets.  
 
Proponents of Hinayana tenets can never realis e emptiness because they cannot realise that 
things do not exist inherently. Until one is able to  get rid of the conception grasping at inherent 
existence, there is no way one can realise empt iness. Even to achieve liberation, one must 
definitely realise that phenomena do not exist inherently. 
 
According to the view of Cittamatra, Serlingpa wa s a bodhisattva who realised bodhicitta but he 
did not realise emptiness as po sited by the higher school. 
 According to the view of the higher school, As anga realised emptiness. Based on historical 
accounts, he was a bodhisattva abiding on the 3
rd ground. In reality, Asanga was not a proponent 
of  Cittamatra although he took on the  appear ance of being the trailblazer of Cittamatra.  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
337  
Lesson 60   Chapter IX - verse 15-19 
D The way to train in wisdom- the nature of insight 
a. Explaining the chapter’s material 
1) Teaching that one who wants to attain liberation must develop the wisdom realizing suchness 
2) The methods by which one develops the wisdom realizing suchness 
a) A presentation of the two truths 
i) The actual ii) Abandoning the objection that the need for emptiness has no power 
1’ The actual 
2’ Abandoning the supposed harm to that 
a’ A general refutation of the proponents of true existence such as the 
Sautrantikas 
b’ A refutation of the Cittamatra position in particular 
1” Stating their position 
2” Refuting that 
a” The similarity [between their objection and ours] 
b” Refuting the response to that 
(1) Stating the position 
(2) Refuting that 
(a) It is not seen by any non-dualistic awareness 
(b) Refuting the self-cognizer posed in the response 
to the query 
(i) Scriptural refutation 
(ii) Refutation by reasoning 
(iii) Refuting the syllogism [that asserts] the existence of a self-cognizer 
(iv) Refuting the position that holds imputed 
existents to be possessors of truly established 
supports for functioning things 
c’ Abandoning the consequence that even the Madhyamaka’s need for the path realizing emptiness has no power 
b) Establishing that even someone who wants to attain mere liberation must realize 
emptiness 
c) An extensive explanation of the reasoning establishing emptiness 
3) Instructions on making effort to de velop that [realization of emptiness] 
 
According to Cittamatra, all phenomena are in th e entity of mind. Cittamatra does not assert 
external objects unlike Sautrantika, which asserts that on the basis of the presence of an object, 
that object is then perceived by a consciousness.   
 Cittamatra does not assert external objects becaus e to them, upon closer analysis, an external 
form cannot be found. This is not to say that fo rm does not exist. To Cittamatra, form does not 
exist externally but form is established in the entity  of mind, i.e., it exists  simultaneously with the 
consciousness apprehending it. They  posit that  consciousness is truly existent because its 
existence can be established through experience.  
 
An example is the way the eye consciousness a pprehending blue  is  generated. The sense 
consciousness is produced upon the aggregation of the three conditions:   the observed object condition 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
338  
the uncommon empowering condition 
the immediately preceding condition  
For Sautrantika, the eye consciousness apprehendi ng blue  comes about due to the object of 
observation of that consciousness, the external form, the colour blue. 
 
For Cittamatra, however, the eye consciousness apprehending blue arises not because of the 
external form, the colour blue but due to the po tential existing upon the immediately preceding 
condition of the eye consciousness.    Consciousness is a continuum. There is a prec eding moment of consciousness prior to the 
generation of  the eye consciousness apprehen ding blue that carries the potential for the 
production of the eye consciousness apprehending bl ue. It is the ripening of that potential which 
is asserted by Cittamatra to be the object of observation for the eye consciousness apprehending 
blue.   
1” Stating their position 
(9, 15 cd) 
[Cittamatra ]: 
If even a mistaken [consciousness] does not exist, 
What is it that will observe the illusory? 
 
Qualm from Cittamatra :  
Madhyamikas asserts that both in ternal and external objects do  not exist truly but are like 
illusions. Consciousness is also said to be empty of true existence. This implies that 
consciousness does not exist. If  consciousness does  not exist, then illusion-like objects cannot be 
posited. This means that neither object nor subject exists. 
 
2” Refuting that 
a” The similarity [between their objection and ours] 
(9,16) 
[Madhyamika ]: 
If the illusory itself does not exist for you, 
Then what is it that is observed? 
 
Response from Prasangika: 
Cittamatra does not assert external objects but they  do assert that consciousness is truly existent. 
What happens then when form a ppears to the consciousness apprehending it?  Does form exist 
as an external object like the way it is appearing  to the consciousness that is apprehending it?  
 
If Cittamatra asserts that form exists exactly in the way it appears  to the consciousness 
apprehending it, then that form has to be posited as an external object which means  external 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
339  
objects do exist. 
 If Cittamatra were to argue that although form  appears to the consciousness as an external 
object, it does not exist in the way it appears, that is akin to saying that form is not truly existent. 
If form does not exist truly, then, to Cittamatra, form does not exist at all. 
 
In both cases, the assertions of Cittamatra are refuted.  
 
b” Refuting the response to that 
(1) Stating the position  
(9, 16 cd) 
[Cittamatra ]:  
Since the other exists with respect to them, 
Those aspects are just mind .  
Response from Cittamatra : 
Form does not exist in the way it appears to the consciousness apprehending it. There are no 
external forms but this does not mean that form does not exist. It exists in another way. The 
appearance of form is established in the entity  of consciousness. The form appearing to the 
consciousness apprehending it is an appearance fa ctor of the consciousne ss and it exists due to 
the ripening of certain potential in the mental continuum. 
 
(2) Refuting that 
(a) It is not seen by any non-dualistic awareness 
 
(9,17) 
[Madhyamika ]: 
If that very mind is the illusory, 
What is seen by what? 
Response from Prasangika : 
To Cittamatra, form is asserted to be establishe d in the entity of mind. It does not exist as a 
different substance from the mind. If that is th e case, the appearance factor of form to the 
consciousness apprehending it would also be in the entity of mind.  What other mind is there 
then to observe that form? 
 
(b) Refuting the self-cognizer posed in the response to the query 
(i) Scriptural refutation 
(9,17 cd) 
The Protector of the World also 
Taught “Mind does not see mind.” 
 
(9,18) 
Just as the blade of a sword 
Does not cut itself, so too is the mind. 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
340  
 
Response from Prasangika (contd.): 
If Cittamatra asserts that form is established in  the entity of mind, this means both the form 
itself and the consciousness apprehending it ar e minds. How then do we differentiate between 
the apprehending consciousness and the apprehen ded object?  It is difficult to distinguish 
between the subject observing the object and the object itself.   
 
Response from Cittamatra : 
We resolve this by asserting a consciousness kn own as the self-knower. (Consciousness can be 
classified as other knower and self-knower. The other knower is a consciousness that apprehends 
an object other than itself while the self-knower is a consciousness that experiences itself.) The 
self-knower has the aspect of the apprehende r and experiences the consciousness itself. 
In the case of the eye consciousness apprehending  blue, there is a self-knower that experiences 
that eye consciousness in a non-du alistic way (which means  there is  a subsidence of that feeling 
of duality between subject and object and there is no longer a distinct separation between subject 
and object).  
 
The position of Prasangika : We do not assert self-knowers and their existence is refuted by 
scriptural authority. The Buddha says, Mind does not see mind . This means consciousness cannot 
experience itself in a non-dualistic way, thro ugh the subsidence of duality. The mind cannot 
experience itself, just as the bl ade of a sword cannot  cut itself. 
 
The fundamental assertion by Cittamatra, with resp ect to the consciousness, is that it is truly 
existent. If the consciousness is truly existent, th is means that it is independent, inherently one 
and does not possess parts. If it does not po ssess parts, then how does Cittamatra account for 
that consciousness which experiences itself. 
 
(ii) Refutation by reasoning 
 
(9,18 cd) 
[Cittamatra ]: 
It is just like a butter lamp 
That perfectly illuminates the thing that is itself. 
 
(9,19) 
[Madhyamika ]: 
A butter lamp is not an object to be illuminated 
Because it is not obscured by darkness. 
 
Rebuttal from Cittamatra :  
It is not true that the self-knowe r does not exist. It exists just like a butter lamp that perfectly 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
341  
illuminates the thing that is itself. In the same  way, the consciousness can experience itself.  
 
Response from Prasangika : 
The example of the butter lamp is  invalid because the butter lamp does not illuminate itself. 
There is neither a need for it to do so, nor does  it possess any ability to illuminate itself.  The 
butter lamp does not illuminate itself be cause it is not obscured by darkness.  
 
What is the fault in asserting that the butter la mp illuminates itself? This would be akin to 
asserting that darkness can be obscured by darkne ss. If darkness is obscured by darkness, then 
darkness can not be seen since it is  obscured.  
 
This line of reasoning appears in the commentary to Nagarjuna’s Fundamental Treatise of the 
Middle Way  called The Drop of Reasoning , where it is said that if we assert that the butter lamp 
illuminates itself, then we have to say that da rkness can obscure itself. If darkness can obscure 
itself, then darkness can never be seen. 
 
When we cover a vase with a piece of cloth, we would not be able to see the vase as the vase is 
covered by the cloth. In the same way, assert ing that  darkness can be obscured by darkness 
means that darkness can never be seen.  Cittamatra then puts forward anothe r example using a piece of glass. 
 
(9,19 cd) 
[Cittamatra ]: 
There is blue, like glass, that depends on 
Other for its blueness and that which does not. 
 
Lesson 61   Chapter IX - verse 16-22 
a’ A general refutation of the proponents of true existence such as the Sautrantikas 
b’ A refutation of the Cittamatra position in particular 
1” Stating their position 
2” Refuting that 
a” The similarity [between their objection and ours] 
b” Refuting the response to that 
(1) Stating the position (2) Refuting that 
(a) It is not seen by any non-dualistic awareness 
(b) Refuting the self-cognizer posed in the response to the query 
(i) Scriptural refutation 
(ii) Refutation by reasoning 
(iii) Refuting the syllogism [that asse rts] the existence of a self-cognizer 
(1’) An example illustrating the pr oduction of memories despite the 
lack of a self-cognizer 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
342  
(2’) Refuting [the position that says] .If there is no self-cognizer, it is 
untenable for there to be a cognizer of others. 
(iv) Refuting the position that holds imputed existents to be possessors of 
truly established supports for functioning things 
c’ Abandoning the consequence that even the Madhyamaka’s need for the path realizing emptiness has 
no power 
 
Dependent Arising – A Praise of the Buddha 
 
11 In your teachings, therefore, 
Knowledge of dependent aris ing is highly praised,  
But it will not be known 
to views of self or non-existence.  
 
The teaching on dependent arising is the essence of all the Buddha’s teachings.  He taught that 
emptiness and dependent arising are not contradict ory but are, in fact, complementary. Because 
of this revelation, the teachings on dependent arising are highly praised. 
 When we fail to realize this and believe that em ptiness and dependent arising  are contradictory, 
then we would have entered the wrong path an d not be able to achieve the state of full 
enlightenment. The Buddha taught many subjects su ch as how to achieve the different levels of 
clairvoyance, concentration and supernatural powe rs but they are not the most important of his 
teachings. This is because being able to accompli sh high levels of clairvoyance or concentration 
does not help us to free ourselves from cyclic exis tence. In order to achieve this, we must realise 
that emptiness and dependent arising are not contradictory.   If the idea of the absence of inhe rent existence makes us think that things do not exist at all, this 
is the extreme of nihilism or non-existence. On the other hand, if we believe that for something 
to exist, it must exist inherently, this is the extr eme of existence. For people holding on to either 
extreme view, it is impossible fo r them to realise dependent ar ising. The phenomena which are 
the objects of these two extreme views do not exis t in reality but the conceptions holding on to 
these two extremes do exist.  
 The lower tenets, with the exception of Prasangika , all assert that all phenomena are established 
by way of their own character (i.e., they truly ex ist). For them, if things exist, they must exist 
inherently. According to Prasangika , this is the extreme of existenc e and as long as we have this 
wrong conception holding on to th e extreme of existence, it is impossible to achieve liberation 
from samsaric suffering.    How should we study this presentation on emptin ess?  The main tool fo r  understanding these 
teachings is by applying our analytical minds,  using our logic and reasoning.  We learn by 
thinking about the subject matter, analysing it  and through debate and questioning. It is 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
343  
impossible to understand this topic by  listening to the teachings alone.  
 
We must use our mental ability. The more we us e our minds, the sharper they  become, the more 
stable the memory and the greater its analytical power. Our minds are not like our bodies. When 
we do not use our minds, they will become duller over time. It is the nature of our minds that 
the more they are used, the sharper they become.  
 
(1’) Refuting by example 
 (In this outline, there are two examples put forth by Cittamatra to support  their assertion of the 
existence of the self-knower – the analogies of the butter-lamp and a piece of glass. Both are 
refuted by Prasangika).  
 
We had discussed the Cittamatra assertion of the existence of a self-knower in the previous 
lesson. Cittamatra tries to prove the existence of the self-knower by using analogies. One analogy 
is the butter lamp illuminating itself: Just as a butter lamp illuminates itself, the mind can also 
experience itself. This is the argument put forth by Cittamatra.  
 Prasangika counters that this is a faulty exampl e because a butter lamp cannot illuminate itself. If 
a butter lamp can do this, then we have to posi t that darkness can be ob scured by darkness. If 
darkness can be obscured by darkne ss, then it follows that darkness can never be seen by anyone.  
Cittamatra then uses another example: 
(9,19 cd)  
[Cittamatra]: 
There is blue, like glass, that depends on 
Other for its blueness and that which does not. 
 
(9, 20) 
Likewise, some [things] are seen in dependence 
On other and some are also  seen without dependence. 
[Madhyamika]: 
It is not that that which was not blueness 
Made itself into blue by itself. 
 
The Cittamatra position:  
The mind is like a piece of glass, clear and tr ansparent. When the glass is placed on a blue 
surface, that surface becomes the condition for th e glass to take on a bluish hue. This does not 
mean that the glass is, by nature, blue in colo ur. The blue hue comes from the surface on which 
the glass is placed. However, if we had a piece of lapis lazuli wh ich, by its nature, is blue in 
colour, that colour does not depend on other factors but is established from its own side.  
 
Phenomena are established in dependence on bein g realised by something other than themselves 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
344  
i.e., form is realised by consciou sness. This is demonstrated by th e analogy of the clear glass being 
placed on a blue surface, taking on a bluish hu e. This symbolises the consciousness, the other 
knower.  
 
But for the consciousness itself, it does not need to depend on any other thing, other than itself, 
to be realised i.e., it realises itself. Here, Citta matra uses the example of the lapis lazuli which is 
blue by nature. Its colour does not depend on any other factors. To Cittamatra, this is analogous 
to the consciousness’ ability to realise or  expe rience itself. This symbolises the self-knower. 
 
The counter-argument of Prasangika:   
It is not that that which was not bluene ss/Made itself into blue by itself.  
 It is incorrect to assert that lapis lazuli is bl ue from its own side. Its colour came about due to 
causes and conditions.  As long as it is a co mposed phenomenon, its existence comes about in 
reliance on causes and conditions. Therefore, la pis lazuli is blue due to certain causes and 
conditions. Its blue colour is not established in herently without depending on other factors.  
 
(2’) Refuting by meaning 
(9, 21) 
(Cittamatra ): 
It can be said “A light illuminates [itself]” 
When it is known by consciousness. 
But through being known by what 
Can it be said “Awareness illuminates [itself]”? 
 
(9,22) 
[Madhyamika]: 
Since it is not seen by any, 
Whether it illuminates or does not illuminate 
Is like the grace of the daughter of a barren woman, 
In that it is meaningless even to discuss it. 
 
Prasangika position:  
 
Even if Cittamatra were to argue in the following  way: “The butter lamp cannot illuminate itself 
but the butter lamp nevertheless illuminates beca use there is a consciou sness, which is of a 
different substance from the butter lamp itself, that  realises this,” how can this argument support 
its assertion that consciousness illuminates?  A consciousness does not experience itself. It is  also not experienced by another consciousness 
other than itself. If consciousness is experienced by another consciousness other than itself, this 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
345  
leads to the fault of limitless regression as ther e has to be another consciousness experiencing the 
experiencer of the consciousness and another consciousness experiencing that consciousness and 
so forth.  
 
For Cittamatra, since the consciousness can neit her experience itself nor be experienced by 
another consciousness, then there is the fallac y of consciousness not existing. When the base, 
consciousness, no longer exists, then   the di scussion on whether consciousness illuminates or 
not is pointless. It is   like  talking about the son and daughter of a barren woman. 
 To reiterate, Cittamatra asserts self-knower, that  the mind is luminous and experiences itself. 
Prasangika asserts other knowers but not self-knowers.   The difficulty with the Cittamatra position is their assertion that the consciousness and its 
luminous (or illuminating) quality are inherently ex istent. When searched for, they can be found. 
With such a position, they are left with two option s - the consciousness either realises itself or it 
is realised by something else.  Prasangika sees problems with both options. Th ey refute the assertion that consciousness can 
illuminate itself (or that consciousness can realise itself). They also refute that consciousness can 
be realised by another consciousness other than itself since this will lead to limitless regression.  
(iii) Refuting the syllogism [that asse rts] the existence of a self-cognizer 
(1’) An example illustrating the production of me mories despite the lack of a self-cognizer 
 
(9,23) 
[Cittamatra]: 
If a self-cognizer did not exist 
How would consciousness be remembered? 
[Madhyamika ]:  
It is remembered through experience and 
In relation to other, like the poison of a rat. 
 Cittamatra asserts self-knowers to explai n how memories of the past occur.   
For example: We saw the colour blue today. Recall ing this the next day, to Cittamatra, the sign 
of memory is the thought: “(1) I remember having seen the colour blue and (2) I remember my 
eye consciousness saw blue.” In other words, there is recall of both the object (the colour blue) 
and the subject (our eye consciousness apprehending blue).    Cittamatra asserts that the fact we can recall seeing blue before is the sign that there was an eye 
consciousness that apprehended blue in the past . Without this eye consciousness apprehending 
blue, it would be  impossible for us to have any memory of the object seen, the colour blue.  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
346  
  
Applying the same line of reasoning, they a ssert that we remember the eye consciousness 
apprehending blue because there was a consciousn ess experiencing that. This is the self-knower 
and therefore, at a later time, one recalls having seen blue.  
 This cannot be experienced by other consciousnesses.  Cittamatra assert that if we posit that other 
consciousnesses were experiencing the eye consci ousness apprehending blue, then this will lead 
to the fault of limitless regression of multiple consciousnesses experiencing the eye consciousness 
apprehending blue. Therefore, Cittamatra asserts that the eye consciousnes s apprehending blue  
experiences itself and there is such a thing as the  self knower.  
Lesson 62   Chapter IX - verse 23-24 
a’ A general refutation of the proponents of true existence such as the Sautrantikas 
b’ A refutation of the Cittamatra position in particular 
1” Stating their position 
2” Refuting that 
a” The similarity [between their objection and ours] 
b” Refuting the response to that 
(1) Stating the position (2) Refuting that 
(a) It is not seen by any non-dualistic awareness 
(b) Refuting the self-cognizer posed in the response to the query 
(i) Scriptural refutation 
(ii) Refutation by reasoning 
(iii) Refuting the syllogism [that asse rts] the existence of a self-cognizer 
(1’) An example illustrating the pr oduction of memories despite the 
lack of a self-cognizer 
(2’) Refuting [the position that says] .If there is no self-cognizer, it is 
untenable for there to be a cognizer of others. 
(iv) Refuting the position that holds imputed existents to be possessors of truly established supports for functioning things 
c’ Abandoning the consequence that even the Madhyamaka’s need for the path realizing emptiness has 
no power 
 
Dependent Arising – A Praise of the Buddha  
12 
Nondependence, you have said, is like the sky flower. Nondependence, therefore, does not exist. 
Anything existent by its own nature 
contradicts existence by cause and circumstance. 
 
Nondependence, you have said, is like the sky fl ower,/Nondependence, therefore, does not exist:  This is 
because there is no conceptual mind that is able  to label something as being non-dependent. The 
existence of a phenomenon depends on a conceptu al thought designating it to be “this” or 
“that.” Nothing can exist without such design ation by a conceptual thought. Since no 
phenomena exist without depending on designat ion by a conceptual thought, therefore, Non-
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
347  
dependence is like the sky flower,  which does not exist.  All existent s must be dependent arising. If a 
phenomenon can exist from its own side, this cont radicts its coming into existence by depending 
on causes and conditions or by depending on the conceptual thought designating it to be “this” 
or “that.”  
 
13 
Nothing  is not dependently arising; 
nothing, therefore, is not empty of self-nature. 
 Therefore, there is nothing that  is not empty of self-nature (o r inherent existence). This was 
taught by the Buddha in the sutras where there are statements such as, Whatever is born from 
causes and conditions is unborn.  This means that whatever is created (born) from causes and 
conditions  is not inherently created (born). The fault in asserting that phenomena are inherently 
existent is addressed in the  next verse.  
14 Self-nature, you said, cannot be destroyed. Phenomena, therefore, possessed of nature  would render nirvana impossible. Samsara likewise would have no end. 
 
If phenomena are inherently existent, whatever ex isted at an earlier time cannot be destroyed or 
cease to exist at a later time. If one held on to th e view that cyclic existence is inherently existent, 
this would lead to the absurd consequence that  one will never be able to achieve liberation or 
nirvana.  
 
Phenomena, therefore,  possessed of nature:  These words are uttered by the Buddha himself in the 
sutra. If phenomena are inherently existent, th e Buddha and the hearers and solitary realizers 
would realise this. But, of course, they do no t. The Buddha points out that if phenomena are 
inherently existent, then nirvana would be impo ssible and there would be no way out of cyclic 
existence for all the scholars and  great practitioners.    According to Prasangika, all phenomena are depe ndent arising and are, therefore, empty of 
inherent existence. Because of this, the presentation of samsara and nirvana becomes feasible and possible.  As explained by Prasangika, whenever we see stat ements that things do not exist inherently, we 
must not understand this to mean that they are non-existent. Rather, it means things and events 
exist, but they are empty of inherent existence.  
(1’) An example illustrating the production of me mories despite the lack of a self-cognizer 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
348  
 
(9,23) 
[Cittamatra ]: 
If a self-cognizer did not exist 
How would consciousness be remembered? 
[Madhyamaka ]: 
It is remembered through experience and 
In relation to other, like the poison of a rat. 
 
Qualm from Cittamatra: 
If, as asserted by Prasangika, the self-knowe r does not exist, at a later time, how would 
consciousness be remembered? 
 Cittamatra asserts that there is an experiencer  of the eye consciousness apprehending blue that 
was generated at an earlier time. Later, we can re call   that eye consciousness apprehending blue 
that was generated earlier. When the thought, “I saw blue yesterday” arises, not only can we remember the colour blue that 
we saw yesterday, we can also remember the eye consciousness apprehending blue that was 
generated then. For Cittamatra, the reason we can remember there was an eye consciousness 
apprehending blue yesterday is because we “exp erienced” that eye consciousness apprehending 
blue yesterday. In other words, if something were  not experienced at an earlier time, it would be 
impossible to remember it later.   A fundamental assertion of Cittamatra is that ph enomena are inherently existent, so when they 
assert an experiencer  of consciousness, they have only tw o options: the consciousness either (1) 
experiences itself or (2) it is expe rienced by another  consciousness. 
 Cittamatra says that we cannot have another cons ciousness experiencing a consciousness (as in 
option 2) because this leads to th e fallacy of limitless regression. Therefore, they have to assert 
that there is a self-knower, a consciousness experiencing itself.  
Response from Prasangika: It is remembered through experience and/In relation to other, like the poison of a 
rat. 
 
Prasangika refutes the Cittamatra assertion of a se lf-knower because Prasangika asserts that it is 
possible to remember things wi thout positing a self-knower. 
 For Prasangika, the memory of the eye consciousn ess apprehending blue comes from the force of 
experiencing the object, the colo u r  b l u e .  T h a t  e x p e r i e n c e  o f  t h e  o b j e c t  i s  d i f f e r e n t  f r o m  t h e  
subject, the mind that apprehends blue. Wh en we remember blue, our memory does not 
selectively only remember blue and discard the memory of the eye consciousness apprehending 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
349  
blue. Through the force of memory of blue, we remember both the obje ct, blue (that we had 
apprehended with our eye consciousness before ) and also remember the subject, the eye 
consciousness apprehending blue. Therefore, we can remember both the object and the subject 
without asserting a self-knower.  
 We can remember something without experiencing it. For example, we are bitten by a mosquito. 
We are aware of being bitten but we are not awar e that the virus has entered our body. When the 
bite swells up a few days later, only then do we  recall that we had been  bitten by a mosquito and 
generate the conceptual thought that the virus from the mosquito must have entered our body at 
that time. We have this kind of remembering consciousness.   Does a memory of something have to be based on experience? Cittamatra maintains that we can 
only remember something that we have experien ced while Prasangika asserts that memory need 
not be preceded by experience.  
 
(Verse 24 shares the same outline as verse 23 ). 
(9,24) 
[Cittamatra ]: 
Because those possessing other conditions see it, 
It is clear to itself. 
[Madhyamaka ]: 
Through applying the eye medicine of attainment 
Vases are seen, but the eye medicine is not. 
 
When we attain concentration, we have the clairvoyant power to ‘see’ the minds of others. 
 
Qualm from Cittamatra: 
Achieving clairvoyance, our minds will be able to  ‘see’ the minds of others even if they are far 
away. If this is so, obviously our own mind can s ee itself. If we can see subtle forms from a great 
distance, obviously, we can see coar se forms that are near to us.  
 
This is another argument put forth by Cittamatr a to justify their position that the mind can 
experience itself and there is a self-knower. 
 
Response from Prasangika: Through applying the eye medicine of attainment,/Vases are seen, but the eye 
medicine is not. 
 
Being able to see far distances does not necessarily  mean we can see something that is closer to 
us. For example, by applying a special eye loti on made from special substances and with the 
recitation of mantras, we can see treasures  hidden underground.  However we cannot see the eye lotion that was applied to the ey es. This shows that being able to see things far away does not 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
350  
necessarily mean that we will be able to see things that are closer to us. 
Lesson 63   Chapter IX - verse 22-29 
a’ A general refutation of the proponents of true existence such as the Sautrantikas 
b’ A refutation of the Cittamatra position in particular 
1” Stating their position 
2” Refuting that 
a” The similarity [between their objection and ours] 
b” Refuting the response to that 
(1) Stating the position 
(2) Refuting that 
(a) It is not seen by any non-dualistic awareness (b) Refuting the self-cognizer posed in the response to the query 
(i) Scriptural refutation 
(ii) Refutation by reasoning 
(iii) Refuting the syllogism [that asse rts] the existence of a self-cognizer 
(1’) An example illustrating the pr oduction of memories despite the 
lack of a self-cognizer 
(2’) Refuting [the position that says] .If there is no self-cognizer, it is 
untenable for there to be a cognizer of others. 
(a’) The actual 
(b’) Refuting that very illusion from mind and its 
inexpressibility to others 
(iv) Refuting the position that holds imputed existents to be possessors of 
truly established supports for functioning things 
c’ Abandoning the consequence that even the Madhyamakas’ need for the path realizing emptiness has 
no power 
 
Dependent Arising – A Praise of the Buddha 
15 
You spoke, therefore, wi th the roar of a lion 
again and again on this absence of nature, 
and amid the assemblies of the wise, 
who dared to challenge you?  
 
You spoke, therefore, with the roar of a li on/again and again on this absence of nature : Asserting that 
phenomena are inherently existent leads to many problems. If things and events are inherently 
existent, nirvana cannot be achieved and there is  no way that we can be liberated from cyclic 
existence.   
 
Due to these faults, Buddha taught that there is  no phenomenon that is inherently existent. 
Buddha expounded the topic of emptiness like the ro ar of a lion. The lion is known as the lord 
of the jungle and when the lion roars,   other animals dare not challenge it. 
 
The Buddha’s teachings on the absence of inherent  existence cannot be refuted or challenged by 
any scriptural authority or any form of logic an d reasoning. This verse is saying that whoever 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
351  
examines the Buddha’s teachings on emptiness, no  matter how hard these scholars try, in the 
end, they will see the validity of the Buddha’s teachings: that things do not exist inherently. 
These teachings accord with reality and show the actual mode of existence of things and 
phenomena.  
 
(2’) Refuting [the position that says] .If there is no self-cognizer, it is untenable for there to be a cognizer 
of others. 
(a’) The actual 
(9, 25) 
[Madhyamaka ]: 
Just seeing, hearing, and knowing 
Are not what are negated here. 
Here it is that whic h causes suffering – 
The conception of them as truly existent – that is to be averted. 
 
Cittamatra asserts that all phen omena exist truly. The Madhyami kas assert that all phenomena 
(both objects and subjects) do not exist truly. Th e counter-argument from Cittamatra is that if 
things do not exist truly, there is no way that  our eye consciousnesses can see forms, our ear 
consciousnesses can hear sounds and our minds ca n understand things. If things are not truly 
existent, there is no way they can function like that.  
Qualm from Cittamatra
: 
Prasangika does not assert self-knowers becaus e they maintain that the consciousness cannot 
illuminate or experience itself. If that is the ca se, that means the consciousness is also unable to 
illuminate or experience another consciousness which negates the existence of an other knower. 
If there is no other knower, it would not be possi ble to posit an eye consciousness that sees, an 
ear consciousness that hears and so forth.  
 
Response from Prasangika : 
Just seeing, hearing, and knowing/ Are not what are negated here. 
 
Prasangika clarifies that they are not refuting that the ear consciousness hears sounds, the eye 
consciousness sees forms and the mental consciousn ess is able to know things. These things exist 
conventionally but, on their own, ar e insufficient to cause us suffering.  
 
Here it is that which causes suffering - /The concepti on of them as truly existe nt – that is to be averted : 
Prasangika refutes the conception which grasps ph enomena as existing in the way they appear to 
our minds. Our consciousnesses perceive phenomena as existing from their own side and  believe 
they exist like that. This is the root of all our suffering. 
 
(b’) Refuting that very illusion from mind and its inexpressibility to others 
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
352  
(9,26) 
[Cittamatra ]: 
The illusory are not other than the mind yet 
They are also not considered to be other. 
[Madhyamaka ]: 
If it is a thing, how could it not be other? 
Stating “It is not other,” it would not exist as a thing. 
 
(9,27) 
Just as the illusory are not truly existent but are viewed, 
Likewise [the mind] is that which acts to view. 
 
Cittamatra asserts that there are no external obje cts.  Objects appear to exist externally as 
separate entities from the mind but, in reality,  this is not how they ex ist. They are not of a 
different substance from the mind itself, yet they are not the mind. The illusory are not other than 
the mind yet/They are also not considered to be other.  As stated in the outline, form is inexpressible.  
 
Cittamatra asserts that forms are truly existent. In  their presentation of the basis of reality, 
anything that exists can be subsumed into th ree natures: other powered nature , thoroughly 
established nature, and imputational nature  Other powered nature and thoroughly established natures are truly existent. Only imputational 
nature is not truly existent. Form is truly existent because it is other powered nature. 
 
Response from Prasangika :  
Cittamatra asserts that forms are truly exis tent. This means that forms must exist exactly  in the 
way they appear  to the mind. Since forms appear as extern al objects, therefore, external objects 
exist. If external objects exist, they exist as separate entities from the mind and are not mind.  
 
If Cittamatra were to insist that form is not a different entity from the mind, the fault would be 
that the consciousness apprehending that  form also cannot be truly existent.  
 
If it is a thing, how could it not be other?/Stati ng “It is not other,” it would not exist as a thing .  
 
Cittamatra holds that form which appe ars as an external object is a fa lsity. If that is so, then the 
consciousness apprehending that form also cannot be truly existent since Cittamatra also asserts 
that the form and the consciousness apprehen ding it cannot be of different substances. 
 The fundamental assertion of Cittamatra is that co nsciousness is truly exis tent. That is why they 
assert self-knower. If consciousness is not tr uly existent, then there will a fault with the 
presentation of the perceiver and the perceived  object. 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
353  
 
In the system of Prasangika, the illusory-like form  which appears as the ex ternal object and does 
not exist truly can be conventionally posited as form, the object to be perceived. Likewise, the 
mind is not truly existent, but it can be conventionally posited as the perceiver. Just as the illusory 
are not truly existent but are vi ewed,/Likewise [the mind] is that which acts to view. 
 
(iv)Refuting the position that holds imputed existents to be possessors of truly established supports for 
functioning things 
(9, 27 cd) 
[Cittamatra ]: 
Cyclic existence has as its support that which is a thing, 
Otherwise it would be like space. 
 
(9,28) 
[Madhyamaka ]: 
If that which is not a thing depends on a thing, 
How can it have a function? 
Your mind would be alone 
Without companions. 
 
(9,29) 
If the mind were free from apprehendeds 
Everyone would be a tathagata. 
If so, what quality would there be 
In considering there to be mere mind? 
 
According to Cittamatra, phenom ena are either substantially ex istent or imputedly existent. 
Whatever is an imputed existent necessarily has a base (support). This base is substantially 
existent and is truly existent.   For example, a person is an imputed existence who necessarily relies on  substantial existence as a 
base (support). That support is th e mind-basis-of- all of the person. To Cittamatra, the illustration 
of a person is the mind-basis-of- all.  To Cittamatra, subject and object appearing as di fferent entities are mistaken appearances.  The 
supports for cyclic existence and mist aken appearance are truly existent. 
 T o  C i t t a m a t r a ,  i f  a  p h e n o m e n o n  s u c h  a s  c y c l i c  existence does not have a truly existent basis 
( s u p p o r t ) ,  t h e n  i t  w i l l  b e  l i k e  s p a c e ,  u n a f f e c t e d  b y  a n y  k i n d  o f  c a u s e s  o r  c o n d i t i o n s .  I t  m e a n s  functioning things become permanent or  uncomp osed phenomena in which case, there will be 
no way out of cyclic existence.  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
354  
 
Response from Prasangika: 
Cittamatra asserts that, for liberation from cyclic existence to be possible, imputed existents, like 
cyclic existence, need to depend on truly existe nt phenomena as their support. But if that which 
is not a thing depends on a thing, how can it have a function? 
  Since Cittamatra asserts that consciousness is truly existent, that  consciousness which is the basis 
for cyclic existence has to be inherently one and it  cannot possess any parts. If that is case, how is 
liberation from cyclic existence possible??   Cittamatra asserts that the basis of cyclic exis tence is the truly existent consciousness. If 
consciousness is truly existent, that means that  the mind has always existed alone and was not 
accompanied by cyclic existence. That mind will be free of stains or faults, which means that all 
sentient beings are already buddhas. If that is th e case, what is the purpose of developing all the 
arguments to prove that everything is in the en tity of mind and that things do not exist as 
separate entities from the mind?   In summary:  For Cittamatra, an imputed existent such as pers on or cyclic existence must necessarily depend 
on a support which has to be a truly existent fu nctioning thing. If the support is not a truly 
existent functioning thing, that im puted existent will not be valid. 
 
Prasangika argues that if the imputed existent such  as person or cyclic existence were to  depend 
on a truly existent functioning thing as its suppo rt, then liberation from cyclic existence could 
not be achieved.  
 
To Cittamatra, the person is an imputed existent and its support is the truly existent functioning 
thing, the-mind-basis-of-all. If the mind-basis-of-all is truly existent, it has to be inherently one and 
not posses any parts. If that is the case, that mi nd cannot possess any stains or faults. This means 
all sentient beings are buddhas.   Because of this problem, Prasangika says the ba sis for the support of the person has to be a 
functioning thing that is not truly existent. Th is is the same logic expressed in Nagarjuna’s 
Fundamental Treatise on Wisdom  which says, If everything is empty, everything  is possible. If everything is 
not empty, nothing is possible. 
Lesson 64(new term for ABC)   Chapter IX - verse 1-3 - review 
I always mention at the first session of each seme ster the importance of generating a strong sense 
of courage and determination to start and co mplete the subject. By generating such 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
355  
determination from the onset,  we are far more li kely to be able to continue and complete the 
entire subject. Otherwise, it is difficult  to even continue coming for classes.  
 
I bought some dharmachakras (or dharma wheels) as presents for everyone during my recent trip.  
There are two colours: the green signifying Mother  Tara and the yellow one signifying Manjushri. 
This is an auspicious dependent arising as the dharma wheel is an important symbol for dharma 
teachers. It points to one’s ability to continue on e’s studies and being able to benefit others in a 
big way with the knowledge and understanding that is gained through such studies.  
 
We can see in the world today many different kinds of problems and difficulties: physical and mental sufferings, people criticis ing and being criticised, looking down on and 
being looked down upon by others, relationship problems in families, marriages and friendships and so forth.     
All the difficulties we experience originate from the ego, the grasping at an inherently existent ‘I’ 
or ‘self’ that exists from its own side.  Believin g such an ‘I’ exists, we engage in all kinds of 
activities in order to achieve happiness for ours elves. We become unhappy when our desires are 
thwarted. Just as those who are disturbed by or  harmed by spirits get into trouble, we get 
ourselves into difficulties because of our self-grasping ignorance.  
 When our main purpose in life is to overcome pr oblems and to achieve the happiness of this life 
alone, then we are no better than animals who do  the same thing in thei r daily lives. The only 
difference is that we have different bodies. Bu t since we have this human life, we must do 
something better with it . Of course we need the necessities of life, such as food and so on, to 
survive but when they become the central focus of our lives, it is not a skilful way to lead our 
lives.   In our daily lives, we should reflect and chec k to see where our emphasis lies. Are we more 
concerned with this life alone or are we more focussed on our   future lives? If we find that we have little interest in our future lives, then we should ask ourselves: how different am I then from 
animals?   As human beings with our advanced mental capaci ty and intelligence, we should lead a superior 
existence. Superficially, we may feel we are better  than  animals. But when we deeply analyse the 
reasons for our feeling this way, if our primar y concerns are limited to getting good food, 
acquiring wealth, reputation and possessions, it is highly questionable whether we are superior to 
animals. We may behave differently at a physical level but our desires are no different from their 
cravings.    In essence, since all our undesirable experience s come from our self-grasping ignorance, our 
problems can only end when this ignorance is co mpletely eradicated. Prayers alone or the mere 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
356  
wish to be free from problems will not get rid of our suffering. In order to remove suffering, we 
need to get rid of the root of sufferi ng, the self-grasping ignorance.  The only way to do this is to 
generate the wisdom realising that such an inhere ntly existent self does not exist and to achieve 
that, we need to listen to and study the teachings on how to develop the wisdom realising 
emptiness. We need to reflect on what we have heard. Then based on our reflections, we need to 
meditate to familiarise ourselves with the mean ing of emptiness that we had ascertained.  
 
For those truly seeking liberation from suffering , the teachings exhort th em to work hard to 
develop this wisdom. It is not easy – to simply  identify this self-grasping ignorance is very 
difficult.  
 
Self-grasping ignorance refers to the conception of grasping at the person that exists by way of its 
own character, which is posited as the subtle selfle ssness. In order to know this subtle selflessness, 
we must first know the presentation of the coarse and subtle levels of selflessness and the coarse 
and subtle presentations of the Four Noble Truths.  
 There is a discussion on the meaning of the coar se and subtle levels of impermanence at the 
beginning of the Four Noble Truths. Only then can we understand that a permanent, unitary 
and independent self cannot possibly exist. Ba sed on that understanding, we can then 
understand that the self -sufficient substantially ex istent person also cannot possibly exist. On the 
basis of understanding this coarser level of selfle ssness, we can understand the most subtle level 
of selflessness, i.e.,  the emptiness of the person  existing by way of its own character.  Through 
this process of studying and ascertainment on th e coarse and subtle levels of impermanence, the 
mind moves towards impermanence and the understand ing that that is really how things are.   
 It is difficult enough to just understand coarse impermanence. For example, it is difficult to have the thought, “I will die sooner or later.” Many  of our friends, relatives and loved ones had 
already died or some of them are about to die. The remaining ones will definitely have to die one 
day. But for ourselves, it is difficult to have th e thought that we are goin g to die and that death 
may come today. This kind of thought never aris es in our minds. When coarse impermanence is 
already so difficult for us, then we  don’t even have to talk about emptiness. Therefore, the proper 
method is to study and ascertain both the coarse  and subtle levels of impermanence and then 
move on to look at the meaning of  coarse and subtle selflessness. 
 In summary, the root of all the suffering we experience is the ego, the self -grasping ignorance. 
The only antidote  is the wisdom realising emptiness or se lflessness and the way to do this is to 
depend on the unmistaken texts and treatises that  explain the meaning of selflessness. Therefore, 
our motivation  for studying these unmistaken texts and tr eatises that focus on this wisdom is to 
achieve liberation and omniscience, the state of full enlightenment so that we can benefit all 
sentient beings.   
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
357  
The fact we have this opportunit y to listen and to study these unmistaken texts and treatises on 
emptiness shows how unbelievably fo rtunate we are and   is a sign  that we had accumulated very 
powerful virtue, vast amounts of merit and had ma de prayers in our past lives to receive these 
teachings. The opportunity we have now did not arise without cause and is not something that 
arises without the correct conditions. It shows how unbelievably fortunate we are just to hear the 
teachings on emptiness which places strong imprin ts  on our mental continua. We will be even 
more fortunate if we can reflect and meditate on emptiness. When we understand and realise 
this, then there is reason for us  to be happy and to rejoice! 
 
This opportunity to study and reflect on selfle ssness and emptiness fulfils the purpose of our 
human lives. If we were born as cats or dogs, there would be  no way for us to listen and reflect on the meaning of emptiness. We have this o pportunity now which is the result of having 
accumulated great virtue in the past, which will all go to waste if we do not capitalise on this 
opportunity.   
 
Therefore, we should remind ourselves how un believably fortunate we are to  have the 
opportunity to listen to, reflect and meditate on  these teachings on empt iness. We should also 
remind ourselves that this opportunity is the resu lt of the virtue we had accumulated in the past. 
This being the case, whenever we attend these teac hings, we should take great pains to make sure 
that we pay full attention.   By listening attentively to the teachings, the im prints placed on our mental continua will be 
stable and strong. Then, when we receive such teac hings again in our future lives, it will become 
much easier for us to understand them. Therefore, we should always pray that we will be able to listen, reflect and meditate on the teachings on emptiness.  
 It would be wonderful if  we can develop this wisdom in this very life. But even if that does not happen, we should pray that, in all our future live s, we will always have the opportunity to receive 
such teachings on emptiness and be able to medita te on them till we realise emptiness. Once we 
have realised  emptiness, we can remove the r oot of our problems, the self-grasping ignorance. 
Since we have this opportunity now, we should tr y our best to listen to, study and reflect on the 
unmistaken texts on emptiness as much as we ca n. We would then have fulfilled the purpose of 
being born human.   We would also fulfil the purpose of having met the Buddha’s teaching s as the teachings on 
emptiness are their very essence.   
Even if we were to spend our days and nights  li stening to teachings on emptiness, reflecting on 
the meaning of emptiness and familiarising ours elves with the meaning of emptiness that we 
have ascertained, that would be a wise and purposef ul life choice. It is a valid and reasonable way 
of spending our time because once we have deve loped the wisdom realising emptiness, the root 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
358  
of all our problems would be destroyed. We would th en have fulfilled our heart wish to be free of  
problems and difficulties in our lives.  
 
As mentioned earlier, the self-grasping ignora nce cannot be eradicated by mere prayers. 
Sometimes, there is a danger of increasing ou r  p r o b l e m s  b y  m e r e l y  p r a y i n g .  W h e n  w e  d o  n o t  
understand what self-grasping ignorance is, we wi ll continue to believe that the ‘I’ is real and 
inherently existent. This ‘I’ wants to be happy an d avoid suffering. When this  ‘I’ starts to pray to 
get rid of the self-grasping ignorance, while stil l clinging on to the notion of the inherently 
existent ‘I,’ it will only serv e to strengthen the ego.   
 
In order to get rid of this self-grasping ignorance (or ego), we need to understand how it works. It 
i s  g r a s p i n g  a t  i t s  o b j e c t ,   b e  i t  t h e  ‘ I ’  o r  s o me other phenomenon, as existing inherently, as 
existing from its own side. When we can generate another mind that realises that, in reality, the 
‘I’ does not exist in the way we believe it to exist, we can then slowly weaken our ego.  
 
(Geshe-la then proceeds to revi ew the verses of Chapter 9) 
(1) 
The Muni (the Subduer) ta ught all these branches 
For the purpose of wisdom 
Therefore, those who wish to pacify suffering 
Should generate wisdom (wisdom realizing emptiness) 
 As mentioned earlier, the root of all our sufferings is  our ego,  the mind that  believes the ‘I’ to be 
inherently existent. Our suffering will be pacified and we will be liberated when  we can get rid of 
the root of all our problems by realising emptiness.   When we want to achieve the state of full enligh tenment for the benefit of sentient beings, then 
it is absolutely necessary to generate this wisd om in our minds. We need this wisdom realising 
emptiness to remove our negative emotions, thei r seeds and predispositions (or obstructions to 
omniscience). Furthermore, that wisdom has to be  supported by a great collection of merit. In 
order to generate this merit, the earlier chapters of this text ( all these branches)  discussed the 
perfections of generosity, ethics, patience, joyo us perseverance and concentration that support 
and make the wisdom realising emptiness  powe rful enough to act as the antidote to the 
obstructions to omniscience.   
In order to achieve the respective goals of eith er the Hinayana or Mahayana, one must definitely 
generate this wisdom realising emptiness. What  is the difference between the Mahayana (Great 
Vehicle) and the Hinayana (Lesser Vehicle)? They are not differentiated by their view of reality 
because both of them agree that all things are em pty of inherent existence. However, the wisdom 
realising emptiness generated by the Hinayanist does not have the power to overcome the 
imprints of the negative emotions (obstructions to  omniscience). It only has the power to destroy 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
359  
the negative emotions themselves  whereas the wisdom realising emptiness generated in the mind 
of the Mahayanist has the power to overcome the im prints of the negative emotions. Why is this 
so? The difference lies in the accumulation of merit.  The Hinayana and Mahayana are therefore 
differentiated not by the view but by the method (collection of merit/virtue). The collection of 
merit refers to the generation of  bodhicitta, the altruistic intent ion to achieve enlightenment for 
the benefit of all sentient beings. The first verse is emphasising the importance of developing this 
wisdom.  
(2) 
The conventional ("thoroughly obscuring" ) and the ultimate ("highest meaning") 
Are asserted to be the two truths 
 
In order to establish the meaning of emptiness in  our minds, we have to understand the reality 
of existence. Any phenomenon (or ex istent or object of knowledge) can be categorised as either a  
conventional truth  or ultimate truth .  
 
What is the basis for the designation of convention al or ultimate truth? If  the existence of that 
phenomenon accords with what appears to the mind, that phenomenon is classified as an 
ultimate truth . 
 
If the existence of that phenomen on does not accord with what appears to the mind, then that 
phenomenon is classified as a conventional truth . 
 Let us take our bodies as an example. There is  a conventional valid cognizer (or mind) that 
realises (or directly apprehends) the body. The body  appears to that mind as  existing from its own 
side, as inherently existent. Al though this is how the body appears  to the mind realising it, in 
reality, the body does not exist inherently. There is a disparity  between the way it appears to the 
conventional valid cognizer and the way it actua lly exists. The mind apprehends the body in a 
dualistic way. The object (body) is seen as separa te from the mind (subject) realising it. The body 
is an example then of a conventional truth.   The emptiness of the truly existent body is an ultimate truth. This is because the mind that 
realises the emptiness of the truly existent body  accords with the way th e body exists. There is no 
disparity between the way it appears to the mind (i.e. the emptiness of the body) and the way the 
body exists (i.e., it is empty of true existence) . The mind realising the emptiness of the body does 
so in a non-dualistic manner, i.e., through th e subsidence of all dualistic appearances.  
 According to the highest philosophical school (or tenet system), the Consequence Middle Way 
School [Prasangika-Ma dhyamaka], with the exception of the wisdom that realises emptiness 
directly, all other minds in the mental continua  of sentient beings are necessarily mistaken 
consciousnesses. All these consciousnesses are perv aded by the appearance of true existence. All 
phenomena appear to sentient beings as truly exis tent (inherently existent, as existing from their 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
360  
own side). This does not necessarily mean that mistaken consciousnesses cannot  be a valid 
cognizer. According to the higher schools, mistaken  consciousnesses can also be  valid cognizers.  
 
The definitions of the two truths are given in the next two lines of Verse 2: 
 
(2 cd) 
The ultimate are not the sphere of activity of the intellect 
The intellect is said to be "thoroughly obscuring." 
 
The persons establishing these two truths are: yogis and common people.  
(3)  
With respect to them, worldly beings are seen 
To be of two types: yogis and common people. 
 The yogis refers to those who have realised the emptiness of true existence, having achieved a 
concentration which is the union of calm abidin g and special insight focussing on emptiness.  
 The common people refer to those who expound that phenomena are truly established (truly 
existent).  When we differentiate the yogis and the commo n people from the perspective of the four 
Buddhist tenets, then the yogis refer to propon ents of the Middle Way Schools (Madhyamika) 
and the common people refer to proponents of th e lower tenet systems: the Mind Only School 
(Cittamatra), the Sutra School (Sautrantika) an d the Great Exposition School (Vaibhasika). 
These three schools all assert that  all phenomena exist inherently. 
 
In some other commentaries, the yogis refer to th ose who have achieved the wisdom arising from 
hearing, reflection and meditation on the lack  of inherent existence (emptiness). The common 
people refer to those who have not achieved any of this. 
 The four schools of Buddhist te nets (established conclusions)  are Vaibhasika, Sautrantika, 
Cittamatra and Madhyamika:  Most of the assertions of Vaibhasika are meant to  refute the mistaken assertions of certain non-
Buddhist philosophical systems. Some of the assertions of Sautrantika are meant to  refute the incorrect assertions of Vaibhasika. 
Some of the assertions of Cittamatra are meant to refute the incorrect assertions of Sautrantika. 
Some of the assertions of the Madhyamika are meant to refute the incorrect assertions of 
Cittamatra.  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
361  
As can be seen, there is a gradual increase in the profundity and subtlety of the philosophical 
position. The most correct assertions are pu t forward by Prasangika who assert that all 
phenomena are empty of true existence.  
  To Prasangika, the body is an illustration of a conventional truth and the emptiness of the truly 
existent body is an ultimate truth. Therefore,  everything that exists is not truly existent. 
 
The proponents of the lower schools cannot accept  this assertion. For ex ample, the proponents 
of Sautrantika and Cittamatra refute Prasangika  position by saying their assertion is not 
supported by logic and reasoning. If everything do es not truly exist, they question the point of 
accumulating merit, the validity of rebirth, the purpose of generating virtue and non-virtue and 
so forth.  
 One example is the potential of fire to burn. Th e lower schools argue:  “How can you say that 
fire is not truly existent and is merely labelled by the mind? Fire has the ability to burn from its 
own side. You can see that for yourself.” In th e previous module, we had seen how the higher 
school refuted this objection.
75 
 
We can see that all the reasoning and logic used by the highest school is accurate and accords 
with reality. We need to understand their line of reasoning. The main purpose of looking at the 
objections put up by the lower schools to th e highest school is to understand how those 
                                              
75  
The lower tenets:  If something arises in dependence on causes and conditions, that 
phenomenon exists truly. For example, fire has the ability to burn and its 
function is to burn naturally.  
From the side of the fire, it has the potential to burn. This is not imputed 
or labelled by the mind. We can directly perceive this – that fire burns and has the potential to do so from its own side.      
Prasangika:  “Since the worldly see things and/Conceive them to be perfectly real,/Not illusion-
like; it is here/That yogis and worldly beings debate’ . 
 We both can directly perceive (or cognise) in a valid way that functioning things (such as fire) have a potential to perform their function (i.e., to burn). This is the common position we share. However, you grasp at the fire’s potential to burn as real and existing truly.  
 This is, in fact, mental fabrication. You are unable to comprehend that the fire’s potential to burn is illusory and does not exist truly. We realise that the fire’s potential to burn is merely labelled (or designated). From its own 
side, the fire is “empty” of its potential to burn and because of that, it 
exists like an illusion. We realise that but you do not.  
(Lesson 57, Chapter IX, pg. 317/318) 
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
362  
objections are  refuted by correct reasoning. We  can then establish that  the assertions by the 
highest school are correct and in accordance with the reality that everything that exists is not truly 
existent.  
 
 
Question from student : Is there any difference in the meaning of emptiness as taught in sutra and 
tantra? 
 
Answer:  Amongst the views of emptiness asserted by  the different tenet systems, Prasangika’ 
assertion is the supreme authority with regards to  the view. Their view of  emptiness is the most 
profound and correct. The view of emptiness practi sed in the sutric path is exactly the same as 
that practised in tantra. When we talk ab out emptiness from the perspective of the object , the 
view of emptiness in sutra and tantra are exactly the same.  
 
However there is a difference with respect to the su bject, i.e., the mind that  realises emptiness in 
sutra and tantra.  
 
Answer to student’s question : It is the common position of the four Tibetan Buddhist traditions 
(Nyingma, Sakya, Kagyu and Gelug) that the fi nal view of emptiness is that expounded by 
Nagarjuna (which is the view of Prasangika) and Chandrakirti.  
 With respect to Cittamatra, rega rdless of who the proponent of Cittamatra may be, the assertion 
of Cittamatra is not the final view. There is a close re lationship between the assertion of 
Cittamatra – that everything is in the entity of  the mind, and the assertion of the Madhyamika, 
i.e., that everything is merely labelled by the mind but they are not the same.  Understanding the 
assertion of Cittamatra helps us to understand an d realise the assertion of  the higher school. In 
some texts, it is said that by familiarising one’s  mind with the view of emptiness as taught by 
Cittamatra, it is possible to develop certain realis ations of the completion stage of highest yoga 
tantra. 
Lesson 65   Chapter IX - verse 30-32 
D The way to train in wisdom- the nature of insight 
a. Explaining the chapter’s material 
1) Teaching that one who wants to attain liberation must develop the wisdom realizing suchness 
2) The methods by which one develops the wisdom realizing suchness 
a) A presentation of the two truths 
i) The actual ii) Abandoning the objection that the need for emptiness has no power 
1’ The actual 
2’ Abandoning the supposed harm to that 
a’ A general refutation of the proponents of true existence such as the 
Sautrantikas 
b’ A refutation of the Cittamatra position in particular 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
363  
c’ Abandoning the consequence that even the Madhyamakas’ need for the 
path realizing emptiness has no power 
1’’ Objection 
2’’ The response 
a’’ The reasons an illusionist generates attachment 
b’’ Showing the validity of [the position that says] that the 
afflictions along with the imprints they’ve left behind are 
abandoned by familiarizing oneself with the wisdom realizing 
emptiness 
(1) A general presentation 
(2) Explaining the particulars 
c’’ Showing that the excellent effect of abandonment arises 
(1) The validity of fulfilling the hopes of the disciple despite the fact there is no conception, along with an 
example (2) Abandoning objections to that 
b) Establishing that even someone who wants to attain mere liberation must realize 
emptiness c) An extensive explanation of the reasoning establishing emptiness 
3) Instructions on making effort to de velop that [realization of emptiness] 
b The chapter’s name  
We had looked at how the conventional and ultima te truths are posited in the last lesson. There 
are four Buddhist philosophical systems (or tenets ) and each has its own way of presenting the 
two truths. From the perspective of the highest sc hool, Prasangika asserts that all phenomena are 
empty of true existence. The lower tenets object to this assertion. 
  
Sautrantika has raised many obje ctions. The proponents of Cittamatra are also unable to accept 
that things are empty of true existence. For exam ple, they argue: “If you (Prasangika) say that 
everything is empty of true existence and is illu sion-like, then the consciousness that apprehends 
that phenomenon would also have to be illusion -like and would be empty of true existence.” To 
Cittamatra, this is not acceptable because if th e illusion-like consciousness is empty of true 
existence, this would mean that  consciousness does not exist at  all and illusion-like objects 
cannot be posited.    Because of their difficulties in accepting the hi ghest school’s position, Cittamatra raised many 
objections to their assertions which we studied in the previous module. 
c’ Abandoning the consequence that even the Madhyamakas’ need for the path realizing emptiness has 
no power 
1’’ Objection 
2’’ The response 
a’’ The reasons an illusionist generates attachment 
(30) 
Even if one knows them to be like illusions, 
How will the afflictions be averted? 
Even the very one who creates an illusory woman 
Can develop attachment to her. 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
364  
 
(In the Tibetan text, this outline appears simply as Objection .) 
 
Qualm from Cittamatra :  
Prasangika have put in time and effort to esta blish that phenomena are empty of true existence 
and are like illusions as a way to remove the nega tive emotions in our mind. There is no point to 
doing this because afflictions cannot be aban doned with the realisation that phenomena are 
empty of true existence. For example, a magician  who has created an illusion of an attractive 
woman can still develop attachment to that il lusory woman even though he knows that the 
woman does not exist.  
(31) 
That creator has not abandoned th e latencies of the afflictions 
With respect to objects of knowledge, 
Therefore when he looks at her 
His latencies of emptiness are weak. 
 
Response from Prasangika: 
The magician who created the illusion of the beautiful woman has not abandoned the manifest 
grasping at phenomena as being truly existent. In order for him to abandon attachment to his 
created illusion, he must develop the mind that realises that the illusory woman is empty of true 
existence.  
 There are many ways to get rid of the mistaken  consciousness which can be conceptual or non-
conceptual in nature.  For example, when we are travelling in a moving  car, the trees on the roadside appear to be 
moving very quickly. The mental consciousness knows that trees are immobile but, when the 
conditions come together, nevertheless, there is the appearance of moving trees. Many conditions 
(or factors) contribute to the arising of th e non-conceptual mistaken consciousness.  
 In this particular example, th e appearance of the moving trees  arises upon the basis of the 
moving vehicle. When we remove that condition by stopping the vehicle,  the appearance of the 
moving trees will be stopped. Simply  knowing in  our minds that trees do not move will not stop 
the appearance of the moving trees when we are travelling in a moving vehicle. This is an 
example of a non-conceptual mistaken consciousness.  An example of the conceptual mistaken consciousn ess is mistaking a coil of rope lying on the 
ground in the dark for a snake or mistaking a tree for a person or ghost. The contributing factor 
here is darkness.  We can remove this mistaken consciousness by moving nearer to the coil of 
rope or tree. When we realise it is only a coil of rope, immediately,  the conceptual  thought that 
misapprehended the coil of rope to be a snake is  eliminated. We do not need to meditate, using 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
365  
the coil of rope as the object, to realise that it is not a snake.  
 
The above examples illustrate that there are di fferent ways to overcome conceptual and non-
conceptual mistaken consciousnesses. In certain cases, we can eliminate the mistaken conception 
immediately while other situations demand more time.  
 Similarly, we can relate this to our grasping at  the true existence of ph enomena. This mistaken 
consciousness has been with us since time wi thout beginning. For us, the mere understanding 
that phenomena are not truly existent is not enough  to get rid of this misc onception. We have to 
continually familiarise ourselves with the realisatio n that things do not ex ist truly. We have to 
progress through different stages to destroy this  ignorance of grasping at true existence. 
 This is why we have the five paths for ordinary  and superior beings. The divisions of the paths 
illustrate the gradual way of eliminating afflicti ons, which are classified into intellectually 
acquired afflictions and innate afflictions.   Intellectually acquired afflictions are abandoned on the path of seeing when we generate the 
uninterrupted path of seeing and we attain the direct realisation of emptiness without reliance 
on a mental image. This is the direct antidote  that can overcome the intellectually acquired 
afflictions.  According to Prasangika, the innate afflictions ar e divided into nine levels which are abandoned 
from the 1
st up to the 7th bodhisattva grounds on the path of meditation. When the nine levels of 
afflictions are abandoned and the 8th bodhisattva ground is achieved, we would have abandoned 
all afflictions with their seeds.  
 
In order to achieve omniscience (full enlighte nment) when all objects of knowledge can be 
directly perceived, we need to remove the obst ructions to omniscience,  which are abandoned at 
the 8th to 10th bodhisattva grounds. When we abandon th e obstructions to liberation (afflictions 
and their seeds) and the obstructions to omniscienc e (their imprints), we achieve the state of full 
enlightenment.  
Overcoming the afflictions are a gradual process and cannot be achieved overnight or by the mere realisation of emptiness alone. We have to familiarise our minds repeatedly with the 
emptiness that has already been realised. With su ch familiarisation over time, we move through 
the paths and grounds and gradually eliminate the va rious levels of afflictions until the state of 
full enlightenment is achieved.   
 
Showing the necessity of the realisation of emptin ess of phenomena, we overcome the objections 
of Cittamatra who asserts that there is no  need to achieve this realisation.  
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
366  
We have to generate many uninterrupted path s (which are the antido tes) to overcome the 
mistaken consciousness of grasping at true exis tence on the way to enli ghtenment. Ignorance had 
existed in our minds since beginningless time. We are, therefore, complete ly familiar with the 
mistaken way of looking at phenomena as truly exis tent. To overcome this, we have to rely on the 
antidotes for a long time. It is not like ridding ourselves of the mistaken thought of seeing the 
coil of rope as a snake. That mistaken though t did not exist since beginningless time but only 
came about due to the adventitious condition of da rkness. It is also unlike the mistaken notion 
of the appearance of the moving trees, which is easily stopped the moment we stop the condition 
of the moving vehicle.   
 
b” Showing the validity of [the position that says] along with the imprints they’ve left behind are 
abandoned familiarizing oneself with the wisdom realizing emptiness 
(1) A general presentation 
(32) 
Through cultivating the latencies of emptiness 
The latencies of [apprehending] things will be abandoned, and 
Through familiarizing with “N othing whatsoever exists,” 
Later on [the apprehending of] that too will be abandoned. 
 
Through cultivating the latencies of  emptiness, the latencies of [appreh ending] things will be abandoned,  
means familiarising ourselves with the real isation of the emptiness of phenomena.  
 
Emptiness is the negation of the subtle object of negation. When we realise that the object (e.g., a 
vase) is empty of true existence, then the grasping at true existence with resp ect to that object will 
be weakened.  
Through familiarizing with “Nothing whatsoever exists, later on [the apprehending of] that too will be 
abandoned : First, we realise that phenomena do not ex ist truly and we familiarise ourselves with 
that realisation. But the emptiness of phenomen a is also empty of true  existence. When we 
realise the emptiness of emptiness (of phenomena), then we will able to stop any kind of grasping 
at emptiness as being truly existent.  
 The above explanation overcomes the assertion of Cittamatra that  both the basis of emptiness 
and emptiness itself are truly existent.  
Lesson 66   Chapter IX - verse 33-40 
D The way to train in wisdom- the nature of insight 
a. Explaining the chapter’s material 
1) Teaching that one who wants to attain liberation must develop the wisdom realizing suchness 
2) The methods by which one develops the wisdom realizing suchness 
a) A presentation of the two truths 
i) The actual 
ii) Abandoning the objection that the need for emptiness has no power 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
367  
1’ The actual 
2’ Abandoning the supposed harm to that 
a’ A general refutation of the proponents of true existence such as the 
Sautrantikas b’ A refutation of the Cittamatra position in particular 
c’ Abandoning the consequence that even the Madhyamakas’ need for the 
path realizing emptiness has no power 
1’’ Objection 
2’’ The response 
a’’ The reasons an illusionist generates attachment 
b’’ Showing the validity of [the position that says] that the 
afflictions along with the imprints they’ve left behind are abandoned by 
familiarizing oneself 
with the wisdom realizing emptiness 
(1) A general presentation 
(2) Explaining the particulars 
c’’ Showing that the excellent effect of abandonment arises 
(1) The validity of fulfilling the hopes of the disciple 
despite the fact 
there is no conception, along with an example 
(2) Abandoning objections to that 
b) Establishing that even someone who wants to attain mere liberation must realize 
emptiness 
i) Objections 
ii) Response 
1’ Establishing the wisdom realizing emptiness as the very path by which one is 
freed from craving 
a’ Establishing it by means of [quoting] scripture - the teachings of the 
Mahayana sutras 
b’ Establishing it by means of reasoning 
2’ Establishing it as the path by which one attains non-abiding nirvana 
3’ Instructions on the reasonableness of someone who strives for freedom to 
meditate 
c) An extensive explanation of the reasoning establishing emptiness 
3) Instructions on making effort to de velop that [realization of emptiness] 
b The chapter’s name 
 
The great Kadampa masters advised us to grasp the opportunity to study the three scriptural 
collections of the Buddha’s teachings to dispel our ignorance and doubts when we are still young.   
We should always remember this advice.   
 
In essence, what it means is th at when our minds are still active, have analytical power and the 
ability to discriminate between right and wrong, we should put our brains and intelligence to good use and not confine ourselves to just re citing mantras and prayers. Of course, such 
recitation is beneficial but it is also important to exercise our intelligence.   Will our minds change by just hearing the teac hings? The answer is, “No .” The Kadampa masters 
say that we cannot expect any realisations or ment al transformation simply by hearing words. On 
the basis of hearing, we have to relate what we have heard and understood to our minds and 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
368  
critically reflect on and analyse the teachings. We should meditate on the knowledge we have 
gained to familiarise our minds with  whatever we have understood.  
 
The Kadampa masters say it is extremely difficult  to destroy the armies of afflictions simply 
through listening to the teachings. We must engage in  reflection and meditation or 
familiarisation. This threefold process is very important.  
 
The text we are studying now is tough. Having de cided to attend this module and come to class, 
from your side, you must try your best to pay full attention to what is said. Along the way, please 
ask when you find anything that is difficult to  understand. You are not following the advice of 
the Kadampa masters when you are physically pres ent but not using your critical faculties to 
analyse what you are hearing.  
 
Once we are able to identify and refute the object of negation (i.e., true existence) with respect to 
any phenomena, we can reduce or eliminate the se nse of grasping at that phenomenon as being 
truly existent. This is the view of th e major texts and treatises such as the Four Hundred Stanzas  by 
Aryadeva. Once we realise emptiness with respec t to a particular phenomenon, that realisation 
can be easily applied to all existent phenomen a. When we focus on another object, we would 
effortlessly understand that that phenomen on is also empty of true existence. 
 
(2) Explaining the particulars 
(9, 33) 
When it is said “Nothing exists,” 
The thing that is invest igated is not observed. 
At that time, free from a support that is a non-thing, 
How does it abide in fr ont of an awareness? 
 
(9, 34) 
What neither thing or non-thing 
Abide in front of the awareness, 
Since there is no other aspect 
[That awareness] is utterly pacified, lacking an observed object . 
 
What appears during the meditative equipoise of the person who has attained the direct 
realisation  of emptiness is emptiness. This is referred to as the ‘complete pacification of all 
elaborations,’  which means that to the perspect ive of the wisdom directly realising emptiness, 
nothing appears except emptiness.  
 The object which is the basis of that realisatio n of emptiness does not appear. There is also 
no 
appearance of truly existent emptiness, conventi onality or any mental image. There is no dual 
appearance or the appearance of any other phen omena. What appears to the perspective of the 
wisdom directly realising emptiness is only emptiness. 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
369  
 
On the five paths, there is the wisdom that  realises emptiness (though this is not a direct  
realisation) on the first two pa ths, the paths of accumulation and preparation. This wisdom 
realising emptiness however still possesses the elaborations of mental images and dual 
appearance, i.e., the subject (the mind realising  emptiness) and the object (emptiness) remain 
separate. 
 
The path of preparation is divided into four stag es: (1) heat (2) peak (3) forbearance and (4) the 
supreme mundane quality. This is so because when  one is on this path, the mind still has the 
elaboration of duality, which becomes increasing ly subtle as one progresses through the four 
stages. One realises emptiness directly when th e separation of subject (the mind realising 
emptiness) and the object (emptiness) is eliminated . At that time, what appears to the mind that 
directly realises emptiness is only emptiness. 
 
According Prasangika, the mind that directly realises emptiness is the only unmistaken mind in 
the continua of sentient beings because to th at mind, there is neither the appearance of 
conventionality nor true existence but only the appearance of emptiness.  All other 
consciousnesses  in the continua of sentient beings are necessarily mistaken as they are 
accompanied by elaborations and conventional phenomena appear to them as truly existent 
when, in reality, things do not exist truly.  
 One gradually progresses along the 10
th bodhisattva ground with the direct perception of 
emptiness until one attains enlightenment. Once enlightenment is achieved, there is a complete 
pacification forever of all elaborations of  true existence and conceptual thought.  
 
Answer to student’s question:  
When the yogi directly perceives emptiness in  meditative equipoise, nothing appears except 
emptiness. All sense consciousnesses are not manifest  during  meditative equipoise. If we were to 
say that the sense consciousnesses are manife st then true existence will appear to the 
consciousnesses with the realisation of  their resp ective objects. Those objects will appear as truly 
existent. At that time, one would have already ar isen from the state of meditative equipoise.  
 
We can say that when the yogi directly perceive s emptiness in meditative equipoise, only that 
particular consciousness is manifest and other consciousnesses do not manifest.   
c” Showing that the excellent effect of abandonment arises( 
(1) The validity of fulfilling the hopes of the disciple  despite the fact there is no conception, along 
with an example 
(9, 35) 
Just as wish-fulfilling jewels and wish-granting trees 
Completely fulfil hopes, 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
370  
Likewise due to the power of their prayers for those to be subdued, 
The exalted bodies of conquerors appear. 
 
(9,36) 
For example, having accomplished 
The Garuda Shrine, he passed away, 
Yet even though he passed  away a long time ago 
It still pacifies poisons and more. 
 
(9,37) 
Likewise, the shrine of a conqueror is also accomplished 
In accordance with the enlightened conduct, and, 
Although the bodhisattva has passed beyond sorrow, 
He still accomplishes all welfares. 
 
Qualm:  
Here we are looking at the assertion that all conc eptual thoughts cease once one has achieved full 
enlightenment. When we think of  benefiting sentient beings, th is involves the motivation and 
the conceptual thought that, “I am going to do such and such.” If it is true that once one is fully 
enlightened, no conceptual thought will exist at all, then it is questionable as to whether the 
buddhas, who no longer have any conceptual thou ght, can generate the motivation to work for 
and benefit sentient beings. The buddhas will not generate the thought, “I am going to benefit 
and work for sentient beings.”  
 
Response:  
Wish-fulfilling trees and wish-granting jewels ar e said to exist. When human beings and gods 
found them, prayed to and made offerings to them , their wishes were all accomplished. From the 
side of the wish-fulfilling trees and wish-granting jewels, they do not have any intention to benefit 
human beings  and gods. Likewise, although the buddhas do not have the conceptual thought,  
“I am going to benefit sentient beings,” due to th e merit of the disciples to gether with the prayers 
made by these buddhas when they were bodhis attvas on the path to  enlightenment, they 
manifest in various forms to benefit sentient beings. 
 An example is given in the sutras. When the sun shines, the flowers of those lotus seeds that are 
ripened will bloom in sunlight. The flowers of lotus seeds that are not ripened will not bloom. 
Likewise, for those disciples to be subdued, when their karma ripens, the buddhas will appear in various forms to benefit them. 
 
Qualm:  
The prayers made by the buddhas when they were on the bodhisattva path occurred so long ago. 
How is it possible for them to yield any positive effects now?  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
371  
 
Response:  
The example of the Garuda shrine  is used to support the assert ion of the power of the prayers 
made by the buddhas while on the path. In th e past, there was a Brahmin who made a shrine 
containing a statue of the garuda (a mystical bi rd) and consecrated it with mantras and prayers to 
pacify poisons. The shrine is still able to bene fit sentient beings even though the Brahmin   
passed away a long time ago. Likewise, the bodh isattvas made many powerful prayers while on 
the path. When they passed into parinirvana an d achieved enlightenment as buddhas, they can 
still benefit sentient beings.  
 
(2) Abandoning objections to that 
 
(9,38) 
[Some hearers: ] 
“What result will come to be possessed 
By making offerings to one without mind?” 
[Madhyamaka: ] 
It is has been explained that it is similar 
Whether he is alive or has passed beyond sorrow. 
 
(9,39) 
Either conventionally or in  thusness it is suitable; 
That there is a result is found in the scriptures. 
For example, it is just like there is a result 
With respect to truly existent buddhas.  
 
Qualm from Vaibhasika and Sautrantika: 
“If the buddhas have no conceptual  thought, then what is the poin t of making offerings to them 
as they would not have the though t , “ This  o fferin g is  fo r m e  an d I w ill part ake o f it .”  If t he 
buddhas do not take the offerings, then what  benefit is there for the person making the 
offerings?”  This qualm appears in  the first two lines of verse 38: What result will come to be 
possessed by making offeri ngs to one without mind?  We may also have such doubts: how do we 
accumulate merit by making such offerings? 
 
Response from Prasangika:  
Although the buddhas do not have  the thought, “This offering is  mine and I am accepting the 
offering,” nevertheless, when we make offerings to  the buddhas, we do accumulate merit. This is 
established through scriptural authority. It is  mentioned in the sutras whether we make offerings 
to the Buddha directly in person (when he was alive) or to holy objects or reliquaries after he had 
passed into parinirvarna, the merit accumulated is  exactly the same, when the offerings are made 
with faith.   
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
372  
 
We should set aside debating whether one will conventionally or ultimately accumulate merit 
when making offerings to the buddhas or ho ly objects. The main point is that we do accumulate 
merit by making such offerings and this is esta blished by scriptural authority in dependence 
upon valid texts. 
 
Phenomena can be classified into three cate gories: (1) manifest phenomena, (2) hidden 
phenomena and (3) extremely hidden phenomena.  A manifest phenomenon can directly be 
realised by a valid cognizer, without any logic or reasoning. A slightly hidden phenomenon is 
realised initially through the use of logic and re asoning. Then, finally, there are extremely hidden 
phenomena which existence  cannot be realised th rough logic and reasoning but only by reliance 
on scriptural authority, i.e., through generating an inferential cognizer depending on valid texts. 
 
Accumulating of merit by making offerings to the buddhas is an extremely hidden phenomenon. 
We cannot realise it directly and it cannot be es tablished by using logic and reasoning. This can 
only be understood by relying on valid texts whic h help us to generate the inferential cognition 
that this is so.  
b) Establishing that even someone who wants to attain mere liberation must realize emptiness 
i) Objections 
(9,40) 
[Vaibhasika: ] 
 “By seeing the truths, one will be liberated, 
So what is accomplished by seeing emptiness?” 
 
Qualm from the hearers’ schools (i.e., Vaibhasika and Sautrantika) :  
According to the Abhidharmakosha  (Treasury of Knowledge)  and Compendium of Knowledge,  one can 
achieve liberation with the realisation of and fa miliarisation with the presentation of the Four 
Noble Truths and its sixteen features. As such, th ere is no need to develop the wisdom realising 
the selflessness of phenomena in order to achieve liberation. Realising the  selflessness of person, 
i.e., realising that the self-sufficient substantially existent person does not truly exist is enough to 
achieve liberation. 
 
ii) Response 
1’ Establishing the wisdom of realizing emptiness as the very path by which one is freed from 
craving 
a’ Establishing it by means of [quoting] scripture - the teachings of the Mahayana sutras 
 
(9,40 cd)  
[Madhyamaka: ] 
It is because in the scriptures it is taught that 
Without this path there is no enlightenment.  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
373  
 
Response from Prasangika:  
The direct perception of the presentation of th e Four Noble Truths and its sixteen features and 
familiarisation with that realisation alone cannot lead one to liberation. 
 
It is clearly mentioned in the Perfection of Wisdom Sutras  that, without the realisation of the 
emptiness of inherent existence, there is no way one can achieve any of the three kinds of 
enlightenment: the enlightenment of the hearers and solitary realizers and the full enlightenment 
of buddhahood.  
 
There is a quotation in the Perfection of Wisdom in Eight Thousand Verses which   states: “If one has 
this discrimination of phenomena as truly existent , then there is no liberation.” Even if one’s 
goal is only to achieve liberation, one must de velop the wisdom realising emptiness as explained 
in the Perfection of Wisdom Sutra s.  This is the path followed by the past and present buddhas and 
w i l l  b e  f o l l o w e d  b y  t h e  f u t u r e  b u d d h a s .  T h i s  i s  also the path followed by the stream-enterers, 
once-returners, non-returners and solitary realizers.  
 We should use logic and reasoning to counter the objection raised by the hearers’ schools, but 
here, we refuted the objections by using scriptural  authority. Using scriptural authority such as 
the Perfection of Wisdom Sutras  will not work for the person of he arer lineage, who does not accept 
that the Mahayana was taught by the Bu ddha. So why is this approach used?  
 When the lower tenets object that  the Mahayana sutras were not taught by the Buddha, we have 
to counter them by asserting that the Mahayana s u t r a s  w e r e  t a u g h t  b y  t h e  B u d d h a  b y  u s i n g  
scriptural authority. To impress upon the hearer s that the Mahayana sutr as were taught by the 
Buddha, scriptural authority is used to prove th at the wisdom realising emptiness is needed to 
achieve liberation.  
Lesson 67   Chapter IX - verse 41-43 
D The way to train in wisdom- the nature of insight 
a. Explaining the chapter’s material 
1) Teaching that one who wants to attain liberation must develop the wisdom realizing suchness 
2) The methods by which one develops the wisdom realizing suchness 
a) A presentation of the two truths 
b) Establishing that even someone who wants to attain mere liberation must realize 
emptiness 
i) Objections 
ii) Response 
1’ Establishing the wisdom realizing emptiness as the very path by which one is freed from craving 
a’ Establishing it by means of [quoting] scripture - the teachings of the 
Mahayana sutras 
b’ Establishing it by means of reasoning 
1” Establishing it by means of equality 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
374  
2” Establishing it by means of the original reasoning 
2’ Establishing it as the path by which one attains non-abiding nirvana 
3’ Instructions on the reasonableness of someone who strives for freedom to 
meditate 
c) An extensive explanation of the reasoning establishing emptiness 
3) Instructions on making effort to de velop that [realization of emptiness] 
b The chapter’s name 
 
This is advice from the Kadampa masters: “It is na tural for sentient beings to have faults, just as 
it is the nature of fire to burn. Do not look for the faults of others. Rather, we should strive to 
abandon our own mistakes.” From the mome nt our minds came into existence since 
beginningless time, our minds were bound by the three mental poisons - ignorance, anger and 
attachment. These afflictions, however, are not the nature of our minds and can be removed. 
Since these afflictions had existed since time with out beginning, naturally, sentient beings have 
faults. We can understand then that it is not the choice of sentient beings  to be afflicted and to 
have faults. It is also not surprising that we see the faults of others but when we dwell on them, it 
only leads to difficulties for ourselves.  
 
Understanding this, we should check our own mind s and see what kind of faults we have. We 
should apply the relevant antidotes and work at abandoning our own faults and mistakes. 
Instead of doing this, we tend to focus on ot her people’s shortcomings. The Kadampa masters 
are reminding us that this is a mistake.  
 
The Kadampa masters continue: “It is very difficult if not impossible to please ordinary sentient beings, who are not arya beings, no matter what you do.”   When there is a gathering of sentient 
beings, they do not look at each  other’s qualities but tend to focus only on the faults, putting 
down and criticising others.   The main thing should be to abandon our own faults. What does Dharma mean? Dharma means 
transforming our minds for the better. We practise Dharma to improve our own minds, not to 
change the minds of others. We need to remember this all the time.   Whether our Dharma practice actually become s Dharma depends on whether there is an 
improvement in our minds and behaviour over time . That is the definition of practising the 
Dharma. When our minds are changing for the bette r that means we are practising Dharma.  It 
does not depend on changing other people's  minds for the better. We are talking about our own 
minds.   
b’ Establishing it by means of reasoning 
1” Establishing it by means of equality 
(9,41) 
If the Mahayana is not established, 
[Madhyamaka: ] 
How are your own scriptures established? 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
375  
[Vaibhasika: ] 
It is because they are es tablished for both of us. 
[Madhyamaka: ] 
So initially they would not ha ve been established for you. 
 
(9,42) 
Your belief in them du e to such a condition 
Should also be similar with regard to the Mahayana. 
If others were true due to  being accepted by two, 
The Vedas and the rest would also be true. 
 
(9,43) 
[Vaibhasika: ] 
It is because the Mahayana is together with debate. 
[Madhyamaka: ] 
Because the Tirthikas and other scri ptures debate your scriptures 
And there is also debate  between you and others, 
You should discard them. 
 
Qualm from the hearers’ schools:  
The hearers' schools assert that the Mahayana was not taug ht by the Buddha. 
The Buddha’s teachings were compiled into three scriptural collections - the Vinaya, Sutras and 
the Abhidharma – after his parinirvana. His teac hings were canonized by compilers such as the 
Mahakashyapa. The proponents of Hinayana tene ts maintain the Mahayana was not taught by 
the Buddha because the Mahayana teachings were  not included in that compilation.   
 
Another reason is that the Mahayana teaching s cannot fit the minds of  the proponents of 
Hinayana tenets. For example, it is said in th e Mahayana sutras that the complete enjoyment 
body of the Buddha is permanent. The proponents of the Hinayana tenets see such assertions as 
directly contradicting the Buddha’s teachings th at all composed phenomena are impermanent.  
 The proponents of the Hinayana tenets find it  unacceptable and believe that the Mahayana 
teachings contradict the Four Seals of the Buddhadharma:   1. All composed phenomena are impermanent.  2. All contaminated phenomena are suffering.  3. All phenomena are empty and selfless.  4. Nirvana is peace  Here is another example. The Mahayana scriptures  explain that bodhisattv as happily choose to 
take rebirth in cyclic existence where, instead of experiencing suffering, they only feel great bliss 
and joy, progressing from happiness to happine ss. This cannot fit the minds of the Hinayana 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
376  
proponents who argue: “How can this be? Once  one is reborn in cyclic existence with 
contaminated physical and mental aggregates, that body is in the nature of suffering. That being 
so, how can the bodhisattvas go from happiness to happiness in samsara?”    
 
Another bone of contention is the Mahayana pr esentation of the Tathagatagarbha (i.e., the 
Tathagata essence or buddhanature). All sentie nt beings possess buddhanature, which means 
that the nature of their minds is empty of inhere nt existence. The propon ents of Vaibhasika and 
Sautrantika fail to understand this and, instea d, think the Mahayana proponents are positing 
that the minds of all sentient beings have a soul and are ever lasting, permanent, unitary and 
independent.  They therefore assert that the Mahayana interpretation of the Tathagata essence 
goes against the third Seal, that all phenomena are empty and selfless.    
 The Mahayana scriptures also mention that the Buddha will never pass away into the state 
beyond sorrow, parinirvana. The Hinayana proponen ts see this as contradi cting the fourth Seal, 
that nirvana is peace.    
 When the Mahayana proponents engage in reci ting mantras, making bath offerings or 
purification practices such as the Nyung Na, th e proponents of the Hinayana tenets see these 
practices as no different from similar practices in non-Buddhist traditions.  
  
Yet another area of difference pertains to the purification of negative karma.  The Mahayana 
scriptures state that there is not a single ne gative karma that cannot be purified when one 
engages in the practice of confession with the application of the four opponent powers. 
Everything can be purified. The Hinayana proponents  find this difficult to accept because some 
scriptures have mentioned that committing any one of the five heinous crimes results in  
unbelievably heavy negative karma which leads i mmediately to a hell rebirth once one dies.  
 In essence, the objections from the proponents  of Hinayana tenets can be attributed to two 
reasons: (1) The subject matter of  the Mahayana scriptures was no t taught in their texts and (2) 
Some of the Mahayana teachings cannot fit their own minds. Therefore, they assert that the 
Mahayana teachings were not taught by the Buddha and are creations of mara s or spirits.  This 
kind of denial is what happens when there is a lack of understanding or knowledge of the true nature of things and how they actually exist.    
Prasangika position:   
Prasangika asserts the need to realise the emptine ss of inherent existence even when the goal is 
only to achieve liberation by quot ing the scriptural authority of the Perfection of Wisdom Sutra : "In 
order to achieve even liberation, you need the wisdom realising emptiness."  
 
Response from the Hi nayana proponents:  
Proponents of the Hinayana tenets do not accept th is: “You quote scriptural authority but, in the 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
377  
first place, I don't accept the Mahayana teaching s are those of the Buddha. You can’t use them as 
proof to support your position because, for me, you need to fi rst prove that the Mahayana was 
t a u g h t  b y  t h e  B u d d h a . "  T h i s  i s  w h a t  t h e  f i r s t  l i n e  o f  v e r s e  4 1  m e a n s :  If the Mahayana is not 
established.   
 
Rebuttal by Prasangika:  
Prasangika responds by questioning how the Hi nayana proponents prove that their scriptures 
were taught by the Buddha.         
 To the proponents of the Hinayana tenets, as lo ng as one of them cannot establish that the 
scriptures are the words of the Buddha, then th ose scriptures are not the Buddha’s teachings.  
 
Response from the Hinayana proponents :  
Their reply appears in the third line of verse 41: It is because they are e stablished for both of us, i.e. 
the Hinayana scriptures are accepted as the teac hings of the Buddha by both the proponents of 
the Hinayana tenets and Prasangika.  
 
Rebuttal from Prasangika:  
“If that is the case, this would mean that from the time you we re born up to the moment you 
studied and accepted the Hinayana scriptures, thos e  scriptures were not established as the words 
of the Buddha for you.  
 “If your acceptance that the Hinayana scriptures  were taught by the Buddha came from your 
faith and conviction in those teachings as the re sult of your studying and reflecting on those 
scriptures later in life, then the same reason ing applies to me with regards to the Mahayana 
scriptures.   
“The three scriptural collections you studied are al so found in the Mahayana scriptures. If that is 
the case, then it is appropriate for you to accept  that the Mahayana scriptur es were taught by the 
Buddha. 
 “We need to determine whether the scriptures were  taught by the Buddha on the basis of their 
content and subject matter. If we  were to make such determination based on whether two or 
more persons share the same views,  then we would also have to accept non-Buddhist teachings as 
the words of the Buddha since those teachings woul d have more than two followers.  This is the 
meaning of the third and fourth lines of verse 42: If others were true due to  accepting by two, /The 
Vedas and the rest would also be true.   
 
Response from the Hinayana proponents :  
It is because the Mahayana  is together with debate : There is no question that the Hinayana scriptures 
are the authentic teachings of the Buddha but there are so many faults and controversies 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
378  
surrounding the Mahayana scriptures.  
 
Reply from Prasangika: 
Non-Buddhists do not agree with the Hinayana scriptural teachings. Even amongst your own 
tenet systems, there is controversy and debate ov er the meaning of some of the scriptures. Does 
this mean then that  those scriptur es were not taught by the Buddha?76 
 
There are thus two main reasons why there are objections to the validity of the Mahayana 
scriptures. Firstly, the subjec t matter of the Mahayana cannot fi t  the minds of the Hinayana 
proponents. Secondly, the Hinayana proponents ha ve their own set of scriptures which they 
deem to be valid and authentic teachings of th e Buddha. They accept th at the Buddha does not 
lie. Therefore, when they see other scriptures that do not accord with their own, they would 
naturally think that those scriptures were not taught by the Buddha as he cannot be making 
contradictory assertions.  
 
There is a historical account that  explains this controversy over the authenticity of the Mahayana 
teachings. It was the Hinayana teachings that we re preserved and spread far and wide after the 
Buddha passed away. These were the public teachi ngs given by the Buddha. For three to four 
hundred years after Buddha's parinirvana, the Mahayana teachings declined.  
 
The Mahayana teachings were not well known and were less popular. This is because the Buddha 
taught the Mahayana teachings only to those with pure karm a. As these were not public 
teachings, their authenticity was questioned by ma ny. In the same way, many people criticise the 
tantric teachings of the Buddha as  the Buddha only gave tantric empowerments and teachings to 
a select few who had pure karma at that time.  Many people cannot accept the subject matter of tantric teachings because it does not fit their 
minds. When this happens, they start to criticis e and deny these teachings were taught by the 
Buddha. For example, it is very clearly set out in the Mahayana teachings that the three mental 
poisons have to be abandoned.  But in the tant ric teachings, the Buddha said that these three 
mental poisons can be brought into the path. Wh en there is such contra diction in the subject 
matter of sutric and tantric teachings, it is un derstandable why there might be doubt, criticism 
and denial regarding the validity and purity of these teachings.   
Lesson 68   Chapter IX - verse 44 
D The way to train in wisdom- the nature of insight 
                                              
76 There are 18 sub-schools amongst the Hearer’s schools.  Within the sub-schools, the Hearers debate among 
themselves over differences. For example,  some schools assert the existence of  the bardo (the intermediate state) 
while other schools disagree  with this assertion.  
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
379  
a. Explaining the chapter’s material 
1) Teaching that one who wants to attain liberation must develop the wisdom realizing suchness 
2) The methods by which one develops the wisdom realizing suchness 
a) A presentation of the two truths 
b) Establishing that even someone who wants to attain mere liberation must realize 
emptiness 
i) Objections 
ii) Response 
1’ Establishing the wisdom realizing emptiness as the very path by which one is 
freed from craving 
a’ Establishing it by means of [quoting] scripture - the teachings of the Mahayana sutras b’ Establishing it by means of reasoning 
1” Establishing it by means of equality 
2” Establishing it by means of the original reasoning 
a” Showing the impossibility of attaining arhatship or nirvana 
if one lacks the wisdom realizing emptiness 
b” It follows that, if one could attain arhatship merely by means of the path of sixteen [aspects of the four noble truths] 
such as impermanence, one could attain such a state merely 
by abandoning the manifest afflictions 
c” Refuting the response to that 
d” Showing that even if one only seeks mere liberation it is 
necessary to meditate on emptiness 
2’ Establishing it as the path by which one attains non-abiding nirvana 
3’ Instructions on the reasonableness of someone who strives for freedom to 
meditate 
c) An extensive explanation of the reasoning establishing emptiness 
3) Instructions on making effort to de velop that [realization of emptiness] 
b The chapter’s name 
 
Guntang Rinpoche advises, “When one has faith in the depths of one’s heart,  naturally one will 
put in the effort.” When we have faith and convic tion in what we are do ing, we will not succumb 
to difficulties in working towards achieving our goal .  However, for most of us, we lack such faith 
and conviction and the result is that our effo rts and exertions are also weak and unstable.  
 
There are three kinds of faith:-clear faith, the fa ith of conviction and the faith of aspiration  
 
Clear faith is generated when we recall the qualit ies of our guru or the Buddha and think, “How 
wonderful and amazing he is.” When  this mind of clear faith is ge nerated, naturally any non-faith 
towards our guru or the Buddha will be eliminated . The text uses an analogy of pouring a special 
chemical into a pool of murky water which dissolves  all the dirty particles, making the water clear 
again. In the same way, clear fa ith helps to cleanse the mind of the different kinds of non-faith, 
which is necessary if we wish to have a clear mind to develop the qualities we seek. When the 
mind is beset with all kinds of negative thou ghts, these are obstacles to our acquiring good 
qualities.  
 In the beginning of the Lam Rim, the root of a ttaining enlightenment is said to be the correct 
reliance in thought and action in our virtuous fr iend, spiritual master or the guru. When we lack 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
380  
such clear faith in our guru, even though we may be  very close to him, we will see only his faults. 
Our minds are not subdued and we will not benefit from the relationship even though we are 
physically close to the guru. As we are unable to learn from him, it will not be possible to 
generate  any realisation in our minds. Why does th is happen? It is the resu lt of the mind of non-
faith that cuts off all possibili ties of developing qualities. 
 
All the texts say that faith is like a mother who gives birth to a baby. Without the mother, there is 
no offspring. Likewise, the root of all good qualitie s is this faith. Clear faith  helps us to develop 
the faith of conviction. For example, when  we develop faith in the Buddha through 
understanding and seeing all his qualities, it enab les us to have the faith of conviction in his 
teachings. In the same way, clear faith leads to the faith of convic tion in the advice and teachings 
given by our own teachers. With this faith of conv iction, naturally, we will abide by those advice 
and teachings, put them into practice and  de velop qualities. Then, naturally, the faith of 
aspiration will arise.  
 
The faith of aspiration can be taken to be the mi nd that engages in thos e teachings, puts them 
into practise and acquires qualities. Before we ca n have the aspiration to engage in practice, we 
must first have the faith of conviction in ou r practice, the basis for which is the Buddha’s 
teachings and the instructions and advice of ou r teachers. Before we can have the faith of  
conviction in what they say, we must first have faith in the person who is giving the teaching, be it the Buddha or the teacher, by seeing his qualitie s.   This is how the three types of faiths are 
related.   At the beginning, we have clear faith in our mind s, the mind which believes in the Buddha or 
the guru through seeing his qualities. Naturally then, we have the faith of conviction in his 
words. Following that, comes the  aspiration to put those teachings into practice. From here, we 
can see that the root is the mind of clear faith. With clear faith, then everything else is possible. 
 That is why Guntang Rinpoche says, in his collec tion of advice: “When yo u have faith, naturally 
you will joyfully persevere and put effort  into achieving the mind of virtue.” We are not going to 
achieve any qualities without exerti ng joyous perseverance and effort . We need faith to 
generate joyous perseverance .  This is an extremely important point  that we need to remember. 
All the qualities and realisations that follow depe nd on the earlier practices as the foundation. 
When the foundational practices are not done well or not done at all, then nothing will happen.  
 Now please pay attention and try to understand  what I am trying to say. If you do not 
understand this from the beginning, then you will not be able to understand what follows. I will 
give you a summary before I proceed wi th the next verse in this chapter. 
 When the Buddha was alive, he turned the Wheel of Dharma three times. The first turning of 
the Wheel of Dharma was targeted  primarily at persons who were predisposed towards the view 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
381  
of the Great Exposition School (Vaibhasika) an d the Sutra School (Sautrantika). The second 
turning of the Wheel of Dharma was for those inclined towards the view of the Middle Way 
Schools (Madhyamika). (The Madhyamika is made  up of the Autonomy Middle Way School  - 
Svatantrika-Madhyamika - and the Conseq uence Middle Way School or Prasangika-
Madhyamika). The third turning of the Wheel of Dharma was meant for people who were 
predisposed to the view of the Mind Only School (Cittamatra).  
 
This is how the tenet systems relate to the three turnings of the Wheel of Dharma. If one were to 
ask whether what the Buddha taught at the first and the third turnings of  the Wheel of Dharma 
accorded with reality, then the answer would have  to be “No.” Only the teachings at the second 
turning of the Wheel of Dharma accorded with reality and are th e  teachings that represented 
the Buddha’s innermost thoughts.  
 What the Buddha taught during th e first and third turnings of the Wheel of Dharma were in 
accordance with the capacity, interest and inclinat ion of his audience at that time. This is the 
skilful means of the Buddha. If the Buddha did not do this but presented the highest and most 
profound teachings such as the final meaning of emptiness, the disciples would not benefit  from 
those teachings and may even lose interest. So th e Buddha taught what was relevant and suitable 
for the disciples at that time with the intention of slowly guiding them towards the final view, in 
the future.  The proponents of Vaibhasika and Sautrantika ar e the proponents of the Hinayana tenets while 
the proponents of the Madhyami ka and Cittamatra are the proponents of the  Mahayana tenets. 
 The proponents of Vaibhasika and Sautrantika on ly assert the selflessness of persons and not 
phenomena. The selflessness of  persons according to Vaibhasika and Sautrantika is divided into 
two: a coarse selflessness of persons – the lack of a permanent, unitary and independent person, 
and a subtle selflessness of persons – the lack of a self-sufficient  substantially existent person 
 They are not able to posit anything subtler than  these two levels of selflessness of persons. 
According to Vaibhasika and Sautrantika, by realising the emptiness of the self-sufficient 
substantially existent person and familiarising ones elf with that realisation, one will be able to 
free oneself from cyclic existence and achi eve nirvana as a foe destroyer or arhat. 
 The proponents of Cittamatra also assert the coar se and subtle selflessnesses of  persons which 
are defined in the same way as Vaibhasika and Saut rantika. Like the two sch ools, they also assert 
that by realising the emptiness of the self-suffici ent substantially existent person and familiarising 
oneself with that realisation, one will be able to free oneself from cyclic existence and achieve 
nirvana as a foe destroyer or arhat. But they are also  able to assert a subtle r selflessness,  i.e., the 
selflessness of phenomena – the emptiness of obje ct and subject existing as separate entities. 
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
382  
Svatantrika-Madhyamika also asse rts that by realising the subtle selflessness of persons and 
familiarising oneself with that realisation, one will also be able to free oneself from cyclic 
existence and achieve nirvana as a foe destroyer or arhat. 
 
Therefore, Vaibhasika, Sautrantika, Cittamatra and Svatantrika-Madhyamika all assert that by 
realising the subtle selflessness of persons - the empt iness of a self-sufficient, substantially existent 
person - and familiarising oneself with that realisat ion, one will be able to free oneself from cyclic 
existence and achieve nirvana as a foe destroyer or arhat. 
 
Only Prasangika asserts that the emptiness of the self-sufficient substantially existent person is 
not the subtle selflessness of persons. There is something  subtler than that and this is the 
emptiness of the truly existent (inherently existent ) person (existing by w ay of its own character). 
 
Prasangika divides the selflessness of persons into two:- 
Coarse selflessness of persons – emptiness of th e self-sufficient substantially existent person 
Subtle selflessness of persons – the emptiness of the truly existent person  
Therefore, Prasangika 
disagrees  with the lower tenet systems that  the realisation of the emptiness 
of the self-sufficient substantially existent person and familiarisation with that realisation can lead 
to liberation from samsara and arhatship. Th ey assert that this realisation alone will not lead to 
liberation from samsara and arhatship.  
 
As seen above, the lower tenet systems are unable to assert a subtler selflessness of  persons than 
the emptiness of the self-sufficient substantially existent person. Due to this assertion, the root of 
samsara for them is the grasping at the self-suffi cient substantially existent person. To them, the 
most powerful antidote for this is the wisd om realising emptiness of the self-sufficient 
substantially existent person.  
 To Prasangika, grasping at the self-sufficient substantially existent person is 
not the root of 
samsara. There is something subtler than that and this is the grasping at the inherently existent 
person (grasping at the person existing by way of its own character). To achieve liberation, one 
needs to generate the  wisdom realising the empt iness of the truly existe nt (inherently existent) 
person.    
Question from student:  
What is the difference between the grasping at the self-sufficient substantially existent person and 
grasping at the inherently existent person? 
 
Answer:  
The difference comes in the mode of apprehension , i.e., how the self of persons is apprehended 
by the mind. 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
383  
 
When the mind grasps at the self-sufficient su bstantially existent person, it grasps at an 
independent self who is the controller or owner of the aggregates. One has the feeling that the 
self is the owner of the aggregates (body and mi nd). This self has no relationship with and 
appears separate from the aggregates.  
 When the mind grasps at the truly existent person , it grasps at the self, who is the owner of the 
aggregates, to be existing inherently rather th an existing as merely labelled by the mind.  
The difference between these two forms of grasping at  the self is the level of subtlety. The latter,  
grasping at the truly  existent person, is subtler.  Does realising the emptin ess of the self-sufficient 
substantially existent person (i.e.,  there isn’t a self who is the owner of the aggregates) necessarily 
mean that one has also realised the emptiness of  the  inherently existent self?  The answer is 
“No!”  It is still possible for one to f eel that the truly existent self exists. 
 
2” Establishing it by means of the original reasoning 
a” Showing the impossibility of attaining arhatshi p or nirvana if one lacks the wisdom realizing 
emptiness 
(9,44) 
While the root of the teaching s is a fully-ordained monk, 
Even that fully-ordained monk himself abides with difficulty. 
For one whose mind is together with observed objects 
Nirvana is also abided in with difficulty. 
 
The fully-ordained monk  here refers to  the ultimate fully-ordained monk, the hearer arhat (foe 
destroyer). The arhat is the root of the teachings , due to  the pratimoksha vows in his mental 
continuum. These vows are the very root of th e teachings. What determines whether the 
teachings exist in the world? Th e teachings exist as long as there are people who keep the 
pratimoksha vows and the main disciples who do this purely are the arhats.  
 
Another reason that the arhats are the root of the teachings is that wh en the Buddha was alive, 
these arhats received the teaching directly from  the Buddha. After the Bu ddha passed away into 
parinirvana, great arhats such as Mahakashyapa  convened the Council, who compiled all the 
teachings of the Buddha and put them into writin g. As a result of that, the teachings of the 
Buddha are able to abide for a very long time. Because of this contribution, the arhats are the root of the teachings.  The pratimoksha vows are the vows of individual li beration and refer to the conduct taught in 
the vinaya which sets out the rules of ethical conduct for th e ordained person. These vows 
emphasise restraining the negative actions of the body and speech. This is also important for us. 
Even if we have the realisation of concentrat ion and wisdom, without restraining our physical 
and verbal conduct, it will  be difficult for us to benefit others.   
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
384  
How much we can benefit others depend on how we  conduct ourselves physically and verbally. If 
we do not exercise such restraint, even if we  have concentration and wisdom, we can be doing 
many harmful and hurtful actions to others. When  we are harming sentient beings, how can we 
benefit them? The basis of ethical conduct is pr imarily focussing on restraining the body and 
speech. This applies to us as well in our rela tionships with other people - how we interact, 
connect and work with others. When  we do not restrain our negative  physical and verbal actions, 
we will face a lot of obstacles, problems and disharmony with others. When this happens, it 
prevents us from benefiting and helping others. 
 It  is  difficult  fo r us  to chan g e o ur m in ds . It is  m uch e as ier fo r us t o  chan ge o ur phys ica l an d verbal behaviour. When we talk to other people, we should talk in a gentle manner and with pleasant words. When we relate to  others physically, instead of glaring at them, we should gaze at 
them with love and compassion. When we say un pleasant things to some one or stare at them, 
that person will not be happy. When we do this to others, then we create problems for ourselves. 
With respect to the centre, this will also become an obstacle for the centre. This is what Lama 
Zopa Rinpoche always advises and gently reminds us : “When we talk to others, we should talk to 
them nicely. When we relate to others, we shou ld give them a pleasant look with a positive 
attitude.” We should all try to do this as much as possible.   
Response from Prasangika:  
It would be difficult to posit the fully ordained monk as the root of the teachings. In order to 
achieve the state of the foe destroyer (arhatsh ip), one must have abandoned the afflictions 
together with their seeds. To do this, one needs to realise the antidote, emptiness.  
 
One cannot posit that the arhat is the root of th e teachings because the tenets below Prasangika 
assert one can achieve liberation by merely dire ctly realising the 16 aspects of the Four Noble 
Truths (such as impermanence), without the realis ation of emptiness. To Prasangika, this is not 
possible.  
For one whose mind is together with observed obje cts,/ Nirvana is also abided in with difficulty: As long 
there is grasping at true existence in our minds,  not to mention enlighte nment, even liberation 
cannot be achieved. As long as one has not realised  emptiness and still grasps at true existence, 
arhatship cannot be attained. Since that is the case , then the arhat cannot be  posited as the  root 
of the teachings.  
Lesson 69   Chapter IX - verse 45 
D The way to train in wisdom- the nature of insight 
a. Explaining the chapter’s material 
1) Teaching that one who wants to attain liberation must develop the wisdom realizing suchness 
2) The methods by which one develops the wisdom realizing suchness 
a) A presentation of the two truths 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
385  
b) Establishing that even someone who wants to attain mere liberation must realize 
emptiness 
i) Objections 
ii) Response 
1’ Establishing the wisdom realizing emptiness as the very path by which one is 
freed from craving 
a’ Establishing it by means of [quoting] scripture - the teachings of the 
Mahayana sutras 
b’ Establishing it by means of reasoning 
1” Establishing it by means of equality 
2” Establishing it by means of the original reasoning 
a” Showing the impossibility of attaining arhatship or nirvana 
if one lacks the wisdom realizing emptiness 
b” It follows that, if one could attain arhatship merely by 
means of the path of sixteen [aspects of the four noble truths] 
such as impermanence, one could attain such a state merely 
by abandoning the manifest afflictions 
c” Refuting the response to that d” Showing that even if one only seeks mere liberation it is 
necessary to meditate on emptiness 
2’ Establishing it as the path by which one attains non-abiding nirvana 
3’ Instructions on the reasonableness of someone who strives for freedom to 
meditate 
c) An extensive explanation of the reasoning establishing emptiness 
3) Instructions on making effort to de velop that [realization of emptiness] 
b The chapter’s name 
 
Guntang Rinpoche said in his collection of ad vice: “We engage in exte nsive listening to the 
teachings in order to remove the darkness of ig norance.” This  activity  of listening to the 
teachings to eliminate ignorance is likened to a great fire. Remaining egotistic and arrogant or  
developing pride after having listened to the teachi ngs is likened to the fire being obscured by the 
amount of smoke produced. This smoke of pride obscures us and prevents us from seeing our 
own faults and mistakes as well as seeing the good qualities of others.  
 
When extensive learning and knowledge only result in reinforcing our pride, then the activity of 
listening to the teachings does not become Dharma . In order for  listening to the teachings to 
become Dharma, it must contribute towards subduing our minds. When planting rice or barley, 
before the sprout matures and ripens, the stem  stands upright. Gunt ang Rinpoche says we 
should not behave like that. As the stem becomes heavy with grain, it starts to droop.  Likewise, 
the more qualities we attain, the greater our un derstanding of the Dharma, the more respect we 
should accord to others. We should “bow” like the fully grown rice plant laden with grain and 
not look down on others but accord others grea ter respect and develop more humility, instead of 
becoming more proud and egoistic.     Pride arises due to certain conditions – more knowledge, more wealth and possessions all contribute towards increasing our pride if we are not careful. When there is pride, we can only 
see the faults of others but we do not see our own mistakes or the qualities of other people. When this happens, there is neither peace for ones elf nor others,  leading only to problems and 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
386  
difficulties. This is the essence of Guntang Rinpoche’s advice. 
 Here, we are listening to and studying great and im portant texts such as this work by Shantideva. 
Having such knowledge should not be the caus e for us to become proud and look down on 
others. 
 
b” It follows that, if one could attain arhatship merely by means of the path of sixteen [aspects of 
the four noble truths] such as impermanence, one could attain such a state merely by abandoning 
the manifest afflictions 
(9,45) 
[Vaibhasika: ] 
They are liberated from suffering due to having abandoned the afflictions. 
[Madhyamaka: ] 
So as soon as that happens they would become [free from suffering]. 
Although there are those without afflictions, 
They are seen [to have suffering] due to the potencies of actions. 
 
Each of the Four Noble Truths has four characte ristics and are referred to as the 16 aspects of 
the Four Noble Truths. All the Buddhist tenets agr ee that the Four Noble Truths were taught by 
the Buddha but they have their own way of interpreting the Four Noble Truths. 
 
The understanding of the Four Noble Truths of   the schools below Prasangika (Svatantrika-
Madhyamika, Cittamatra, Sautrantika and Vaibha sika) is coarser compared to the subtler 
understanding of Prasangika. Prasangika’ presenta tions of true suffering and true origins are 
subtler than those schools.   
Question from student:   
What is the difference between the coarse and su btle level of understanding of true suffering? 
 
Answer : In order to become an arhat, one must have necessarily abandoned the afflictions, after 
which one will no longer take rebirth. 
 According to Prasangika, the assertion by the othe r schools of how a person becomes an arhat is 
questionable. This is because these schools assert  that by realising the emptiness of the self-
sufficient substantially existent person and familiar isation with that realisation, one will be able 
to achieve liberation from samsara and attain arhatship.  To Prasangika, the presentations of true path an d true cessation by these schools are incorrect 
and liberation cannot be achieved by actualising the true path as asserted by them. The arhat 
who achieves liberation simply by abandoning th e grasping at the self-sufficient substantially 
existent person does not exist.    
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
387  
With the exception of Prasangika, every Buddhist tenet system asserts that there is no need to 
realise emptiness to achieve liberation. Instead, they assert that by simply actualising their 
presentation of the true path, liberation  can be achieved (line 1 of verse 45: They are liberated from 
suffering due to having ab andoned the afflictions.). To the other schools, liberation can be achieved by 
familiarisation with and meditation on the realisat ion of the 16 aspects of  the Four Noble Truths 
as set out in the Treasury of Knowledge  and the Compendium of Knowledge .   
 
Response from Prasangika: 
The foe destroyer mentioned in the Treasury of Knowledge  and the Compendium of Knowledge,  has 
only abandoned the manifest afflictions (as taug ht in both the lower and higher Abhidharma) 
but not their seeds. To these schools, arhatship is achieved simply by abandoning the manifest 
(or coarse) afflictions.    
 
This is incorrect because, as mentioned in  the third and fourth lines of verse 45: Although there 
are those without afflictions,/They are seen [to have suffering] due to th e potencies of actions.  This is 
because despite having abandoned the manifest a fflictions, a strong potential that throws the 
person into another rebirth remains in the me ntal continuum. This is  established through 
scriptural authority and reasoning.  
 In summary:- All four Buddhist tenets agree that: - in order to become an arhat, one must abandon the afflictions - ignorance is the root of cyclic existence - ignorance is the grasping at the self of persons and   - ignorance gives rise to the three mental poisons.  But each of them has different views as to what this ignorance and this grasping at self of persons is!   The tenets below Prasangika assert that grasping at  the self of persons is the grasping at the self-
sufficient substantially existent person. This is the ignorance posited by these schools. They are 
not able to posit another grasping at the self of  persons as the root of samsara which is subtler 
than this. To them, the root of samsara is graspi ng at the self-sufficient substantially existent 
person  and once one has abandoned this gras ping, one would have abandoned the root of 
samsara and achieved liberation to become an arhat.  Prasangika also asserts that graspi ng at the self of persons is th e ignorance which is the root of 
samsara. However, Prasangika does not agree that  grasping at the self-sufficient substantially 
existent person is the root of samsara. It  posits  a grasping that is subtler than that, which is the 
grasping at the self of persons as ex isting by way of its own character. 
 Because of this difference between Prasangika and the other schools with regards to what 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
388  
grasping at the self of persons is, we can unders tand the reason why there are coarse and subtle 
levels of understanding true origin. 
 
True origin, the cause of samsara, is karma and a ffliction. All four Buddhist tenets agree on this.  
But due to the different levels of understanding of what ignorance, the root of affliction is, 
Prasangika and the other schools disagree on what  is true origin. The understanding of true 
origin by the schools below Prasangika is coarse because they assert that grasping at the self-
sufficient substantially existent person is igno rance. The understanding of true origin by 
Prasangika is  subtler because it as serts that grasping at the self of persons as existing by way of its 
own character is ignorance. 
 Therefore Prasangika says to the other schools: “The arhats in yo ur presentation actually do not 
exist because they have not abando ned the root of samsara and would have to take rebirth again. 
Since this is so, then they are not arhats.”   
 
Point of clarification Hinayanists and the proponents of  Hinayana tenets are different. A Hinayanist is someone who 
is abiding anywhere from the Hinayana path of accu mulation up to attaining the fruit of a hearer 
arhat. However, that person who has entered the Hinayana path needs not be a proponent of 
Hinayana tenets. He may be upholding Prasangika te nets with regards to th e direct realisation of 
emptiness and is therefore a proponent of Mahayana  tenets. He  may be a hearer superior being. 
He realises the selflessness posited by the highest school but deep down in his heart, he is only 
interested in his own happiness. Therefore, he entered the Hinayana path.  Mahayanists and the proponents of Mahayana tene ts are also different. For example, someone 
who has developed bodhicitta but holds the view of selflessness in accordance with Vaibhasika, 
that person is a Mahayanist  but is not a proponent of Mahayana tenet.  
 Someone can hold Mahayana tenets but be predis posed towards the lesser vehicle path. As the 
Buddha said, everyone is different with different interests, abilities and predispositions and therefore attains different results. Due to these different aspirations, Buddha taught the three 
vehicles.  
Homework: 
Please analyse the different presentations of the true path and true cessation between Prasangika 
and the other schools.  
Lesson 70   Chapter IX - verse 46-51 
D The way to train in wisdom- the nature of insight 
a. Explaining the chapter’s material 
1) Teaching that one who wants to attain liberation must develop the wisdom realizing suchness 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
389  
2) The methods by which one develops the wisdom realizing suchness 
a) A presentation of the two truths 
b) Establishing that even someone who wants to attain mere liberation must realize 
emptiness 
i) Objections 
ii) Response 
1’ Establishing the wisdom realizing emptiness as the very path by which one is 
freed from craving 
a’ Establishing it by means of [quoting] scripture - the teachings of the 
Mahayana sutras 
b’ Establishing it by means of reasoning 
1” Establishing it by means of equality 
2” Establishing it by means of the original reasoning 
a” Showing the impossibility of attaining arhatship or nirvana if one lacks the wisdom realizing emptiness b” It follows that, if one could attain arhatship merely by 
means of the path of sixteen [aspects of the four noble truths] 
such as impermanence, one could attain such a state merely by abandoning the manifest afflictions 
c” Refuting the response to that 
d” Showing that even if one only seeks mere liberation it is 
necessary to meditate on emptiness 
2’ Establishing it as the path by which one attains non-abiding nirvana 
3’ Instructions on the reasonableness of someone who strives for freedom to meditate 
c) An extensive explanation of the reasoning establishing emptiness 
3) Instructions on making effort to de velop that [realization of emptiness] 
b The chapter’s name 
 
In his collection of advice, Guntang Rinpoche sa id: “Water does not remain at the top of the 
mountain.” This analogy means that when we are egoistic and proud, then it is difficult to 
generate positive thoughts in our minds. Inst ead, we should be humble and respect others. 
When we have this humble mental attitude, there is  then room for us to develop good qualities.  
 
We should not hesitate to seek help from the people around us when there are things we do not 
know or understand, regardless of whether these people may have superior or lesser qualities 
than ourselves. We should not be like the water on the mountain peak but be like the water that 
accumulates in the plains. Cultivating humility and subduing our pride are the bases for us to 
develop good qualities.   Whenever we hear such advice, we should see them  as directed at ourselves rather than others. 
There is a danger that we may think: “This advice  does not pertain to me. It applies to so-and-so 
who does not behave in this humble manner.” Such thoughts are not beneficial. Rather, we 
should see this as personal advice for ourselves.   E v e r y o n e  h a s  p r i d e .  S o m e  o f  u s  h a v e  s t r o n g  egos. There are times we are reluctant to ask 
questions.  Our pride is the obst a c l e  h e r e .  R a t h e r  t h a n  g i v i n g  i n  t o  o u r  p r i d e ,  w e  s h o u l d  b e  
humble and ask the more knowledgeable person in a respectful way. We will benefit from this as 
we will get the answer we seek. 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
390  
From the side of the person who is doing the aski ng, he should do so, respectfully, in accordance 
with the Dharma. From the side of  the person who is being queried, he should reply respectfully, 
in accordance with the Dharma. If he does not know the answer, he should say so. (Sometimes, 
when a newcomer addresses a question to a senior  student, the latter may feel compelled to say 
something even when he does not know the answer.  This is due to pride). When the exchange is 
conducted in this way, then we can help one another with our studies.  
 
Guntang Rinpoche is pointing out the fault of pr ide on both the parts of the person asking and 
the person answering the question and how such pride is an obstacle for those who want to 
study. For those who really want to  find out what they do not know , they must  ask questions, to 
eliminate  any doubt they may have. 
 We are now studying the tenets in detail an d examining their respective presentations of the 
basis  (their mode of asserting persons and phenomena), the path  ( t h e i r  m o d e  o f  a s s e r t i n g  
selflessness/emptiness) and the fruit  (their presentation of the grounds and paths). We may find 
the material a difficult fit for our minds. For ex ample, it is very difficult for someone who has 
always believed that a creator god is responsibl e for all his happiness, wealth and possessions, to 
be told that that creator god does not exist. In the same way, it seems very odd when we consider, 
from the perspective of Prasangika, the asse rtions put forth by the other schools below 
Prasangika, with regards to the basis, the path and the fruit.  
 Prasangika stated, in verse 45 that even thou gh the arhat (as define d by the schools below 
Prasangika) has abandoned the manifest afflictions as mentioned in the Treasury of Knowledge  and 
the Compendium of Knowledge , he has not abandoned the seeds  of those afflictions. Therefore, that 
arhat is still subject to rebirth in cyclic exis tence because he still possesses powerful throwing 
karma in his mental continuum.   
c” Refuting the response to that 
(9, 46)  
[Vaibhasika: ] 
That is temporary for they are definitely said 
To be without craving for the appropriated. 
[Madhyamaka: ] 
Why would they not have that craving, 
Which although unafflicted, still obscures them?  
 
(9, 47) 
Due to the condition of feeling, there is craving. 
So feelings also exist in them. 
A mind that is together  with observed objects 
Abides with respect to some.  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
391  
 
Response from the schools below Prasangika: 
That is temporary for they ar e definitely said/To be without craving for the appropriated: The arhats we 
posit will not undergo any more rebirths in cy clic existence because they do not possess the 
craving and grasping, which are needed to nourish the throwing karma, in their mental continua.  
 
Reply from Prasangika:  
Prasangika disputes this assertion: Why would they not have that crav ing,/Which although unafflicted, 
still obscures them?   
 
They argue: You (referring to the other schools)  have asserted that there is ‘afflicted’  and 
‘unafflicted ignorance’. Using your line of reason ing which has divided ignorance into ‘afflicted’ 
and ‘unafflicted ignorance,’ with respect to craving, you would have to accept that it is possible to 
have ‘afflicted’ and ‘unafflicted craving.’  
  
For you, the craving induced by ‘unafflicted ignora nce,’ which is the grasping at the inherently 
existent self, would then have to be ‘unafflicted’ cr aving.  Why is it then that your arhats do not 
possess this unafflicted craving?   Therefore, contrary to your assertion that the arha ts are free of craving, they do have unafflicted 
craving in their mental continua which can nour ish the throwing karma that will cause them to 
taken rebirth in cyclic existenc e.  This is explained in th e first two lines of verse 47: Due to the 
condition of feeling, there is cravin g./ So feelings also exist in them.  The first line seems to suggest that if 
there is feeling, there is necessarily craving. This is not the case.   Your arhats possess the mental factor of feeling  in their minds.  
There is also the object  towards which the feeling is directed.  
There is the experiencer  of that feeling (the arhat himself). 
 Your arhats do not realise that these three elemen ts are not inherently existent. This means when 
they experience feelings towards the object, they gr asp at it as being inherently existent. As long 
as they have not abandoned grasping at these th ree elements as inherently existent, they will 
continue to have craving in their minds. Grasping  arises from pleasant feelings. Suffering results 
from unpleasant feelings. Once feelings arise, th ey will generate the desire (craving) not to be 
separated from pleasant feelings and the desire (craving) to be free from unpleasant feelings. 
Therefore, your arhats will still ha ve craving in their mindstreams. 
 As long as we grasp at anything as being truly existent, we will generate craving (grasping) with 
respect to that object. This is explained in the third and fourth lines of verse 47: A mind that is 
together with observed objects/ Abides with respect to some. 
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
392  
This is how Prasangika establishes that the arhats  posited by the schools below it   still have 
craving in their mental continua.  
 
d” Showing that even if one only seeks mere liber ation it is necessary to meditate on emptiness 
 
(9,48) 
A mind that is separa te from emptiness, 
Having ceased, will be produced once again, 
Like the absorption without discrimination. 
Therefore, meditate on emptiness.   
 
Since the arhats have only abando ned the manifest affliction of grasping at the self-sufficient 
substantially existent person as mentioned in the Treasury of Knowledge and the Compendium of 
Knowledge    but not its seed, the affliction will manife st in their minds again in the future, similar 
to someone born as a long life  god who lacks di scrimination and lives in the formless realm. The 
mental factors of feeling, discrimination, etc. are not manifest when one is born as such a being.  
When the karma for such a rebirth ends, these mental factors manifest again. 
 Just as we need the realisation of emptiness to  achieve omniscience and full enlightenment, we 
also need the realisation of emptiness to achieve liberation. That emptiness is the negation of the 
subtle  object of negation. The afflictions together wi th their seeds can only be removed with this 
realisation of emptiness,  the negation  of the subtle object of negation.  
 (Verses 49, 50, and 51 are set out he re in accordance with how they occur in the root text but in 
Togme Sangpo’s commentary in the LTWA edition, they appear as verses 44, 45, and 46 under 
the outline:-
 b’ Establishing it by means of reasoning. It makes more sense to place these three 
verses under b’ Establishing it by means of reasoning  as they pertain to establishing the authenticity 
of the Mahayana teachings. When  these three ve rses are placed as verses 49, 50 and 51 after 
verse 48, there does not seem to be much relationship with the outline: d” Showing that even if 
one only seeks mere liberation it is necessary to meditate on emptiness . In fact, scholars debate as to 
whether these three verses were composed by Shan tideva or not.  Since there is a qualm, these 
three verses are placed here, as in most commentaries, as verses 49, 50 and 51). 
 The Buddha’s teachings are compiled into three scri ptural collections: the vinaya (pertaining to 
the higher training in ethics), sutra (related to the higher training in concentration) and 
knowledge (which deals with the higher training in  wisdom). Verses 49-51 are trying to prove the 
authenticity of the Mahayana teachings because th ey also contain the subject matter of the three 
scriptural collections.   
The argument put forth by Prasangika : 
You, the proponents of the Hina yana tenets, assert that the Hi nayana teachings are the authentic 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
393  
teachings of the Buddha because they cover the subj ect matter of the three hi gher trainings of the 
three scriptural collections.  Likewise, I can al so prove that the Mahayana teachings were taught 
by the Buddha because they also contain the subject matter of the three higher trainings. That 
being the case, you should accept that the Ma hayana teachings are the words of the Buddha.  
 
When you argue that the Mahayana teachings were not taught by the Buddha because you were 
able to point to a single Mahayana text that failed to have the defining characteristic of being the 
teachings of the Buddha, likewise, when there is a single Mahayana text that does possess all the 
defining characteristics of being the teachings of the Buddha, you have to accept then that all the 
Mahayana teachings are the words of the Buddha.  Just because Mahakashyapa and the other arhats fo und it difficult to fathom certain Mahayana 
sutras such as the extensive, the middling and the condensed Perfection of Wisdom Sutras , that is 
not a valid reason to denounce the Mahayana text s as not being the authentic teachings of the 
Buddha. 
(9,49) 
If any speech inserted in the sutra sets 
Is asserted by you to be  spoken by the Buddha, 
Why do you not assert that rega rding most of the Mahayana 
Since they are similar to your sutras? 
 
(9,50) 
If due to one exception* 
All become faulty, 
Why, due to one of your  sutras being similar, 
Were not all spoken by the Conqueror? 
 
*(The root text reads ma gtog ‘exception’, wher eas Togme Sangpo’s commentary reads ma rtogs 
‘not being realized’). 
 
(9,51) 
Mahakashyapa and the others 
Did not manage to fathom that speech, 
So who would consider it as not to be held as that 
Due to your not realizing it? 
Lesson 71   Chapter IX - verse 52-56 
D The way to train in wisdom- the nature of insight 
a. Explaining the chapter’s material 
1) Teaching that one who wants to attain liberation must develop the wisdom realizing suchness 
2) The methods by which one develops the wisdom realizing suchness 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
394  
a) A presentation of the two truths 
b) Establishing that even someone who wants to attain mere liberation must realize 
emptiness 
i) Objections 
ii) Response 
1’ Establishing the wisdom realizing emptiness as the very path by which one is freed from craving 
2’ Establishing it as the path by which one attains non-abiding nirvana 
3’ Instructions on the reasonableness of someone who strives for freedom to 
meditate 
c) An extensive explanation of the reasoning establishing emptiness 
3) Instructions on making effort to de velop that [realization of emptiness] 
b The chapter’s name 
 
In his collection of advice, Guntang Rinpoche said: “We put in a lot of effort to attend and listen 
to the teachings, like someone working very hard  to accumulate wealth and possessions.” But the 
wealth of knowledge we gain from  the teachings is slowly depleted over time, stolen by the thief 
of forgetfulness, our forgetting what we had heard and learnt.  
 Even when we are living in a place filled with jewe ls and precious things, it is possible for us to 
leave that place empty-handed.  In the same way, although we may have he ard many teachings, if 
we do not exercise mindfulness and make the effo rt to remember those teachings, it is possible 
that, at the time of death, we may go empty-hand ed to the next life. This is due to not having 
properly placed the imprint of the teachings in ou r minds. Therefore, when we receive teachings, 
we must remember what we had heard, ascertai n the meaning of and continuously familiarise 
our minds with what we had understood. Even as we gain new knowledge and greater understanding, we should not forget what we had learnt earlier. This is not beneficial as all the 
teachings are interrelated.   
 Guntang Rinpoche directed this advice specific ally at those who rea lly want to learn the 
teachings of the Buddha through listening and reflection. We are now   studying the great 
treatises of the Buddhadharma, which are all inte rrelated. So forgetting what you had learnt 
earlier will not be helpful for your study of the new material. Yes, we are dealing with a difficult subject. On top of that, everyone has their own difficulties with their personal lives and work 
commitments. But what we can do is to try our best , as much as possible. We should always keep 
this advice in our minds.  
2’ Establishing it as the path by which one attains non-abiding nirvana 
 
(9,52) 
To remain in cyclic existence, 
Free from the extremes of attachment and fear, 
Accomplishing the welfare of thos e suffering out of confusion, 
Is the result of [medit ating on] emptiness.  
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
395  
We had studied the need to realise emptiness for those who wish to achieve liberation. Here, we 
are establishing the need to realise emptine ss to achieve omniscienc e, the state of full 
enlightenment.  
 
Accomplishing the welfare of those su ffering out of confusion: Confusion refers to the fact that sentient 
beings are confused about the presentation on ka rma, the law of cause and effect. They are also 
confused with regards to the final mode of ab iding of the aggregates, not understanding the 
ultimate nature of their bodies and minds wh ich they grasp at as being truly existent. 
 
For the benefit of such confused sentient beings , the superior bodhisattvas, having achieved the 
direct perception of emptiness, out of their great compassion, choose to remain in cyclic 
existence. This is different from ordinary beings  remaining in cyclic exis tence, without choice,  
due to being under the power of their ignoranc e grasping at true existence. The superior 
bodhisattvas do not remain in cyclic existence du e to being under the power of grasping at true 
existence.  The superior bodhisattvas are also different from the hearer superiors and solitary realiser superiors. The hearer superiors and solitary realiser  superiors seek liberation because of their fear 
of contaminated suffering. Once liberated, they  abide in peace, the state of abandonment of 
suffering. This is their goal.  The superior bodhis attvas do not seek to abide in such peace for 
themselves but they choose to take rebirth in cy clic existence out of their great compassion for 
sentient beings. They are as happy to take such a rebirth as someone who takes great pleasure in 
visiting a beautiful park or garden, due to their wi sh to benefit sentient beings.  They are able to 
do so due to their realisation of emptiness as  indicated in the first two lines of verse 52: To remain 
in cyclic existence, free from the extremes of attachment and fear. 
 
If such bodhisattvas had not attained the wisdom realising emptiness in their minds, it is possible 
they may become disenchanted when they encoun ter  suffering, pain and difficulties. This may 
result in the danger of their falling into th e extreme of peace and seeking liberation for 
themselves. They may think, “Thi s is too difficult. I may as well work for my own happiness and 
peace.”   However, for the bodhisattvas who have achieved the wisdom realising emptiness, when samsaric 
suffering arises, they are able to see such sufferi ng as illusory and not being truly existent. They 
are not harmed by those sufferings because of their realisation of emptiness.  Therefore, there is a 
difference between bodhisattvas who have realis ed emptiness and those who have not.    
 Since we have not realised emptiness, when we experience a problem, the problem appears to us 
to be very solid and real. We ourselves, as the experiencer of the problem, also appear solid and real. This makes things very difficult for our mi nds. But the superior bodhisattvas are not like 
that. 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
396  
 
3’. Instructions on the reasonableness of someone who strives for freedom to meditate 
 
(9, 53) 
In that case, it is not correct to 
Repudiate the side of emptiness. 
Therefore, without entertaining any doubts, 
Meditate on emptiness!  
 
(9,54) 
The antidote to the darkness of the afflictive obscurations and 
Obscurations to knowledge is emptiness. 
So why do those who wish to quickly attain omniscience 
Not meditate on it? 
 
(9,55) 
Fear should be developed with regard to 
That which produces suffering – [apprehending] things; 
But why develop fear with respect to 
That which pacifies suffering – emptiness? 
 
(9,56) 
If some self existed 
One should fear everything whatsoever. 
But since no such self exists 
Who is there to be afraid of?  
 
(Verses 53 and 54 are set out here in accordance with how they occur in the root text but in 
Togme Sangpo’s commentary, their order is reversed.) 
 
The above verses mean that we need to meditate on emptiness whether we are aspiring to achieve 
liberation or enlightenment.  
 
We had seen earlier how the hearers’ schools (i.e ., Vaibhasika and Sautra ntika) do not assert a 
selflessness of phenomena. On the contrary, they assert a self of phenomena. Furthermore, they 
say there is no need to achieve the wisdom realising emptiness to achieve liberation. They 
question the authenticity of the Mahayana teachi ngs which they believe are not the words of the 
Buddha. We have already refuted all these wrong a ssertions with logic and reasoning. This means 
that even the proponents of the hearers’ school s must meditate on emptiness to achieve their 
goal of liberation.   The root of cyclic existence is the ignorance graspi ng at the self. There is no way to be free of 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
397  
cyclic existence until  we see that  the self grasped at by this igno rance does not exist. In order to 
ascertain the non-existence of that self, we need the wisdom realising emptiness. 
There are many works by Nagarjuna and other scriptural authority to substantiate the fact that in 
order to achieve liberation and enlightenment,  we need to achieve the wisdom realising 
emptiness.  
 Nagarjuna’s texts clearly state that in order to ac hieve any of the three enlightenments – that of 
the hearer, the solitary realiser or the state of fu ll enlightenment -  we must realise emptiness and 
that we need to do this to destroy samsara as explained in verse 54: The antidote to the darkness of 
the afflictive obscurations [obstructions to liberati on] and/Obscurations to kn owledge [obstruction to 
omniscience] is emptiness.  Anyone who wishes to quickly attain full enlightenment must meditate 
on emptiness to eliminate these two obstructions. Without meditating on emptiness, it will not 
be possible to abandon the manifest afflictions an d to eliminate the seed of grasping at true 
existence, much less the obst ructions to omniscience. 
 According to Prasangika, the obstructions to liberation  are posited as grasping at true existence 
together with the seed that produces that grasping . The afflictions that resu lt from such grasping, 
such as attachment, are also the obstructions to liberation. The subtle final predispositions 
placed on the mental continuum by this grasping  at true existence toge ther with the mistaken 
appearance of true existence produced by that subtle predisposition are posited as the 
obstructions to omniscience .  
 
Difference between the seed and th e subtle final predisposition 
The subtle final predisposition (or imprint) is  subtler than the seed of afflictions. This 
predisposition produces the mistaken appearance  of true existence but it  does not have the power 
to produce the grasping  at true existence.  
 
The seed of grasping at true existence has the powe r to produce, at a later time, the grasping at  
true existence but the predisposition do es not have the power to do this.   
 
Question : Does the wisdom realising emptiness remove  the seeds of afflictions completely from the 
root or does it simply disable  them? 
Answer : When one realises emptiness, that wisdom re alising emptiness is able to destroy the seeds 
of the afflictions completely without leaving a tr ace. The wisdom realising the emptiness of the 
self-sufficient substantially existent person canno t even destroy the seed of grasping at such a 
person. In order to eliminate  completely the seed  of grasping at the self-sufficient substantially 
existent person, one must realise emptiness. (This was discussed earlier in verse 45). 
 
Question:  Why do we need to destroy the karmic seeds? Won’t disabling them be enough? 
Answer : When a person completes the path of prepar ation, he no longer takes rebirth in the 
lower realms, but this does not mean he has destro yed the karmic seed that will propel him to a 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
398  
lower realm rebirth. It simply means that ther e will be no opportunit y for him to do so.  
 
That karmic seed that can cause him to be rebo rn in the lower realms will only be destroyed 
when he achieves the path of seeing. This does not mean that there wasn’t any need for him to 
destroy that karmic seed completely when he was on  the path of preparation. He simply had no 
ability to do so at that point. It is not desirable to have this karmic seed even though it no longer 
had the potential to propel him to take rebirth in  the lower realms. But he only has the ability to 
destroy that seed when he ac hieves the path of seeing. 
 These seeds are placed in the mental continuum by the afflictions. As the entity of the seed is 
produced by the afflictions, it is, by nature, undesirable.  
Question : Will achieving the wisdom realising emptin ess also eliminate completely the disabled 
karmic seeds left behind by our purification practices?  
Answer : The section on confession in the Lam Rim Chenmo  says that when we engage in 
purification practice, that purification does not destroy the seed of the negative action. In order 
to destroy that seed, we need to achieve the path  of seeing. We will not experience the result of 
the negative action after the puri fication but this does not mean that we do not need to destroy 
the seed. It is just that we do no t have the ability to do so. Only wh en we are at the path of seeing 
will we be able to destroy the seed completely. 
 Proponents of Mahayana and Hinayana tenets both  accept the selflessness of person. However, 
the proponents of Hinayana tenets (i.e., Vaibhasi ka and Sautrantika) assert a self of phenomena 
and do not accept the selflessness of phenomena,  which is only posited by the proponents of 
Mahayana tenets. While the texts are unclear as to  the difference between the proponents of the 
Hinayana and Mahayana tenets, they can be differe ntiated on the basis of this assertion of the 
self of phenomena.  
 
Why do the proponents of Hinayana tenets asse rt that there is a self of phenomena?  
It is unclear as to why the proponents of Hinayana tenets assert that there is a self of phenomena, 
i.e., the notion that phenomena possess a self. It gi ves us the feeling that there is something from 
the side of the object, i.e., it is established from its own side.  In my view, they may have arrived at this conclusi on that there is a self of phenomena as a result 
of their assertions: that all phenomena are established by way of thei r own character as the basis of engagement (or 
the referent) of phenomena; and  that external objects exist.  Based on this, we can say that this is the defining  characteristic of the  assertion of the self of 
phenomena.   
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
399  
It is questionable, however, whether Sautra ntika-Svatantrika-Madhyamika – Svatantrika-
Madhyamika is sub-divided into the Yogaca ra-Svatantrika-Madhyamika and Sautrantika-
Svatantrika-Madhyamika – also asserts that all phenomena are established by way of their own 
character as the basis of engagement  (or the referent) of phenomena.  
 
After having established the need to realise emptiness in order to attain liberation and 
enlightenment, qualms may still arise. For ex ample, there are people who are fearful of 
meditating on emptiness when, in f a c t ,  t h e y  s h o u l d  b e  a f r a i d  o f  the root of cyclic existence, 
which is the grasping at true existence. But we do not fear this graspi ng which exists in our 
minds, instead, we fear the wisdom realising em ptiness, which is the on ly antidote that can 
destroy the root of all our suffering.  If we are af raid of meditating on emptiness, we should ask 
ourselves: “Why are we afraid of something that we should not be afraid of? And why are we not 
afraid of something that we sh ould really be afraid of?” 
 
If some self existed/One shou ld fear everything whatsoever :  W e  s h o u l d  r e a l l y  b e  t e r r i f i e d  i f  t h e  
inherently existent self does exis t. But when we try to look for th is self, it cannot be found. When 
we look for the inherently existent I that is experiencing the fear and, upon analysis, we are 
unable to find it, the fear will disappear. So there is nothing to fear.    Whenever we experience any fear, unhappiness, an xiety, stress or  depression, etc., we should 
stop to examine and look for this I that is experiencin g this suffering. When we look for this inherently existent I, we will not be able to fi nd it. Naturally the unhappiness experienced by the 
I will subside when this I cannot be found. Of course, we do not yet have the realisation of emptiness, but it is beneficial to check out the I in  this way.  We are not saying that there is no 
suffering but when we look for that unpleasant f eeling, we cannot pinpoint where it is. When we 
see we are unable to find it, then the mind loosen s up. This is the benefit. This is something we 
can do for ourselves. We do not need to sit in a meditation position to do this, we can do this 
lying down.  Suffering arises due to various conditions. Me ntal unhappiness is created by our discursive 
thoughts. When we are completely fixated on our problem, it will only stir up more negative 
thoughts, making the problem appear even bigger and more serious. The more we focus on the 
problem, the worse it gets and we only end up wi th more suffering. We tend to focus only on the 
problem but we do not focus on the solution or examine the nature, the location of the 
unpleasant feelings. The mind will naturally rela x when we discover we cannot find the location 
of these unhappy feelings.   Reflecting in this way does not mean that we ha ve realised emptiness. But, at least, we are 
moving in the right direction to wards that realisation one day. Also, it helps to reduce our 
suffering. From this, we can infer the kind of happiness and bliss we will experience when we 
achieve the realisation of emptiness.  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
400  
 
Question : It seems easier to meditate on the selflessn ess of phenomena rather than the selflessness 
of the person. Is this possible? Answer: It is clearly stated in the texts, especially th e treatises of Prasangika, that it is easier to 
meditate on the selflessness of the person than to meditate on the selflessness of phenomena.  
 
The entity of the person is the mere I that is imputed in dependence on the aggregates. It is 
easier to bring to mind how such a person do es not exist from its own side. When we see 
phenomena (i.e., anything other than the person),  for example, the aggregates, they seem to be 
inherently existent and it is more difficult to  generate the feeling that they are imputed on 
something else.   Therefore it is easier to see th e selflessness of the person as a dependent arising 
and more difficult to see the aggr egates as dependently arisen.  
 But when we look at the order in which the graspi ng of these two selves are generated, then, on 
the basis of grasping at the self of phenomena,  grasping at the  self of person follows. 
Lesson 72   Chapter IX - verse 57-69 
D The way to train in wisdom- the nature of insight 
a. Explaining the chapter’s material 
1) Teaching that one who wants to attain liberation must develop the wisdom realizing suchness 
2) The methods by which one develops the wisdom realizing suchness 
a) A presentation of the two truths b) Establishing that even someone who wants to attain mere liberation must realize 
emptiness 
c) An extensive explanation of the reasoning establishing emptiness 
i) The reasoning that establishes the selflessness of persons 
1’ Refuting the conceived object of the innate apprehension of self 
2’ Refuting the imputed self 
a’ Refuting the Samkhya position that the self is awareness 
1” The actual refutation 
2” Refuting the response to that 
b’ Refuting the Vaisheshika position that the self is matter 
3’ Abandoning objections to the refutations 
ii) An extensive explanation of the reasoning that establishes the selflessness of 
phenomena 
3) Instructions on making effort to de velop that [realization of emptiness] 
b The chapter’s name 
 
Guntang Rinpoche, in his collection of advice , said: “Even if you know and have memorised 
many phrases and terms of the Bu ddha’s teachings but you have not reflected on or analysed the 
meaning of these words, then it is like when  sutras  are recited, upon request, without 
contemplation or understanding of their meaning.”  
 
Simply knowing and being able to recite the wo rds of the Buddha’s teachings are not enough. 
Even animals can do that. What we must do is wo rk at eliminating any misconceptions or lack of 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
401  
understanding of the teachings. This can only be  achieved through analysis and reflection and 
not mere knowledge and recitation. We must asce rtain the meaning of the words through critical 
analysis.  
 
In essence, Gungtang Rinpoche is  pointing out that it is insufficient to know the words alone. 
He is not saying that that is unimportant. It is  as important to memorise and rely on the terms 
and phrases as an old man relies on his walking stick to move around. Without the words, there 
will be nothing to analyse in the first place.   For example, when there is a teaching of a co mmentary on a text, knowing the words and their 
meanings are important to understand what is  being taught.  Knowing the words gives us 
something to reflect on and to arrive at a deeper  understanding of the teaching. This is how we 
should study. But simply knowing the words alone will not be beneficial.   
c) An extensive explanation of the reasoning establishing emptiness 
i) The reasoning that establishes the selflessness of persons 
1’ Refuting the conceived object of the innate apprehension of self 
 
(9,57) 
Teeth, hair, and nails are not the self. 
The self is not the bones or blood. 
The mucus is not it, nor is the phlegm, 
Neither is the lymph or pus. 
 
(9, 58) 
The self is not the fat nor sweat. 
The lungs and liver are also not the self, 
Nor are the other inner organs the self. 
The self is not the excrement or urine. 
 
(9, 59) 
The flesh and skin are not the self. 
The warmth and winds are also not the self. 
The cavities are not the self. In all ways 
The six consciousnesses are also not the self. 
 
The meaning of the three verses is the same  as the famous quotation from Nagarjuna’s Precious 
Garland : A person is neither the earth, no r water, nor wind, nor space, nor sk y. A person is not other than 
these as well . 
 
According to Prasangika, selflessness is divided into the selflessness of persons and the 
selflessness of phenomena. “Selflessness” means the absence  of a self that is established from its 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
402  
own side, without being posited by conceptuality. Wh en the basis for such a self is a person, it is 
called  self of persons . When  the basis of such a self is something other than person, a 
phenomenon, then it is called  self of phenomenon . Does that self of persons exist? No. Does 
that self of phenomenon exist? Again the answer is no.  
 According to Prasangika, the selflessness of pers ons and of phenomena do not differ with respect 
to the self that does not exist. With respect to the object of negation, the self is the same with 
respect to the self of persons or self of phenomena. But they are di fferentiated with respect to the 
basis. The lack of self of person s (or when the self is negated wi th respect to a person) is called 
the selflessness of persons  and the lack of self of phenomena (or when the self is negated with 
respect to a phenomenon) is called selflessness of phenomena . 
 
This means that both selflessness of pers ons and selflessness of phenomena have the same object 
of negation, the self. The difference  is the basis of that selflessne ss: the person or phenomena. The 
apprehension of the grasping at such a self with  respect to the basis of a person is called the 
grasping at the self of persons. The apprehension of  grasping at such a self with respect to the 
basis of a phenomenon is called gras ping at the self of phenomena.  
 
What is the order in which the grasping at the self of persons and grasping at the self of 
phenomena arise? As explained in the Middle Length Lam Rim  by Lama Tsongkhapa, first, there is 
the grasping at the self of phenomena. On that basi s arises the grasping at the self of  persons.  
 With respect to realising the meaning of these two forms of selflessness, first understand the 
selflessness of persons. On this ba sis, then go on to understand the selflessness of phenomena. It 
is easier to realise the selflessness of persons th an the selflessness of phenomena, not because of 
the difference  in the object of negation (the  self) but because of the basis (persons or 
phenomena).  
 
According to Prasangika, both self graspings (grasp ing at the self of pers ons and grasping at the 
self of phenomena) have innate and intellectually  acquired forms. This means that there is the 
innate grasping at the self of persons and the in tellectually acquired grasping at the self of 
persons. Innate grasping at the self of persons: Regardless of whether we are humans, animals or 
proponents of tenets, the moment we focus on th e object, “person,” innately we grasp at that 
person as existing from its own side (existing by  way of its own character). This arises naturally, 
without reason or dependence on any tenets. Intellectually acquired grasping at the self of 
persons: This grasping does not arise innately or natu rally but arises due to having thought about 
and adhering to a tenet system.  For example, when one thinks of the object, “person,” one 
thinks that the person is truly existent and do es not seem to change. One then concludes that 
the person exists by way of it s own character. When one conclu des that the person is truly 
existent with such reasoning, this conclusion is called the intellectually acquired grasping at the 
self of persons. It did not arise innately bu t came about through a process of reasoning. 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
403  
 
The coarse self of persons  is the grasping at the self-sufficient substantially existent person. This 
also has innate and intellectually  acquired forms. The intellectually acquired grasping at the 
self-sufficient substanti ally existent person is the grasping at the permanent, unitary and 
independent self. This grasping at the permanen t, unitary and independent self is necessarily 
intellectually acquired because it does not arise innately but  comes about only after one thinks 
about it. One concludes the self is permanen t by thinking the I does not disappear or 
disintegrate but remains forever. One concludes the I is unitary because one thinks the I does 
not possess any parts and by thin king that the I does not depend  on causes and conditions, one 
concludes  the I is independent. Therefore, on e concludes that the self must be permanent, 
unitary and independent. The innate grasping at the self-suffici ent substantially existent person  
is grasping at a self who is like the owner of the ag gregates. This self is the entity of the aggregates 
of body and mind. The text gives an example of a trader and his wares. The things that the trader 
deals in belong to him, just like the body and mind (the aggregates) belong to the self. In the 
same way, the innate grasping at the self-sufficien t substantially existent person is like this sense 
that the aggregates depend on the self but the se lf (which is grasped at) does not depend on the 
aggregates.  
 Another example: When one is in poor health  and a strong, healthy person comes along and 
offers to exchange his body for one’s sickly body, in stinctively this self wants to take up the offer. 
In other words, this self can do as it wishes an d the aggregates would simply have to obey.  Or 
another example: One has an opportunity to ex change one’s dull mind for a smarter mind, 
again, instinctively, the self will agree to the ex change. There is a sense that this self exists 
independently of the aggregates and it owns the aggregates.   According to Prasangika, the view of the transitory collection  is the mind grasping at I and mine 
as established by way of its own character (inher ently existent). Whatever is the view of the 
transitory collection is necessarily grasping at the se lf of persons. It is all right to say that grasping 
at the I to be established by way of its own character is grasping at  the self of persons. But it is 
questionable whether we can say that grasping at that which is mine as es tablished by way of its 
own character is grasping at the self of persons. Or is that grasping at the self of phenomena?  
 Grasping at mine is necessarily a grasping at the self of person. What is the basis for this self that is being refuted? The object of observation for this view of the transitory collection is the 
conventionally existent I, the se lf. That exists. However, the obje ct of the mode of apprehension 
of the view of the transitory coll ection does not exist, i.e., when the mind focuses on the self and  
apprehends it to exist inherently, that inhere ntly existent self does not exist at all.  
 If the inherently existent self exists, it is findab le. Is it inside the aggregates? Is it one of the 
aggregates or all of the aggregates? Is it the bo dy or the mind? We will not be able to find 
something that we can point to as the self. Upon analysis, the inherently existent self, I or person 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
404  
cannot be found. But this is not to say that the self does not exist. It exists as being merely 
labelled by the mind, through the force of conceptuality.  
 
For example: In the darkness, one misapprehends a co il of rope to be a snake. When seen from a 
distance, it is possible to mistake the rope or  the whole coil to be a snake. On closer 
examination, however, there is nothing within the rope that can be pointe d to as the snake. In 
t h e  s a m e  w a y ,  w h e n  w e  l o o k  f o r  t h e  I  o r  p e r s o n  t h a t  i s  d e s i g n a t e d  o n  t h e  b o d y  a n d  m i n d  
(aggregates), there is no person who is one of the aggregates or the collection of the aggregates. In 
both examples, looking for the sn ake on the coil of rope and looking for the person on the 
aggregates are the same in the manner in which we  search for the object. The difference is that 
the snake does not exist on the coil of rope but the person does exist. Does the person exist on 
the aggregates?  
 Prasangika asserts that neither the person no r phenomena exist inherently. The schools below 
Prasangika assert that the person and phenomena are necessarily inherently existent. Since they 
make this assertion, it means they  can point to something that is the person. Some tenets say that 
the mind is the person while others say it is the co llection of the aggregates. Yet others assert that 
the person is the continuum of the aggregates.    
2’ Refuting the imputed self 
a’ Refuting the Samkhya position that the self is awareness 
1” The actual refutation 
 
(9, 60) 
If a knower of sound were permanent 
At all times there would be the apprehension of sound. 
If there is no object to be known, 
Due to what type [of object] is  it said to be a “knower”? 
 
(9,61) 
If without a knower there is a knower, 
It would follow that wood is also a knower. 
Therefore, without a closely abiding object of knowledge 
It is definitely to be stat ed “There is no knower.” 
 Prasangika is refuting the assertion of the Samkhyas  that self is awareness and the assertion of the 
Vaisheshikas that self is matter.  The Samkhyas assert that the se lf is awareness (consciousness) 
without  beginning or end and that it is perman ent and unitary. The object apprehended by such 
a self, sound, is also asserted to be permanent.  However, upon analysis, we find that such a self 
cannot possibly exist. If the self is  permanent, then there is a fallac y that self will not be able to 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
405  
apprehend sound.77 
 
2” Refuting the response to that 
(9,62) 
“That very one knows form.” 
At that time, why is there also not hearing? 
“Because there is no sound nearby.” 
Therefore, a knower of that [sound] also does not exist. 
 
(9,63) 
How can that which is the nature of 
Apprehending sound apprehend form? 
That [for you] one is considered to be 
Both father and son is not correct. 
 
(9,64) 
In that case, the lightness, motility, and darkness 
Are not a son, nor are they a father. 
That [apprehension of form] is  not seen to be the nature 
Of possessing the appr ehension of sound. 
 
(9,65) 
If that itself, like an acto r, is seen in other modes, 
It would not be permanent. 
“That itself has other modes.” 
Such a oneness is a oneness that never existed before. 
 
(9,66) 
“Although it has other mo des, it is not true.” 
Tell us what is its nature. 
“It is just consciousness.” If it were like that, 
It would follow that all beings are one. 
 
                                              
77 Madhyamika : (60) If the consciousness that apprehends sound were a permanent (self), there would be a conscious 
apprehension of sound at all times even when sound was ab sent. Since the consciousness of sound is dependent upon 
sound, if there were no sound as an object of consciou sness, for what reason and th rough the cognition of what 
object could it be called a consciousness that apprehends sound? (61) If there can be a consciousness that apprehends 
sound, even though there is no consciousness of sound, it would (absurdly) follow that even a piece of wood could 
become a consciousness of sound. Therefore, without an object of consciousness remaining close by, we can definitely say that 
there is no consciousn ess that apprehends it. (Root text, pg. 134)  
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
406  
(9,67) 
Also that with mind and that without mind 
Would become one because they are similar in existing. 
When instants are mistaken, 
How can they have a similar support? 
 
b’. Refuting the Vaisheshika position that the self is matter 
 
(9,68) 
Also that without mind is not the self 
Because it is not mind, like a vase and so forth. 
Nonetheless, if because it is endowed with mind, 
It is conscious, it follows that  the non-conscious disintegrates. 
 
(9,69) 
If the self does not change, 
How can it act due to mind? 
Thus, that which is not conscious and free from activity – 
Space – would also act as a self. 
 
The Vaisheshikas assert that self is matter. This mean the self is  not mind. This absurdly follows 
that the vase is also a person. Prasangika refutes that the self is awareness or matter. They object 
that if the self does not exist, then there will be  problems positing the law of cause and effect and 
meditating on compassion will be meaningless. Du e to time constraints, we will not look into the 
non-Buddhist tenets and thei r assertions in detail.  78 
Lesson 73   Chapter IX - verse 70-74 
D The way to train in wisdom- the nature of insight 
a. Explaining the chapter’s material 
1) Teaching that one who wants to attain liberation must develop the wisdom realizing suchness 
2) The methods by which one develops the wisdom realizing suchness 
a) A presentation of the two truths b) Establishing that even someone who wants to attain mere liberation must realize 
                                              
78 In general ‘self’, ‘person’ and ‘I’ are synonyms along with  ‘creature’ or ‘being’, which has also been translated 
here as ‘person’. However, when Pr asangikas speak specifically of a self of persons , this ‘self’ does not refer to the 
conventionally existent person which is imputed in  dependence on the aggregates of mind and body. 
In the term ‘self of persons’, ‘self’ means ‘inherent ex istence’, and the word ‘persons’ means ‘nominally exist 
persons’. Hence, the term ‘selflessness of persons’ means th e non-inherent existence of nominally existent persons.  
‘Inherent existence’ means ‘independent existence’, ‘objective  existence’, ‘natural existence’, or ‘existence under its 
own power’ etc. The meaning of inherent existence is be st seen when one progresses toward realizing the imputed 
nature of the person. ( Meditation on Emptiness  by Jeffrey Hopkins, pg. 175)  
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
407  
emptiness 
c) An extensive explanation of the reasoning establishing emptiness 
i) The reasoning that establishes the selflessness of persons 
1’ Refuting the conceived object of the innate apprehension of self 
2’ Refuting the imputed self 
3’ Abandoning objections to the refutations 
a’ Rejecting the consequence that karma and its effects would be invalid 
1’’ The objection 
2’’ The response 
b’ Rejecting the consequence that cultivating compassion would be invalid 
ii) An extensive explanation of the reasoning that establishes the selflessness of 
phenomena 
3) Instructions on making effort to de velop that [realization of emptiness] 
b The chapter’s name 
 
In his collection of advice, Gungtang Rinpoche  noted that once people start studying the 
Buddha’s teachings, they expect to know everythi ng and change into an angel overnight. Such 
thoughts are useless. Then, ther e are others who study for a few days but forget what they had 
studied in the beginning. Studying th is way is also not beneficial.  
 
Because of this expectation of knowing everything, even those wh o are genuinely interested in 
understanding the Buddhadharma and engage in li stening and reflecting on them, within a short 
period of time, when they find they are un able to understand everything, they become 
discouraged and discontinue their studies. Then, there are those who continue studying but   
keep on forgetting what was taught earlier. Bo th these groups of peop le will not benefit from 
their studies. Therefore, we must a pply joyous perseverance continuously. 
 When we study the Buddha’s teachings, some to pics are more difficult and challenging while 
others are easier.  People usually avoid learning  the more difficult texts but when we do not 
bother to even try studying them, those texts wi ll only become more difficult, not less. It is 
important to persevere when studying the difficult texts. We should constantly revise and reflect 
on those topics and not forget them.   We may also feel bored with te achings we have heard before. When we hear those teachings 
repeatedly, we may think: “I know this already. Th is is not beneficial. It is so boring. Why is the 
teacher saying this again and again?” I know this happens from my personal experience. At times, 
my teachers liked to repeat certain topics again and again for more than 20 to 30 times. I would 
feel bored listening to these teachings. But having  heard the same teachings over and over again, 
they remain in my mind even after 15,  20 year s later. The fact I can remember those teachings 
after so long is due to the kindness of the teachers who went thro ugh the same teachings 
repeatedly. But at that time of hearing those teac hings, one does not  think about the kindness of 
the teacher. One only th inks how boring it is. 
In particular, when we study the great treatises, it is important to hear the teachings over and 
over again. We may not understand the subtler points or there may be things we cannot grasp 
fully no matter how hard we try.  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
408  
 
When we study the great treatises and philosophical texts, each and every word or sentence is so 
profound that there seems to be no end to how th ey can be analysed. There are so many ways of 
understanding them.  It is difficu lt to say that we can have complete understanding of even a 
single word of such texts. Because there are so many viewpoints and qualms, we have to look at 
certain topics over and over again. Due to their profundity, there will be a different 
understanding and perspective each time we read th e texts. It is not like reading story books like 
Harry Potter which we can easily understand.  
 The essence of this advice is to study the great treatises over and over again. 
 
3’ Abandoning objections to the refutations 
a’ Rejecting the consequence that karma and its effects would be invalid 
1” The objection 
(9, 70) 
“If a self does not exist, 
A relationship between action an d result would not be suitable. 
Having done an action, one would disintegrate, 
Whereby whose action would it be?” 
 All the four Buddhist tenets assert that, beca use all composed phenomena are impermanent, a 
permanent self does not exist. Also many su tras mention that once the karma has been 
accumulated, we will experience the fruitional effect of that particular karma even after many 
eons had passed.  
The refutation put forth by the Samkhyas:  
The self (soul) is permanent  and moves from life to life. For this reason, one  will definitely 
experience the result of the karma accumula ted in this life in one’s  future life. 
 
But you Buddhists are not able to explain how the karma accumulated now will yield its effect in 
a future life since you assert that the self is impermanent. If the self is impermanent (i.e., 
disintegrating from moment to moment), then the self that should be experiencing the result of 
the karma accumulated would have disappeared. In other words, by the time the self who created 
the karma is supposed to experience the result of that specific karma, that self will no longer 
exist.  Since there is no self to  experience the result, then you Buddhists cannot establish that you 
have to experience the effects of karma that you  have accumulated. 
The karma has to remain from the time of its crea tion until it ripens. If that is the case, then 
karma is permanent . When you say karma is impermanent, it will disintegrate. Then how are 
you going to experience the effect?  Looking at their argument, it can be seen that the proponents of non-Buddhist tenets have put in 
a great deal of thought before they arrived at th e conclusion that the self is permanent. To the 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
409  
Samkhyas, the Buddhist assertion of  the impermanent self leads to the absurd consequence that 
the self will not be able to experience the effe ct of the karma that it had accumulated earlier. 
 
 
The response from Prasangika: But if you (the Samkhyas) say that the self is permanent, it also 
absurdly follows that that self will not experience  the effect of the karma that it has accumulated 
earlier. When the self is permanent, there is no agent and no action rendering the discussion 
about the self experiencing the karmic results i rrelevant. Furthermore, when you assert that the 
self is permanent, how do you then  explain the taking of rebirth, the movement of that self from 
life to life, experiencing the karmic results of  past actions? Your a ssertions therefore are 
contradictory. 
 Does the person who created the karma experience  the effect? If the answer is ‘no,’ we can no 
longer say that karma does not disappear. It is said in the Lam Rim  that all karma is not wasted 
and will yield consequences. It will not disappear on its own accord. The answer is explained in the next four verses.  
2” The response 
(9,71) 
Since it is established for both of us 
That the basis of the action and of the result are different 
And that there is no self that does it, 
Is it not meaningless to argue about this? 
 
(9,72) 
It is impossible to see 
That possessing the caus e as well as the result. 
In dependence on being one continuum, 
He taught “The doer is the experiencer.” 
 
(9,73) 
The mind of the past and of the future 
Are not the self because they do not exist. 
“The mind that has been produced is the self.” 
Also when that disintegrates, there would be no self. 
 
(9,74) 
For example, when the trunk of a banana tree 
Is split into parts, there is nothing at all. 
Likewise, when sought with thorough analysis, 
Also the self is not real. 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
410  
 
Prasangika asserts that the agent (the self) wh o accumulated the karma is designated on the 
aggregates. The self, who will be the experiencer of  the result in the future, is imputed on the 
future set of aggregates. These two selves are diffe rent. The self at the time  of accumulating  the 
karma is different from the self at the time of experiencing the effect of that karma. This is 
established through logic and reasoning. Since both of  us have to accept this, there is no need to 
argue over the fact that the self is im permanent and that karma is not wasted. 
 
At the time of accumulating karma (be it virtuo us or non-virtuous), the self who is going to 
experience the result of that karma does not exist yet. If the self did exist at that time, it has to be 
realised by a valid cognizer. As there is no valid cognizer that can certify the existence of the self 
who is going to experience the result of that karma at the time when it was created, that self does 
not exist at that time.  
 If that is the case, does that mean the creator of the karma (the self) does not experience its 
effect?   When we accumulate karma,  we have to experience its result, as explained in the third line of 
verse 72, In dependence on being one continuum . The basis of labelling (or designation) of these two 
selves is either the continuum of the aggregat es or the continuum of the consciousness.  
 There is many ways of differentiating the self (or person):- 
The specific self of this life  
The specific self of the next life The specific self who exists as a human being (or as an animal) The self that pervades all of this  (without differentiating between th is  and the next life, i.e., the 
self that exists in the past, present and future)  In general, there is an all-pervasive self because th ere is the self who  came from the previous life, 
the self who will go on to future lives and the self who  goes on to enlighte nment. This is the self 
that pervades both the previous life and the pr esent life. This self, who is designated on the 
continuum of the consciousness or continuum of th e aggregates, moved from the previous life to 
this life. Because there is such a self, therefore we can say that there is a self who accumulated 
karma in the past and there is a self who will expe rience the karmic results in the future. This is 
how we prove that karma will no t go to waste and that karmic results will be experienced.  
 The self of this I (as a human bein g) is designated in dependence on the aggregates of this human 
body. If one is reborn as a hell being in the next life,  then the self of this life (as a human being) will not exist in the hell realms. If one were to say that this human self exists in the next life in 
hell, then one would still have to be called a huma n being. Therefore, the se lf of this life does 
not go on to the next life. 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
411  
 
Karma, once created, disintegra tes from the very next moment onwards and does not remain 
until it ripens to give rise to the effect. Although  it disintegrates so quickl y, it does not mean it 
will not give rise to effects and each of the fo ur Buddhist tenets has its own explanation as to 
how this takes place.  
 All the schools below Prasangika (Svatantri ka-Madhyamika, Cittamatra, Sautrantika and 
Vaibhasika) assert that  karma disintegrates in th e very next moment after its creation, leaving a 
potential in the form of an imprint (or predispo sition) on the mental continuum. This imprint, 
which is a non-associated compositional factor, will gi ve rise to an effect in the future. Cittamatra 
asserts that the mind-basis-of–all is the carrier of the latency of this action.  
 Prasangika also asserts the immediate disintegrati on of karma after its creation.  To Prasangika, 
however, it is this factor of disintegratedness, wh ich  is a functioning thing, that will give rise to 
the effect in the future. The factors of produc tion and disintegratedness are asserted to be 
functioning things and are composed (impermanent) phenomena.  According to Prasangika, the self who is the crea tor of karma and the self who is the experiencer 
of the result of that karma cannot be found, upon analysis, either within the aggregates or within 
the consciousness. Nevertheless, th e self  exists conventionally. 
 If the self is findable upon analysis, then we sh ould be able to point to  either the body or the 
mind as being the self. If we were to posit the co nsciousness (or mind) to be the self,  this would 
mean that:  the consciousness of the past, which has disinteg rated and no longer exists now, cannot be the 
self;  the consciousness of the future, which does not exis t as it has yet to be generated, cannot be the 
self; and  the present consciousness also cannot  be the self  as it disintegrates in the very next moment. 
 
As mentioned then in verse 73: The mind of the past and of the future /Are not the self because they do 
not exist./’The mind that has been pr oduced is the self.’ Also when that disintegrates, there would be no self .  
 
If we were to search for the self amongst the coll ection of the aggregates, we will also not be able 
to find the self there, as pointed out in verse 74: For example, when the trunk of a banana tree/Is split 
into parts, there is nothing at all./ Likewise, when sought with thorough analysis,/Also the self is not real.  
According to Prasangika, nothing ex ists inherently (truly, from its own side). If something exists 
truly, it has to be findable upon analysis.  
 
We should think about how karma is never wasted . When we create karma,  we will definitely 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
412  
experience the result. This is fu ndamental Buddhadharma but it is also a most difficult point for 
many people. Some people think th at the self  of the present mome nt and the self  of the future 
are different. They therefore doubt whether they wi ll experience the result in the future for the 
karma  they create now. Because of this, they  do not bother about doing virtuous deeds and 
avoiding non-virtue.  
 W e  n e e d  t o  s o r t  t h i s  o u t  c l e a r l y   i n  o u r  m i n d s until we realise that we definitely have to 
experience the result of our actions. 
Lesson 74   Chapter IX - verse 75-84 
D The way to train in wisdom- the nature of insight 
a. Explaining the chapter’s material 
1) Teaching that one who wants to attain liberation must develop the wisdom realizing suchness 
2) The methods by which one develops the wisdom realizing suchness 
a) A presentation of the two truths 
b) Establishing that even someone who wants to attain mere liberation must realize 
emptiness 
c) An extensive explanation of the reasoning establishing emptiness 
i) The reasoning that establishes the selflessness of persons 
1’ Refuting the conceived object of the innate apprehension of self 
2’ Refuting the imputed self 
3’ Abandoning objections to the refutations 
a’ Rejecting the consequence that karma and its effects would be invalid 
b’ Rejecting the consequence that cultivating compassion would be invalid 
ii) An extensive explanation of the reasoning that establishes the selflessness of 
phenomena 
1’ Explaining the selflessness of phenom ena by means of the four placements of 
mindfulness 
a’ Meditating on placing mindfulness on the body 
1” Resolving that the body - the possessor of parts - does not inherently 
exist 
2” Resolving that the limbs- the parts- do not inherently exist 3” Thus, it is unreasonable to be attached to the dream-like body that lacks 
inherent existence 
4” That establishes that the person also does not inherently exist 
b’ Meditating on placing mindfulness on feelings 
c’ Meditating on placing mindfulness on mind 
d’ Meditating on placing mindfulness on phenomena 
2’ Rejecting the dispute that the two truths would be invalid 
3’ Stating the syllogism that acts to establish selflessness 
3) Instructions on making effort to de velop that [realization of emptiness] 
b The chapter’s name 
 
The Kadampa masters said: Be farsighted, have a big mind and keep a steady pace. 
 
To be farsighted   relates to the mental perspective and th e motivation we should have for studying 
and practising the Dharma. Although our goal is to attain enlightenment for the benefit of all 
sentient beings, we should realise that this will take many lifetimes to achieve. As enlightenment 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
413  
does not happen overnight,  we need to work very hard from life to life in order to achieve our 
goal.   
This also applies to studying the Buddhadharma. We should not expect to know everything very 
quickly. For example, whenever we start studying a new topic, we expect to learn and understand 
everything within a few years or even a few mont hs. Such expectations are neither realistic nor 
beneficial at this stage. 
 
T h e r e f o r e ,  b e  i t  s t u d y i n g  o r  p r a c t i s i n g  t h e  D h a r m a ,  b e  f a r - s i g h t e d .  D o  n o t   e x p e c t  t o  s e e  immediate results but plan to have this  happen over a longer time frame. 
 
Have a big mind  refers to the kind of joyous perseverance  we need in order to achieve any goal we 
set for ourselves. Strong determination is required  before joyous perseverance will arise. When 
we have a big goal, then our minds will  be expa nsive, not tight and narrow. With a big mind and 
strong determination, it is then possible to cu ltivate continuous joyous  perseverance, like the 
flow of a river. When our minds are narrow, it be comes difficult to achiev e whatever goal we may 
have.   
 When we are joyously persevering in virtuous acti vities, we can become  exhausted along the way. 
W e  n e e d  t o  k n o w  w h e n  t o  r e l a x    a n d  t o  ap p l y  t h e  p o w e r  o f  r e l in q u i s h m e n t .  T h i s  i s  w h a t  i s  
referred to in Keep a steady pace. But we must know how to rest. For example, some people 
practise very hard for a month or two then they rest for one or two years!. This is wrong. When 
we do not know how to pace ourselves, to rest when needed and to continue once we are rested, 
it will also be difficult for us to achieve our goal.  
 When our minds are tired, rest. While resting, deep in our hearts, we should always have the desire to carry on and work hard again. But, for us, once we are rested, we tend to forget about 
virtue and the need to continue. When we rest in such a way, we will never achieve our goal.    We should memorise this advice from the Kada mpa masters together with  their  meaning. Why 
are we not succeeding in our Dharma practice and nothing happens? This is because we have 
been doing the exact opposite of these  three things: we are not fa r-sighted, we do not have a big 
mind and we do not keep a steady pace.   
b’ Rejecting the consequence that cultivating compassion would be invalid 
 
(9,75) 
“Well then, if sentient beings do not exist, 
For whom is compassion developed?” 
For those who imputed ignorance 
For whom a promise has been made  for the sake of the result. 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
414  
 
(9,76) 
“If sentient beings do not exist,  who [obtains] the results?” 
That they are true, nonetheless, is asserted from ignorance. 
In order to totally pacify suffering, 
One should not reject ignorant results. 
 
(9,77) 
The pride that is the cause of suffering 
Increases due to ignorance regarding the self. 
If it is said “But there is no turning away from that,” 
Meditation on selflessness is the best. 
 
Prasangika asserts that the person  does not exist inherently. To the schools below Prasangika and 
the non-Buddhists, this is tantamount to s aying that the person does not exist.  
 
Objection from the schools below Prasangika and the  non-Buddhists : 
For a person to exist, that person has to exist inherently. When there is no inherently existent 
person, then the person does not ex ist. If the person does not exist, sentient beings also do not 
exist. Then, since there is no object for the ge neration of compassion, whom are you generating 
compassion for? 
 
The response from Prasangika :   
For those who imputed ignorance/For  whom a promise has been made  for the sake of the result.  
 
A person who does not exist inherently does not mean that the person is  non- existent. That 
person does not exist inherently because when we look for the imputed object, it is not findable 
but rather, that person exists as being merely la belled by the mind. Compassion is generated for 
such merely labelled sentient beings.   
Generally, ‘ignorance’ means ‘not knowing’ but here, those who imputed ignorance refers to 
ordinary sentient beings whose minds are not traine d in or have not yet realised emptiness, like 
the worldly beings mentioned in th e beginning of this chapter.  
 
There is a conventional valid cognizer that does not realise emptiness but who is able to realise 
sentient beings. The sentient beings established by the conventional valid cognizer are merely 
labelled sentient beings who are the objects of compassion.   
Objection from the schools below Prasangika and the non-Buddhists : 
If the person does not exist inherently (and therefore does not exist) then who will achieve 
enlightenment? Ultimately, buddhahood does not exist. 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
415  
 
The reply from Prasangika : 
From the ultimate point of view, there is no real buddhahood and no real person achieving 
enlightenment.  But this does not mean that buddhahood and the person achieving 
enlightenment do not exist. 
 
Conventionally speaking, there is a person achiev ing enlightenment or who is going to achieving 
enlightenment. We can posit that the state of  enlightenment can be achieved and buddhahood 
exists. As stated in the second line of verse 76: That they are true, nonetheless, is asserted from 
ignorance:  enlightenment and the person who is going to achieve it exist as it is asserted from 
ignorance  by the mind that does not realise emptiness but is a conventional valid cognizer that is 
able to realise the person. 
 Here we are saying that whatever is asserted by  ignorance  exists. But earlier in this chapter, 
a n y t h i n g  t h a t  i s  i m p u t e d  b y  i g n o r a n c e  ( w h i c h  r e f e r s  t o  g r a s p i n g  a t  t r u e  e x i s t e n c e )  h a s  t o  b e  abandoned as an object of negation. This  seems to be contradictory.  
‘Ignorance ’ in verse 75 does not refer to grasping at true  existence but it refers to the ordinary or 
conventional mind that does not realise empt iness but can impute the person. The ignorance 
referred to earlier on in the chapter is the mind grasping at true existence. These two ignorances 
are different. 
 The meditation on compassion, fo cussing on the suffering of thos e imputed sentient beings, by a 
person who does not realise emptiness can stil l become a cause to achieve enlightenment.  
 
The pride that is the cause of suffering/Inc reases due to ignorance regarding the self: Pride here refers to 
both grasping at the self of persons and phen omena. These two are the causes of suffering, 
causing suffering to arise and increase. These two graspings must be abandoned by the yogi. 
 
Qualm from the schools below Prasangika :  
There is no way to abandon the self grasping ig norance because it has b een together with the 
mind since time without beginning (verse 77: If it is said “But there is no turning away from that”). 
 
The reply by Prasangika:  
This is not true. It is possible to destroy the self grasping ignorance because grasping at the self of 
persons and phenomena is an erroneous mind, wh ich engages reality in a completely mistaken 
way. Such a mind is very weak and can be destro yed by our meditation on selflessness. This is 
because the mind that realises the selflessne ss of persons and phenomena is the mind that 
accords with the final mode of abiding (i.e., ho w they actually exist) of persons and phenomena 
and is the supreme mind that can overcome the lo wly mind grasping at the self of persons and 
phenomena.  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
416  
 
The selflessness of persons and phenomena is established by a  valid cognizer, while the conceived object (i.e., the self of  persons an d phenomena)  grasped at by ignorance does not 
exist in reality and is not established by valid co gnition and therefore can be  harmed by it, i.e. a 
valid cognizer can harm a non-valid (or erroneous) mind.  
 Both minds - the ignorance grasping at the pers on and the wisdom realising the selflessness of 
the person - are observing the same object, the pe rson but the way they apprehend the person is 
different. The way ignorance apprehends the person  is completely erroneous (or mistaken). The 
way the wisdom realising the se lflessness of the person appreh ends the person accords with 
reality and is correct.   
ii) An extensive explanation of the reasoning that establishes the selflessness of phenomena 
1’ Explaining the selflessness of phenomena by m eans of the four placements of mindfulness 
a’ Meditating on placing mindfulness on the body 
1” Resolving that the body - the possessor of parts - does not inherently exist 
 
(9,78) 
The body is not the feet or calves. 
The thighs and loins ar e also not the body. 
Neither are the abdomen and back the body. 
The chest and shoulders are not the body either. 
The ribs and hands are also not the body. 
 
(9,79) 
The armpits and upper arms are also not the body. 
Even the inner organs are not it. 
The head and neck ar e also not the body. 
With regard to them, what is the body? 
 
(9,80) 
If the body were to abide 
By each area in all of them, 
Although indeed its par ts abide in its parts, 
In what does it itself abide? 
 
(9,81) 
If the body in its entirety 
Were to abide in the hands and so forth, 
However many hands there are and so forth, 
That many bodies would there be. 
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
417  
(9,82) 
If the body does not exis t outside and inside them, 
How could the body exist in  the hands and so forth? 
If it is not other than the hands and so forth, 
How could it exist? 
 
(9,83) 
Thus, due to ignorance regard ing the arms and so forth 
Of a non-existent body, a body comes to mind; 
Like, due to the feature of it being arranged in that shape, 
The mind [apprehends] a cair n to be a human being. 
 
(9,84) 
As long as the conditions are collected together, 
For that long the body will appe ar as though it were a being. 
Likewise, as long as the hands and so forth exist, 
For that long will a body appear there. 
 
We can meditate on the four placements of mi ndfulness from the conventional or from the 
ultimate point of view. As the commentary relates to  the selflessness of ph enomena, it should be 
done from the ultimate point of view.   
 The placement of the mindfulness of the body fr om the conventional point of view was covered 
in Chapter 8 where we studied the methods to ac hieve calm abiding through meditating on the 
filthy, unpleasant nature of the body.  The same applies here. Taki ng the body as the basis, from 
the conventional point of view, we reflect on how it is impermanent, in the nature of suffering 
and by nature unclean and filthy.    When we meditate on the body from the ultima te point of view, then we contemplate how the 
body does not possess a self , i.e., its selflessness.  
 In the future, when we cover the 37 limbs of en lightenment, we will study in more detail the 
close placement of mindfulness.  Here, we  focu s on the non- inherent existence of the body.  
 When the body exists inherently, then the body has to exist on th e basis of designation. There is 
an object referred to by the word, “body,” and fi ndable  either among its parts or the collection 
of its parts.  But such an object is not findable and therefore, the inherently existent body does 
not exist.  
 When we look for the inherently existent body on the basis of designation and  it does not exist as either “one” with the basis of designation nor do es it  exist as a completely “different” entity 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
418  
from the body, then such an inherent ly existent body does not exist.  
 
If the body is inherently existent, when we look for it, it has to be findable within one of the 
body parts. But when we look at  the different body parts individu ally - the feet, calves, thighs, 
loin, abdomen, back, chest etc. (as in verses 78  and 79) - we discover they are not the body. 
Therefore, the inherently existent body does not exist.  
 
S o m e  p e o p l e  a s s e r t :  “ T h e  b o d y  i s  n o t the parts but there is a body which possesses  parts and 
pervades them all.” This is also untrue.   
 How does the body pervade all its parts?: 
1. Is part of the body pervading the arms/legs etc.? or  
2. Does the entire  body pervade a single body part, for example, a leg or the hand, etc.?  
 
If the body were to abide/ By each area in all of them,/Although in deed its parts abide in its parts, / In 
what does it itself abide ?(Verse 80) : If part of that the body, the po ssessor of parts abides in, let say, 
the hand, then there will be the problem of limi tless regression. Where does the hand abide? The 
hand abides in the collection of the fingers. Wher e then does the fingers abide? And so on till 
the atomic level. There is the problem of finding the place in which the part of the body abides. 
Although it is possible that part of the body abid es in its parts but what does the body abide in?  
This body does not abide anywhere; not within any parts of the body.  
 
If the body in its entirety/Were to abide in the hand s and so forth,/However ma ny hands there are and so 
forth,/That many bodies would there be  (Verse 81): If we assert that the body as a whole  abides in all 
the parts of the body, then there is the fallacy of  asserting the existence of  many bodies as there 
are many parts that make up the body. It is inappr opriate to say that the body exists as something 
abiding in the parts of the body. 
 
If the body does not exist outside and inside them,/How could the body exist in the hands and so forth?/If it 
is not other than the hands and so forth,/How could it exist ?  ( V e r s e  8 2 ) :  W h e n  w e  l o o k  a t  t h e  
inherently existent body, it has to exist as either  one with the body or different from it. When we 
look for the inherently existent bo dy outside of the body, we will not be able to find it. When we 
look for the inherently existent body within th e body, we will also not be able to find it. 
 
Is the collection  of bodily parts the body or not? Is the shape  of the collection of bodily parts the 
body or not? Why is the collection of the parts wh ich is the basis of designation for the body not 
the body? 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
419  
Lesson 75   Chapter IX - verse 80-87 
D The way to train in wisdom- the nature of insight 
a. Explaining the chapter’s material 
1) Teaching that one who wants to attain liberation must develop the wisdom realizing suchness 
2) The methods by which one develops the wisdom realizing suchness 
a) A presentation of the two truths 
b) Establishing that even someone who wants to attain mere liberation must realize 
emptiness 
c) An extensive explanation of the reasoning establishing emptiness 
i) The reasoning that establishes the selflessness of persons ii) An extensive explanation of the reasoning that establishes the selflessness of 
phenomena 
1’ Explaining the selflessness of phenom ena by means of the four placements of 
mindfulness 
a’ Meditating on placing mindfulness on the body 
1” Resolving that the body - the possessor of parts - does not inherently 
exist 
2” Resolving that the limbs- the parts- do not inherently exist 
3” Thus, it is unreasonable to be attached to the dream-like body that lacks 
inherent existence 
4” That establishes that the person also does not inherently exist 
b’ Meditating on placing mindfulness on feelings 
c’ Meditating on placing mindfulness on mind 
d’ Meditating on placing mindfulness on phenomena 
2’ Rejecting the dispute that the two truths would be invalid 
3’ Stating the syllogism that acts to establish selflessness 
3) Instructions on making effort to de velop that [realization of emptiness] 
b The chapter’s name 
 
Dependent Arising - A Praise of the Buddha  
16 
The absence of self-nature anywhere, this arising because of that, 
both presentations are true, 
and what need to say that both co me together without contradiction. 
 17 
Moreover, by reason of dependent arising, 
one will not depend on extreme views. This is the excellent teaching, my protector, that renders you orator supreme. 
 18 All this by nature is empty, and this arises from that 
Such realizations do not hinder  but mutually complement. 
What is more wonderful, mo re astonishing than that? 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
420  
Praising you this way is praise in deed; all other praise is lesser. 
 
These verses point out that emptiness and dependent arising are not contradictory but 
complementary and that one is able to posit both  of them with respect to a single object.  
Understanding emptiness complements our understa nding of dependent arising and vice versa.  
 These two minds - (1) the mind that has ascertai ned the emptiness of all phenomena and (2) the 
mind that has ascertained how effects arise from caus es as an infallible aspect of reality - do not 
contradict one another.  The  understanding of  dependent arising aids one's realisation of 
emptiness and vice versa.   
The absence of self-nature anywhere, th is arising because of that, both pr esentations are true , and what need 
to say that both come to gether without contradiction  (Verse 16): Since all phenomena are empty of 
inherent existence, we will not find any inherent ly existent phenomena.  Understanding the lack 
of inherent existence of all phenomena, we can,  at the same time, explain how cause and effect 
can arise.  
 With the correct understanding that all phenomen a are dependently arisen, one will not hold on 
to either of the extreme views of permanence or  nihilism. The teachings showing that emptiness 
and dependent arising are not contradictory and are complementary are the unsurpassed 
teachings of the Buddha and were only taught by him. No one else has ever taught such 
marvellous teachings. Indeed, no one else is ab le to do so. Since the Buddha is the only one 
capable of these teachings, we praise him as the supreme teacher.    We may have an understanding of emptiness but we may not be able to posit the relationship 
between cause and effect or explain how things are empty of inherent existence. When our 
understanding of emptiness and cause and effect is li ke this, it is a sign th at we have not realised 
emptiness at all.   What is the indicator of a correct understanding of emptiness?  We will realise things are empty 
of inherent existence and, at the same time, we  are able to understand that all phenomena are 
dependently arisen. Or when we think abou t how all phenomena are dependently arisen, 
immediately, the understanding comes that beca use of dependent arising, phenomena are empty 
of inherent existence. When th e understanding of emptiness and dependent arising go together 
hand in hand, then that is the sign that we have the correct understanding of emptiness.  
 
1” Resolving that the body- the possessor of parts- does not inherently exist 
 
Amongst the four placements of mindfulness, firs t, when we consider th e  meditation  placing 
mindfulness on the body from the ultimate perspect ive,   we meditate on how the body that is 
the possessor of parts is empty of inherent existence. 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
421  
 
We are investigating whether the body exists inherent ly or not. If the body is inherently existent, 
then it has to be findable on the basis of designation of the body.  
 
When we look for the body within the individual parts, there is nothing we  can point to as  the 
body and we cannot specify any part of the body as  the body. Although we are unable to find the 
inherently existent body when we look for it within the individual parts, we know that there is a 
body.   We may then think that the body pervades all the parts. We then have to  investigate the nature 
of this pervasion. There are two possibilities:- (1) Part of the body (the possessor of parts) pe rvades a part of the body, e.g. the hand or  
(2) the entire body (the possessor of part s) pervades all the parts of the body. 
 
Looking at the first possibility, what is the prob lem if we were to say that part of the body 
pervades, say, the hand. There will be the proble m of limitless regression, identifying where the 
hand abides and so on. It is problematic to say where the body is really abiding.    
 
From the perspective of the second possibility, if the entire body (the possessor of parts) pervades 
all the body parts, then there will be many bodies as there are many parts.  
 
If the body exists inherently, it should be findable when we look for it within the collection of all 
its parts. But we are unable to po int to anything that is a body.  
 When we look for the body outside  the basis of designation of th e body, we are also unable to 
find the body. Since it is neither inside nor outs ide the body, the conclusi on has to be that the 
inherently existent body does not exist.  
 
(9, 80) 
If the body were to abide 
By each area in all of them, 
Although indeed its par ts abide in its parts, 
In what does it itself abide? 
 
(9,81) 
If the body in its entirety 
Were to abide in the hands and so forth, 
However many hands there are and so forth, 
That many bodies would there be. 
 
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
422  
(9,82) 
If the body does not exis t outside and inside them, 
How could the body exist in  the hands and so forth? 
If it is not other than the hands and so forth, 
How could it exist? 
 
This concludes the explanation fo r verses 80 - 82 on how the body cannot be found either inside 
or outside the basis of designation.   
(9,83) 
Thus, due to ignorance regard ing the arms and so forth 
Of a non-existent body, a body comes to mind; 
Like, due to the feature of it being arranged in that shape, 
The mind [apprehends] a cair n to be a human being. 
 Although the body does not exist inherently, th ose who are confused or blinded by ignorance 
grasping at inherent existence, apprehend the basis of designation of the body to exist inherently. 
 For example, in the darkness, a scarecrow can be  mistaken to be a person. In the same way, 
people who are blinded or confused by ignoranc e can mistake the basis of designation of the 
body to be the real body.   
2” Resolving that the limbs- the parts- do not inherently exist 
 
(9,85) 
Similarly, because they are a collection of fingers, 
The hands are also that. 
Because they too are a collection of joints 
Since the joints are also divided into their parts. 
 
(9,86) 
Since the parts are also divided into particles, 
Since those particles are also divided into directional parts, 
Because the directions too, di vided are free from parts, 
Like space, therefore, part icles also do not exist. 
 The hand is part of the basis of designation of  the body. Does the hand exist inherently? The 
answer is no. Why? This is because the hand is me rely  imputed in dependence on the collection 
of fingers. Therefore, the hand does not exist inherently.  I f  t h e  h a n d  i s  i n h e r e n t l y  e x i s t e n t ,  i t  h a s  t o  b e  f i n d a b l e  w i t h i n  t h e  b a s i s  o f  d e s i g n a t i o n .  A s  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
423  
discussed earlier, if the body were inherently ex istent, it would have to be findable within the 
basis of designation of the parts - the hand, the le g and so forth. In the same way, if the hand 
were inherently existent, it would have to be fi ndable within its basis of designation. But when 
we look for the hand within its basis of designat ion – the individual fingers or the collection of 
fingers -  we are unable to point to anything that is the hand. Th erefore, the hand is established 
to be not inherently existent. 
 
We can analyse further by looking at the parts that make up the hand. The fingers are imputed 
on the collection of joints. If the fingers were to  exist inherently, we should be able to point to 
something that is the fingers within  the basis of designation of the fingers.  But we are unable to 
find the fingers within the basis of designation (i.e ., the joints). This proves that fingers are not 
inherently existent. When we analyse the joints  that make up the finger, they are also not 
inherently existent because the existence of the jo ints depends on parts. Even if we go down to 
the subtlest atomic level, the atoms that ma ke up the joints do not exist inherently.  
 Does the subtlest atom - the smallest atom po ssible that cannot be further divided – exist 
inherently? This atom also does not exist inhe rently. Why? Because it possesses direction.   
Imagine that the smallest atom is  surrounded by other atoms in a ll the four cardinal directions 
(east, west, north and south) and above and below it, making a total of six directions. Is there a 
part of the central atom which   touches the othe r atom in the eastern side/western side and so 
on? As long as there is a part of the central at om touching another atom in any one of the six 
directions, it means the central atom possesses di rection. Therefore, the directionally partless 
particle cannot exist.  Since the central atom is touching atoms in all the six directions, we al so cannot say that the 
atom is partless as there is a part touching anot her atom in the east, there is a part touching 
another atom in the west and so on. The central at om in fact has six parts. Therefore, the partless 
particle also does not exist.  When we say that the central atom is partless, it  implies that it is touching the entire western 
atom, the entire eastern atom and so. If that is the case, then there will be no difference between 
the eastern atom and the western atom as every at om will be touching one another completely.   
 When we analyse at this subtlest level, we are ch ecking to see whether a  particular direction of a 
specified atom exists inherently or not, for exampl e, is the part of the ce ntral atom touching the 
eastern atom inherently existent? We will not be able to find any inherently existent basis of 
designation.  
 
When a yogi meditates on emptiness looking for th e inherently existent object, he will discover 
nothing exists inherently. What a ppears to that yogi then is simp ly emptiness, the negation of 
true existence. Conventional truth does not appear at that time to the mind of the yogi  realising 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
424  
emptiness. What is that empt iness? Emptiness is the negation of true existence.  
 
3" Thus, it is unreasonable to be attached to the dream-like body that lacks inherent 
existence 
(9, 87ab) 
Hence who, having analyzed, 
Would be attached to such dream-like form? 
 
When left unanalysed, everything we see appears as inherently existent, existing from its own 
side. However, upon analysis, we cannot find any inherently existent phenomenon. This is 
likened to a dream where we may see many differe nt things – a beautiful house, garden and so 
forth. Although these things appear real bu t, in reality, they do not exist at all. 
 When we analyse whether the body or its parts are inherently existent, when we look for the 
imputed object, we will not be able to find the inherently existent body. However, when we look 
at our bodies without  analysing them, the body and its parts appear real.  
 Yogis who have completed their analysis realise that all phenomena do not exist the way they 
appear and are empty of inherent existence. To  the yogis, phenomena appear to them in the 
same way as we see phenomena in our dreams. Yo gis who have attained th e wisdom realising the 
emptiness of phenomena will not generate any de sire or attachment towards the body because 
they realise that the body is by  nature filthy and unpleasant an d does not  exist inherently,  
unlike the way the body appears to our minds.   
4" That establishes that the person also does not inherently exist 
 
(9, 87cd) 
When, like that, the body does not exist, 
What are men? What are women? 
 When the body which is the basis of designation does not exist inherently, then the division of 
human beings into male and female based on the characteristics of the body cannot exist 
inherently either. So there is no inherently exis tent man or woman. When there is no inherently 
existent person, we refer to this as the selflessn ess of persons. Speaking from the perspective of 
the body, as the body does not exist inherently, then neither the body of a man nor woman exists 
inherently. When we talk about the selflessne ss of the body, then we are talking about the 
selflessness of phenomena wi th respect to the body. 
Lesson 76   Chapter IX - verse 88-91 
D The way to train in wisdom- the nature of insight 
a. Explaining the chapter’s material 
1) Teaching that one who wants to attain liberation must develop the wisdom realizing suchness 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
425  
2) The methods by which one develops the wisdom realizing suchness 
a) A presentation of the two truths 
b) Establishing that even someone who wants to attain mere liberation must realize 
emptiness c) An extensive explanation of the reasoning establishing emptiness 
i) The reasoning that establishes the selflessness of persons ii) An extensive explanation of the reasoning that establishes the selflessness of 
phenomena 
1’ Explaining the selflessness of phenom ena by means of the four placements of 
mindfulness 
a’ Meditating on placing mindfulness on the body 
b’ Meditating on placing mindfulness on feelings 
1’’ Refuting that feelings are not in their nature inherently established 
a’’ Feelings of suffering are not inherently established 
b’’ Feelings of pleasure are not inherently established 
c’’ Instructions on remaining in the yoga of meditating on feelings’ 
lack of inherent existence 
2’’ Refuting the inherent establishment of causes 
3’’ Refuting the inherent establishment of the focal object 
4’’ Refuting the inherent establishment of the feelings’ subject 
c’ Meditating on placing mindfulness on mind 
d’ Meditating on placing mindfulness on phenomena 
2’ Rejecting the dispute that the two truths would be invalid 3’ Stating the syllogism that acts to establish selflessness 
3) Instructions on making effort to de velop that [realization of emptiness] 
b The chapter’s name 
 
Dependent Arising - A Praise of the Buddha  
19 
That some, hostile to you, held as the slaves of ignorance, 
are unable to bear the sounds of no self-nature 
comes as no surprise.  20 
That others, accepting dependent arising, 
the crown jewel of your teaching, are unable to hear tolerate the roar of emptiness does surprise me.  21 If by the very name of dependent arising, 
gateway supreme to no self-nature, self-nature is asserted , how will they be led 
to that noble path that pleases you, that incomparable highway well- travelled by exalted beings? 
 
Slaves of ignorance  refers to those who are confused by the two forms of self grasping: grasping at 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
426  
self of  persons and grasping at self of phenomena. Such  non-Buddhists are unable to identify 
the real object of refuge, are confused by the law of cause and effect and reject the Buddha and 
his teachings on the emptiness of inherent existence, finding them unacceptable.   
 
Non-Buddhists believe that things can arise wi thout cause and that effects can arise from 
discordant causes. They are unable to understand  dependent arising from the perspective of the 
law of cause and effect. Since they are unable to posit correctly the law of cause and effect, it is 
not surprising that they reject Buddha’s teaching s on the lack of inhere nt existence. In some 
commentaries, these non-Buddhists are likened to a blind person walking off the edge of a cliff.  
 
But Lama Tsongkhapa expresses his bewilderment that there are people wh o accept the teachings 
on dependent arising as the essence of all the Buddha’s teachings yet are unable to accept the 
Buddha’s teachings on emptiness. (Lama Tsongkhapa is probably referring to the proponents of Vaibhasika, Sautrantika and Cittamatra.) Some commentaries say that such people see an 
internal contradiction between dependent arising and emptiness of inherent existence, likened 
to asserting, “My mother is a barren woman, ” and they continue to cling to their assertion that 
things exist inherently.   The proponents of Vaibhasika, Sautrantika an d Cittamatra may know the words, “dependent 
arising” yet fail to grasp its meaning. How will th ey be able to guide sentient beings to the path 
that is pleasing to the Buddha and which will le ad them to the achievement of buddhahood? The 
understanding of dependent arising leads to th e realisation of the emptiness of inherent 
existence. As long as the proponents of thes e tenets assert that phenomena are inherently 
existent, they will not be able to understand dependent arising and without realising this, these 
proponents cannot enter the path that  is pleasing to all the buddhas. 
 
a” Feelings of suffering are not inherently established 
 
(9,88) 
If suffering exists in reality, 
Why does it not harm intense joy? 
 Having earlier examined how the body does not exist inherently, we now turn our attention to 
the fact that feelings are also not inherently existent. We begin by ex amining the feeling of 
suffering.   If the feeling of suffering (or pain) exists inherent ly, once generated, it will always remain and will 
never go away as the feeling will never change. If that is the case, then there will be no opportunity for the feeling of pleasure (or happiness) to arise.   But it is untrue that the pers on experiencing suffering now will never ever experience any 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
427  
pleasure. Even when he is feeling pain, the oppo rtunity to  experience pleasure is there.  
 
It is said in Nagarjuna’s Fundamental Treatise of the Middle Way , “If something exists inherently, it 
will never be valid.” Therefore it is incorrect to a ssert that feelings of pain are inherently existent 
for if it is so, those feelings can never change. 
 
b” Feelings of pleasure are not inherently established 
(9,88) 
If there is happiness, why do thos e tormented by sorrow and so on 
Not find joy in the delicious and so forth? 
 
(9,89) 
Because it is overwhelmed by the strong, 
It is not experienced. 
How can that which is not 
The nature of experience be feeling? 
 
(9,90) 
You say “The suffering that exists is subtle. 
The coarse form is not dispelled or 
There is mere joy distinct from it.” 
The subtle is also that. 
 
(9,91) 
If the conditions adverse to it are produced, 
Suffering is not produced. 
To conceive it to be feeling, 
Is it not established as “It is strongly grasped”? 
 We can apply the same logic to prove that plea surable feelings are likewise not inherently 
existent.   There are also other ways to prove this. Whether th ey are feelings of pain or  pleasure, if those 
feelings are inherently established, those feelin gs must arise  without dependence on any other 
factors, i.e., without relying on causes and conditio ns. Once those feelings ar ise, they will remain 
forever, unchanging.     If the feeling of pain is established as inherently  existent, it follows then that  the feeling of 
pleasure can never arise. Similarly, if the feeling of  pleasure is  established as inherently existent, 
the feeling of pain can never arise.   
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
428  
We know, in reality, that feelings of pain and pleasure undergo change because they arise from 
causes and conditions. Since this is so, feelings do not remain static. When there is a change in 
the precipitating causes and conditions for those feelings, the effects and results of those causes 
and conditions will likewise change.   
 In this way, when we assert that feelings of pain and pleasure are not  inherently existent, we do not run into the problem of asserting that f eelings of pleasure cannot arise when one is 
experiencing suffering.  Even when one is suffe ring, happiness can arise when the causes and 
conditions change.   
If the feelings of pain or pleasure inherently exist, where  do those feelings abide?  Do they exist 
within the mind or in the object that is  causing the pain or pleasure to arise? 
 
If the feeling of pain inherently exists within the mind, then that person will always be unhappy 
and never be able to experience any pleasure and vice versa.  
 If the feelings of pleasure exist inherently from  the side of the object, then let us take the 
example of a grieving parent, who has lost his chil d or someone who is gravely ill.  Why is it not 
possible for them to experience pleasure when they  eat delicious food or wear beautiful clothes?  
If pleasurable feelings were inherently existent from the side of the object, then happiness must 
necessarily arise when they experience such  enjoyments. But we know that for people 
experiencing such difficulties, neither food nor clothes can bring any comfort.   Therefore from the above analysis, we see that f eelings of pain or pleasure are not inherently 
existent because they do not exist inherently with in the mind.  We also see that the feelings of 
pleasure are not inherently existent because th ey do not exist inherent ly within the object. 
Feelings are not inherently existent because they  are not findable either within the mind or 
within the object giving rise to those feelings.     
Qualm:   
It is then argued by some that people experi encing great sorrow or sickness do not experience 
pleasure when they eat delicious foods because the pleasurable feeling is overwhelmed by the 
powerful feeling of suffering and pain.  
 
Response from Prasangika : 
What is the nature of feeling? The defining char acteristic of feeling is experience. How can you 
call something which is not experienced a feeling?  
 
Qualm: 
Even when a person is experiencing great pleasure , a subtle feeling of pain remains in his mind.  
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
429  
The rebuttal from Prasangika:  
This means then that the feeling of great pleasure in that person’s mind is not able to harm the 
feeling of pain which remains in his mind. 
 
Response:  This kind of subtle pain manifests as mere joy , a subtle kind of happiness.  
 
The rebuttal from Prasangika : 
The subtle is also that . (line 4 of verse 90): You are still unab le to prove that in the midst of great 
pleasure, pain remains because you assert that th i s  s u b t l e  p a i n  i s  a  f o r m  o f  s u b t l e  h a p p i n e s s ,  
which is still in the nature of pleasure.  
 When the suffering person who is experiencing  pain eats delicious food, he should only 
experience happiness (feeling of pleasure) and not suffering. But he is unable to do so because 
the feeling of suffering is the obstructing factor for the generation of pleasure from eating the 
delicious food. 
 
With the same object (delicious food), some  people will experience happiness when they 
consume it while others, whose minds are troubled  or sad, will not experience any enjoyment 
from eating the same food. This shows that  f eelings of pain and pleasure come through the 
gathering of causes and conditions.   Feelings of pain or pleasure are designated as  such through the force of conceptuality and are 
merely labelled by the mind.    Let us take the example of a beautiful body. If the body were inherently beautiful from its own side, then it would appear as such to someone me ditating on the uncleanliness of the body. This 
meditator does not see the body as beautiful. Th e body will only appear beautiful to those who 
have desire and attachment. The same object (bea utiful body) therefore appears in different ways 
to different people. This shows that the beautiful body exists as something merely labelled by the 
mind.   We can look at another object - delicious food. This food will appear delicious to someone  who 
is hungry. But if we give the same delicious food  to someone who is sick, the delicious food will 
n o t  appear  t o  be so  appeali n g. T hi s  s ho w s  that  w het he r  t he fo o d i s  d eli ci o u s o r  n ot  does  n o t come from the side of the food itself. It is some thing merely labelled by the mind. If something is 
inherently pleasant from the side of the object, then whoever looks at the object will like it but 
this is not so in reality. 
Lesson 77   Chapter IX - verse 92-96 
D The way to train in wisdom- the nature of insight 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
430  
a. Explaining the chapter’s material 
1) Teaching that one who wants to attain liberation must develop the wisdom realizing suchness 
2) The methods by which one develops the wisdom realizing suchness 
a) A presentation of the two truths 
b) Establishing that even someone who wants to attain mere liberation must realize 
emptiness 
c) An extensive explanation of the reasoning establishing emptiness 
i) The reasoning that establishes the selflessness of persons 
ii) An extensive explanation of the reasoning that establishes the selflessness of phenomena 
1’ Explaining the selflessness of phenom ena by means of the four placements of 
mindfulness 
a’ Meditating on placing mindfulness on the body 
b’ Meditating on placing mindfulness on feelings 
1’’ Refuting that feelings are not in their nature inherently established 
a’’ Feelings of suffering are not inherently established b’’ Feelings of pleasure are not inherently established 
c’’ Instructions on remaining in the yoga of meditating on feelings’ 
lack of inherent existence 
2’’ Refuting the inherent establishment of causes 
a’’ Refuting the inherent establishment of the meeting of sense and 
object 
b’’ Refuting the inherent establishment of the meeting of 
consciousness 
c’’ Thus, the sensation that arises from the meeting of those three is 
not inherently established 
3’’ Refuting the inherent establishment of the focal object 
4’’ Refuting the inherent establishment of the feelings’ subject 
c’ Meditating on placing mindfulness on mind d’ Meditating on placing mindfulness on phenomena 
2’ Rejecting the dispute that the two truths would be invalid 
3’ Stating the syllogism that acts to establish selflessness 
3) Instructions on making effort to de velop that [realization of emptiness] 
b The chapter’s name 
 
Dependent Arising - A Praise of the Buddha  
22 
Self-nature - real and nondependent, dependent arising - unreal and of dependent nature, 
how, without contradiction, could these two ever come together? 
 
Self-nature  can mean the entity or the nature of a partic ular phenomenon. In this  context, it refers 
to the object of negation, inherent or true existe nce. It is said here th at if something exists 
inherently, it has to be real and nondependent,  i.e., it cannot depend on other factors. If something 
is a dependent arising , then it has to be unreal an d dependent on other factors.  
 
Since self-nature and dependent arising are radically different, it is impossible to posit that these 
two can exist within a single object, i.e., to posit that a phenomenon exists inherently and yet is a 
dependent arising. If something exists inherently, then it is necessarily not dependently arisen. If 
something is dependently arisen, that necessarily means it is not inherently existent. 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
431  
 
23 
Consequently, that which dependently arises 
has forever been empty and void of nature. 
Things, however, do not appear that way. All this, you have said, is ther efore like an illusion.   
 Although phenomena have never existed inherently , however they appear to us as inherently 
existent. All phenomena are dependently arisen but nevertheless they appear to us to be 
inherently existent. Therefore we say that  all phenomena are like an illusion.  
 
c” Instructions on remaining in the yoga of meditating on feelings’ lack of inherent existence 
 
(9,92) 
Because of that, its antidote 
Thorough analysis, is to be meditated. 
The meditative stabilization that arises from the field 
Of thorough investigation is the food of a yogi. 
 We had earlier established that feelings of pain and pleasure do not exist inherently. But there is 
a mind that grasps at those feelings to be inherently  existent.    What is the antidote to such a mind? The antidote  to that grasping is th e wisdom that realises 
that feelings do not exist inherently.   We are advised here to generate the powerful wi sdom that realises that feelings do not exist 
inherently, to overcome the grasping at the inhe rent existence of feelings. How do we do this? 
With the concentration focussing on  the lack of inherent existence of feelings, we cultivate the 
discriminating wisdom of the mind of special insight, i.e., cultivat ing the practice of the union of 
calm abiding and special insight.  This meditative stabilisation which is the union of calm abiding and special insight focussing on 
the fact that feelings lack inherent existence is the food or sustenance for the yogi as it is the 
cause for the yogi to develop realis ations. It is like the food we eat which helps to strengthen our 
bodies.  This completes the refutation of feelings as being in the nature of inherent existence (or 
establishment). Next we refute the inherent existence of the causes of feelings.  
 
2" Refuting the inherent establishment of causes 
a" Refuting the inherent establishment of the meeting of sense and object 
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
432  
 
(9,93) 
If there were a gap between the sense power and object, 
How would they meet? 
Also if there were no gap, being a unit 
What would meet with what? 
(9, 94) 
A subtle particle does no t enter a subtle particle. 
They are without an interval and equal. 
Without entering, they  do not mix, and 
Without mixing, they do not meet. 
 
(9, 95) 
How could it be right to say 
"Even though they are partless, they meet"? 
If you have seen that which meets 
But yet us partless, show to me! 
 
When we talk about the cause  of feelings, we are referring specifically to the mental factor of 
contact. Is contact itself inherently existent?  If  we can prove that the cause that produces feeling 
is not inherently established, then the effect, the resultant feeling, also cannot be inherently 
established.   
 Contact is that which distinguis hes the transformation of the se nse power upon the aggregation 
of (1) the object, (2) the sense po wer and (3) the consciousness and it has the function of acting 
as a support for feeling.   
The main cause of feeling is th erefore contact when the three elements mentioned above come 
together upon apprehending an object. Contact exists conventionally but it does not exist 
inherently.  
 
When the object and the sense power meet, is this  meeting inherently established? If the mental 
factor of contact exists inherently, then we have  to say that this meeting of the object and the 
sense power must also exist inherently. But this is untenable.   The refutation by Prasangika is directed at the lower schools below it wh ich assert the existence 
of partless particles.   When we say that the sense power and the object come  into contact, then it is the same as saying 
that the atoms that make up these two come into  contact with each other. Therefore, we first 
have to refute that there is contact between the atoms that make up the sense power and the 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
433  
atoms that make up the object.  
 
If there is a gap between these two, then the object and the sense power will never meet: If there 
were a gap between the sense power and object,/How would they meet?  It is like the mountain on this 
side not meeting the mountain on the other side because they are separated by the valley between 
them.   
 If there is no gap between these two, again we  cannot say that the object and the sense power 
meet because if they meet, they will become one unit and it would be impossible to differentiate 
between what is meeting and what is being met. We  are basically applying the same logic we used 
to establish that partless part icles cannot possibly exist.  
 When two things meet, there are two possibilities. They either come together from all directions 
(i.e. meeting from all directions) or they co me into contact from a single direction.  
  For those who assert partless partic les, they cannot say that two things meet by coming together 
from a particular direction as this would mean the particles possess parts, which directly opposes 
their assertion of the partless part icle. If two partless particles can meet from one direction, then 
we have to posit that there is a particle that is subtler than that partless particle. But to the 
schools positing the partless particle, the partless particle is the smallest unit. 
 When we consider the alternative position – that  when the two things meet, they meet from all 
directions – this means that no matter how many particles come together, there will only be one 
particle in the end because they become a single unit.   In the same way, if the object and the sense po wer meet because there is no gap between them, 
these two will become one unit, making it impossi ble to differentiate what is meeting what and 
what is being met.   
A subtle particle does not ente r a subtle particle./They are wi thout an interval and equal: One partless 
particle cannot dissolve into another partless pa rticle as the atoms cannot penetrate one another 
because there is no space within the latter part icle. If an atom cannot penetrate another atom, 
then the former atom would have to remain wh ere it is. They cannot intermingle and therefore 
they cannot possibly meet and make contact. 
 
b" Refuting the inherent establishment of the meeting of consciousness 
 
(9,96) 
It is not correct for there to be a meeting 
With consciousness, which is without form. 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
434  
Because even a collection is not a thing, 
It is as was thorough ly analyzed before. 
 
We have established that there can be no contac t between the particles th at make up the sense 
power and the particles that make up the object.   Now we consider whether it is possible for th e consciousness apprehending the object, for 
example, the eye consciousness a pprehending form, to make contac t with the particles that make 
up the object. This is impossible as explained in verse 96: It is not correct for there to be a 
meeting/With consciousness,  which is without form. 
 
Consciousness cannot come into co ntact with the form that is made up of partless particles 
because consciousness is not established as form . If the contact between the consciousness and 
form is inherently existent, this would mean that  consciousness would have to be inherently one 
with the form. This would suggest then th at consciousness would have to be form. 
 
We have now established that: (1) It is impossible for the partic les that make up the sense power and the particles that make up 
the object to meet and (2) it is also impossible for the consciousness to meet with the particles that make up the object. 
 However some people still assert  that although the consciousne ss cannot meet with the subtle 
particle, it can contact the coarse object itself. This is also  impossible as stated in verse 96: 
Because even a collection is not a thing,/I t is as was thoroughly analyzed before.  
 The meeting of the coarse sense power (which is made up of many atoms) and the coarse object 
(e.g. form, which is also made up  of many atoms) is not inhere ntly existent because these two 
coarse elements themselves do not exist inherent ly. Therefore the meeting of the two also cannot 
be established to be inherently existent. 
Lesson 78   Chapter IX - verse 97-103 
D The way to train in wisdom- the nature of insight 
a. Explaining the chapter’s material 
1) Teaching that one who wants to attain liberation must develop the wisdom realizing suchness 
2) The methods by which one develops the wisdom realizing suchness 
a) A presentation of the two truths 
b) Establishing that even someone who wants to attain mere liberation must realize 
emptiness 
c) An extensive explanation of the reasoning establishing emptiness 
i) The reasoning that establishes the selflessness of persons 
ii) An extensive explanation of the reasoning that establishes the selflessness of 
phenomena 
1’ Explaining the selflessness of phenom ena by means of the four placements of 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
435  
mindfulness 
a’ Meditating on placing mindfulness on the body 
b’ Meditating on placing mindfulness on feelings 
1’’ Refuting that feelings are not in their nature inherently established 
2’’ Refuting the inherent establishment of causes 
a’’ Refuting the inherent establishment of the meeting of sense and object 
b’’ Refuting the inherent establishment of the meeting of 
consciousness 
c’’ Thus, the sensation that arises from the meeting of those three is 
not inherently established 
3’’ Refuting the inherent establishment of the focal object 
4’’ Refuting the inherent establishment of the feelings’ subject 
c’ Meditating on placing mindfulness on mind 
1’’ Teaching that mental awareness is not inherently existent 
2’’ Teaching that the five consciousness do not inherently exist 
d’ Meditating on placing mindfulness on phenomena 
2’ Rejecting the dispute that the two truths would be invalid 
3’ Stating the syllogism that acts to establish selflessness 
3) Instructions on making effort to de velop that [realization of emptiness] 
b The chapter’s name 
 
Dependent Arising - A Praise of the Buddha  
24 
“Others may attack your teaching but they will never be any match.” 
Such claims are validated by dependent arising. 
How? Because its explanation casts away all possibility of flawed assertion and faulty denial of all phenomena evident or hidden. 
 
Because of the Buddha teaching dependent arisin g (or dependent origination), it is suggested 
that the non-Buddhists will never be able to matc h the teachings of the Buddha. No one, be they 
Buddhists or non-Buddhists, will succeed in atta cking the validity of the Buddha’s teachings 
because of his teachings on dependent aris ing and how phenomena are all dependently 
originated.  
 What is the impact of understanding dependen t arising? With the understanding that all 
phenomena, both manifest and hidden, are dependently originated, we will be able to eliminate: (1) any kind of exaggeration of phenomena and th e assertion that they are  inherently existent 
and (2) we can reject the denial of the existence of phenomena, i.e., thinking that phenomena do not 
exist.  
 
All phenomena do not exist inherently as all ph enomena are dependently originated. This single 
reason of dependent arising has the power to remove  all forms of exaggeration or denial of both 
manifest and hidden phenomena.   
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
436  
 
The Tibetan word, ten jung  means “dependent origination ” (or dependently arisen) in English. 
The word “dependent” gives us an understand ing that all phenomena are not inherently 
established and also has to the power to help us  stop any grasping at inherent existence. The 
word “origination” has the power to overcome an y assertion that phenomena do not even exist 
conventionally. Phenomena do exist. Such is the power of these two words. Amongst all the 
different reasons used to establish the emptiness of inherent existence, dependent arising is the 
king of all logic. 
 
25 This very path of dependent arising, the reason for seeing your  words as unparalleled, 
generates conviction in the va lidity of other teachings. 
 
Here is the reason for seeing the Buddha's teachi ngs on dependent arising as unsurpassed. It is 
said that when we understand the teachings on depe ndent arising, we will be able to arrive at an 
ascertainment of all the other teachings of the Buddha.  
 
c" Thus, the sensation that arisen from the meeting of those three is not inherently established 
 
(9,97) 
Thus, if contact does not exist, 
From what do feelings arise? 
For the sake of what is there this fatigue? 
What is it that harms what? 
 
(9,98) 
When there is no one who feels and 
Feelings also do not exist, 
Having seen this situation, 
Why do you not turn away from craving? 
 
We had earlier established how there is no inhere nt meeting of the object with the sense power 
and consciousness. Therefore, the contact that  a r i s e s  f r o m  s u c h  m e e t i n g s  a l s o  c a n n o t  b e  
inherently established. Since there is no inherently existent contact (the cause  for feeling to arise), 
then its effect,  feeling, cannot possibly exist inherently either. In other words, a true effect 
(feeling) cannot arise from a cause (contact) which is a falsity.    If feelings are not truly existent, then what is the purpose of striving to accumulate wealth and 
possessions? It is meaningless to do so.   
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
437  
Some people argue that acquiring wealth and possessi ons is meaningful as it is done to overcome 
suffering and achieve happiness. The resp onse to this appears in verse 97: What is it that harms 
what? What or who is being harmed by the suffering ? Both the object that is causing harm and 
the object being harmed do not exist inherently. 
 We had established that the person who is the experiencer  of different feelings does not exist 
inherently by using different reasons to refute the inherent existence of a person. We had also 
established that feelings do not exist inherently by using different reasons to refute the inherent 
existence of feelings.  With logic and reasoning, therefore, we had establ ished that both the experiencer of the feelings 
and the feelings themselves ar e not inherently existent.  
 W h e n  w e  d i r e c t l y  r e a l i s e  t h e  l a c k  o f  i n h e r e n t  e x i s t e n c e ,  w e  w i l l  b e  a b l e  t o  s t o p  a l l  f o r m s  o f  craving such as craving for happiness and to be free from suffering. These cravings arise on the 
basis of grasping at feelings to be inherently existent.  We crave for different feelings because we grasp at feelings as existent inherently. To stop our craving for feelings, we need to stop grasping 
at them as inherently existent.   Ultimately, the main purpose for meditating on plac ing mindfulness on feelings is to be able to 
stop all forms of craving and grasping, particular ly craving for different kinds of feelings. When 
we do not eliminate our craving an d continue to grasp at feelings to be inherently existent, we 
will accumulate all sorts of karma and then ta ke repeated rebirths in cyclic existence.  
 
3" Refuting the inherent establishment of the focal object 
 
(9,99) 
Even though they are seen or touched, 
Their nature is similar to a dream or illusion. 
 
Objects seen by the eye consciousness or felt by  the body consciousness do not exist inherently. 
They do not exist in the way they appear to us but are like illusion s or dreams. They are falsities. 
 
When the object which instigates the generation of a particular f eeling does not exist inherently, 
then the feeling that is generate d also cannot exist inherently.   
 
4" Refuting the inherent establishment of the feelings' subject 
 
(9,99 cd) 
Therefore, because they ar e produced simultaneously 
With the mind, feelings are not seen by it. 
 
(9,100) 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
438  
Also, due to being produced  before or after them, 
It remembers them but do es not experience them. 
They do not experience themselves, 
Nor are they experienced by other. 
 
(9,101) 
Since there is no one who feels, 
There are no feelings themselves. 
Thus, by what is there harm 
To this selfless collection? 
 
If the object to be experienced, i.e., feeling exis ts inherently, then what about the mind that is 
experiencing that feeling?  Which mi nd is experiencing that feeling?  
Is the feeling experienced by the mind preceding it, established simultaneously with it or 
subsequent to it? Does the mind come before or after the feeling or at the same time together 
with the feeling? When does this mind occur?  
 
Therefore, because they are produc ed simultaneously, with  the mind, feelings are not seen by it:  If we say 
the feeling is experienced by a mind that is pr oduced simultaneously with it, then that mind 
cannot experience the feeling. Wh y is that when two things are produced simultaneously, one 
cannot experience the other?79  
 
If the feeling is only subsequently experienced by  the mind, we have to say this is also wrong 
because the mind that comes after the feeling can only remember that feeling. We cannot 
experience something that has already ceased. It will only be a memory, as stated in verse 100: 
Also, due to being produced before  or after them,/It remembers them  but does not experience them. We also 
cannot say that the mind experiencing the feeling precedes the feeling since the feeling has yet to 
arise and there is nothing to be experienced by the mind.   
 Since the feeling cannot be experien ced by a mind that comes before  or after it, the only option 
seems to be the mind that is produced simultaneo usly with the feeling. Bu t this also has to be 
refuted.   
When we posit that the mind is produced simultaneously  with the feeling to be experienced, when 
that mind experiences the inherently existent f eeling, this means that the inherently existent 
feeling (the object to be experienced) will also become the experiencer. Th is means that the mind 
is also inherently existent.  
                                             
 
79 Feelings are not seen (or experienced) by the mind whic h arises simultaneously with them because, since they 
are produced simultaneously with it, they would be  (causally) unrelated to it. (Root text, pg. 143)   
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
439  
 
The problem with this proposition is that we ca n no longer distinguish between the object, i.e., 
the feeling to be experienced and the subject, i.e. the mind that is the experiencer of the feeling. 
  
When the inherently existent feeling is the in herently existent experiencer, is that mind 
inherently one or inherently different? If they are inherently different,  this means the feeling 
and the mind are not related to one another wh ich means that we cannot posit one to be the 
object to be experienced and the other to be the experiencer.  If they are inherently one , this means that the two of them  are the same; the object to be 
experienced and the experiencer are one. If they  are one, then conventionally, we cannot posit 
that one is the experiencer and the other is  the object that is to be experienced. 
 
Answer to student’s question :  
The main objective of this analysis is to refute that the feeling (the object) and the mind which is 
the experiencer of the feeling (the subject) are no t inherently existent. If the experiencer of the 
feeling is inherently existent, does it experience the feeling before it, simu ltaneously with it or 
subsequent to it? 
 It is difficult to explain why the mind cannot expe rience the feeling simultaneously as stated in 
verse 99: Therefore, because they are produced simultaneously ,/With the mind, feelings  are not seen by it. 
One way to look at this is to relate it to the ob ject of negation, inherent existence. If both the 
feeling (object) and the experiencer (the subject) are inherently existent, then we will not be able 
to distinguish between the object and the experience r. If the mind is inherently existent, then it 
has to be either inherently one or inherently different.  
 Through this analysis, we are unable to find an experiencer of the feeling because the inherently 
existent experiencer does not exist. Why? Becaus e when we look for it in the past, present and 
future, it is not findable. Therefore, the inherent ly existent experiencer of the feeling does not 
exist.  We had earlier refuted the self-knower, the notion  that consciousness can experience itself. We 
also refuted that consciousness can be experienced by another consciousness.   For those who assert that consciousness is inhere ntly existent, what is the meaning of inherent 
existence? It means that when the imputed object is sought, it can be found. For those who assert 
inherent existence, they have no choice but to s ay that consciousness either experiences itself or 
is experienced by another consciousness.  Prasangika does not encounter such difficulties because they assert that consciousness does not 
exist inherently and is merely designated thro ugh the force of conceptuality. They assert 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
440  
consciousness is an experiencer but they do not need to check whether that consciousness 
experiences itself or is experienced by another consciousness. Nor does Prasangika need to go 
into the discussion of whether consciousness experiences the past , present and future because an 
inherently existent consciousness is not fi ndable in the past, present and future.   
 
Verse 100 states They do not experience themselves, nor are they experienced by other . The fact that 
feeling can not experience itself nor can it be ex perienced by another mind other than itself can 
be established by using the same logic that is used to refute the self-knower. If we were to say that 
feeling can be experienced by another mind, then there will be the problem of infinite 
regression. We cannot say that the feeling can be  experienced by another inherently existent 
mind as that mind will be comple tely unrelated to the feeling. 
 
In summary, feeling cannot exist inherently since it cannot experience itself nor can it be experienced by something other than itself. We had earlier established that the person (who 
experiences feelings) is not inherently existent. He re, we establish that feeling is not inherently 
existent. Since this is the case, how can feeling ha rm or benefit a person since it does not exist 
inherently?  We establish therefore feelings of pain or pleasure cannot harm nor benefit the person 
experiencing it. This is because they are not in herently existent. And as  the experiencer, the 
person, is also not inherently existent, that pers on cannot be harmed or benefited by the feeling. 
 This section on placement on mindfulness on feelings focuses on establishing that feelings are not inherently existent. We find that: (1) the entity of feeling itself  is not inherently existent; 
(2) the primary cause for feeling, co ntact, is not inherently existent; 
(3) the object giving rise to feeling is not inherently existent; and 
(4) the experiencer of the feeling is not inherently existent. 
 
c' Meditating on placing mindfulness on mind 
1" Teaching that mental awareness is not inherently existent 
 
(9,102) 
The mental does not abide in the sense powers, 
Not in forms and so forth, nor in between. 
Inside there is no mind, outside there is none, and 
Elsewhere it is also not found 
 
(9,103) 
It is not the body, it is not other, 
It is not mixed with it, nor is it at all separate from it. 
It is not in the slightest; therefore 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
441  
Sentient beings, by nature, are nirvana.80 
 
The mental consciousness does not inherently abid e in the sense powers nor does it abide in the 
object, e.g., form. It also does not inherently  abide in within the collection of these two: nor in 
between . Verse 102 presents this thesis but it does  not present the supporting proof. It does not 
say why the mind does not inherently abide in  the sense powers, in the objects or in the 
collection of these two.   
 Why does the consciousness not abide within the collection of the sense power and the object? 
We can apply the reasoning of one or different. If the mental consciousness inherently abides 
within the sense power, it ha s to be either inherently one with the sense power or it has to be 
inherently different  from the sense power. 
When we look for the inherently existent mind, it  is not findable inside the body, in the heart, 
lungs, intestines and so forth and it cannot be found outside the body, on the arms and legs and 
s o  f o r t h .  T h e  i n h e r e n t l y  e x i s t e n t  m i n d  c a n n o t  be found existing separately, on its own, apart 
from the body, in a place other than the collection  of these different body parts. Therefore, the 
mind is not inherently existent. It exists in natura l nirvana (i.e. the lack of the inherently existent 
mind) and beyond sorrow.  
 
Answer to student’s question:  The experience of feeling itself is merely labelled by the mind. This is because when we search for 
the inherently existent feelings in the past, pr esent and  future, they are not findable. Also, 
although we cannot find the inherently existent experiencer of the feeling, this does not mean 
that we do not experience the feeling. This does not mean that there is no experiencer. How does 
the person experiencing the feeling exist if not in herently? That person ex ists as merely labelled 
by the mind. 
Lesson 79   Chapter IX - verse 104-106 
D The way to train in wisdom- the nature of insight 
a. Explaining the chapter’s material 
1) Teaching that one who wants to attain liberation must develop the wisdom realizing suchness 
2) The methods by which one develops the wisdom realizing suchness 
a) A presentation of the two truths 
b) Establishing that even someone who wants to attain mere liberation must realize 
emptiness 
                                              
80 Root text pp 143: (102) A (truly existent) mental consciou sness does not abide in the sense faculties such as the 
eyes, it does not abide in the objects such as visual forms,  and it does not abide in be tween the two. Neither does a 
(truly existent) mind exist either inside or outside the body , and it is not to be found elsewhere. (103) This (mind) 
is neither the body nor truly other than it; it is not mixed with it nor entirely separate from it; the mind is not in 
the slightest bit truly existent. Therefore all sentient be ings have from the very beginning been in the natural 
Nirvana (i.e. their minds have always  been devoid of true existence). 
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
442  
c) An extensive explanation of the reasoning establishing emptiness 
i) The reasoning that establishes the selflessness of persons 
ii) An extensive explanation of the reasoning that establishes the selflessness of 
phenomena 
1’ Explaining the selflessness of phenom ena by means of the four placements of 
mindfulness 
a’ Meditating on placing mindfulness on the body 
b’ Meditating on placing mindfulness on feelings 
c’ Meditating on placing mindfulness on mind 
1’’ Teaching that mental awareness is not inherently existent 
2’’ Teaching that the five consciousness do not inherently exist 
d’ Meditating on placing mindfulness on phenomena 
2’ Rejecting the dispute that the two truths would be invalid 
a' Rejecting the extreme consequences 
b' Rejecting the consequence of infinite regress c' Teaching that there is no evidence that object awareness is truly established 
3’ Stating the syllogism that acts to establish selflessness 
3) Instructions on making effort to de velop that [realization of emptiness] 
b The chapter’s name 
 
Dependent Arising - A Praise of the Buddha  
26 
Having seen the truth, you taught it. Those following you will leave all troubles far behind, 
for they will cut to the root of every fault. 
 27 Those, however, outside your teachings, 
though they practi ce long and hard, 
are those who beckon back faults, 
for they are welded to views of self. 
 
28 Ah! When the wise see the difference, how could they not revere you 
from the very depths  of their hearts! 
 
These three verses show the reasons why we should respect the Foun der and Teacher, the 
Buddha and his teachings. Buddha had seen the natu re of reality - the final mode of abiding of 
all phenomena and he taught this realisation to others. When we follow and practise his 
teachings on emptiness, we will be able to leav e the faults of both cy clic existence and peace 
behind us for we will then be able to get rid of the root of all these faults, self-grasping.  Hence,  
verse 26 reads: Those following you will leave all troubles far be hind/for they will cut to the root of every 
fault.    
 
Those, however, outside your teachings,/ though they practice long and hard, /a re those who beckon back 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
443  
faults points out that, if we were  to follow a teac her  other than the Buddha, like non-Buddhists, 
we would not be able to overcome our faults no  matter how hard and long we practise. Instead, 
in the end, we would naturally acquire faults.  
We would be unable to eliminate the faul ts of cyclic existence as we remain welded to views of self , 
which is the root of all the problems of cyclic existence and, as our self-grasping grows stronger, 
liberation is no longer possible.  
 
The exclamation ‘ Ah!’ (Tib.: E MA HO) in verse 28 is an  expression of amazement on how 
marvellous the Buddha is and how wonderful it is to be able to differentiate between the 
Buddha’s teachings and those of non-Buddhists.  
 
The ‘ wise’ refers to those who are able  to use their intelligence to see the difference between the 
Buddha and the founders of non-Buddhist traditions  and, as a result, generate heartfelt respect 
for the Buddha. Lama Tsongkhapa is talking here  about his  own experience. Having seen the 
differences between the Buddha’s special qual ities and other non-Buddhist teachers,  he 
generates  heartfelt faith in and respect for the Buddha. 
 Amongst the different kinds of faith, this is the be st faith of all and the kind of faith we need to 
generate, i.e.,  the faith that is generated as a result of analysing the teachings of the Buddha. 
When we use our intelligence to critically analys e the Buddha’s teachings, the faith that arises 
from such  analysis will be stable and irreve rsible, regardless of whatever obstacles we may 
encounter. This is the faith of th ose with sharp faculties and this is  the kind of faith  we should 
all aspire to develop.    
29 What need to talk of many teachings! The simplest conviction in just a single part 
brings on the greatest of joy! 
  
Merely knowing the words and having conviction in a single portion of the Buddha’s teachings 
without in-depth understanding of thos e teachings can  bring so much joy. 
 
For example, by simply hearing the phrase, “dependent origination” and having a rough 
understanding of what it means, although   we have yet to achieve ascertainment of its profound 
meaning, it will help us to achieve  liberation an d enlightenment one day. If  that is the case with 
just a partial understanding of a portion of th e Buddha’s teachings, imagine what will happen 
when we can ascertain all aspects of his teachings.  
 
Aryadeva mentioned in his Four Hundred Stanzas: 
For those who have no merits, they would not bother to think about the meaning of dependent origination, 
much less wonder what it is. But if  such a person were to  think about the meaning of dependent origination 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
444  
alone, it would cause his samsara to shake. 
 
There are three types of doubt: (1) doubt tending to the non-fa ctual, (2) equal doubt and (3) 
doubt tending to the factual. Here, Aryadeva is  referring to a person who develops the doubt 
tending to the factual with respect to dependent origination. When that happens, the process of 
removing the root of all problems and faults, whic h manifests in grasping at true existence, and 
the end of that person's cyclic existence will have started. 
 
Although we have yet to gain any ascertainm ent through generating the valid cognition of 
dependent origination, emptiness or  inherent existence, at least now we may have this doubt that 
tends towards reality, “Maybe things are dependently originated and not inherently existent.”   Having this kind of understanding alone sho ws how unbelievably fortunate we are and how 
much merit we have accumulated. Great virtue and merit are generated by simply studying a 
verse of any teachings on emptiness. Hearing and reflecting on teachings of emptiness is such a 
meritorious activity. It is  mentioned in a su tra that the merit that comes from listening, 
reflecting or simply reading a verse of the teac hings on emptiness surpasses the merit one gains 
from offering all the different precious substances  existing in the three thousand world systems to 
the Buddha.  We have to consider whether the merit arising from such an extensive offering to the Buddha 
can harm our self-grasping or not? I think it is di fficult to say that such merit can harm our self-
grasping. But if we were to study and reflect on the meaning of emptiness of inherent existence, 
such as how the I does not exist inherently, we can gain an ascertainment and the correct 
understanding of emptiness which can destroy our se lf-grasping. This self-g rasping, which is the 
root  of all our problems, must be destroyed i f  w e  d o  n o t  w a n t  a n y  p r o b l e m s .   W h e n   o u r  
problems cease, naturally happiness comes.  
 
Since we know the essence of the Buddha’s te achings is the teaching on emptiness and 
dependent origination, it is extremely important to  listen to and  reflect on such teachings. We 
are so fortunate to have the opportunity to listen  to and reflect on the teachings on emptiness. 
We have to know why we are so fortunate and so lucky and remind ourselves of our good 
fortune. We need to examine how fortunate we are from all possible different angles because 
there are Buddhists who have no awareness of their fortunate circ umstances. Not only do they 
fail to appreciate their good fortune and rejo icing and being happy about it but due to this 
ignorance, they spend their whole life in depression.  The Buddha turned the wheel of Dh arma in the presence of the fi ve fortunate disciples for the 
first time at Sarnath by teaching the Four Noble Truths. He said: This is the truth of suffering. This 
is the truth of the origin of suffering. This is the true path and this is true cessation.  Upon hearing these 
words, the five disciples immediately realised the Four Noble Truths and became arhats.  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
445  
 
Although we may believe such accounts, we do not think deeply about th em and perhaps, deep 
in our hearts, we suspect that such occurrences are impossible. We are then going against the law 
of cause and effect. Such things occur as the result of causes an d conditions. There is a reason 
why the five disciples were able to immediatel y realise the Four Noble Truths simply upon 
hearing the verses from the Buddha. During the time of the previous Buddha, Buddha Kashyapa, 
these five disciples had reflected and practised th e teachings correctly after hearing them  from 
the Buddha. As a result, when Buddha Shakyamuni  taught the Four Noble Truths, the imprints 
from their previous lives ripened, enabling them to understand  them immediately.  
 
The moral of this story is that it  is not easy to realise emptiness.  We have to receive the teachings 
over and over again and thereafter reflect on wh atever we have heard. Now that we have this 
human rebirth, with human intelligence, we must listen to as many teachings on emptiness as 
possible. But we cannot leave it at the level of listening. We should use our minds to study and 
analyse the meaning of emptiness as much as po ssible and make sure that we can leave a very 
stable imprint of its meaning on our mental continua. Then, in the future, when Buddha 
Maitreya descends and turns the wh eel of Dharma, there is hope that we may be born as his 
disciples. When he teaches  emptiness, he may s ay: “All things do not exist truly because they are 
dependently arisen.”  Because of having studied and reflected on emptiness now, there is hope 
that we can realise emptiness there and then  upon hearing that statement from Buddha 
Maitreya.  So it is extremely important to always critic ally analyse and reflect on the meaning of the 
t e a c h i n g s  f r o m  m a n y  d i f f e r e n t  a n g l e s .  O t h e r w i s e ,  i t  w i l l  b e  v e r y  d i f f i c u l t  t o  a c t u a l l y  s t u d y  a n d  gain an understanding of his teachings. Of course  it is not easy. When we do not think about the 
teachings from many different perspectives, we ca nnot see their relevance and we might question,  
“What has this to do with my li fe?” Such excuses coupled with the difficulty of understanding the 
text, we may then think: “Never mi nd. Forget about it. It has nothin g to do with my life. I do not 
need it.” We will then close th e book and that’s the end of that . We must make sure that this 
will not happen to us. This will not happen when  we understand and see,  at all times, how 
important it is to study and anal yse the teachings and see the benefit that comes from such effort.  
 Earlier on we have already established how the mental consciousness does not exist inherently. Next we are establishing that the five sense co nsciousnesses do not exist inherently as well. 
 
2” Teaching that the five consciousnesses do not inherently exist 
 
(9,104) 
If the consciousness existed before the object to be known, 
Through observing what would it be produced? 
If the consciousness and the object  to be known are simultaneous. 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
446  
Through observing what would it be produced? 
 
(9,105) 
Well then, if it exists after the object to be known, 
From what is consciousness produced? 
 
 
The eye consciousness apprehending form is prod uced in dependence on its observed object 
condition, form. If the eye consciousness is in herently produced, does the observed object 
condition, form, exist:-(1) before the eye cons ciousness or (2) at the same time as the eye 
consciousness or (3) after the gene ration of the eye consciousness? 
 The eye consciousness has to be produced in depend ence on perceiving an object. If we say that 
the sense consciousness, in this instance, the  eye consciousness, is generated before  observing its 
object, form, then what is the observed obje ct condition for the generation of that eye 
consciousness? On what basis is that eye consciousness generated?   If we say that the eye consciousness and the ob ject, form, perceived by that eye consciousness 
exists simultaneously , it is akin to saying that one does not depend on the other. This means the 
eye consciousness need not depend on seeing its object, form, for it to be generated. But for a 
sense consciousness to be generated,  it must first depend on its observed  object condition.  Since 
that is the case, then the sens e consciousness cannot be generate d before contacting its object 
and it cannot be generated simultaneously with its respective object. Why? Because cause and 
effect are sequential.  
Well then, if it exists after the object to be known,/From what is consciousness produced ?: If we then say 
that the eye consciousness is produced after the object, form, then from what observed object 
condition is it ultimately produced? 
 Since we say that the object, form, has to exist before an eye consciousness apprehending it due 
to cause and effect, how is it then possible for th at eye consciousness to be ultimately produced? 
We are refuting here the ultimate, not the conv entional, production of the eye consciousness 
apprehending form because even Prasangika assert s  that the eye consciousness is generated by 
depending on its observed object condition,  fo rm, and that production of the eye consciousness 
apprehending form exists conventionally. Howeve r, Prasangika does not assert that the eye 
consciousness is ultimately produced in dependen ce on its observed object condition, form.  
 If an eye consciousness apprehending form is ultimately produced (inherently generated) in 
dependence on its observed object condition, form, we then have to analyse how that can 
happen.   
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
447  
As the eye consciousness has to depend on the visual form for it to be generated, at the time of 
generating the eye consciousness, does the form ex ist or not? Or has it already ceased to exist? 
 
If we say that at the time of generating the eye consciousness apprehending form, the form has 
already ceased to exist, then it is difficult to say that the eye consciousness is produced. Where is 
the form? 
 
If we say that the form exists simultaneously wi th the eye consciousness apprehending it, there is 
a also a problem because cause and effect are sequential. 
 If we say that the ultimate production of the eye consciousness  depends on the continuum of 
the moments of that form as the observed object co ndition, it is also incorrect to say this because 
even the collection of moments themselves do  not exist inherently, as explained earlier.
81 
 
If the form can neither exist simultaneously nor after the production of the eye consciousness, 
the only option left is for the eye consciousness to  be  inherently produced in dependence on the 
                                              
81 (8, 101) Such things as a continuum and an aggregation, Are false in the same way as prayer beads and an army. 
We think of the “I,” who experiences the passage of time , as the same, unchanging pe rson as the present “I”. 
We think that it is the continuum that is moving. Wh en we consider a continuum of I or person and our 
collection of aggregates, we also thin k of them as existing very solidly and independently.  Such conceptions are 
refuted by the first two lines of Verse 101: Such things as a continuum and an aggr egation/Are false in the same way as 
prayer beads and an army.  
We conceive of the “I” as existing inherently and indepe ndently. In the same way, we think of our bodies and 
minds as being solid and real, existing independently and in herently. But that is not how they truly exist. E.g. A 
rosary (or mala) is made up of many prayer beads. When all the prayer beads are strung together, the result is a 
rosary. We impute  the collection of prayer beads to be a rosary. How does an army exist? It exists in dependence on 
a group of soldiers. When a group of so ldiers come together, we impute and lab el it as an army. This is how an 
army exists.  
The rosary does not exist inherently and inde pendently other than being merely imputed  upon the collection of 
prayer beads. Why is this so? When we search for the inherently existent rosary amongst the individual prayer 
beads, we will  not be able to find it there. If there is an inherently existent rosary,  when we look amongst the 
beads, we should find the rosary there. But after checking  and setting aside each and ev ery single prayer bead, we 
do not end up with a rosary. We apply this reasoning to  the army. When we look for the army amongst the group 
of soldiers, we will not be able to find the army. 
We can relate this to the collection of our physical and mental aggregates, which form the bases for the label 
“I”, the person. Some Buddhist tenet sy stems assert that the “I” is the contin uum of the physical aggregates while 
others assert that the “I” is found within the continuum of  mental consciousness. Yet others claim that the person 
is the mere collection of the aggregates. 
The analogy of the rosary and army helps us to el iminate the wrong consciousn ess which apprehends any 
continuum or collection as being inherently existent. Us ing the same logic and applyi ng it to the person, we 
eliminate the possibilities of the person being (1) the co ntinuum of the physical aggregates (2) the continuum of 
mental consciousness or (3) the mere collection of  the aggregates. (Lesson 43, Chapter VIII, pg 239)  
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
448  
form that precedes its generation. But this option is also refuted here.82 
 
d' Meditating on placing mindfulness on phenomena 
 
(9,105 cd) 
Hence, the production of all phenomena 
Is not to be realized. 
 
We have now established that the body, feeling and mind do not exist inherently. Of the five 
aggregates, we had dealt with form, feeling and consciousness. The remaining two aggregates are 
discrimination and compositional factors.  
 So all phenomena including the aggregates of di scrimination and  compositional factors are not 
inherently existent and also not inherently  produced. If composed phenomena are not 
inherently produced, then all uncomposed (perma nent) phenomena will also have to be empty of 
inherent existence and not inherently produced. Once we are able to establish that composed phenomena do not exist inherently through the fo rce of realisation, we will also be able to 
establish that uncomposed phenomena are not inherently produced.  Therefore, the object of observation for plac ing mindfulness on phenomena will include the 
aggregates of discrimination and compositional fa ctors and also  uncomposed phenomena.  This 
means all existents and objects of knowledge are observed when we place mindfulness on these 
four things; feeling, body, mind and phenomena.  
2' Rejecting the dispute that the two truths would be invalid 
a' Rejecting the extreme consequences 
 
(9,106) 
If, like this, they would not exist conventionally, 
How could there be two truths with respect to them? 
Moreover, if they are conv entional due to other, 
                                              
82 Question: Although the mental consciousness may exist in th at way, don't the five  sense consciousnesses 
truly apprehend their five objects?   
Answer: Well, let us first consider whether they exist prior to , simultaneously with or after their objects. (104) If 
we said that the five sense consciousnesses existed before the five objects of which they are conscious, then, having referred to what objects 
could those consciousnesses arise? At that time there could be no objects because they would still have to be produced. 
Even if the consciousness and what it is conscious of  arose simultaneously, still, having referred to what object could the consciousness 
arise? In this case, when the consciousness is yet to be prod uced so is its object, and once it has been produced 
there would be no need for it to be produced by an object. 
(105) And if the consciousness came into existence after the object of which it is conscious, then from what object could it 
arise? Since the object would have ceased by the time the consciousness arose, the consciousness would have no 
object. (Root text, pg. 143-144) 
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
449  
How could sentient beings pass beyond sorrow? 
 
(9,107) 
This is a projection of someone else's mind, 
It is not his own all-obscuring [mind]. 
Later, if ascertained, it would exist; 
If not, it does not exist conventionally. 
 
(9,108) 
That which investigates and that which is investigated, 
These two, are mutually dependent. 
Thus, in dependence on being renowned, 
All the thoroughly analytical are expressed. 
 
Objection by schools below Prasangika 
(Verse 106 is the objection raised by the sc hools below Prasangika, Svatantrika-Madhyamika, 
Cittamatra, Sautrantika and Vaibhasika, against Prasangika.) 
   You have gone to great lengths to prove that all phenomena do not exist inherently. Since you 
have established that all phenomena are not inhe rently existent, this means that phenomena are 
not even conventionally existent. If conventional  phenomena do not exist,  then the final modes 
of abiding of those conventional phenomena also  do not exist, which wo uld mean that the two 
truths will be non-existent as well.   The fact is that when you assert phenomena ar e conventionally existent, you do so from the 
perspective of the mind grasping at true existenc e. Such a mind is no different from the mind 
t h a t  a p p r e h e n d s  a  c o i l  o f  r o p e  t o  b e  a  s n ake, which is a wrong mind and a mistaken 
consciousness. This is no different from your saying that although all phenomena do not exist 
inherently, they conventionally exist. This is a mi staken mind for if this was the case, there will 
be no sentient beings achieving nirvana. There wi ll be no nirvana. It will be pointless then to 
exert so much effort to establ ish the meaning of emptiness. 
 In summary, it has been established earlier in the section on placement of mindfulness on the 
body, feeling, mind and phenomena that all ph enomena do not exist inherently. But from the 
perspective of these lower schools,  if phenomena do not exist inhere ntly, they cannot exist at all. 
When they consider the assertions of Prasan gika, to them, it means phenomena will become 
non-existent. In which case, Prasangika’ assert ion that phenomena exis t conventionally would 
also be invalid.   To these lower schools, there is no point in ta lking about emptiness as emptiness of phenomena 
will be non-existent since both conventional and ultimate truths will also be  non-existent. To 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
450  
them, when Prasangika asserts that phenomena ex ist conventionally, this is posited from the 
perspective of the mind grasping at true existenc e, i.e., a mistaken mind. This will entail that 
sentient beings do not exist and no one will achi eve nirvana, which means there is no nirvana. It 
will be pointless to establish the meaning of emptiness and dependent arising. 
Lesson 80   Chapter IX - verse 106-115 
D The way to train in wisdom- the nature of insight 
a. Explaining the chapter’s material 
1) Teaching that one who wants to attain liberation must develop the wisdom realizing suchness 
2) The methods by which one develops the wisdom realizing suchness 
a) A presentation of the two truths 
b) Establishing that even someone who wants to attain mere liberation must realize 
emptiness 
c) An extensive explanation of the reasoning establishing emptiness 
i) The reasoning that establishes the selflessness of persons ii) An extensive explanation of the reasoning that establishes the selflessness of phenomena 
1’ Explaining the selflessness of phenom ena by means of the four placements of 
mindfulness 2’ Rejecting the dispute that the two truths would be invalid 
a' Rejecting the extreme consequences 
b' Rejecting the consequence of infinite regress 
c' Teaching that there is no evidence that object awareness is truly established 
3’ Stating the syllogism that acts to establish selflessness 
3) Instructions on making effort to de velop that [realization of emptiness] 
b The chapter’s name 
 
Dependent Arising - A Praise of the Buddha  
30 
Alas! My mind is ru ined by ignorance! 
For so long have I gone for refuge 
to this great store of meritorious qualities, 
yet not a single one do I possess.  
31 
As yet, however, my life has not slipped 
between the jaws of the Lord of Death and, having a modicum of faith in you, I do consider myself fortunate. 
 
Alas! is Lama Tsongkhapa’s expression of sadness that although he has b een wishing for a very 
long time to understand the meaning of the Buddh a’s  teachings and scriptures, but, due to his 
own ignorance, he has not yet  realised  even a portion of those teachings.  
 
Dependent origination is the essence of the Buddha’ s teachings. Lama Tsongkhapa is aspiring to 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
451  
understand these essential teaching s of the Buddha.  He is saying here that he has yet to gain 
even a partial understanding of dependent originat ion although he has been studying for a very 
long time.   
 
It is possible that Lama Tsongkhapa showed differe nt aspects of himself to different disciples and 
he is manifesting here as someone who has not yet understood the meaning of dependent 
origination. This shows Lama Tsongkhapa’s humility  and lack of pride. In reality, it is possible 
that Lama Tsongkhapa had already fully realised the meaning of dependent origination.   We should follow Lama Tsongkhapa’s example. It  is very common that, on the basis of knowing 
just a few words or a small portion of the te achings, one behaves as if one has complete 
understanding of the teachings.  One should not do that.  
 Lama Tsongkhapa recognises that, in reality, in each and every single moment, he is getting 
closer and closer to the Lord of Death.  Therefor e, he expresses here his good fortune that he is 
still alive and able to generate irreversible fait h in the Buddha on the basis of his teachings on 
dependent origination.  He is so happy this has happened to him.  
 At first, Lama Tsongkhapa is saddened by his igno rance but then he finds joy in the faith he has 
in Buddha’s teachings. We should also follow hi s example. When we are disheartened, lost or 
feeling hopeless, it is important to  cultivate joy in our minds and up lift ourselves. At other times, 
when things are going well, when we are distract ed by enjoyments and not putting effort into 
improving our minds,  it is then  difficult to move our minds towards or to practise the Dharma. 
 
a' Rejecting the extreme consequences 
(9,106) 
If, like this, they would not exist conventionally, 
How could there be two truths with respect to them? 
Moreover, if they are conv entional due to other, 
How could sentient beings pass beyond sorrow? 
 In the earlier section on placing of mindfulness on the feeling, body, mind and phenomena, we 
had established that both the object and subjec t do not exist inherently in accordance with 
Prasangika assertion that all phen omena do not inherently exist.  
 
Objection from the schools below Prasangika:  
If you assert that the object and subject do not inherently exist, it will be incorrect for you to 
posit that phenomena exist conventionally. If there is no conventional truth, then ultimate truth 
also cannot exist. Therefore, the two truths will be non-existent.  
 Your assertion that phenomena exist conventional ly is posited from the  perspective of the 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
452  
conventional mind grasping at true existence. Si nce that is the case, then , in reality, phenomena 
do not exist at all and there will be no sentient beings achieving nirvana.  What is the point then 
of you going to such great lengths to establis h that all phenomena do  not exist inherently? 
 
(9,107) 
This is a projection of someone else's mind, 
It is not his own all-obscuring [mind]. 
Later, if ascertained, it would exist; 
If not, it does not exist conventionally. 
 
Reply from Prasangika: 
You have misunderstood our way of positing the conventional existence of phenomena.  
 Be it a phenomenon or person, from the perspe ctive of Prasangika, one has to ascertain that 
object to be merely labelled by the mind and no t existing from its own side. Only after that 
ascertainment, if one can then certify with a va lid cognition that that phenomenon possesses the 
features of functionality (such  as functioning as a subject or obje ct and activities such as birth, 
cessation, coming, going and so forth), then th at phenomenon can be understood to exist 
conventionally. 
 
Answer to student’s question : 
Without the ascertainment of the emptiness of inherent existence, it will be impossible to 
understand that phenomena exist conventionally. Amongst ordinary  and superior beings (those 
who have already directly realised emptiness), it  is possible that there are ordinary beings who 
have also realised emptiness. For such ordinary beings, they would be ab le to understand that 
phenomena exist conventionally.  
(9,108) 
That which investigates and that which is investigated, 
These two, are mutually dependent. 
Thus, in dependence on being renowned, 
All the thoroughly analytical are expressed. 
 
This verse points out how object and subject are posited in dependence upon one another. 
 In verse 107, we looked at how phenomenon is ce rtified to exist conventionally on the basis of 
ascertaining the emptiness of that phenomenon. In  reality, all phenomena exist conventionally.  
 What does it mean for a phenomenon to be  conventionally existent? Phenomena are not 
established from their own side but phenomena exist conventionally when they exist by depending on other factors.  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
453  
 
According to Prasangika, phenomena do not exist inherently because when the imputed object is 
sought, it is not findable. Phenomena do not exist ultimately but do exist conventionally in 
accordance with worldly a ccepted conventions:    Thus, in dependence on being renowned, all the 
thoroughly analytical are expressed. 
 
b' Rejecting the consequence of infinite regress 
 
(9,109) 
If analyzed by the thorough analysis 
Of the thoroughly analytical, 
Because also the thoroughly analytical 
Would be thoroughly analyzed, it would be endless. 
 
(9,110) 
When that to be analyzed is thoroughly analyzed, 
The thoroughly analytical does not have a support. 
Because it lacks a support, it is not produced. 
That too is said to be nirvana. 
 
Objection raised by the schools below Prasangika:  
How do we determine whether phenomena exist inhere ntly or not? We have to use our analytical 
wisdom to establish whether phenomena exist inherently or not and to arrive at the 
ascertainment that phenomena do not exist inherently.  
 
Is there a need for another mind to analyse whether this analytical wisdom  exists or not? If we 
say yes, then there will be the problem of infi nite regression – there will be another mind to 
analyse that mind that is analysing th e analytical wisdom and so forth.  
 If there is no need for another analytical mind to analyse whether that analytical wisdom exists 
inherently, then this means we do not need to analyse whether all phenomena exist inherently or 
not. 
 
The response from Prasangika: 
There is no need for another analytical mind to investigate that analytical wisdom establishing 
that phenomena do not exist inherently. Th is is because, as stated in verse 110, ‘The thoroughly 
analytical does not have a support./Beca use it lacks a support, it is not pr oduced./ That too is said to be 
nirvana.’   
 
There is a valid cognizer analysing whether phenom ena exist inherently or not. When this valid 
cognizer ascertains the emptiness of inherent existence of all phenomena, all phenomena no 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
454  
longer appear as objects of inquiry to that  va lid cognition. Due to the fact that all phenomena 
no longer appear as objects of in quiry to this valid cognition that is ascertaining the emptiness of 
inherent existence of phenomena, both the object of negation (which is inherent existence) and 
the mind that is realising the emptiness of inherent  existence are not existing inherently.  This is 
the naturally abiding (or natural) nirvana. Throug h realising and familiarising ourselves with this 
realisation, we can achieve the nirvana that is  the result of the complete purification and 
elimination of the adventitious defilements.  
 
c' Teaching that there is no evidence that object awareness is truly established 
 
(9,111) 
According to them, the two would be truly existent. 
To abide in that is very difficult. 
“The object is established from th e sense power of the consciousness.” 
What can be supported on an existent consciousness? 
 
(9,112) 
“Well then, the consciousness is establis hed from the object to be known.” 
What can be supported on an ex istent object to be known? 
Existing by the force of one another, 
Both are also non-existent. 
 
(9,113) 
If he is without a son, he is not a father. 
From where would that son arise? 
Without a son, there is no father; 
Likewise the two do not exist. 
 
(9,114) 
Just as a sprout is produced from a seed and 
And the seed is realized by just that, since, likewise, 
Consciousness is produced from an object to be known, 
Why is its existence not realized? 
 
(9,115) 
By a consciousness that is other than sprout, 
“The seed exists” is realized: 
But through what is a consciousness 
Realizing an object to be known realized to exist? 
 
To the proponents of realism (i.e., the proponen ts of Vaibhasika, Sautrantika and Cittamatra),   
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
455  
both the object (e.g., form) and the subject (e.g ., eye consciousness) are asserted to be truly 
existent.  
 
To Prasangika, there are many faults in this assertion by the realists which is merely an 
exaggeration of (or superimposition) on reality and cannot be substantiated, as stated in verse 
111: According to them, the two would be truly exi stent. To abide in that is very difficult.  
 
Response from the pr oponents of realism: 
The object is established from th e sense power of the consciousness (Line 3, verse 111) : We can prove our 
assertion that both object and subject are truly ex istent. For example, form is established to be 
truly existent due to the power of th e eye consciousness realising it.   
 
What is the supporting evidence then to prove that  the eye consciousness  realising form is truly 
existent? There is none because if  there is another valid cognition that can certify the eye 
consciousness to be truly existent, then there wi ll be the problem of infinite regression. The eye 
consciousness cannot certify itself to be truly ex istent since a consciousness cannot realise itself. 
(We had earlier refuted the existence of the self-knower).   
The question then from Prasangika  appears in line 4, verse 111: What can be supported on an 
existent consciousness?  W h a t  e v i d e n c e  d o  y o u  h a v e  t o  s u pport your assertion that the eye 
consciousness is truly existent? 
 
If the proponents of realism were to reply as in the first line of verse 112: Well then, the 
consciousness is established fr om the object to be known,  i.e., the consciousness is truly existent because 
the object that it realises is truly existent, th e rebuttal from Prasangika follows in the next line: 
What can be supported on an existent object to be known ? In other words, how do you establish that 
your object is truly existent in the first place?  
The proponents of realism will then respond:  The object is truly existent because the 
consciousness that is realising it is truly existent.  
 
Response from Prasangika : 
If these are your answers to our questions, it is  clear that, for you, the object and subject are 
posited on the basis of a relati onship of mutual dependence. If the object and subject are 
mutually dependent in this way, then they canno t be inherently existent (line 3-4, verse 112: 
Existing by the force of one anot her,/ Both are also non-existent .) 
 
This is like the analogy of the father and son:  the son cannot possibly exist without a father and 
the father is posited in dependence on the fact that he has fathered a son. Both are mutually 
dependent. Likewise, both object and subject ar e posited by mutual dependence. The subject is 
posited in dependence on the object and vice vers a. Therefore, they do not exist inherently.   
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
456  
Response from the pr oponents of realism 
This appears in verse 114: Just as a sprout is produced from a seed/A nd the seed is realized by just that, 
since, likewise,/Consciousness is prod uced from an object to be known, /Why is its existence not realized? 
  
The realists are asserting here that the sprout is inherently existent because it is produced from a 
seed. In the same way, through the force of the truly existent eye consciousness, one comes to 
understand that the form it realises also exists truly.   
 
Response from Prasangika 
A consciousness that is other than the sprout real ises that the sprout is produced from its seed 
and that it is the effect of the seed. It is all righ t to use the logic of seeing the sprout to posit that 
the seed exists.  
 But these two examples - the sprout that comes from the seed and the eye consciousness apprehending form - are not similar. Even if th ere is a consciousness that realises objects of 
knowledge such as form, then what  is that which realises the eye consciousness to be inherently 
existent?  As discussed earlier, there cannot be another cons ciousness that validates that eye consciousness 
as this will lead to infinite regression. Also  the eye consciousness apprehending form cannot 
realise itself. (We had already refuted the existe nce of the self-knower.) Therefore, there is 
nothing that can certify that the consciousness is truly existent. This is th e meaning of verse 115: 
By a consciousness that is other than sprout,/ “The  seed exists” is realized:/But through what is a 
consciousness/Realizing an object to  be known realized to exist?  
Lesson 81   Chapter IX - verse 116-125 
D The way to train in wisdom- the nature of insight 
a. Explaining the chapter’s material 
1) Teaching that one who wants to attain liberation must develop the wisdom realizing suchness 
2) The methods by which one develops the wisdom realizing suchness 
a) A presentation of the two truths 
b) Establishing that even someone who wants to attain mere liberation must realize 
emptiness 
c) An extensive explanation of the reasoning establishing emptiness 
i) The reasoning that establishes the selflessness of persons 
ii) An extensive explanation of the reasoning that establishes the selflessness of 
phenomena 
1’ Explaining the selflessness of phenom ena by means of the four placements of 
mindfulness 2’ Rejecting the dispute that the two truths would be invalid 
3’ Stating the syllogism that acts to establish selflessness 
a’ The vajra vision syllogism 
1’’ Refuting causeless production 
2’’ Refuting production from another permanent cause 
a’’ Refuting the question posed by Ishvara 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
457  
b’’ If something is permanent, it is unsuitable for it to be the cause of 
anything conditional 
c’’ Applying mindfulness once the refutation of particles as 
permanent, causeless [phenomena] has been explained 
3’’ Refuting production from a permanent principle 
4’’ A synopsis of the refutation of causelessness 
5’’ Refuting production from both self and other 
b’ The syllogism of interdependence 
c’ The syllogism of existence and non-existence, production and cessation 
3) Instructions on making effort to de velop that [realization of emptiness] 
b The chapter’s name 
 
Dependent Arising - A Praise of the Buddha  
31 
As yet, however, my life has not slipped between the jaws of the Lord of Death 
and, having a modicum of faith in you, 
I do consider myself fortunate.  
When we are feeling discouraged, it is beneficial to reflect on the meaning of this verse, after we 
have  memorised and recited it, as it will he lp us to develop enthusiasm and delight.  
 When we are confronted with difficulties, simply reciting prayers or certain mantras alone is not 
going to change our minds or mental perspectives. But by reflecting on a verse such as this one, 
immediately, the mind can change and have a di fferent outlook, helping us to uplift our mood 
and improve our state of mind.    We have obtained this human bo dy and have met not only the teachings of the Buddha but the 
Mahayana teachings. On top of that, we have even  met with the teachings on secret mantra and 
highest yoga tantra. In short, we have come into contact with and developed faith in the 
Buddha’s sutric and tantric teachings.  We should  reflect on how fortunate we are to have had 
such opportunities and be content.   
32 Among teachers, the teacher of dependent arising, among  knowledge, knowledge of dependent arising. These two, like a mighty conqueror in the world, you know to be supreme,  where others do not. 
 
The teachings of the Buddha are divided into script ural and realisational teachings. This verse is 
referring to the realisational teachings and pointi ng out that the teachings on emptiness are the 
best of all the Dharma that was taught. Amongs t all knowledge and understanding, the supreme 
knowledge is the understanding of dependent origination.  
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
458  
A mighty conqueror in the world  refers to the Buddha who is su preme amongst all human beings. 
The teachings on emptiness can only be found amon gst his teachings and it is only through such 
teachings that we will be able to gain an understanding of dependent origination. Such 
understanding cannot come about by relying on  teachings found outside the Buddhadharma.  
 
33 
All that you have taught 
proceeds from dependent arising; its purpose, the transcending of suffering. Nothing you do, therefore, is not for peace.  
In fact, everything that the Buddha taught was me ant to help suffering sentient beings establish 
correctly the meaning of dependent origination so that their suffering can be pacified and they 
can work towards enlightenment.    Amongst the four Buddhist tenets, the ultimate tenet system is Prasangika. On the basis of 
knowing the assertions of the lowe r schools, which become increasingly refined and subtle as we 
move up the hierarchy, we will finally arrive at Prasangika presentation of subtle dependent 
origination.   
The main meaning of this verse is the same as the first verse of Chapter 9: The Muni (Subduer) 
taught all these branches/For the purpose of wisdom.  
 
3' Stating the syllogism (proof) that acts to establish selflessness 
a' The vajra vision syllogism  
 
The subject of the vajra vision syllogism (also kn own as the diamond splinters argument) is that 
phenomena do not exist inherently because they are not produced from the four possibilities. 
 
Composed or impermanent phenomena are ex amined to establish the selflessness of 
phenomena. A composed phenomenon does not exist inherently. Why? If it inherently exists, it  
must necessarily be produced by one of the following four possibilities:- 
1) It is produced from itself    or 
2) It is produced from other    or 
3) It is produced from both itself and other  or 
4) It is produced without a cause  
 
By examining whether production arises from any of these four possibilities and establishing the 
meaning of selflessness of phenomena,  we refu te the assertion by the realists (i.e., the 
proponents of Vaibhasika, Sautrantika and Ci ttamatra) and non-Buddhists that impermanent 
phenomena exist inherently because  they  are produced and they disintegrate.  
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
459  
Phenomena are made up of impermanent and permanent phenomena. We are examining 
whether composed phenomena are truly existent as there is not much discussion based on 
permanent phenomena.  But once we can es tablish that composed phenomena are not 
inherently existent, then it is not difficult  to establish that permanent phenomena (or 
uncomposed phenomena) also do not exist inherently.  
 
The category of composed phenomena are charac terised by their production, abiding and final 
disintegration. First, we have to establish that th e factor of production is not inherently existent. 
Once that is done, it is easy to establish that th e factors of abiding and disintegration are also not 
inherently existent as well. If production does not exist inherently, then abiding and 
disintegration cannot exist inherently.  
At the beginning of Nagarjuna's text Fundamental Treatise on Wisdom,  he refuted production from 
these four possibilities:  
It is not produced from itself, 
Neither is it produced from other. It is not produced from both of it, Neither is it produced without a cause Therefore all functional things are not (ultimately) produced 
 
1" Refuting causeless production 
(9,116) 
Sometimes by direct perception of the world 
All the causes are seen. 
The diversity of the stems of lotuses and so forth 
Are produced by the diversity if causes 
 
(9,117) 
“By what is the diversity of causes made?” 
It comes from the diversity of previous causes. 
“Why is a cause able to produce a result?” 
That comes from the very stren gth of the previous cause. 
 The proponents of non-Buddhist tenets called Ni hilists believe that things are produced and 
events happen without cause or reason.  They argu e that there is no reas on to explain why the 
sun shines and water always flows downwards, peas  and nuts are round, thorns are sharp and peacocks always come in different colours. They are like that by nature. They use this reasoning 
to support their claim that everything comes abou t without cause. No one is responsible for their 
creation as by nature everything exists like that.
83 
                                              
83 The (non-Buddhist)  Charvakas assert  t h a t  a l l  t h i n g s  a r e  p r o d u c e d  f r o m  no cause, because in one of their 
scriptures it states; “All things such as the rising of the sun, the flowing of water downhill, the roundness of peas, 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
460  
 
This argument is refuted in verse 116: Sometimes by direct perception of  this world all the causes are 
seen. For example, farmers hoping for bountiful harvests will create the cause for this to happen 
by planting seeds.  This can be commonly observ ed in the world. This harms the assertion that 
things and events can occur without cause.  
 How do we then account for the peacocks with  their multi-coloured plumage and the multi-
petalled lotuses? Prasangika asserts that these th ings that we see in nature do not come about 
without cause. Rather, the diversity of phenomena is the result of the diversity of causes. What 
enables this diversity of causes to produce this di versity of results? That comes from the strength 
of the preceding cause. Once the causes and co nditions for the production of an effect are 
present, nothing can stop the arising of that effect.
84 
 
2" Refuting production from another permanent cause 
a" Refuting the question posed by Ishvara 
 
(9,118) 
If Ishvara is the caus e of migrating beings, 
Who is this one you call 'Ishvara'? 
“He is the elements.” They are indeed like that, 
So why tire yourself our even for a mere name? 
 
(9,119) 
Well then, since earth and so forth are many, 
Impermanent, without movement, not a god, 
To be walked on and unclean, 
They are not Ishvara himself. 
 
(9,120) 
Ishvara is not space because it is without movement. 
He is not the self because that has already been refuted before. 
                                                                                                                                                           
the sharpness of thorns and the tail feathers of the peac ock were not made by anyone , they arise from their own 
nature.”] (Root text, pg. 147)  
84 Madhyamika: This assertion is unacce ptable because (116) sometimes the pr oduction of an effect from the 
collection of all its causes can be seen even by the tr ue perception of the worldly people. (Furthermore) it is 
understood through inference that the variety among effect s, such as the different stems of lotus flowers, is 
produced because of their having a variety of causes. 
Charvaka: (117) Yet by what has this variety of causes been made? 
Madhyamika: By a variety of previous causes 
Charvaka: For what reason is a distinct cause able to produce a distinct effect? Madhyamika: This comes from the force of its previous cause. (Root text, pg. 147)  
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
461  
He is also a creator who is unthinkable; 
What is the point in talk ing about the unthinkable? 
 
Some non-Buddhists agree that things and events arise from causes. They assert, however, that 
Ishvara, the mighty god, is the cause and is the creator of the wo rld and all living beings in it 
because he generated the thought: “I am going to create this and that.” Based on that thought, 
Ishvara created this world and us. 
 
If Ishvara is the creator of the world and all living  beings, who is this Ishvara? If you were to say 
that Ishvara is the four great elem ents of earth, water, fire and wi nd and the multiplicity of effects 
arises from the coming together of these four  elements and the combination of the varying 
strengths of the individual elements, we can accept that the multiplicity of effects arises from the 
coming together of the four elements.    
But you cannot posit that Ishvara is the nature of the four elements. Why? Because for you, 
Ishvara, the creator god is partless, unitary an d permanent, is neither produced nor does he 
disintegrate and is worthy of respect for hi s purity. The elements, on the other hand, are 
completely different in nature as the elem ents are impermanent, are produced, undergo 
disintegration and are impure e.g., we walk on ea rth. These elements cannot be god. (Verse 119: 
Well then, since earth and so forth are many, impermanen t, without movement, not a god, to be walked on 
and unclean, they are not Ishvara himself. ) 
 
If you were to say Ishvara is space, Ishvara is  not space because space is immobile and has no 
intention. For example, when Ishv ara says, “I am going to produce this and that,”  space does not 
have that function. (Verse 120: Ishvara is not space because it is without movement.) 
 
Ishvara is not the self because we had already refuted earlier that: 
a permanent self exists  the self is consciousness and  
the self is matter.  
 
The non-Buddhists say :  
“You cannot explain god as it is beyond us. He is  inconceivable.” 
 
Response from Prasangika : 
If that is so, What is the point in talk ing about the unthinkable?  (Verse 120)  
 
b" If something is permanent, it is unsuitable for it to be the cause of anything conditional 
 
(9,121) 
Also what is he asserted to produce? 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
462  
Are not the entity of the self, 
Earth and so forth, and Ishvara permanent? 
Consciousness is produced from an object to be known and 
 
(9,122) 
Beginningless happiness and suffering come from karma, 
Therefore, what do you claim is produced by him? 
If the cause does not have a beginning, 
How could there be a beginning of results? 
 
(9,123) 
Why would they not always function? 
If he does not depend on other and 
There does not exist other that is not created by him, 
Due to that, on what do they depend? 
 
(9,124) 
That very collection on which they depend 
Would be the cause, not Ishvara. 
When assembled, he would lack th e power to not produce them, and 
When they are absent, he would lack the power to produce them. 
 
(9,125) 
If they are created without Ishvara desiring them, 
It would follow that they are under the control of other. 
Even if they are desired, if they are created 
In dependence on desire, what  would become of Ishvara? 
 
Since the non-Buddhists maintain  that Ishvara is the creator, what has he  produced?  
 
The non-Buddhists say :  He has produced the self. 
 
Response from Prasangika:  
Won’t that self be permanent? Are the particles that make up the four elements permanent in 
nature like Ishvara himself? If the cause is perm anent, how is it possible for it to produce an 
effect? (Verse 121: Also what is he asserted to pr oduce?/Are not the entity of the self,/Earth and so forth, 
and Ishvara permanent?)   
 
For example, we maintain that the eye consciousn ess is generated by depending on its object - 
form. The happiness and sufferings we have experienced from time without beginning is the result of karma. Due to our negative actions, we  experience unhappiness or sufferings and due to 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
463  
our positive actions, we experience happiness. So what does Ishvara pr oduce? (Verses 121 and 
122: Consciousness is produced from an object to be  known and/Beginningless happiness and suffering 
come from karma./Therefo re, what do you claim is produced by him?)  
 
If Ishvara is permanent, that which is permanen t would have no beginning. By the same token, 
whatever is produced by Ishvara would also have  no beginning. If the cause has no beginning, 
likewise, the result would also have no beginning.  
 
Since Ishvara is the cause and he has no beginning , then the sprout that he  produces today has 
no beginning as well. If that is  the case, you cannot say that the sprout is being produced today. 
(Verse 122: If the cause does not have a beginning,/How  could there be a beginning of results?) 
 
If you assert that Ishvara, who is a permanent enti ty, can produce results, then it would always be 
producing. There would not be a time wh en  production ceases. (Verse 123: Why would they not 
always function?) 
 
The non-Buddhists say :  
It is untrue that the creator god, Ishvara, woul d always be producing results. He only produces 
results occasionally when all the necessary conditions are present. 
 
Response from Prasangika:   
You said earlier that Ishvara, the creator god, is permanent, unitary and independent of other 
factors. He can create whatever he wishes. Now you are saying that Ishvara creates things by 
depending on the coming together of  conditio ns. This means he does not have the power and 
has no control over the causes since he needs to depend on conditions for the production of an 
effect.  
 This contradicts your belief that Ishvara is inde pendent. If things can be produced simply by 
conditions coming together, then ther e is no need for a creator god.  
 For example, the hell realms are supposedly crea ted by Ishvara. The non-Buddhists agree that 
there are hell realms but assert that Ishvara has no wi sh for their existence. If  that is the case, this 
means Ishvara is not completely independent as he has no control over certain things and is 
subjected  to the control of other factors. 
 
The non-Buddhists say:  
The hells and all phenomena are created by Ishvara due to his desire. 
  
Response from Prasangika:
 
If things are created due to his desire, this goes  against the principle that your creator god is 
independent as he is subject to his own wishes. If the hells and all sufferings are created by 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
464  
Ishvara, then no one would like to be in hell as they have to suffer when they go there. Then, 
Ishvara is not a holy being as he has created he ll. How can he subject people to suffering when 
people do not like suffering (Ver ses 123, 124 and 125)? In some commentaries, the last line of 
verse 125, reads as In dependence on desire, what would become of holy Ishvara?  This means he is 
actually not holy as he is subjecting peop le to sufferings which they wish to avoid. 
Lesson 82   Chapter IX - verse 126-137 
D The way to train in wisdom- the nature of insight 
a. Explaining the chapter’s material 
1) Teaching that one who wants to attain liberation must develop the wisdom realizing suchness 
2) The methods by which one develops the wisdom realizing suchness 
a) A presentation of the two truths 
b) Establishing that even someone who wants to attain mere liberation must realize 
emptiness 
c) An extensive explanation of the reasoning establishing emptiness 
i) The reasoning that establishes the selflessness of persons 
ii) An extensive explanation of the reasoning that establishes the selflessness of 
phenomena 
1’ Explaining the selflessness of phenom ena by means of the four placements of 
mindfulness 2’ Rejecting the dispute that the two truths would be invalid 3’ Stating the syllogism that acts to establish selflessness 
a’ The vajra vision syllogism 
1’’ Refuting causeless production 2’’ Refuting production from another permanent cause 
3’’ Refuting production from a permanent principle 
a’’ Stating the position 
b’’ Repudiating that 
(1) The actual [repudiation] 
(a) Refuting that the principle is a partless, permanent 
expression of nature 
(b) Refuting that it is permanent 
(c) Refuting the impossibility of producing anew an 
effect that was not previously existent 
(2) These faults are not uniform amongst Madhyamakas 
4’’ A synopsis of the refutation of causelessness 
5’’ Refuting production from both self and other 
b’ The syllogism of interdependence 
c’ The syllogism of existence and non-existence, production and cessation 
3) Instructions on making effort to de velop that [realization of emptiness] 
b The chapter’s name 
 
Dependent Arising - A Praise of the Buddha  
34 
Ah! Your teachings! Those whose ears they fall upon will all find peace. 
Who therefore would not hold them dear? 
 
35 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
465  
Across their breadth, no contradiction; 
opponents’ arguments all destroyed— fulfilling the two aims of living beings. 
My joy in these teachi ngs grows and grows. 
 
These two verses express respect for the Buddha’ s teachings, showing why we should cherish 
them dearly in our hearts through remembering the kindness of the great teacher, Shakyamuni 
Buddha.   
In this context, the teachings  refer to the scriptural teachings wh ich, when heard by those desiring 
liberation, will confer everlasting peace, the paci fication of all sufferings and difficulties and the 
fulfilment of their purpose.   Because of this reason, Who therefore would not hold dear this teaching ?  
 
For those desiring liberation, they will know co rrectly what is to be abandoned and cultivated, 
enabling them to train purely in ethics. Once this is achieved, they  will be able to engage in the 
practice of concentration and on the basis of th at practice, they can ge nerate the meditative 
stabilisation which is the union of calm abidin g and special insight focussing on emptiness. 
When they realise the empty nature of all phenom ena, they will be able to achieve everlasting 
happiness. This is the potential or  power that can be found in and the quality of happiness that 
can be achieved from practising the teachings of the Buddha, making th em worthy objects for 
our faith and respect.   The Buddha’s teachings are able to destroy all forms of wrong conception and incorrect 
understanding of phenomena in the minds of th ose who do not subscribe to the teachings. 
There is no internal contradiction in any of the presentation of the different topics, allowing us 
to posit properly earlier and later subject matters and the lower and higher stages of the teachings 
at the correct places without any problems or difficulties.   The teachings are able to confer upon those desi ring liberation good rebirths either as human 
beings or gods and the ability to achieve the state of liberation.  In these verses, Je Rinpoche (Lama Tsongkhapa) de scribes how his joy grows and grows in seeing  
these special characteristics and the power and potential of the teachings of the Buddha.  
 To emulate Je Rinpoche’s example and to expe rience increasing joy whenever we read the 
teachings of the Buddha, we have to know what those teachings really ar e. This can only be 
achieved through studying and reflecting on all aspects, not just a portion, of the 
Buddhadharma. Through such a pplication, then, every time we study and reflect on the 
teachings, that will only serve to increase  our joy and enthusiasm to practise them. 
 Je Rinpoche is pointing out that joy and enth usiasm for the Buddhadharma can only come from 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
466  
thoroughly studying and contemplating all aspects of the teachings.  He himself had studied both 
sutra and tantra, the tenets and the teachings pert aining to the Three Scopes. Having done this, 
he can see how the Buddhadharma is really a cut ab ove all other instructions. That is the source 
of his joy and enthusiasm.  
 Our problem is that we do not study and analys e to gain an overall understanding of all the 
aspects of the teachings, focussing instead on a small portion of the teachings. What are the 
consequences of this narrow approach? For exam ple, a person inclined only towards Hinayana 
teachings will not investigate or study the Mahaya na teachings and will question their validity.  
There are also those who claim to be Mahayanist s but they have little knowledge of the Hinayana 
teachings. They also look down on the Hinayanists and criticise th eir teachings.  There are still 
others who are only interested in sutric teaching s and criticise and question the validity of the 
Buddha’s tantric teachings. All these problems come  about due to the failure to have a full and 
correct understanding of all aspects of the Buddhadharma. 
 
c" Applying mindfulness once the refutation of particles as permanent, causeless [phenomena] 
has been explained 
(9,126)  
Those propounding permanent subtle particles, 
They too were already turned away before. 
 
There are many non-Buddhist Indian philosophical traditions with their own assertions. One of 
them is known as the Vaisheshika who asse rt that the world was formed from the 
conglomeration of  permanent subtle particles of the four elements.  Living beings then followed 
which means these subtle particles created th e world and its inhabitants, which are also 
permanent.  
 These assertions can be refuted with the same reasoning used in the refutation of partless 
particles where we established it is impossible for directionally partless particles to come together 
to form a larger object.  
 
3” Refuting production from a permanent principle (primal substance ) 
a” Stating the position 
(9,126) 
The Samkhyas assert a pe rmanent Primal Substance 
Is the cause of migrating beings. 
 
(9,127) 
The qualities of that called “lightness, 
Motility, and darkness” abiding in balance 
Are finely expressed to be that called “the Primal Substance.” 
The unbalanced are said to be going. 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
467  
 
The Samkhyas assert a permanent entity known as  the primal substance which is responsible for 
the creation of the varieties of phenomena.   
 
The primal substance is said to have six features:- 
• It is the creator of all effects. 
• It is permanent. 
• It is unitary and partless. 
• It is not mind. 
• It pervades the environment and its inhabitants. 
• It has three characteristics (lightness, motility and darkness) 
The three characteristics are always  in balance. Lightness is syno nymous with happiness, motility 
with suffering and darkness with equanimity. When these three characteristics are in balance, it 
is called the principle or primal substance. When  these three characteristics are imbalanced, then 
it is called the effect.  
 
The primal substance itself has neither shape no r colour nor any measure to it. Its nature is 
unclear, i.e., it is not clarifying. We may relate the idea of the primal substance to the behaviour 
of human beings. When a person’s happiness and suffering are balanced, then he will behave 
well and be pleasant and good-hearted. But wh en his happiness and suffering are imbalanced, 
then he will display more negative behaviour.  
 The Samkhyas have their reason for making thes e assertions. I remember reading from one text 
that the Samkhyas assert th at when we meet another hu man being, the thought will 
spontaneously arise, “This is a human being.” We  do not need to analyse to arrive at this 
conclusion. To the Samkhyas, this is because th e primal substance, being unitary and partless, 
abides in and pervades all phenomena.  
b” Repudiating that 
(1) The actual [repudiation] 
(a) Refuting that the principle is a partless, permanent expression of nature 
 
(9,128) 
Since the three natures are not suitable 
In a unity, it does not exist. 
Likewise, the qualities do not exist 
Because they too are three individual aspects. 
 
(9,129) 
If the qualities do not exis t, also the existence of 
Sound and so forth becomes extremely farfetched. 
That with respect to the mi ndless, cloth and so forth, 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
468  
Happiness and so forth exist is also not possible. 
 
(9,130) 
“Those things are the nature of causes.” 
Have things not already been thoroughly analyzed? 
For you also the causes ar e happiness and so forth, 
But woollen blankets and so fo rth do not arise from them. 
 
(9,131) 
From woollen blankets there is happiness and so forth. 
Because they do not exist, happine ss and so forth do not exist. 
 
Prasangika does not accept the Sa mkhyas’ assertion that  the primal  substance is characterised by 
lightness, motility and darkness.  
 
The position of Prasangika: 
The assertion that the primal substance is unit ary and partless means it cannot bear the three 
characteristics of lightness, motility and darkne ss. The primal substance cannot possibly exist. 
Since for you the primal substance is the cause, then its effects ar e also non-existent. There is no 
way then that objects such as form, sound, smell, taste and touch can be produced in 
dependence on the primal substance. 
 There are things that are atomic ally established such as matter and non-mind, for example, a 
piece of cloth. Since the Samkhyas  assert that the primal substanc e pervades all phenomena, this 
means it will necessarily pervade that piece of clot h which, in turn, suggests that the cloth will be 
pervaded by happiness. Then we have to say th at the cloth is mind which is ridiculous.  
 
Response from the Samkhyas 
We concede that the piece of cloth is not happi ness and is not mind. Nevertheless, there is no 
fault in saying that the piece of cloth is inhe rently produced by the primal substance, which 
entity is the equilibrium of the three characteristics.  
 
Reply from Prasangika: 
We have already refuted the existence of inhe rent production. If something is produced 
inherently, when we look for the imputed object, it  should be findable but this is not the case.  
 
We need to understand this discussion between  the Samkhyas and Prasangika because we need 
to know how their assertions are refuted with logic and reasoning. I am going through this 
material for the benefit of those who would like to  read further on this subject in the future.   
 
(b) Refuting that it is permanent 
(9,131) 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
469  
Happiness and so forth have never 
Been observed to be permanent. 
 
(9,132) 
If happiness and so forth visibly exist, 
Why is the experience not apprehended? 
You say “They become subtle,” 
But how are they coar se and also subtle? 
 
(9,133) 
Since having given up being coarse, they become subtle, 
Those coarse and subtle are just impermanent. 
Likewise, why do you not assert 
All things to be impermanent? 
 
(9,134)  
If the coarse is not other than happiness, 
Happiness is clearly impermanent. 
 
The Samkhyas assert that the en tity of the primal substance,  which is permanent, is the 
equilibrium of happiness, suffering and equanimity.  
 Rebuttal from Prasangika: 
The primal substance does not exis t. If it exists, it has to be apprehended by a valid cognition. 
(Verse 131: Happiness and so forth have never been observed to be permanent.) If happiness is 
permanent, then it would always be observed by a valid cognition but happiness only arises 
occasionally. If happiness is permanent then, when we are experiencing suffering, why is it that 
happiness is no longer observable?   
Response from the Samkhyas: 
There is happiness even when we are suffering. It is  just that we do not experience it because due 
to the suffering, the happiness becomes subtler.  
 
Rebuttal by Prasangika: 
If happiness is permanent, how can it become subtler? How can it become coarser?  Since 
happiness can change as it sometimes becomes co arser and sometimes it becomes subtler, this 
means happiness is, by nature,  impermanent. As  happiness is impermanent and is one of the 
characteristics of the primal substa nce, this means that the entity of the primal substance is also 
impermanent. Therefore, we can assert that happiness is impermanent and that all composed 
phenomena are impermanent. 
 
(c) Refuting the impossibility of producing anew an effect was not previously existent 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
470  
 
(9,134) 
When asserting “That which does not exist whatsoever 
Is not produced becaus e it does not exist,” 
 
(9,135) 
Although you do not assert that 
The visibly non-existent is  produced, it does abide. 
But if the result abides in the cause, 
To eat food would be to eat excrement. 
 
(9,136) 
You should wear cotton seeds 
With the price of cotton. 
You say “Due to ignorance the world does not see,” 
But those who know reality posit it. 
 
(9, 137) 
Why do those knowing reality 
Who exist in the world also not see it? 
If you say “The world’s are not valid cognizers,” 
Also that which is clearly seen would not be true. 
 
The Samkhyas assert that if it is produced, the produced phenomena necessarily exist at the 
causal stage, i.e., the result must exist at the time  of the cause. For them, if the result did not exist 
at the time of the cause, then it would be impossi ble to posit that that effect arises from that 
cause. If the result did  not exist at the time of the cause, then it would be possible for butter to 
arise from sand.  For example, to the Samkhyas, the sprout has to ex ist at the time of the cause, the seed. To the 
Samkhyas, one can say, “the sprout is produced” when the sprout becomes the object of the eye 
consciousness.  
Rebuttal by Prasangika: 
You say, “the sprout is produced” when the spro ut becomes the object of the eye consciousness. 
In actuality, you are saying that the sprout (which is the object of the eye consciousness 
perceiving it) did not exist at the time of the cause. 
 You assert that effects (or results) are simu ltaneous with their causes, meaning they are 
inseparable from the causes. If this is so, then ea ting food will be the same as eating excrement. 
This is because excrement is the result of having co nsumed food. If the result exists at the time of 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
471  
the cause, then we do not need to wear clothes made from cotton as buying cotton seeds to wear 
will be sufficient. 
 
Response from the Samkhyas : 
We worldly beings are confused and therefore unable to see that the result  exists at the time of 
the cause. We cannot see the piece of cloth which is present at the time of the cause, the cotton 
seed. Not knowing that, we do not buy cotton seeds to wear. 
  
Rebuttal from Prasangika : 
But the founder of your tradition, Kapila, whom you say is omniscient, al so do not wear cotton 
seeds!. 
 
The Samkhyas say: 
Worldly beings do not possess the valid cognition t h a t  i s  a b l e  t o  p e r c e i v e  c a u s e s  a n d  e f f e c t s  
correctly. They are unable to realise and therefore cannot see that the result exists at the time of 
the cause.   
 
Rebuttal by Prasangika: 
If that is so, how about the validity of the mi nds of those worldly people who see the sprout 
arising from the seed? Our position  is that worldly people are  ab le to see and realise that the 
sprout comes from the seed. That being the case, your assertion that worldly people do not have 
the ability to perceive cause and effect is incorrect. 
 
The purpose of the above exchange is to establ ish that composed phenomena (things or events 
that arise from causes and cond itions) are necessarily impermanent. Three things are established 
here:- 
 
An effect cannot arise without a cause. There is no such thing as causeless production. 
An effect cannot arise from a permanent cause. 
An effect cannot arise from a disc ordant cause, i.e., an effect has to arise from a concordant 
cause. 
 
Because composed phenomena arise from causes an d conditions, it has to undergone change and 
their entity is necessarily impermanent. Therefor e, cause and effect are not inherently existent 
but are of substantially different entities. This me ans that, at the time of  the cause, the effect 
does not exist. At the time of the effect, the cause does not exist.  
 There are many benefits that ca n be derived from the above di scussion. There are many wrong 
views which do not accord with reality being asse rted by our  opponents. We have refuted all 
their assertions through analysis, logic and reasoning.   
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
472  
We can establish that all composed phenom ena are necessarily impermanent and undergo 
change. Also, phenomena are produced by their re spective causes. Having established that, this 
does not mean that the production of compos ed phenomena happens inherently. We do not 
accept inherent production. If something is inhere ntly produced, it has to be produced by one of 
four possibilities:- 
1) It is produced from itself     
2) It is produced from other   
3) It is produced from both itself and other   
4) It is produced without a cause  
 If a composed phenomena is not produced by an y of the above four possibilities, then its 
production is not inherently existent. This anal ysis  establishes that there is no inherent 
production.  
Lesson 83   Chapter IX - verse 138-142 
D The way to train in wisdom- the nature of insight 
a. Explaining the chapter’s material 
1) Teaching that one who wants to attain liberation must develop the wisdom realizing suchness 
2) The methods by which one develops the wisdom realizing suchness 
a) A presentation of the two truths 
b) Establishing that even someone who wants to attain mere liberation must realize 
emptiness 
c) An extensive explanation of the reasoning establishing emptiness 
i) The reasoning that establishes the selflessness of persons ii) An extensive explanation of the reasoning that establishes the selflessness of 
phenomena 
1’ Explaining the selflessness of phenom ena by means of the four placements of 
mindfulness 2’ Rejecting the dispute that the two truths would be invalid 
3’ Stating the syllogism that acts to establish selflessness 
a’ The vajra vision syllogism 
1’’ Refuting causeless production 2’’ Refuting production from another permanent cause 3’’ Refuting production from a permanent principle 
a’’ Stating the position b’’ Repudiating that 
(1) The actual [repudiation] 
(2) These faults are not uniform amongst Madhyamakas 
4’’ A synopsis of the refutation of causelessness 
5’’ Refuting production from both self and other 
b’ The syllogism of interdependence 
c’ The syllogism of existence and non-existence, production and cessation 
3) Instructions on making effort to de velop that [realization of emptiness] 
b The chapter’s name 
 
Dependent Arising - A Praise of the Buddha’  
36 
For this knowledge you gave away - 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
473  
over countless eons  again and again - 
your loved ones, your possessions, 
sometimes your body, ot her times your life. 
 
This verse refers to how the Buddha engaged in the practice of austerities – giving away his 
possessions, sometimes his body and even his life ma ny times  - over a long period of time for the 
sake of understanding, learning and practising th e Dharma in order to understand the nature of 
reality, dependent origination and finally to  achieve the state of full enlightenment. 
 The Buddha wanted to achieve enlightenment fo r the benefit of destitute suffering sentient 
beings so we should understand that the Buddha made these sacrifices for us. Therefore, from 
our side, we have to try our best. There are many accounts of the Buddha practising the 
austerities in the sutras. In one of the Buddha’s past lives, when he was training to achieve 
enlightenment, he was born as a prince and na med as “The All Liberated One.” Because of his 
wealth, he was able to give everything to ev eryone and became renowned for his generosity. 
People would come to ask for things and he was always able to fulfil their wishes. One day, as he rode in his jewelled chariot to a park, a Brahmin as ked him   for his chariot. He agreed and made 
a dedication prayer that may his act of giving  become a cause for him to  achieve enlightenment. 
Later, on another day, the prince rode on his elephant on his way to the park. Again, he was 
approached by a Brahmin who asked him for the elephant. The prince gave away the elephant 
and again made the same dedication prayer.    The king was furious when he heard about the pr ince giving away his chariot and elephant and 
wanted to banish the prince. The prince told the king: “I am unable to reject any request when 
someone asks me for something. Since this is the case, I have decided to go  to the forest and stay 
there.” The prince told his wife of his decision to leave the kingdom. His wife told him: “There is no way I can live without you. I will follow you in to isolation.” The prince tried to dissuade his 
wife from following him but she insisted. However,  he warned her, “I will not change my ways. 
Even in isolation, I will still practise giving  when asked for anything. So do not regret your 
decision to follow me. You must keep your promise.”   
 
The prince and his wife then went to see th e king, prostrated to him and asked for his 
forgiveness. The prince admitted he was wrong to give away the chariot and elephant and told his 
father of his decision to leave and live in isolation.  The king was upset and told him: “You can 
r e m a i n  h e r e  a s  l o n g  a s  y o u  d o n ’ t  g i v e  a w a y  y o u r  t h i n g s . ”  T h e  p r i n c e  r e f u s e d  t o  g i v e  u p  h i s  
practise of generosity. He left the kingdom with his wife, son and daughter in a chariot followed by a large entourage. The prince  told them not to follow him and so they returned to their 
families. On their way to the forest, the prince  and his family encountered another Brahmin who 
asked for his chariot. Again, the prince gave this away without hesitation, making his usual 
dedication prayer. The prince and his wife then  carried their children on their shoulders and 
proceeded on their way to the forest.  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
474  
 
One day, while living in the forest, his wife went  to look for food.  A Brahmin came and told the 
prince; “I don't have a servant and I need a servan t. Why don't you give me your children to be 
my servants?” The prince replied: “If I were to give you my children, some people might  think 
that I do not love them. So rather than giving them  to you, I will go with you as a servant. Please 
take me.” The Brahmin told the prince: “You ar e reputed to be someone who always fulfils the 
wishes of all living beings; you should also fulfil  my wish. You must  give me your children.” On 
hearing this, the prince decided from the depths of his heart, to give his children to the Brahmin.  
 
At that very moment, due to the tremendous meri t generated by his heartfelt decision, the earth 
began to shake. At that time, there were many  other Brahmins and meditators living in the 
forest, some of whom had clairvoyant powers. Wh en the earth shook, one of the clairvoyant ones 
saw that the shaking of the ea rth was due to the prince’s wh ole-hearted commitment to the 
practice of giving and his decision to give away his children. 
 
When the children heard about their father’s de cision, with folded palms, they requested: 
“Before you give us away to the Brahmin, please le t us see our mother one last time.” The prince 
cried and hugged his children and told them: “I am giving you both away not because I do not 
love you. I am doing this for the benefit of a ll sentient beings.” The children saw that their 
father’s mind was made up. So they both bowed to  him requesting him to forgive all the mistakes 
they had made due to their youth and to relay th eir apologies y to their mother. With tears in 
their eyes, they made three prostrations and ci rcumambulated their father three times. They 
walked away gazing at their father as they left . The prince was very sad but his mind was also 
filled with compassion. As usual, he dedicated his act of giving  towards achieving enlightenment.  
 The earth shook again when the children left and th ere were strange displays of light in the sky. 
When the earth shook, the children’s mother wa s still away gathering food. She became afraid 
and quickly hurried to return to her family. One of the worldly gods saw this and knew that if 
she were to arrive too soon, she would be an obst acle to the prince’s practice of generosity. The 
worldly god therefore manifested as  a lioness and blocked her way. The princess told the lioness, 
“You are the queen of animals and I am the queen  of human beings. Since we are both equal, 
you should not block my way.” In her mind, sh e saw the encounter with the lioness as an 
inauspicious sign, suspecting that her husband must have given the children away. She felt 
troubled and hurried on her way. When she saw her husband, she asked: “Where are the 
children?” The prince replied: “I have given them away because a Brahmin requested for them. 
You should rejoice. ” The princess was very dist raught when she heard this and decided to go 
after the children, by following the trail of  their footprints. When  she saw the muddied 
footprints, she became even more tormented thinking, “Oh no. That Brahmin must have 
dragged my children away.” The prince comforte d his wife by reminding her of impermanence 
and explaining that he had given the children aw ay, not because he did not love them but he did 
so for the benefit of sentient beings. He told her that that act of giving would become a cause for 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
475  
him to achieve enlightenment. The princess unders tood and told her husband that he must not 
allow her to obstruct his practice of giving; that  the prince may give her away if someone were to 
request for her.  
 
In order to test her sincerity, Indra, the king of the worldly gods manifested as a Brahmin and 
asked the prince for his wife. The prince agreed. The princess was saddened by this and asked herself: “What had I done in the past, what karma had I created to experience all this and to be 
separated from my children?” Indra then reve aled himself to her and asked, “What do you 
actually want?” She told him: “I wish that my children may be freed from the suffering and 
bondage of slavery and returned to me.” Indra granted her wish and reunited the princess with 
her children.   This is as far as I have read so I do not know the rest of the story. I am not sure what happened after that.  This story is related to the verse we discussed. Reading such accounts of the Buddha’s 
activities in the past is inspiring, encouragin g and beneficial for our minds. Sometimes, the 
stories seem quite incredible.  When we compare our generosity wi th the Buddha’s practice of giving, we find even the smallest 
act of giving difficult or we make a great deal of fuss when we do give something away and it is really difficult to give away something completely from our hearts. Our giving is often impure and tainted with self cherishing or attachment.  Our main goal is focussed not on giving things 
away but on accumulating more wealth and possessions.   We have listened to enough teachings to know better but our main goal in life is still to 
accumulate things. When we die, we have to leave everything behind as they are of no use to us 
and they become the enjoyments of others. But in  the process of accumulating these possessions, 
we had accumulated a lot of negative karma. Most of us are like that. 
 After spending our whole life working so hard to accumulate wealth and possessions, when the 
time comes to enjoy the fruits of our labour, it is also the time for us do die. When we die, everything will be given away to be used by others. This happens to many people.   Therefore it is important that we look at the life stories of the Buddha. When our minds are 
unhappy or tormented by desire and attachment, we should reflect on death and impermanence. 
By doing this, we will have fewer expectations an d experience less mental unhappiness, desire or 
attachment. When we have less de sire and attachment in our lives, we will have less suffering.  
 
We should emulate the Buddha’s practice of giving .  Of course, at the present time, to give away 
everything is difficult for us but we can give at  a level commensurate with our financial situation. 
For example, we can help the centre financially in whatever small way we can, remembering we 
are supporting the Dharma or give to the poor with a pure, happy mind.  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
476  
 
We will always need an organisation with faciliti es and all the right conditions in order for the 
pure teachings of the Buddha to survive, to be  preserved and disseminated in the world. An 
individual cannot do all this so people will have to come together and do this important work to 
benefit people in an organized way.   So it will be very good if people can help the centre, which 
clearly does not exist to make money, rememb ering the hardships the Buddha endured in order 
to benefit us all. 
 
(2) These faults are not uniform against Madhyamakas 
 
(9,138) 
"If valid cognizers are not valid, 
Is that understood by them not false? 
Meditation on emptiness with respect to reality 
Would, because of th at, be incorrect." 
 
(9,139) 
Without contacting the thing that is investigated 
The non-thingness of that will not be apprehended. 
Therefore, it is any thing that is false. 
The non-thingness of that is clearly false. 
 
(9,140) 
Therefore, regarding a son who dies in a dream, 
The projection thinking "He is no more," 
Blocks the projection that he exists; 
But that too is false. 
 
Objection from the non-Buddhists :  
If you, Prasangika, dispute the validity of the vali d cognizer, this means it must be a falsity. Since 
that is so, then the object of that valid cognition would also have to be a falsity, which means that 
the meditation on emptiness will be mistaken  (or erroneous). In other words, these non-
Buddhists are asserting that both the valid cognizer  and the object that is being cognised by that 
valid cognition cannot be false. To them, if the vali d cognizer is false, then its object would also 
be false which would mean that the medi tation on emptiness is also false.  
 Reply from Prasangika :  
This appears in verse 139. There is nothing wrong in asserting that both the valid cognizer which 
realises emptiness and its object, emptiness, are false.  
 
The thing that is investigated refers to the object of negation, i.e., the true ex istence that is 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
477  
superimposed by the mind grasping at it.   
 
Without contacting means that the object of negation is no t showing itself to the mind due to our 
failure to understand what is being negated and the absence therefore of a mental image of our 
object of negation. If something exists truly, th ere must be an understanding and  mental image 
of that object.  
 
The non-thingness of that  will not be apprehended  refers to our not understanding the meaning of 
emptiness of true existence, i.e., th e negation of true existence.    
 
In other words, to ascertain the emptiness of true  existence, we must first have an understanding 
of the nature of the object of negation which, in this instance, refers to true existence.   
 
Since the object of negation is false, therefore true existence does not exist: Therefore, it is any 
thing that is false  (line 3).   If the object of negation is false, it follows then that true existence itself 
is false: The non-thingness of that is also false  (line 4). That which is the negation of true existence is 
also false. 
 Prasangika says that everything, in cluding emptiness, is false. We need to understand why this is 
so. All phenomena including emptiness exist conv entionally. All phenomena are false because all 
phenomena do not exist from their own side bu t are merely labelled by conceptuality (merely 
labelled by the mind).   If something exists from its own side and is not merely labelled by force of conceptuality, then 
that thing must be true (or truly and ultimately existent).   The question then arises: If emptiness and the vali d cognizer ascertaining it are false, how about 
the validity of the entire presentation of wh at is to be abandoned and their antidotes? 
 The answer is “It is still valid.”  For example, a parent who dreams that his child has died thinks, 
“Now my child is no longer with me.” This thought interferes wi th another thought in his dream 
that thinks, “I have a child.” Both these though ts are false as both of them appeared in the 
dream. Nevertheless, both thoughts  can interfere with one another. 
 Through this analogy, it helps us to understand Prasangika’ assertion that the presentation of the 
objects of abandonment and their antidotes rema in valid even though emptiness and the valid 
cognition that realises emptiness are false. Therefor e, it is still correct to meditate on emptiness. 
 
4" A synopsis of the refutation of causelessness 
 
(9,141) 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
478  
Therefore, by thorough analysis in this way, 
Nothing exists without a cause. 
 
5" Refuting production from both self and other 
 
(9,141cd) 
Conditions also do not abide, 
Whether individual or gathered together. 
 
(9,142) 
Also, not coming from something else, 
They do not abide, they do not go. 
 
These verses deal with the refutation of producti o n  f r o m  t h e  f o u r  p o s s i b i l i t i e s .   I n  r e a l i t y ,  a l l  
phenomena do not exist inherently. If phenomen a exist inherently, then they have to be 
produced from one of the four possibilities.  When we ascertain that phenomena are not 
produced from any of these four possibilities , the conclusion is that phenomena cannot be 
inherently produced and therefore cannot inherently exist. We will  look into this in the next 
lesson. 
Lesson 84   Chapter IX - verse 142-150 
D The way to train in wisdom- the nature of insight 
a. Explaining the chapter’s material 
1) Teaching that one who wants to attain liberation must develop the wisdom realizing suchness 
2) The methods by which one develops the wisdom realizing suchness 
a) A presentation of the two truths 
b) Establishing that even someone who wants to attain mere liberation must realize 
emptiness 
c) An extensive explanation of the reasoning establishing emptiness 
i) The reasoning that establishes the selflessness of persons 
ii) An extensive explanation of the reasoning that establishes the selflessness of 
phenomena 
1’ Explaining the selflessness of phenom ena by means of the four placements of 
mindfulness 2’ Rejecting the dispute that the two truths would be invalid 3’ Stating the syllogism that acts to establish selflessness 
a’ The vajra vision syllogism 
1" Refuting causeless production 
2" Refuting production from another permanent cause 
3" Refuting production from a permanent principle 4" A synopsis of the refutation of causelessness 
5" Refuting production from both self and other 
b’ The syllogism of interdependence 
c’ The syllogism of existence and non-existence, production and cessation 
1’’ Establishing the syllogism refuting inherently established production 
2’’ That stops inherently established cessation 
3’’ And thus, conditioned existence and peace are established in equality 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
479  
3) Instructions on making effort to de velop that [realization of emptiness] 
b The chapter’s name 
 
Dependent Arising - A Praise of the Buddha’  
37 
Seeing such qualities I am drawn by your mind like a fish on the hook, 
Not hearing your Dharma from you in person, 
such misfortune!  38 
By the pain of such sorrow,  
my mind will never give you up,  like the mind of a mother  for her precious child. 
 
39 
And yet as I think on your words, hearing you talk of this and that, 
teacher with a voice melodic as Brahma, 
resplendent with features of perfection , encircled by garlands of light, 
your enlightened form reflects in my mind, 
like the cool light of the moon, me dicine for my feverish torment. 
 Je Rinpoche is expressing in these verses hi s regret and sorrow in not having received the 
teachings directly from the Buddha himself, espe cially his teachings on dependent origination. 
By understanding these teachings, one can see the possibility of achieving liberation and 
enlightenment. Naturally, one would be drawn to su ch teachings like a fish to bait. The depth of 
s o r r o w  h e  f e e l s  i s  l i k e n e d  b y  J e  R i n p o c h e  t o  t h a t  o f  a  m o t h e r  g r i e v i n g  o v e r  t h e  l o s s  o f  h e r  precious child.   E v e n  s o ,  L a m a  T s o n g k h a p a  d e c l a r e s  t h a t  h e  w i l l  n e v e r  g i v e  u p  t h e  B u d d h a  a s  a  t e a c h e r .  H i s  
feverish torment  is pacified when he reflects on how he has met and reflected on the Buddha’s 
teachings, especially those on dependent originatio n. He recalls the historical account and brings 
to his mind the image of the Buddha teaching, with a melodious voice, the Perfection of Wisdom 
Sutra  at Vultures Peak in Rajagriha to the assemb ly of fully ordained monks and disciples.  
 
We can learn from Je Rinpoche’s example.  In our lives, we cannot be happy all the time. There 
will be bad days and good days. In the context of  our studies here, it is possible that sometimes 
we feel discouraged while at other times, we feel  quite happy when our studies are going well. We 
need to know how to think accord ing to the time and situation. 
 
We need to uplift our minds when we are disc ouraged and feeling down. The important thing is 
our mental perspective.  When we are physically sick, we can rely on a doctor and medicine to 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
480  
recover. But seeing a doctor will not help us to overcome mental difficulties. Mental hardships 
can only be overcome with a change in mental outlook and be removed at the level of the mind. 
When we adopt a different mental perspective, our view of things can change immediately.  
 
With physical sickness, sometimes we need to de pend on medical treatments over a long period 
of time. However, with respect to mental unhappine ss, anxiety or stress, if we know how to think 
and change our perspective, there and then our mental unhappiness will go away. Usually, this 
does not take a long time if we practise and put some effort into changing our perspective.  
5” Refuting production from both self and other 
 
In this section, the emptiness of phenom ena are established through analysing the entity and 
nature of the causes  that bring about impermanent phen omena by using the vajra vision 
syllogism (or diamond splinters’ argument). The syllogism is being used to establish that 
composed phenomena are not inherently produced. If something is inherently produced, it has 
to be produced from one of the four possibili ties. Once we prove that phenomena  are not 
produced from these four possibilities, th en they cannot be inherently produced. 
 
Only Prasangika refutes inherent production. All the other Buddhist tenets assert that composed 
phenomena are inherently produced. Why is this so?   
 Because for them, things must be inherently  produced because they are created.   
 There are two options to proving that somethin g is inherently produced: either (1) it is 
inherently produced from a cause or (2) it is inherently produced without a cause.  If a composed phenomenon is inherently pr oduced from a cause, then there are three 
possibilities:- 1) It is produced from itself     
2) It is produced from other   
3) It is produced from both itself and other   
 Combining these three possibilities with the possibility that composed phenomena can be 
produced without a cause, there are four possi bilities. If a composed phenomenon is not 
produced from one of these four possibiliti es, then it cannot be inherently produced. 
 Let us examine the possibility of production from itself . That would mean that cause and effect 
will be one and not different since they are of th e same entity. How then could we posit which is 
the producer and which is the product produced ? Such a line of reasoning is stated in 
Nagarjuna’s Fundamental Wisdom.  
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
481  
We had earlier refuted that it is impossible for th e sprout to exist at th e time of the seed as 
asserted by the non-Buddhists. They assert that the result exists at the time of the cause in a non-
manifest manner, e.g., the sprout exists at the time of the seed in this non-manifest way.  
 
If the sprout is a single entity with the seed, then  at the time when the seed existed, we have to 
say that the sprout was also in existence. If the sprout existed at the time of the seed, then there 
would be no need for it to be produced at a later time. Such production would be meaningless 
since it has already been produced and need not be produced again.  Now, let us examine the second possibility: production from a cause that is other , i.e., it must be 
inherently produced from a cause that is of a diffe rent entity from its result. This is the assertion 
of all the schools below Prasangika.   Such production means that an effect which is es tablished by way of its own character arises from 
a cause which is also established by way of its own character, i.e., an inhere nt cause giving rise to 
an inherent effect.  A sprout and the seed it comes from are very di fferent. Prasangika assert that the sprout is 
produced from the seed but it does not, unli ke the lower schools, assert the sprout is inherently  
produced from the seed.   What is the fallacy in asserting such inherent pr oduction? If both the cause and the effect exist 
inherently, then there is no relationship of de pendence between them. How then can the effect 
arise from its cause?   Nevertheless, the proponents of this position insist that this is possible; that it is possible for an 
inherent effect to arise from an inherent cause. If  this is the case, then a single cause can produce 
every kind of results and light can be produced from darkness. 
 
Since we have proved that effects cannot be produced from itself and from other, then the third possibility, i.e., production from a combination of itself and other is also disproved.    
 If composed phenomena are not inherently produced  from a cause, can it be produced without a 
cause? This is obviously impossibl e although some non-Buddhists, known as Nihilists, assert this. 
T h e y  a s s e r t  t h a t  t h i n g s  c a n  b e  p r o d u c e d  f r o m  n o t h i n g .  I f  t h a t  i s  s o ,  t h e n  e v e r y t h i n g  c a n  b e  produced from anything. This assertion can be h a r m e d  b y  o r d i n a r y  p e r c e p t i o n  a s  w e  c a n  s e e  
people putting in the effort and striving to achieve different goals.   We are establishing that composed phenomena do not exist inherently  as they are not 
inherently produced  since they are not produced from any of the four possibilities. Since 
production from the four possibilities has b een refuted, we can conclude that inherent 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
482  
production is impossible. 
 
Question from student: Do the other tenet systems accept Prasangika’ definition of inherent 
existence? 
Answer: Prasangika does not assert that phenomena ex ist inherently, as asserted by the schools 
below it. What is the measure of inherent exis tence? It means that th e imputed object, when 
sought, is findable.  This is also the assertion of th e lower schools.  
 
b’ The syllogism of interdependence 
 
(9, 142 cd) 
How does that which is considered to be true 
By ignorance differ from an illusion? 
 
(9,143) 
Whatever is emanated by an illusionist and 
Whatever is emanated by causes 
Should be investigated as to 
Where they come from and also where they go. 
 
(9,144) 
Whatever is seen due to being close, 
But is not if that does not exist, 
Is similar to a reflection in  a mirror in being fabricated. 
How can it be truly existent? 
 
The appearance of inherently existent phenomena is the superimposition of our grasping at true 
existence; our ignorance grasping at the self of persons and phenomena. Phenomena are like 
illusions created by the illusionist. For   example, the illusory elephant created by the illu sionist has an appearance of an elephant but no 
elephant actually exists. In the same way, phenom ena appear to us as truly existent due to the 
superimposition of our grasping at true existe nce. But, in reality, they are falsities.  
 Whatever is created by an illusionist (e.g., th e illusory elephant) and arises from causes and 
conditions (e.g., form) are the same in that th ey do not exist inherently. If they do exist 
inherently, then we have to analyse: where do they come from and where will they go? From our 
analysis, we will find that they come from no where and do not go anyw here. The appearance of 
the illusory elephant created by the illusionist comes about from the mere aggregation of causes: 
the illusionist, his recitation of mantra and an obje ct that is the basis for the illusory elephant to 
arise. The illusory elephant does not inherently exis t. If we were to say that the illusory elephant 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
483  
is inherently existent, then it must inherently come from somewhere and then inherently go to 
somewhere and that somewhere must be findable, but it cannot be found.  
 
All composed phenomena arise from the mere aggr egation of causes and conditions. There is no 
inherently coming or inherently going. Therefore karma, the second link of the twelve links of 
dependent origination, is not inherently existent  but arises when causes and conditions coming 
together. For example, the sprout will arise when it s cause, its seed, is present. In the same way, 
the link of karma will be activated wh en its cause, ignorance, is present. 85 
 
A syllogism to establish that all composed phenom ena are not inherently existent can read like 
this: The subject, form, is not truly existent be cause it arises in dependence on causes and 
conditions like a reflection in the mirror. Since this is so, form itself is not independent and  
therefore does not exist inherently. 
 
c’ The syllogism of existence and non-existence, production and cessation 
1” Establishing the syllogism refuting inherently established production 
 
(9,145) 
For things that exist, 
What need is there for a cause? 
Also for those that do not exist, 
What need is there for a cause? 
 
(9,146) 
Even by a hundred million causes, 
A non-thing is not transformed. 
How could that state become a thing? 
Also what else would be transformed into a thing? 
 
                                              
85 (142) Since (truly existent phenomena) do not come anew from (somewhere or something) else, in the beginning 
they are not produced, in the middle they do not remain, and in the end they do not go elsewhere upon cessation. 
How, then, are all these things, which under analysis are not established, although they are apprehended as true by 
confused minds, not different from illusions? They appear to be truly existent, whereas in fact they are not. 
4. Establishing that Phenomena Co nventionally Arise from Causes 
(143) Whatever horses and elephants have been made manifest through a (magician's) illusion, and whatever visual 
forms and so forth have been made manifest  by causes and conditions should be examined as to where they first came from, 
where they abide in the meantime and where they go to in the end. Upon examination they will be found to be 
similar in not truly coming and going. 
(144) An effect will only be seen because of its being closely connected with a cause, but without that cause it will 
not be seen. Since it is a product of causes and conditions, it is similar to a reflection in a mirror; so how can it 
have true (independent) existence? (Root text  ,pg. 152-153] 
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
484  
(9,147) 
If, when non-existent, it is no t possible for a thing to exist, 
At what point will a th ing become existent? 
Without a thing being produced, 
It will not become free from non-thingness. 
 
(9,148) 
If it does not become fr ee from non-thingness, 
The state of existent thing is impossible. 
Also a thing does not become non-existent 
Because it would follow as having two natures. 
 
The syllogism of existence and no n-existence, production and cess ation is:  The sprout is not 
inherently produced because it is not inherently produced as an existent sprout and it is not 
inherently produced as a non-existent sprout.  
 If the sprout is produced, it has to be produced as  an existent sprout as it cannot be produced as 
a non-existent sprout.   Those asserting inherent production would have to assert that the sprout is inherently produced 
as an existent sprout. This will be the same as s aying the inherently existent sprout is produced 
from its cause. But an inherently existent sp rout cannot be produced from its cause as an 
inherently existent sprout does not need to depend on any other thing: For things that exist, what 
need is there for a cause ?(Verse 145) 
 Therefore for something to exist, they exist in  dependence on causes and conditions. But it 
would be ridiculous to say that non-existents can arise from causes. For thin gs that do not exist, 
what need are there for causes? Even by a hundred million causes ,/A non-thing is not transformed . 
(Verse 146)   
86 
                                              
86 C. Establishing Emptiness of True Existence from the Point of View of the Effect 
(145) What would be the need of a cause for a thing that (truly) existed? (If it truly existed), it would already exist. 
And what w o u l d  b e  t h e  n e e d  o f  a  c a u s e  f o r  i t  i f  i t  d i d n ’ t  e x i s t  a t  a l l ?  (If it didn't exist), it would not be the effect of 
anything. 
Objection : Although a cause cannot make a non-existent arise into a non-thing, it can change into a thing.  
Reply: This is illogical; (146) even by means of a hundred million causes, a non-thing cannot be transformed into anything 
else because it is permanent. If it were able to change, it would have to do so either while retaining its non-
thingness, or through discarding it. In the former instance, how could it become a thing as long as its condition 
remained unseparated from being a non-thing? And in the second instance, what is there that could (first) separate 
itself from the state of a non-thing and then (proceed) to become a thing? This is an impossibility. (147) Furthermore, if 
the-condition of a non-thing is not discarded, it will be impossible for a thing to exist at the same time. In which case, 
when could a thing  ever come to exist? Also (a further considerat ion should be made) in the case of a non-thing 
becoming a thing upon having first discarded the condition of a non-thing. Without actually becoming a thing, a 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
485  
 
2” That stops inherently established cessation 
 
(9,149) 
In this way, there is no cessation and 
Also things do not exist. Therefore, 
All the migrating beings are 
Always not produced and not ceased. 
 
The vajra vision syllogism establishes that all composed phenomena do not exist inherently. The 
syllogism of existence and non-existence, produc tion and cessation shows how the sprout is not 
inherently produced.  
 From the first moment when phenomena came in to existence, their ex istents did not exist 
inherently as there was no inherently existent pr oduction. Since there is no inherent production, 
when phenomena cease to exist, the cessation of those phenomena cannot exist inherently as 
well. Without inherent production and cessation , those phenomena which have the nature of 
being produced and ceasing cannot exist inherently as well: All the migrating beings are/Always not 
produced and not ceased  (Verse 149). 
87 
 
3” And thus, conditioned existence and peace are established in equality 
 
(9,150) 
Migrating beings ar e like a dream; 
When thoroughly analyzed, they resemble a plantain tree. 
Also passed beyond and not passed beyond sorrow, 
In reality, are not different. 
 
Migrating sentient beings circle in cyclic existence under the powe r of their afflictions and karma, 
as if they were in a dream. In our dreams, all a ppearances seem real but th ey do not exist in the 
way they appear to us.   Likewise, sentient beings appear to be inherently  existent, but they do no t exist in the way they 
appear to us.  
                                                                                                                                                          
 
non-thing cannot be separated from the state of a non-thing; and (148) if it has not become separate from this state, it is 
impossible for the state of an existent thing to arise. Similarly, a (truly existent) thing does not become a non-thing upon 
cessation, because it would absurdly follow that something with one nature would become twofold (i.e. both a thing and a 
non-thing). (Root text, pgs. 153-154] 
 
87 (149) In this way there is no cessation or production of (truly existent) things. Therefore all beings never have a (truly 
existent) birth nor a (truly existent) cessation. They are pacified (of true existence) from the very beginning, and by 
nature in the state beyond sorrow (i.e. in a stat e devoid of true existenc e). (Root text, pg. 154)  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
486  
 
We will not able to find the real trunk of the banana tree even if we were to tear the tree apart. Likewise, when we look for these inherently existe nt sentient beings, we will not be able to find 
any. When we discover that sentient beings do no t exist inherently, then th e cyclic existence that 
they are in and the state of nirvana they seek also  do not exist inherently. In reality then, samsara 
and nirvana are equal in the sense th at they do not exist inherently. 
Lesson 85   Chapter IX - verse 151-159 
D The way to train in wisdom- the nature of insight 
a. Explaining the chapter’s material 
1) Teaching that one who wants to attain liberation must develop the wisdom realizing suchness 
2) The methods by which one develops the wisdom realizing suchness 
3) Instructions on making effort to de velop that [realization of emptiness] 
a) The actual instructions 
i) Teaching the mode of existence [ or nature; lit. mode of abidance] 
ii) It is reasonable to make  effort to realize that 
b) Teaching the focus of compassion by way of teaching the disadvantages of cyclic 
existence c) Teaching the subjective aspect of the way in which great compassion apprehends things 
[lit. the aspect of great compassion’s mode of apprehension] 
b The chapter’s name 
 
Dependent Arising - A Praise of the Buddha’  
40 
Those unwise in this wonderfu l doctrine were confused and entangled like plaited grass. 
 
Lama Tsongkhapa refers to the fact that althou gh the Buddha’s teachings,  especially those on 
dependent origination were really marvellous, duri ng his lifetime, he saw many people who were 
confused and misunderstood these instructio ns, expounding their own views instead.  
 
Such scholars were neither skilled in scriptures nor reasoning and were unable to explain 
correctly the meaning of emptine ss. Some of them th ought the emptiness of  inherent existence 
meant that things did not exist an d were unable to posit the validi ty of action, subject and object 
within the context of  the emptin ess of inherent existence. Othe rs declared that the ultimate 
truth was not an object of knowledge.  These scholars who came before Lama Tsongkha pa did not know how to posit the two truths 
correctly and were confused with respect to th e assertions of the four tenet systems. Lama 
Tsongkhapa likened these scholars to plaited gr ass, which are entangled and difficult to pull 
apart or separate.   
41 Seeing this, I followed with diligence the great scholars, 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
487  
seeking again and again your thoughts, 
poring over many works of our and others' tradition, yet still my mind was torn by doubts. 
When, with the kindness of my lamas, I saw this unsurpassed vehicle of yours  
leaving behind extremes of existence and non-existence, 
elucidated by the prophesized Nagarjuna, his lotus grove illuminated by the moonlight of the glorious  Chandrakirti's teachings, 
whose globe of stainless wisdom moved fr eely through the sky of your words, 
dispelling the darkness that holds to extrem es, outshining the stars of false speakers 
 -it was then that my mind found its peace. 
 
Lama Tsongkhapa felt it was incorrect to simply follow anyone who bore the title of scholar as 
many of them were giving wrong explanations on  the meaning of dependent origination. Seeing 
their inability to explain correctly  the Buddha’s in tent, i.e., his final thoughts on the meaning of 
dependent origination, Je Rinpoche put in a lot of effort to check amongst trustworthy  
scholars
88 to ascertain this correctly. As he said: I followed with diligence th e great scholars, seeking 
again and again your thoughts and poring over many works of our and others' tradition . ‘Our tradition’ 
here refers to the Middle Way Schools. ‘Others’ tradition’ refers to the proponents of realism 
(Vaibhasika, Sautrantika and Cittamatra).  
 Lama Tsongkhapa applied himself to learning all the assertions and viewpoints of the four tenet 
systems and saw how things were explained from many different angles. Since the great Indian 
masters were all scholars, they explained the teac hings in different ways using different logic and 
reasoning. Instead of clarifying his understa nding, Je Rinpoche developed more doubts: poring 
over many works of our and others' tradit ion, yet still my mind was torn by doubts.   
 The essence of all the Buddha’s teachings is dependent origination. Lama Tsongkhapa was 
tormented by the fact he was unable to ascert ain exactly the Buddha’s intent on dependent 
origination.  
 
Despite this, he was not discouraged nor did he give  in to laziness. Instead, he persevered with 
his extensive study of the treatises and made st rong heartfelt requests to his guru-deities, 
accumulated a lot of merits and purified his obscurations.    By relying on the texts of Nagarjuna and Chandrak irti and his own special guru-deity, Manjushri, 
he finally grasped the meaning of emptiness an d dependent origination as intended by the 
Buddha. Only then did his torment and sa dness end and his mind was at peace.  
 Seeing the intense effort that Lama Tsongkhapa put into understanding the Buddha’s teachings, 
                                             
 
88 ‘These scholars’ refer to the grea t Indian masters, especially the Tw o Supreme and the Six Ornaments.  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
488  
it is needless to say how much more effort we must  apply, on our part, to understand anything at 
all! We should not feel discouraged just because of not understanding one or two things. In fact, 
we should become more determined to work even harder. 
 
These verses contain a lot of useful advice for us. We won’t reap the benefit of such advice if we 
only see them as verses describing Je Rinpoche’s personal experience.  
 
T h e  p o i n t  h e r e  i s  t h a t  w h e n  o u r  s t u d i e s  b e c o m e  d i f f i c u l t ,  t h a t  i s  n o  r e a s o n  t o  g i v e  i n  t o  
discouragement. Instead, we should put in even more effort and generate  the determination to 
understand the particular topic we are having pr oblems with. We can see that Lama Tsongkhapa 
was also very selective with respect to the treati ses that he studied, checking very carefully the 
qualification and qualities of their authors. It is only after such ca reful analysis and checking that 
he would engage in studying them.  
 
3) Instructions on making effort to de velop that [realization of emptiness] 
a) The actual instructions 
i) Teaching the mode of existence [or nature; lit, mode of abidance] 
 
(9,151) 
What is there to gain and what is there to lose 
With things that are empty (of true existence) in this way? 
Who is there to pay me respect, 
And who is there to abuse me? 
 
(9,152) 
From what are pleasure and pain derived? 
What is there to be happy or unhappy about? 
When I search for the ultimate nature, 
Who is there to crave, and what is there to crave for? 
 
(9,153) 
Upon analysis, this world of livi ng beings (is found to have no 
 true existence). 
Therefore who can die here? 
What is there to come and what has been? 
Who are friends and who are relatives? 
 
These verses are advice on how to equalise the eight worldly dharmas based on an understanding 
of the emptiness of inherent existence.  Usually, we are happy when we ga in something and unhappy when we do not get what we want. 
But there is no need for such reactions when, upon analysis,   we understand that both 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
489  
occurrences are equal in the sense that they do no t inherently exist. This being the case, there is 
no need for elation when we get something and de spondency when we do not get what we want.  
 
It is the same with respect. We are happy when  we are praised and respected and upset when we 
are criticised or abused. When we analyse the nature  of the praise or criticism, they are equal in 
the sense that they do not exist inherently. Ther efore, there is no reason to be happy when 
praised or unhappy  when criticised. 
  We can apply the same reasoning to pleasure an d suffering. These occur on both physical and 
mental levels. A pleasurable experience makes us  happy and excited but a suffering one makes us 
upset and disturbed. But, again, both are equal in  the sense that they do not exist inherently so 
t h e r e  i s  n o  r e a s o n  f o r  u s  t o  b e  h a p p y  w h e n  e x periencing pleasure or upset when undergoing 
suffering.   We react in a similar way when it comes to our re putation. We are happy when we hear flattering 
words and we are unhappy when we are being slande red. The nature of a good or bad reputation 
is also equal in the sense that it does not exis t inherently so our responses are not justified.  
 
We are equalising the four pairs of the eight worldly dharmas by examining  their ultimate 
natures.  Usually, we dislike criticism, not gett ing what we want, not having a good reputation 
and experiencing suffering or unhappiness. Wh en these things happen to us, we become 
unhappy. But what is the basis for such  unhappiness? What appears to our minds when we are experiencing these things? They appear to us as something very real and inherently existent and 
we believe them to be so. When we believe in the appearance  of inherent existence, this leads to 
mental unhappiness.   On the other hand, we like praise, getting what we want, having a good reputation and pleasure. We feel happy and are attached to these experien ces of happiness. But what  is the basis for that 
happiness to arise? Again, these experiences appe ar to us as real, right there and inherently 
existent. Not only do they appear  real to us, we believe them to be so and we become so excited.   
 When we understand, however, the true nature of  these pleasurable or  unpleasant experiences, 
we will equalise our reactions towards them and no t be adversely affected in either situations.  
 When we analyse the nature of either praise or criticism, they are essent ially words which are not 
inherently existent. When sought, both praise an d criticism are not findable and we cannot point 
to anything that is praise or criticism as they do not exist inherently. Someone who understands 
this will have no reason to feel excited by praise or dejected by criticism.   It would be like hearing words of praise or abus e in a dream. When you dream of being praised, 
upon waking up, those nice words will be powe rless to make you happy or excited any more. 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
490  
That would be the experience of someone who ha s realised the ultimate nature of praise and 
criticism. But, for most of us, we cannot see the falsity of praise or criticism.  
 
There are even people who will remain excited and happy when they wake up from their dream 
of being praised. It is like the illusionist deve loping attachment for the illusory woman he has 
created. Such attachment still arises even thou gh he knows the woman is not real because he 
does not realise that the illusory woman is empty of true existence. 
 
We had seen earlier how both samsara and nirvan a are equal in that they are both empty of 
inherent existence. Here, we are applying our un derstanding of emptiness to equalising the eight 
worldly dharmas by recognising that pleasure and suffering are equal in the sense of not existing 
inherently.   The conventional methods for equalising the eigh t worldly dharmas were covered in the chapter 
on patience. For example, to avoid getting excited wh en we are praised, we reflect on the faults of 
praise. In the same way, to avoid feeling depressed when criticised, we reflect on the benefits of  
criticism.   We are supposed to work on developing disenchan tment with the sufferings of cyclic existence. 
But when we are praised, our minds are distracted from this task. When the praise is directed at 
someone else or someone we dislike, then jealousy arises, destroying our virtue.  
 When we believe we have the qualities which are the bases for the praise, we generate arrogance 
and pride. We will not be humble nor will ou r behaviour be subdued or pacified. We can see 
how praise is actually a cause for us to go to  the lower realms. Since this is the case, when 
someone stops us from being praised, instead of feeling upset, we should  be happy because that 
person is actually closing the door to a miserable rebirth for us.
89  
 
Our whole lives are mixed with the eight worldly dharmas so it is important to weaken them.  
Our feeling happy or upset is the source of al l the problems and difficulties we have been 
experiencing throughout our lives. We experience  so many problems with respect to praise and 
criticism. We should recall that praise is not benefi cial in any way and is, in fact, full of faults and 
remember how helpful criticism can be. Thinking about these points from many different angles, 
combined with the understanding that the eight worldly dharmas do not exist inherently, we can 
reduce the influence of the eight worldly dharmas in our lives. Through this understanding, we 
can equalise our reaction to  the eight worldly dh armas. When we can practise in this way, there 
will be fewer problems and less suffering in ou r lives and whatever Dharma practice we do  
becomes pure.  
                                              
89 We dealt with this in detail in chapter 6 in the sect ion dealing with anger directed at someone who prevents 
others from praising us. 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
491  
Lesson 86   Chapter IX - verse 151-154 
D The way to train in wisdom- the nature of insight 
a. Explaining the chapter’s material 
1) Teaching that one who wants to attain liberation must develop the wisdom realizing suchness 
2) The methods by which one develops the wisdom realizing suchness 3) Instructions on making effort to de velop that [realization of emptiness] 
a) The actual instructions 
i) Teaching the mode of existence [ or nature; lit. mode of abidance] 
ii) It is reasonable to make  effort to realize that 
b) Teaching the focus of compassion by way of teaching the disadvantages of cyclic existence 
c) Teaching the subjective aspect of the way in which great compassion apprehends things 
[lit. the aspect of great compassion’s mode of apprehension] 
b The chapter’s name 
 
Dependent Arising - A Praise of the Buddha’  
42 
Of all Buddha’s deeds his words were the greatest, 
and they were words of dependent arising. 
Let the wise therefore re member him this way. 
 
Lama Tsongkhapa had mentioned how he finall y attained mental peace upon gaining the 
unmistaken realisation of dependent origination in  reliance on the kindness of his own teachers 
and the great treatises composed by Nagarjuna and Chandrakirti.  
 
When we study the great treatises in our quest to  understand and realise dependent origination, 
we have to focus on three things:-  Making whole-hearted requests to our  guru-deity Continuously studying and analysing the treatises and Accumulating merit and purifying obscurations  Some intelligent students may think, “I have shar p faculties. I will be able to study these great 
treatises without accumulating merit.” Such stud ents, who focus only on studying and do not 
perform any purification practices or work at a ccumulating merit, may learn something but they 
will never be able to complete their studies. Inst ead, they will encounter many obstacles and find 
it difficult to understand the treatises, especially the teachings on emptiness.   Then there are those who do not study at all thinking, “Studying is not important. I will 
concentrate on accumulating merit and purifying my  negative karma. That is enough.” There is 
no way such people can realise emptiness without  listening to, studying and reflecting on the 
great treatises, especially the presen tations on dependent origination.  
 Can we realise emptiness and the meaning of dependent origination simply by making requests 
to the guru-deities? This is also impossible. We may  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
492  
 
supplicate our guru-deities with single-pointed faith, “Please grant me blessings to realise emptiness.” That alone will not bring the realisation we seek.  
So, the three things must go together hand-in-ha nd: supplicating our guru-deities, studying and 
analysing the great treatises, accumulating merit and purifying negativities. This is what Lama 
Tsongkhapa did and we should follow his example.  
 
 
When it comes to studying the treatises, we shou ld not simply study any treatise or a text that 
looks like a treatise. We should study an unmistaken  treatise. We saw how Lama Tsongkhapa only 
studied the treatises composed by the fully qualif ied great Indian masters, especially the texts 
composed by Nagarjuna and Chandrakirti.   Amongst the enlightened activities of the body , speech and mind of the Buddha, the best was 
said to be the enlightened activities perf ormed by his holy speech. The Buddha said: The Subduers 
do not wash away the negativities of sentient beings with water nor do they  remove their suffering with their 
hands. They also do not transfer their realisations to sentient beings. They liberate  through teaching suchness.  
 The Buddha wants to help us eliminate our suffe ring and unhappiness but he cannot do so with 
his body or mind or by giving us his realisations in the form of a present. He helps us by teaching us the Four Noble Truths, particularly what is to  be abandoned and what is to be cultivated. His 
teachings are the best medicine for our problems an d that is why the enlightened activities of his 
speech is praised as the best.  
 
Amongst his teachings, the supreme teachings ar e said to be the ones on the meaning of 
dependent origination, which help us to cut the root of our problems and suffering. As 
mentioned in the beginning of chapter 9: The Subduer taught all these branches for the purpose of 
wisdom.   
 The root of our suffering is ignorance. Its antidote is the unmistaken realisation of dependent origination, which Lama Tsongkhapa sees is only  correctly taught by the Buddha. Seeing this 
unique characteristic of the Buddha’s teachings,  Je Rinpoche thinks about the kindness of the 
Buddha and advises us to do likewise.    In the next verse, Lama Tsongkhapa talks again about his respect for the teachings.  
 
43 Becoming ordained into the way of the Buddha  
by not being lax in study of his words, 
and by yoga practice of great resolve, 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
493  
this monk devotes himself to th at great purveyor of truth. 
 
Following the footsteps of the Buddha, Lama Tson gkhapa was ordained when he was very young. 
As a monk, he studied the great treatises in deta il particularly the texts composed by the Two 
Supremes and the Six Ornaments.  Having done this, he reflected and meditated on their 
meaning day and night, gaining many realisatio ns and developing extraordinary faith in his 
mind.  
 
He sees all this is due to the ki ndness of his teacher who, in this  context, is the Buddha. He is 
declaring here, “This is me, the fully ordained monk, named Losang Dragpa, paying respect to 
the Buddha.”  It is very important that we begin, in the same way, with studying extensively and then reflecting 
on and analysing what we have learnt. Only then can we gain firm ascertainment of the 
teachings, which should be followed by constant meditation on them. In this way, realisations 
can come and extraordinary faith in our teachers and in the great composers of the treatises will 
arise.   D i f f e r e n t  l e v e l s  o f  f a i t h  a r e  g e n e r a t e d  i n  t h i s  p r o c e s s .  W h e n  w e  f i r s t  l i s t e n  t o  a n d  h a v e  s o m e  understanding of the teachings from our guru, we develop some faith in him.  Our faith in our 
guru deepens when we reflect on and ascertain th e teachings we have received from him. Then, 
when we meditate and develop some realisations  based on his instructions, we will generate 
extraordinary faith in our guru.  From there, we can generate irreversible faith in  the lineage lamas going all the way back to the 
Buddha himself.   We can see from this that the power of our faith depends on wh ether we have done extensive 
studying, reflection and meditation. The greater th e faith in our teachers, the greater will be our 
effort to put the teachings into practice. Then, we will definitely be able to pacify and remove our 
suffering.  The sutras say that faith is the foundation of al l our virtue. A mind without faith cannot generate 
virtue just as a burnt seed is unable to produce a plant.   When we strongly develop the correct 
kind of faith, our virtue will increase. For such faith to arise in our minds, we have to study, 
reflect and meditate on the teachings. We must  understand the reasons for and the importance 
of studying in order to generate the determinatio n to apply ourselves to our studies. We should 
aspire to be like Lama Tsongkhapa. 
 
Our minds will not change or improve when ou r faith is weak and unstable and we do not 
practise properly. Faith comes when we taste and experience the teachings for ourselves and that 
experience can only come from reflection an d meditation. Whether we develop faith or not 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
494  
depends on us.   
 In the last lesson, we studied how we can equalise the eight worldly dharmas based on 
conventional methods as well as our understandin g of the emptiness of inherent existence.  
 
We like getting (1) material things, (2) praise (3 ) happiness and pleasure and (4) hearing pleasant 
words. We should reflect on the disadvantage s of these supposedly desirable things: how we 
become obsessed with them and become unable to do  anything else, especially virtuous activities. 
They are actually obstacles to our Dharma practi ce. On the other hand, we  dislike those things 
opposite to these four. To equalise our reactions to them, we should reflect on the benefits of 
encountering them.   This advice on analysing the problems that come  with the eight worldly dharmas is targeted at 
practitioners who assert past and future lives, wh o believe in the possibility of liberation and who 
wish to achieve it.   Many people think: “As much as I would like to go  into retreat, I can’t do so now because I don’t 
have enough money. So I can’t go . But if I have a million dollars now, I will definitely  go into 
retreat.” Who is to blame for that kind of thinking? Money becomes so important to such 
people. They are saying they cannot go into retreat due to lack of funds.  
 Actually the time to go into retreat is when one has no money! This is because when one has 
money, especially when one has a million dollars,  one will never  go into retreat. The more 
money one accumulates, the more attached one wi ll become to it to the point where one is 
bound by one’s wealth and loses one’s freedom. Ju dging from historical a ccounts, there does not 
seem to be a single instance of a millionaire goin g into retreat! Milarepa did retreat in isolation 
with absolutely nothing. Even today, some practitioners are doing the same.  
 I heard this story two or three years ago from my friend in Dharamsala . There was a monk who 
went into retreat after having saved some money.  Before he began his retreat, he loaned the 
money (between Rp20, 000 to Rp50, 000) to some one in order to generate interest. While he 
was in retreat, he kept on thinking about his mo ney -  calculating the interest, worrying that the 
money may disappear, considering whether to deposit it in a bank to gain higher interest and so 
on. He could not meditate. He then decided to  offer the money away (to someone or to the 
monastery). After that, his meditation went very well.   We value money, praise and reputation when we do not have these things. Once we have them, 
however, it is difficult to let go of them and give them up.  Take the example of money which we 
normally think of as something desirable. The more  we have, the more attached we are to it and 
we are less free to do as we wish. In retreat, we are unable to meditate properly. Our wealth 
becomes an obstacle for virtue.  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
495  
 
Another type of people does not do retreat for fear  of having to suffer and lacking this and that 
during the retreat. Actually, in re treat, we only experience happiness. We do not want to go into 
retreat because we are happier with our current samsaric situation, pursuing the eight worldly 
dharmas as our source of pleasure and happiness.  
 We can see from our own experience how much e ffort we put into looking for happiness in the 
eight worldly dharmas. What we finally achieve, however, are only problems and difficulties. We 
seek material gain, praise, reputation and plea sant words and are unhappy when we cannot get 
what we want. We need to reflect on th eir faults from many different angles.  
 We experience material gain, praise, pleasure and good reputation because we had accumulated 
the causes in the past. When we are praised, however, we are drawing on our store of merit and 
depleting it. It is like withdrawing our life  savings of $100,000 from the bank leaving nothing 
behind, making us feel insecure. Reflecting like this, we understand there is nothing to be happy 
about when we are praised, enjoy material success and so on.  When we do not have material success and expe riencing unhappiness and criticism and having a 
bad reputation, we should remember they ar e the results of the negative karma we had 
accumulated and experiencing them depletes that  negative karma. When our negative karma is 
exhausted, we will not have to experience it again.   
The great Kadampa masters said: All the unfavourable conditions or obstacles are our teachers because 
we only think about virtue after ex periencing problems and obstacles.  When we reflect that it is problems 
and obstacles that lead us to think about doing vi rtuous activities, our minds will not be shaken 
or disturbed when we encounter them. If we acce pt the workings of karma, we will understand 
that difficulties only help to exhaust our negative karma.  
 
We can see for ourselves that when people are healthy, wealthy and happy, they do not develop 
any interest in virtue. But once they start to ex perience problems, difficulties or sicknesses, they 
turn to reciting sutras or mantras. Previously, such people would have no interest at all in 
Dharma practice even if the Budd ha himself were to appear before them. What caused them to 
begin engaging in Dharma practice, something ev en the Buddha was unable to persuade them to 
do? It was their problems or sicknesses. Therefore,  their real guru is the sickness or problem they 
were experiencing..   Seeing how all our problems come from pursing the eight worldly dharma s, we should weaken 
t h e i r  h o l d  o n  u s  a s  m u c h  a s  p o s s i b l e .  T h e  c o n v entional way of doing this was taught in the 
chapter on patience. If we have the correct unde rstanding of emptiness, then the best way to 
equalise the eight worldly dharmas is through th e understanding that they are all equal in the 
sense of not existing inherently. 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
496  
 
Praise or criticism are basically words which, wh en sought, are not findable.  They do not exist 
inherently. Since praise and criticism are equal in this sense, then it is inappropriate for us to 
swing from the extreme of great excitement to the other extreme of great depression when we 
hear them. The reason for our extreme responses is because of our failure to understand the 
ultimate nature of praise and criticism and grasping at them as inherently existent.  
 
i) Teaching the mode of existence [or nature; lit, mode of abidance] 
 
(9,151) 
What is there to gain and what is there to lose 
With things that are empty (of true existence) in this way? 
Who is there to pay me respect, 
And who is there to abuse me? 
 
(9,152) 
From what are pleasure and pain derived? 
What is there to be happy or unhappy about? 
 
The above verses talked about equalising the wo rldly dharmas from the ultimate perspective by 
reflecting on their lack of inherent existence.  We have also covered equalising the worldly 
dharmas using conventional methods.    
(9,152 cd) 
When I search for the ultimate nature, 
Who is there to crave, and what is there to crave for? 
 When we investigate further, we find that both  the person who is craving and the object of 
craving do not exist inherently. Both the person of the present life and the person of the past life 
also lack inherent existence. Likewise, friends or relatives who benefit us also do not exist 
inherently. Discovering this will  definitely reduce our attachment or craving.   
(9,153) 
Upon analysis, this world of living beings  (is found to have no true existence), 
Therefore we can die here? 
What is there to come and what has been? 
Who are friends and who are relatives?  
 When we recognise that we ourselves are not inhe rently existent, the “we” who will die in the 
future are also not inherently existent. Understa nding this will  reduce any sense of fear for 
death. In the same way, having ascertained th at our friends and relatives are not inherently 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
497  
existent, parting or being separated from them will lead to less suffering and agony for us.  
 
ii) It is reasonable to make  effort to realize that 
 
(9,154) 
O you (who are investigating reality), 
Please recognize, as I have don e, that all is just like space! 
 
Therefore, it is appropriate to strive to realise emptiness. All phenomena are empty of inherent 
existence, like space. Shantideva  is talking to himself and at the same time, instructing us: “You 
s h o u l d  r e a l i s e  t h a t  t h i n g s  a r e  l i k e  s p a c e ,  j u s t  a s  I  h a v e  r e a l i s e d  t h e  n a t u r e  o f  e m p t i n e s s . ”  
Emptiness is likened to space, which is posited as the mere lack of obstructive contact. It is not 
findable. Likewise, emptiness is the me re negation of true existence.  
Lesson 87   Chapter IX - verse 154-160 
D The way to train in wisdom- the nature of insight 
a. Explaining the chapter’s material 
1) Teaching that one who wants to attain liberation must develop the wisdom realizing suchness 
2) The methods by which one develops the wisdom realizing suchness 
3) Instructions on making effort to de velop that [realization of emptiness] 
a) The actual instructions 
b) Teaching the focus of compassion by way of teaching the disadvantages of cyclic 
existence 
i) The disadvantages of this life 
ii) The disadvantages of future lives 
iii) Reflecting on the fact that even should one  take rebirth in the higher realms, there 
will be no time to practice the pure dharma 
iv) Reflecting on the extreme difficulty of  obtaining the leisures and endowments 
v) Thus, it is fitting to feel sorrow for the fact that both oneself and others are 
tormented by the suffering of cyclic existence 
c) Teaching the subjective aspect of the way in which great compassion apprehends things 
[lit. the aspect of great compassion’s mode of apprehension] 
b The chapter’s name 
 
Dependent Arising - A Praise of the Buddha’  
43 
Becoming ordained into the way of the Buddha by not being lax in study of his words, 
and by yoga practice of great resolve, 
this monk devotes himself to th at great purveyor of truth. 
 
We should learn how we can generate the same level of respect that Lama Tsongkhapa had for 
the Buddha.  We are Buddhists who have received  the Mahayana sutric an d tantric teachings and 
who even have the good fortune to study and refl ect on the Mahayana trea tises. If the Buddha 
had not come into this world during these dege nerate times, none of this can occur. These 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
498  
opportunities are due solely to his kindness.  Re membering this, naturally we will have faith and 
respect for Shakyamuni Buddha. 
 
W e  h a v e  d o n e  a  f a i r  b i t  o f  s t u d y i n g  a n d  n o w  w e  h a v e  r e a c h e d  t h e  w i s d o m  c h a p t e r  o f  
Shantideva’s Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds.  We have repeatedly seen that it is our self-grasping 
ignorance which lies at the root of  all our problems and suffering. The only antidote to cut the 
root of samsara is the wisdom realising selflessness.  Understanding this, we will then see that  the 
Buddha is the only one who had given us such ex cellent instructions on the methods to develop 
this wisdom and faith in him will definitely arise.  
  Ironically, many people fail to appreciate the power of Shakyamuni Buddha. They have the 
notion that somehow, he is less  powerful compared to other budd has and deities, e.g., they think 
praying to Mother Tara is more effective This is a mistake.   
Who has shown us the way to re move all our suffering? It is the Buddha. We will definitely 
benefit when we put his advice into practice. Many people think of Manjushri or Tara when 
making requests to their guru deities. They ne ver think of the Buddha. We can supplicate Tara 
or Manjushri but we cannot receive direct teaching s from them unless our karma is very pure. As 
beginners, the one who has benefited us in th e most practical way is  the Buddha with his 
excellent teachings. When we understand this, we  can appreciate why the enlightened activities 
of his speech are considered the best amongst hi s holy deeds. We should always see the Buddha 
as our refuge and  protector and direct our prayers and requests to him.  
 
When our karma becomes very pure, it is definitely  possible for us to see and receive instructions 
directly from Manjushri and many other deities. But by the time we reach that stage, we would 
not be so desperate for help. We are now very far from that level and we are confused and 
ignorant as to what is to be abandoned and what is  to be cultivated. Who is teaching us this?  It 
is the Buddha! The fact we have this opportunit y to study and practise these teachings and to 
know what to abandon and  cultivate is du e solely to the kindness of the Buddha.   
 
Shakyamuni Buddha has eliminated all faults and possesses perfect power and all the qualities. 
He has also conquered the four types of mara. So when we make requests to him, there is 
nothing that he cannot grant. Relying on the Buddh a, we will be protected from spirit harm and 
going to the lower realms.    Please remember this: Shakyamuni Buddha is as powerful as all the other buddhas. When we 
wish for wisdom, we naturally think of Manjushri and when we want long life, we think of the 
long life deities. Lama Tsongkhapa’s faith comes from the depths of his heart. We should follow 
his example by reflecting on the kindness of the Buddha.   
We have now completed the main text of this prayer, A Praise to the Buddha . What follows are the 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
499  
dedication verses.  
 
44 
Due to the kindness of my lamas, 
I have met the teachings of the greatest of teachers. 
I dedicate this virtue, theref ore, for every living being 
to be nourished by true spiritual friends. 
 
Lama Tsongkhapa is dedicating his roots of virt ue from the three times and, in particular, the 
merit from having composed this text to become th e causes for all sentient beings to be cared for 
by qualified teachers. This is because he realises his ordination is due solely to the kindness of his 
own gurus.  Due to their kindness, he was able  to study, reflect and meditate on the great 
philosophical treatises and the teachings of the Budd ha. He sees that it is imperative for anyone 
who wishes to study and practise to have a guru and qualified teacher to guide him.   
 
45 
I pray that the teachings of he who is solely benevolent 
remain unscattered by the winds of false views until the end of time, 
and with faith in the Buddha  gained from understanding 
their essential nature, may they pervade forever.  
 Lama Tsongkhapa is praying for the teachings of  the Buddha to remain until the end of cyclic 
existence. For this to happen, it depends on  the existence of qualified upholders of the 
Buddhadharma, especially those upholding the script ural teachings of the Buddha so he prays for 
the whole earth to be pervaded by such practitioners.   What will otherwise happen? The teachings will degenerate if the number of those who have 
correct understanding of the scriptural teachi ngs decreases.   The Buddhadharma will also 
decline and degenerate when there are people who adhere to wrong views, giving incorrect or a 
mixture of wrong and correct expl anations of the teachings.   
 Seeing the importance of this, Lama Tsongkhapa fi rst dedicated his merits for all sentient beings 
to be taken care of by qualified teachers and then for the whole  world to be pervaded by 
qualified upholders of the Buddhadharma. We sh ould do likewise, understanding the reasons 
for dedicating in such a way.   Making dedications is like our declaration of commitment, supporting or giving a donation 
towards a cause that we believe in. When we unde rstand the reasons, our minds will be inspired 
to move in that direction and we will genera te the determination to achieve that goal.  
 
b) Teaching the focus of compassion by way of teaching the disadvantages of cyclic existence 
i) The disadvantages of this life 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
500  
 
(9,154 cd) 
Those who wish to be happy 
Are greatly disturbed by causes for conflict 
And overjoyed by the causes for pleasure. 
 
(9,155) 
Not finding happiness, they suffer, 
And in order to find it, they exert themselves. 
They argue with others, cut and stab one another; 
With many wrong deeds, they live  in a state of great hardship. 
 
These verses refer to the faults associated with  our worldly lives when we are controlled by our 
self-grasping. Although we want happiness, beca use of not knowing the methods to achieve this, 
we become preoccupied with the happiness of this life alone, which brings us only problems and suffering.   We are controlled by our anger towards our enem ies and desire and attachment to our loved 
ones. When things do not go our way, we engage unrestrainedly in many negative actions to get 
the happiness we seek. We work so hard to achi eve happiness but because we do not know the 
correct methods, we only become unhappier, which is a sign of our ignora nce of what will truly 
bring us happiness.   This way of life - committing negativities for the sole purpose of accomplishing the happiness of 
this life alone - brings small profit but great lo ss and is completely meaningless. Reflecting on 
this, we should work at weakening our grasping at  and attachment to the happiness of this life.  
 
Then, when we see others in the same predicament,  leading their lives in this empty, meaningless 
way, we are able to develop compassion for them, overcoming our inability to feel compassion for 
the rich and famous.   
 
ii) The disadvantages of future lives 
 
(9,156) 
Even though they repeatedly come to happy existences 
And experience much pleasure there. 
Upon dying, they fall for a long time 
Into the unbearable suff erings of lower realms. 
 
(9,157) 
Within conditioned existence, the chasms (of suffering) are many 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
501  
And the (liberating comprehension of) ultimate truth is absent. 
Furthermore (the apprehension of tr ue existence and the understanding of  emptiness) mutually contradict 
one another. 
Yet if, while in conditioned existence, I do not (realize) this ultimate truth, 
 
(9,158) 
I shall (continue to experience ) a limitless ocean of misery, 
Unbearable and beyond analogy. 
 
Our good rebirths are the results of having met and having faith in our gurus and living in pure 
ethics. But the number of good rebirths we can a ttain are like occasional flashes of lightning.  
 
What happens when we have a good rebirth?  We become absorbed in the pleasures and 
enjoyments it offers. When we indulge ourselves in  this way, we are actually depleting the virtue 
we had accumulated in the past. At the same time, we also accumulate a lot of negativities which 
can only result in rebirths in the lower realms. These are the pitfalls of a good rebirth.  
 
The main reason why we are still not free of cyclic  existence is our ignorance, grasping at the self. 
As long as we are in cyclic existe nce, we are bound by this rope of ignorance and as long as this is 
so, it is extremely difficult for us to realise the true nature of phenomena. Failing to do so means 
there is no way for us to free ourselves from cyclic  existence. Therefore, it  is important for us to 
put all our efforts into realising emptiness.  
In this context, the term “emptiness” and “selfl essness” are synonymous. Emptiness refers to the 
emptiness of inherent existence (subtle emptiness) which is the same as se lflessness. But when we 
look at the four features of the First Noble Truth, true suffering, which are impermanence, 
suffering, empty and selfless, then “empty” and “sel fless” would mean slightly different things.  
 
iii) Reflecting on the fact that even should one take rebirth in th e higher realms, there will be 
no time to practice the pure dharma 
 
(9,158 cd) 
Likewise, (through not having realized emptiness,) I have li ttle strength (for virtue) 
And my human life (of leisure and endowment) is indeed very short. 
 
(9,159) 
Also, I strive hard to live long and avoid illness, 
I am (concerned with) hunger, rest and sleep; 
I am injured by others 
And keep meaningless company with the childish. 
 
(9,160) 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
502  
Therefore this life swiftly passes with no meaning, 
And it is very hard to find th e chance to investigate reality. 
 
Even when we do get a good rebirth, our mental capacity for virtue remains small. Even when we 
have a basis for practising Dharma, we never seem  to live long enough. Even when we have a 
human life, our maximum life span is quite short compared to rebirths in other realms of cyclic existence such as the gods in the form and form less realms. Even hell beings and some animals 
live for a far longer time than we do.   Although in reality our lifespan is short but, due to our strong grasping at permanence, we think 
w e  c a n  l i v e  f o r  a  l o n g  t i m e .  T h i n k i n g  i n  t h i s  w a y ,  w e  w o r k  h a r d  t o  a c c u m u l a t e  m o n e y  a n d  possessions, which we then have to protect. We  work even harder to increase whatever we 
already have. Although we do not have much time left, we do all sorts of things to stay alive and 
keep the body healthy: we sleep, bathe, have ma ssages, eat and  rely on medicine to prevent 
sickness.   Although we have limited time, we keep bad comp any, i.e., spending too much time with people 
who do not understand what is to be abandoned an d what is to be cultivated. In the process, we 
accumulate negativities and spend our time doing meaningless activities even though we have the 
conditions to practise.    It then becomes extremely difficult to be able  to reflect on and understand the meaning of 
dependent origination or the more subtle levels of  emptiness, which are the causes for us to free 
ourselves from suffering.  We should recognize that we have  the opportunity to and the basis (our bodies) for practising the 
Dharma.  Since our lifespan is short, we should  make our lives more meaningful. We need to 
strive to study, reflect and meditate on emptiness,  at the very least, to the point where we develop 
the doubt tending towards the factual with regards to the meaning of emptiness. Even though we 
may  not realise emptiness, at least we have th e doubt tending towards reality, thinking, “Maybe 
emptiness is like that.” As mentioned in the 400 Stanzas  by Aryadeva: Those without merit will never 
bother to think about dependent or igination. For those who develop ev en the slightest understanding of 
emptiness, the process of shattering  cyclic existence would have begun .  
 Geshe-la’s comments on the guided meditations:
 90 
We had seen how form, the observed object cond ition for the eye consciousness apprehending it 
has to exist prior to the generation of the ey e consciousness. Once that eye consciousness 
                                              
90 Geshe-la had given the class an assi gnment to produce a meditation outlin e based on the four placements of 
mindfulness. Each group were required to present their outlines in class in the form of a guided meditation. 
Geshe-la’s comments followed on e of these presentations.   
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
503  
a p p r e h e n d i n g  f o r m  i s  g e n e r a t e d ,  t h e  f o r m  w o u l d  h a v e  a l r e a d y  c e a s e d  t o  e x i s t .  F o r m  i s  a  
momentary phenomenon  disintegrating moment  by moment and therefore, it would have 
disintegrated before the eye consciousn ess apprehending it is generated. 
 
“Disintegrate” does not mean becoming nothing in this context. We should understand this 
disintegration from the philosophical viewpoint. Fi rst, there is a form that is disintegrating and 
then there is the “disintegratedness” of that form . That disintegratedness of form is a functioning 
thing (composed phenomenon).  All the proponents of the tenets below Prasangika  assert that form that  has disintegrated means 
that the form ceases to exist. It is either a non-existent or a permanent phenomenon. Only 
Prasangika is able to posit how once an imperm anent phenomenon has disintegrated, that state 
of disintegratedness nevertheless is still a functioning thing.  
Form and the eye consciousness apprehending it ha ve a cause and effect relationship. Form must 
exist prior to the eye consciousness apprehending it. It is impossible for the eye consciousness to 
be generated before the form exists. 
 We are also unable to explain how both the ey e consciousness apprehending form and form can 
exist simultaneously.  The only option left therefore is that the eye co nsciousness apprehending form has to come after 
form. That being the case, since form is an impermanent phenomenon, it would have 
disintegrated before the eye consciousness appreh ending it can be generated. Only Prasangika 
knows how to posit this. While the other sch ools have to say that the eye consciousness 
apprehending form is generated after form, they fi nd it very difficult to explain why this is so. 
 
Question from student : If form is not inherently existent , why can't the eye consciousness be 
inherently existent? 
 
Answer:  If form is not inherently existent, how can an inherently existent eye consciousnesses be 
produced in dependence on something that is no t inherently existent? As the eye consciousness 
apprehending form is generated in dependence  on form, then the inherently existent eye 
consciousness must be generated in dependence on an inherently existent form. Since there is no 
inherently existent form, then there is no way that the inherently existent eye consciousness 
apprehending form can ever be generated. 
Lesson 88   Chapter IX - verse 161-167 
D The way to train in wisdom- the nature of insight 
a. Explaining the chapter’s material 
1) Teaching that one who wants to attain liberation must develop the wisdom realizing suchness 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
504  
2) The methods by which one develops the wisdom realizing suchness 
3) Instructions on making effort to de velop that [realization of emptiness] 
a) The actual instructions 
b) Teaching the focus of compassion by way of teaching the disadvantages of cyclic existence 
i) The disadvantages of this life ii) The disadvantages of future lives 
iii) Reflecting on the fact that even should one  take rebirth in the higher realms, there 
will be no time to practice the pure dharma 
iv) Reflecting on the extreme difficulty of  obtaining the leisures and endowments 
v) Thus, it is fitting to feel sorrow for the fact that both oneself and others are 
tormented by the suffering of cyclic existence 
c) Teaching the subjective aspect of the way in which great compassion apprehends things 
[lit. the aspect of great compassion’s mode of apprehension] 
b The chapter’s name 
 
Dependent Arising - A Praise of the Buddha’  
46 
In all my rebirths, even at the cost of my life, may I never falter nor shrink from working 
for the wonderful doctrine of the mighty Buddha,  
who showed clearly the nature of dependent arising. 
 
Here, Lama Tsongkhapa is dedicating all his meri ts of the three times an d, in particular,  the 
merits of having composed this text to become the causes for him to upho ld the teachings of the 
Buddha in all his future lifetimes.   Once one understands the teaching s of the Buddha, especially th ose on dependent origination, 
one will understand how all phenomena do not ex ist inherently. These are such marvellous and 
wonderful teachings. Lama Tsongkhapa is theref ore praying that, with a complete disregard for 
his own welfare,  he can uphold , sustain and increase these teachings in all his future lives 
without giving in to laziness. Lama Tsongkhapa made these dedications from the depths of his 
heart because he knew how important they were.   For us to be able to dedicate in a similar way, we must first understand why it is essential to 
dedicate our merit for such purposes. Recall how earlier Lama Tsongkhapa had dedicated his 
merit for sentient beings to be cared for by qualif ied teachers and for the world to be pervaded by 
qualified upholders of the Buddhadharma.   
47  I pray that I pass my days and nights 
in thinking how I might spread this Dharma  
born from the heroic perseverance in the face of countless hardships  of this supreme guide. 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
505  
 
 Lama Tsongkhapa is praying to be able to uphold  and spread the teachings, especially those on 
dependent origination, day and night, through va rious ways and means. This is because these 
teachings were given by the Buddha only after he  had  encountered many difficulties and great 
hardships.  
 
48 When I pursue these endeavours wholeheartedly and sincerely,  may I be supported constantly by  Brahma, Indra, Mahakala,  
the four guardians of the world, and all other protectors. 
 
Lama Tsongkhapa is praying that, whenever he is  engaging in sincere endeavours to sustain and 
increase the Buddha’s teachings, may he always be supported by the guardians and protectors 
who delight in virtue.  
 
Brahma and Indra are worldly gods. According to historical accounts, after   Buddha attained 
enlightenment, it was Brahma and Indra who re quested him to turn the Wheel of Dharma. One 
offered a golden thousand-spoked Dharma wheel while the other offered a conch. They protect 
Dharma practitioners from obstacles. There are al so the four heavenly kings commonly seen in  
Chinese Mahayana temples who are worldly gods but are also Dharma protectors. There are 
historical accounts of how these four heavenly  kings promised the Buddha to guard and uphold 
his teachings. It is all right to request the worldly gods for help as  long as we do not relate to 
them in the same way we do the Buddha, as  objects of refuge or supreme protectors. 
 
We have now completed A Praise of the Buddha  composed by Lama Ts ongkhapa at Ganden 
Monastery, Tibet. Lama Tsongkhapa had spent his li fe studying in detail the great treatises. He 
paid particular attention to the teachings on de pendent origination. Having realised the meaning 
of dependent origination at its most profound le vel - how, due to the fa ct that phenomena are 
dependently originated, they cannot exist inhere ntly - he developed extraordinary faith in the 
Buddha and his qualities. He was therefore inspired to compose A Praise of the Buddha.  
 
The life story of Lama Tsongkhapa shows us  how proper ascertainment of the teachings 
supported by correct and valid realisations form  the basis for generating faith in the Buddha. 
Once there is faith in the teachings, naturally there would be faith in the teacher who taught 
them, the Buddha.    
That is why it is so extremely important  to listen to and study the teachings followed by reflecting 
on them. Based on such reflection, ascertainmen t of the teachings will come. We then meditate 
and familiarise our minds with what we have ascertained. Then we can develop some valid 
experience of the teachings and our hearts and minds will change. Only then will pure faith in 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
506  
the teachings of the Buddha arise.  
 This whole process leads to the generation of va lid experiences of the teachings. There are no 
short cuts. Sometimes, we may question the value of studying the teachings when they seem to 
have little relevance to our daily lives and no impa ct on the quality of our minds.  This is wrong 
misunderstanding on our part.  
 
When we analyse carefully, we can see how ex tremely important it is for us to study the 
teachings. Whether we continue to practise or not depends on our faith. Correct faith can only 
arise from positive and valid experiences of th e teachings and such experiences can come only 
through completing the threefold process of  list ening and studying, reflection and meditation.  
W h e n  t h a t  h a p p e n s ,  t h e n  o u r  v i e w  o f  t h e  T h r e e  J e w e l s  w i l l  c h a n g e .  O u r  f a i t h  w i l l  a l s o  b e  
d i f f e r e n t .  W e  w i l l  n o  l o n g e r  b e  b o t h e r e d  b y  whatever difficulties we may encounter in our 
Dharma practice. Without goin g through the threefold process and gaining some valid 
experience, our faith exists only at the level of mere words. We will then start to criticise the 
Dharma or the Buddha or even give up our Dhar ma practice when we experience problems.  
 I have mentioned all this before. Personally, I s ee this as extremely impo rtant and that is why I 
am repeating myself. You have to re alise its importance for yourself. It is difficult. It is not easy 
but we need to put effort into this.  
iv) Reflecting on the extreme difficulty of  obtaining the leisures and endowments 
 
(9,160 cd) 
In this state, where is th ere the means to reverse 
This beginningless habit of gr asping at true existence? 
 
(9,161) 
Furthermore, devils are exerting themselves 
To cast us into vast  unfortunate realms, 
They show us many mistaken paths 
And it is hard to resolve do ubts about the perfect way. 
 
(9,162) 
It will be hard to find the leisure (of a human life) again, 
And extremely difficult to find the presence of the Buddhas. 
It is hard to forsake this flood of disturbing conceptions. 
Alas, sentient beings wi ll continue to suffer! 
 
We are fortunate to be reborn as human beings. Ho wever, it is very difficult for us to overcome 
our grasping at true existence, to which we ar e habituated since time without beginning.  Our 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
507  
afflictions are very strong and there are  many opposing factors against us and few favourable 
conditions to help us succeed . When we try to counter our grasping at true existence, many 
negative states of mind manifest. There are also disturbances from external beings. For example, 
amongst the four maras, one is th e mara of Deva’s son who will tr y in many ways to stimulate our 
afflictions and to create obstacles for our Dharma  practice. He cannot bear others doing virtue, 
fearing they will outshine him.  
 
Many obstacles arise when we try to engage in vi rtue. Even in the midst of carrying out virtuous 
actions, we can see the afflictions manifesting in our minds. We may experience interferences 
from external beings, stirring up our negative em otions. Sometimes, we meet with wrong teachers 
who lead us to the wrong paths. Alternatively, even when we receive pure teachings, we are 
unable to ascertain those teachings, having only doubts in our minds. Such doubts will hinder us 
from meeting qualified teachers and virtuous friends who can help us overcome our doubts. 
Even when we do meet with such people, we do not have enough analytical wisdom to cut the 
doubts from our own minds. Even if we have th e wisdom to eliminate such doubts, we have no 
opportunity or  interest to hear, refl ect and meditate on the teachings.  
 
Our lives are rendered meaningless because of all thes e obstacles. If we let things stay as they are, 
then it will be extremely difficult for us to find all the favourable conditions to practise Dharma 
in our future lives. We can safely conclude it will be almost impossible for us to find a future 
rebirth that is  endowed with the eight freedoms and the ten endowments. We can also safely say 
that we can forget about practising Dharma then as  there will be no condit ions for us to do so.  
 
Therefore, while we still have the conditions to practise the Dharma, coupled with this human 
life of leisures and opportunities, we should re ly on conscientiousness to study and practise the 
teachings on emptiness, which ar e the essence of the entire Buddh adharma, as much as we can. 
Without applying ourselves to achieving the realisat ion of emptiness, it will be impossible for us 
to cross the river of afflictions and to stop ou r suffering. The wisdom realising emptiness is the 
only  antidote against our negative emotions. Without this wisdom realising emptiness, our 
suffering will go on and on and our cy clic existence will also not stop.  
 
v) Thus, it is fitting to feel sorrow for the fact that both oneself and others are tormented by 
the sufferings of cyclic existence 
(9,163) 
O indeed, it is worth feeling sorrow 
For those adrift in the river of pain, who 
Although they experience great misery 
Are unaware of the suffer ings they go through. 
 
(9,164) 
For example, some (ascetics) wash themselves again and again, 
And others repeatedly enter fire, 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
508  
But although they thereby suffer greatly, 
They pride themselves in being content. 
 
(9,165) 
Similarly, those (who mistak e their suffering for joy) 
And live as though there were no ageing or death, 
Are' first of all killed (by the Lord of Death), 
And then experience the unbearable mi sery of falling into lower realms. 
 
The childish are those who do not know what is to be abandoned and what is to be cultivated. 
They think they are experiencing  happiness and pleasure and fail to see how they are tormented 
by suffering. Because of this, they are bounded to  the river of suffering. The childish become our 
objects of compassion.   
For example, people who dislike feeling hot will do many things to cool themselves down but 
after a while, they will start to feel cold. They then look for ways to wa rm themselves. This shows 
no matter what these people do, they will end up  with suffering. But they do not realise this. 
Instead, they grasp at that which is in the nature of suffering to be pleasure.  
 
They think like arhats, doubting whether they will ever fall ill, grow old or even die. With such 
doubts, they live their lives in a very relaxed way as if they had already gained the state of 
liberation. They enjoy themselves, indulging in material comforts an d idle chatter. One day, their 
world collapses when death suddenly arrives. Th ey proceed to the lower realms where greater 
sufferings await them.    When we reflect on this state of affairs, then the understanding comes that as long as we take 
rebirth in cyclic existence, it is all in the nature  of suffering. When we are able to see this, then 
compassion will be developed for all  sentient be ings in cyclic existence regardless of where they 
may be. Presently, our compassion is half-heart ed. It is easy to feel compassionate towards 
someone undergoing manifest suffering and pain. But when we see the rich and famous, we do 
not feel any compassion for them.  
c) Teaching the subjective aspect of the way in which great compassion apprehends things [lit. the 
aspect of great compassion's mode of apprehension] 
 
(9,166) 
When shall I be able to extinguish 
(The pains of) those tormented by the fires of suffering 
With the rain of my accumulated happiness 
That has sprung from the clouds of my merits? 
 
(9,167) 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
509  
And by having, in the manner of no t referring (to true existence), 
Respectfully gathered the accumulation of merit, 
When, by referring to th e other, will I be able  to reveal emptiness 
To those who are wretched and sad? 
 
The objects of compassion here are the suffering  sentient beings of the three realms.  This 
compassion takes the aspe ct of the mind that wishes these sentient beings to be free from all 
suffering.   When we engage in the practices of generosity, pa tience and so forth, we accumulate merit. We 
visualise emanating the results of such merit. For example, when we practise generosity, we 
accumulate the merit to have food, clothing and me dicines, etc. We visualise giving all this food, 
clothing, medicine, etc. to all sentient beings to  eliminate their temporal suffering. We visualise 
liberating the sentient beings in the lower realms  and placing them in good rebirths. Essentially, 
it is a mind that visualises this, focussing on sentient beings and thinking, “When will I actually 
be able to do this? I will do this one d ay.” This is taking on the responsibility.  
 The collection of wisdom accumulated through the ascertainment of th e meaning of dependent 
origination at its subtlest level enhances our ment al capacity to realise the subtle conventionality 
of how things actually exist. This, in turn, incr eases the power of our accumulation of merit. We 
then dedicate that collection of merit as causes  for all sentient beings to realise emptiness and 
also for us to be able to reveal to them the mean ing of emptiness. So, first, we generate the mind 
of wishing to place all sentient beings in the state of temporal happiness. On that basis, we 
develop the wish to place all sentient bein gs in the state of  ultimate happiness. 
 
At the end of the commentary to this chapter, Gy altsab Je mentioned that as long as we do not 
f i n d  a  p e r f e c t  h o l y  g u r u  o r  q u a l i f i e d  t e a c h e r ,  w e  w i l l  n o t  b e  a b l e  t o  g a i n  e v e n  a  p a r t i a l  
understanding of the Middle Way that is free of th e two extremes. We would not be able to gain 
a partial understanding of the meaning of depend ent origination which is the path that enables 
us to cut the root of cyclic ex istence. Gyaltsab Je is speaking from his personal experience. 
 
Gyaltsab Je had already declared that whatever ex planation he was able to offer on this chapter 
came only from the kindness of his own teache rs. Whatever understanding and realisation on 
emptiness he might have and whatever explanation on emptiness he was able to give to sentient 
beings, all this was due to the kindness of his own gurus. Therefore, he dedicated all his merit for 
all mother sentient beings to meet and be guided by Mahayana gurus.   Gyaltsab Je is pointing out that without realisin g the view of the Middle Way that is free from the 
two extremes, it is extremely difficult for us to achieve liberation and enlightenment. Therefore, 
we must strive to have decisive ascertainment of the presentation on dependent origination and 
emptiness, that is, because things are dependen tly originated, therefore they are empty of  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
510  
inherent existence. We must put in great e ffort to understand and meditate on this.  
 
Gyaltsab Je also said that ascertaining and un derstanding the teachings on  emptiness are very 
difficult even if we were to put in a lot of ef fort. There will come a time when these wonderful 
teachings, especially Nagarjuna's presentation on the two truths, will not last  much longer in this 
world and will degenerate quickly. Therefore,  those who are intelligent and wise should 
understand this and quickly put in th e effort now to realise emptiness. 
Lesson 89   Chapter IX 
We have been looking at the four placements of mindfulness, which can be considered from 
conventional and ultimate perspectives. The latte r perspective is covered in great detail by 
Shantideva in chapter 9 of this text, Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds . 
 
I had divided the class into different groups. Each group was given the task of  produce a 
meditation outline on this su bject. The accuracy of the ou tlines produced based on the 
presentations made remains to be seen. But ther e does not seem to be much difference in the 
presentations by the different groups. Your outl ines appear to be simply extracted from the 
material we had studied. Nevertheless, doing this  exercise facilitates studying the material. We 
may think it is easy to produce a meditation outlin e but when we actually have to do so, we find 
it is not so straightforward.   When we look at the four placements of mindfu lness, each has its own line of reasoning to 
establish the lack of inherent existence of its object – the body, feelin gs, mind and phenomena. 
For example, when we examine placing mindfulne ss on feelings, we analyse their  nature, the 
causes and objects that gives rise to them and th e experiencer of those feelings. From the various 
reasons used to establish the lack of inherent ex istence, we should pick out the arguments that 
we find particularly beneficial for our minds. Th en, when we meditate on them, they will have a 
positive effect on our minds.   When we work on the meditation outlines, we sh ould not simply regurgitate what was covered in 
class. For example, when we look at the placemen t of mindfulness on the body, the purpose is to 
subdue our attachment to it. So many arguments are put forth. We should be able to select a few that we find particularly helpful for our minds.  We spend our whole lives doing many things to 
sustain and maintain our bodies. All this is due to our strong attachment for our bodies, which 
we need to overcome. The best way to do this is  to reflect and meditate on how the body is not 
inherently existent.   Whenever we listen to and study the teachings, we  should not leave it at those levels. We should 
apply ourselves to reflecting on what we had he ard and studied with the aim of producing some 
experience of the teachings in our minds. Only wh en we reflect on the teachings will we be able 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
511  
to come to some ascertainment or understanding of th e topic: “I see. It is really like this.” There 
is some movement in the mind. 
 
We have heard the words “emptiness of inherent existence” and “lack of inherent existence” 
countless times over the last few months. Our minds should have changed after hearing the 
words “emptiness of inherent existence” so frequently but we do not see any mental 
transformation.  The reason is because we have no t put in any effort to reflect on the meaning of 
this phrase: “emptiness of inherent existence.” Knowing the words alone are not enough.   We 
need to think, “What do they really  mean? What are they driving at?”  
 
Chapter 8 also dealt at great lengths on how to  remove our attachment to our bodies through 
reflecting on their dirty nature and unpleasant as pects. But reflecting on the lack of inherent 
existence of the body as presented in Chapter 9 is  the best method to deal with our attachment 
to our bodies. For someone who has strong desire and attachment to the bo dy, I doubt that that 
attachment can be weakened simply by reflecting on its unpleasant aspects. He or she may be thoroughly convinced that the body is desirable an d pleasant and may find it difficult to accept 
and be resistant towards the reasons refuting this.   Here the object of attachment is  the body which appears pleasant  and existing inherently, from 
its own side. When we are attracted to the body of  another person, that desirability appears very 
real which reinforces our attraction towards it . When I mention these points, check from your 
own experience whether what I am saying is true or not.   Now,  let us switch our attention to another pleasa nt object that we are attached to other than 
our own body.  Check how that object appears to our minds. All its pleasant attributes seem to 
come independently from the side of the object itself, having nothing to do with our minds or 
mental projections.  Isn't that how the pleasant object appears to our minds?  
 We do not have the idea: “Oh! The existence of that pleasant object has something to do with 
my mind.” This kind of thought never arises in  our minds. Not only do pleasant things and 
events appear to us to be completely existent from their own side but we believe they exist in the 
way they appear to us. We grasp at those objects to be inherently existent and it is this grasping  
that acts as the condition for a ttachment and desire to increase when we come into contact with 
them.   In the same way, what happens when we come into  contact with unpleasant objects that cause us 
suffering and unhappiness? How do they appear to our minds? They appear to be completely 
unpleasant from their own side, again having nothing to do with our minds. We completely believe in their unpleasantness which is why we  develop hatred and aversion towards them.  
  Be it  frien d o r fo e, pl eas an t  o r un pleas an t  o b ject, we need to analyse whether they exist from 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
512  
their own side or are created by our minds. When  we really analyse this, we can conclude that 
the object is merely labelled by the mind as pleasant or unpleasant and that quality is the 
creation or projection of our mi nds. There is nothing inherently pleasant or unpleasant from the 
side of the object.  
 How can we verify that this is so?  It is very easy. Think of a time when we had strong attachment and desire for someone. Let us say we are atta ched to a woman. When that attachment is 
manifesting in our mind, she appears to be comple tely pleasant and attrac tive. It does not matter 
from which angle we look at her. From the top of her head down to her toes, every single part of her body appears pleasant and desirable. But th is is mere mental projection on our part.  
 How can we understand that there is nothing th at comes from the side  of the object? When 
there is the slightest change of condition, fo r example, she does something that hurts us, 
immediately she appears differently to us and will not seem as desirable as before. This change in 
appearance is the result of our minds changing th eir outlook and does not arise from the side of 
the object. When we reflect in such a way, it be comes clear that an inherently pleasant object 
does not exist.   Similarly, there isn't any inherently existent attrac tive body and since this is so, the person also 
cannot inherently exist as well. That is the reality but  we are completely ignorant of this fact. We 
perceive reality in the completely opposite way.  That is why our lives are full of problems and 
difficulties due to our grasping at inherently ex istent phenomena. This is the root of all our 
problems. This is what we need to meditate on for a few minutes every day. Then, we will definitely see some positive change in our minds.  If we do not meditate on this, our minds will 
never change and improve.   This brings our attention to the object of attach ment, the body.  Where is this body that we are 
attached to? We have to check from the top of our heads to the tips of our toes. If the body exists 
inherently, where is it? When we l ook for the body that we are so attached to, there is nothing we 
can point to that we can call the body.   It is easy to establish the lack of inherent existe nce of a coarse object su ch as the body. The body 
does not exist inherently because there is nothin g that we can point to as the body. When we 
analyse the different parts of the body, they ar e not the body. When we analyse the individual 
parts of the body, for example the hand, we will not be able to find an inherently existent hand 
either because the hand is also made up of  sma ller parts. Analysing even more deeply, the object 
of inquiry would be the subtlest particles that make up the body, which are subtler than coarse 
objects such as the body and its parts.   Nevertheless even when we look at the subtlest  particles of the body, which cannot be broken 
down any further into smaller units, they possess directional parts, i.e., there are parts of the 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
513  
particle facing each of the cardinal directions. These directional parts are merely imputed by the 
mind, like space whose mere lack of obstructiv e contact is also merely imputed by the mind. 
There is nothing that we can point to as space.  
 
Therefore, analysing a coarse object  such as the body to its subtlest  level, we will realise that its 
subtlest particles are also empty of inherent existenc e, like space.  But when  we say that the object 
does not exist inherently, it does not mean it do es not exist at all. For example, although we 
cannot find the inherently existent body, this do es not mean that the body is non-existent. The 
body is conventionally established. If, at the end of our analysis, we were to conclude: “Oh! Since 
the body cannot be found, then the body does not exist,” that would be wrong.  
 The body does exist as it is certified by a valid cognition even though the inherently existent body 
is not findable. We cannot say that there is no bo dy as this assertion can be harmed by worldly 
conventions. Therefore when we try to establish the emptiness of the body, we should arrive at 
the conclusion that “Yes! The body is not inherently  existent but nevertheless it exists as it can be 
validated by valid cognition and worldly conventi ons. The body exists as a dependent arising.” 
We should understand that the body is depend ently arisen and is merely imputed upon the 
collection of its parts and exists through the force of conceptuality. 
 If we can understand the above lines of reasonin g as applied to the body, we can use them to 
analyse the desirable body we are attached to. We will then conclude that that body also exists 
only through the force of conceptuality and is merely labelled by our minds and is empty of inherent existence. When we have ascertained th is fact, we can decisively conclude: “The body 
exists only through the force of conceptuality. Th ere is nothing other than that.” Being able to 
arrive at that ascertainment and conclusion will definitely help us to reduce our attachment for 
the desirable body we are attracted to.   With respect to the stages of me ditation on emptiness, there are two. First, we analyse whether 
phenomena are inherently existent or not.  That is the object of inquiry. Employing logic and 
reasoning, we should conclude that phenomena do not exist inherently.   During our meditation, we should try to enter into  the state of meditative equipoise which is like 
space. During the post meditative sessions, when we arise from that state of meditative equipoise, 
then we should see everything to be like illusions.  Once we have achieved the decisive ascertainm ent of this fact, then we place our minds in 
meditative equipoise, focussing on emptiness whic h is like space, for as long as we can.  
 After arising from the state of meditative eq uipoise, when we think of conventionality, 
functionality, object, agent and activities,  causes  and effects or karma and its results, if they 
appear to be inherently existent and that appearan ce increases our self-grasping, this is the sign 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
514  
that our understanding of emptiness has not yet hit the spot. We still grasp at things and events 
as being inherently existent.   
On the other hand, after arising from the medita tive equipoise focussing on emptiness which is 
like space, when the mere appearance of co nventionality or causality supports our earlier 
ascertainment, then this is the sign that we have correctly understood emptiness. That is why it is 
said in the teachings: “Emptiness and dependent origination are complementary and not 
contradictory.”  
 Arising from meditative equipoise with our correct  understanding of emptiness, we train in the 
post meditative sessions by seeing how phenomen a are like illusions. While having ascertained 
that phenomena are not inherently existent, neve rtheless we clearly understand that there is 
functionality, that conventionality can be posite d. For example, although things are empty of 
inherent existence, nevertheless there is still accu mulation of merit and purification of negative 
karma and so forth.   During the meditative equipoise focussing on spac e-like emptiness, we accumulate the collection 
of wisdom. In the post meditative sessions, we a ccumulate the collection of merit on the basis of 
understanding the functionality and conventional ity of phenomena, which is grounded in our 
earlier ascertainment of the empt iness of inherent existence. 
 Our understanding of cause and effect will be rein forced and we will be able to live our lives 
following strictly the law of cause and effect. Th e stronger our  understanding and ascertainment 
of emptiness, the stronger will be our certainty th at when we engage in virtue, we will definitely 
experience happy  results and if we engage in non-virtue, we will  experience suffering results.  
The correct realisation of emptiness increases our belief and conviction in the law of cause and 
effect precisely because we understand that  they are empty of inherent existence. 
 We need both the collection of merit and wi sdom to achieve enlightenment. When we 
accumulate the collection of merit after havi ng ascertained that phenomena are empty of 
inherent existence, then our accumulation of merit becomes very pure and powerful. This is 
because such accumulation of merit is now perfor med on the basis of realising the emptiness of 
inherent existence of the three circles of the agent, the action and the object.   
 When we have the correct ascertainment of empt iness, we will understand that phenomena are 
dependently originated: “Because phenomena are em pty of inherent existence, therefore they are 
dependently originated. Because phenomena are dependently originated, therefore they are 
empty of inherent existence.” This supports and strengthens our conviction in conventionalities 
such as the law of cause and effect, karma.   When we are feeling agitated or  unhappy, we should investigate the nature of those feelings. 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
515  
Where are the feelings? When we search for them, they cannot be found either within or outside 
the body. When we look for the unpleasant feel ing, we probably would not think that it is 
abiding in our heads or arms but rather, instinct ively, we feel it is abiding somewhere in our 
heart. We are unlikely to say that the feeling is  at our belly. Why the heart? There seems to be 
some physical relationship between the mind and the heart. But even so, when we think that the 
unhappy feeling is at our heart, a doctor will not be able to find it if he was to cut us open. 
 
We should analyse and look for that feeling at th e level of our heart. We would not be able to 
find it. We can conclude: “This unpleasant feelin g is my own creation.”  Then we should ask 
ourselves, “Why do I do this to myself? Why am  I making myself unhappy? I want to be happy 
b u t  I  a m  o n l y  c r e a t i n g  s u f f e r i n g  f o r  m y s e l f . ”  T h i s  i s  s o m e t h i n g  w e  c a n  o n l y  e x p e r i e n c e  o n  a n  
individual level upon reflection and analysis. When we have this understanding, we will become more relaxed and at peace with ourselves. Wh en we are experiencing a lot of problems, 
difficulties and unhappiness, it will definitely be be neficial for us to try and think in this way.  
Lesson 90   Chapter IX 
When we search for the body by looking for it fr om the top of our heads down to the tips of our 
toes, it cannot be found. Although each body pa rt is not the body itself, whenever we think of 
the body, how does that body appear to our mind s? It still appears as very solid. Then the 
question will arise in our minds: “Yes, I can point to something that is the body. It is the mere aggregation of the body parts. The collectio n of those parts together is the body.”  
 We can establish that each individual body part  that makes up the body is  not the body. But 
what about the aggregation of th ose parts together?  We have to  analyse whether that collection 
of parts is the body.    The great Indian master, Chandrakirti uses th e analogy of a chariot to help us determine 
whether the body is the mere collection of all its parts. Chandrakirti said: If the mere collection of 
the bodily parts is the body then, similarly, one will have  to say that a chariot is th e mere collection of all its 
constituent parts. If we agree a chario t is basically the mere collection of  its parts - the axle, the wheels and 
so forth - if we were to disassemble the chariot and lay out all its parts, we have to say that those parts are 
the chariot as well. But where is the chariot?  
 
If we can understand this analogy, we can appl y it to the body. When we maintain that the 
chariot is the mere aggregation of  its parts, this means the chario t remains even when it is taken 
apart and all its parts laid out. But we will no t say those parts are the chariot. The chariot no 
longer exists. Similarly, the body is no t the mere collections of its parts.  
 Another argument that refutes the body being a me re collection of its parts is shown by this 
example: We can no longer say that a physically impaired person who is missing a body part, say 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
516  
an arm or a leg, has a body. In fact, we would have  to say that the physically impaired person has 
no body because his body no longer fits  our definition of what a body is.  
 
If we were asked, we would probably say that the body is the collection of its parts. That is how 
we usually perceive our bodies which appear as something very solid and complete entities by 
themselves. But from the reasons given, we  can es tablish that the body is not the mere collection 
of its parts.  
 
Someone may then wonder: “The mere collection of the body's parts is not the body, perhaps, 
the shape of all those parts when  put together is the body?”  
 We had seen earlier how the chariot ceases to exist when its constituent parts are disassembled 
and laid out. We would say that the collection of  parts in this  disassembled state is not the 
chariot. But what if we were to put all the parts back together again, giving rise to the peculiar 
shape associated with the chariot? We would have to  say that that is a char iot. When we say that, 
is that not akin to saying that that peculiar shap e is the chariot? What is the fallacy in asserting 
that that shape of the assembled chariot parts is the chariot?  
 When we look for the inherently existent chariot, first, we have  to examine whether any of the 
chariot parts is the chariot itself. It is relatively easy to establish that the individual parts of the 
chariot are not the chariot.   Then we proceed to the next level: “
Is the mere collection of all those parts assembled 
together the chariot?”  We had already established that that is also not the chariot because 
when we disassemble the parts, the chariot no longer exists.  
 
The next level of inquiry then is: “Is the peculiar shape of that a ssembly of collection of parts the 
chariot?”   
 
Answer to student’s question: 
A scarecrow with the shape of a hu man body does not have the func tion of one. The function of 
the human body is not to scare off birds! If we were to assert the inherent existence of a human 
body, then the peculiar shape of the collection  of the human body parts is the human body.  
 
According to Prasangika, all phenomena are esta blished through the force of conceptuality and 
are merely labelled by the mind. Whatever are mere ly labelled by the mind (our mental creations) 
however, do not necessarily exist. 
 
Under certain conditions, such as darkness, it is po ssible to mistake a coil of rope to be a snake. 
Because of the  darkness, we see the appearance of the snake and believing that there is a snake, 
we become frightened and run away. The mind is completely convinced of the existence of a real 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
517  
snake but in reality there is no snake there at all.  
 The object of inquiry here is the body.  We look  for the body, analysing where it could be step-by-
step through the various levels mentioned above. We  have to analyse what is the fault in asserting 
that the body is the shape of the assembly of the collection of body  parts. This assertion seems to 
be true, that the body is really there and inherently existent. 
 
Although we had been discussing the emptiness of  inherent existence for the last three to four 
months, after this period of inquiries and studying, we may conclude, “Things do exist 
inherently!” 
 Only Prasangika asserts that phenomena are empt y of inherent existence. All the tenet systems 
below Prasangika assert that for anything to exist, they exist inherently. What does inherent 
existence mean? It means when the imputed object is  sought, it is findable. If it cannot be found, 
then the imputed object does not exist inhe rently. It seems we have found the body!
 We have 
found the chariot! 
 
We have to understand the difference between in herent existence and no n- inherent existence 
and know the measure of each. The great Indian pandits and ma sters such as Nagarjuna and 
Chandrakirti are unanimous in asserting that the measure of inherent existence is that when the 
imputed object is sought, it is findable. That is  the rule of engagement and cannot be changed.  
 
Prasangika has its own reasons for asserting that phenomena do not exist inherently just as the 
schools below it have their own reasons for saying  that phenomena do exis t inherently. This is 
the basis for debate here.   We had seen earlier how the different Buddhist tene ts have different illustrations of the person, 
the I, ranging from the collection of the aggreg ates to all the five aggregates to the mental 
consciousness. For Cittamatra, the person is the mind-basis-of-all. The reason for these different 
illustrations is because all these tenet systems poin t to an inherently existent person who can be 
found upon analysis.   Prasangika, on the other hand, asserts that thin gs do not exist inherent ly. Why? Because when 
one looks for the imputed object, it cannot be foun d.  There is nothing that one can point to as 
the object one is looking for.   The whole purpose of using the chariot as an anal ogy is to help us to establish within our own 
minds the selflessness or emptiness of the inherent ly existent person. When the object of inquiry 
is the person, we have to check if the person is abiding within the pa rts of the body – the 
individual body parts, the mind or the collection of these two? Is the shape of the collection of 
the body parts the person? We have to check. 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
518  
 
If we posit that the chariot is th e shape of the collection of its a ssembled parts, then we also have 
to assert that the person is the shape of the collection of the five aggregates put together. But is 
the shape of  the collection of the five aggregat es the person? We can say,  “No,” because shape is 
form which means the person has to be  form but the person is not form.  
 
In the module on Lorig, we saw how composed phenomena (or functioning things) are divided 
into three categories: form, consciousness or non- associated compositional factor. The person is 
neither form nor consciousness but since it is a fu nctioning thing, it has to be a non-associated 
compositional factor.  
 It is easy to say the words, “The person is not inherently  existent.” But we really need to check up 
– can the person be found upon analysis or not? It is only upon analysis, when we discover that the person we seek is not findable, that we have ascertained that the person really does not exist 
inherently.   At the same time, we know the person still exists . How does the person exist? The person exists 
on the basis of being merely labe lled by the mind, through the forc e of conceptuality. This is the 
conclusion we should arrive at. But we should not stop there.   How do we account for the functionality of the pe rson when it is merely  labelled by the mind 
through the force of conceptuality? There is the agent, the action and the object. These elements 
still appear as very real and inherently existe nt in our minds. That is the difficult part. 
 There is another issue to be analysed. Mere impu tation through the force of conceptuality can be 
divided into two categories: (1) existents that  are merely labelled by the mind and (2) non-
existents that are merely labelled by the mind.  When we analyse existents and non-existents, the mi nd can fall into the trap of thinking things 
exist inherently. We may be inclined to think: “For  things that do exist, there is some objective 
reality and something about them, existing from their own side.” 
   We can see from this discussion it is easy to say the words, “merely labelled by the mind” and 
“things are empty of inherent existence.” But wh en we really study and analyse these concepts, 
things are no longer so straight forward.  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                           CHAPTER IX - WISDOM  
 
519  
 
 It is very difficult and our understanding seems to  fluctuate and be very unstable.  This is the 
difficulty we will experience. 
91 
 
b The chapter’s name 
 
We have been spending a few months trying to study Chapter 9, Wisdom  and we have finally 
finished the chapter. You shou ld rejoice that you have persevered in coming to class. 
 
                                              
91 The fivefold reasoning as stated in Nagarjuna's Treatise on the Middle Way is: 
The self does not inherently exist because of :- 
1. not being the aggregates, 
2. not being other than the aggregates,  
3. not being the base of the aggregates,  
4. not depending on the aggregates, and  
5. not possessing the aggregates.  
An example is a chariot. 
The reason is fivefold, and thus it is called the fivefold reasoning.  Chandrakirti added two more 'corners' to the 
reason: 
6. not being the shape of the aggregates, and 
7. not being the composite of the aggregates. 
 
In a slightly longer form the sevenfold reasoning is: 
Except for only being imputed in depe ndence upon the aggregates which are its basis of imputation, there is no 
self-subsistent self, for: 
1. the aggregates which are the basis of  the imputation are not the person 
2. the person is not an entity other than the aggregates which are the basis of its     imputation 
3. the person is not the support of the aggr egates which are its basis of imputation 
4. the person ultimately does not depend on the aggregates which are its basis of imputation 
5. the person ultimately does  not possess the aggregates 
6. the person is not the shape of the aggreg ates which are its basis of imputation 
7. the person is not the composite of the aggreg ates which are the basis of its imputation. 
(Meditation on Emptiness  by Jeffrey Hopkins, pages 179-180) 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                     CHAPTER X - DEDICATION  
 
520  
The Tenth Chapter: Dedication 
4. Explaining, by way of the branch of dedication, th e way to train in giving away body, material wealth, 
and the roots of virtue for the welfare of others 
A. Explaining the chapter’s material 
1) A brief presentation of the dedication for all migrators to engage in the bodhisattvas’ conduct 
2) An extensive explanation of the dedication 
a) Dedicating for the welfare of others 
i) Dedicating for mundane purposes 
1’ Dedicating so that the suffering of disease and so forth may be pacified 
a’ Dedicating for the sake of temporary pleasure 
b’ Dedicating for the sake of the final bliss 
2’ Dedicating so that the suffering of  the lower realms may be pacified 
a’ Pacifying the hells realms’ suffering 
1’’ Dedicating so that such suffering may quickly be pacified 
a’’ Dedicating so that the universal sufferings [of the hell realms] may be pacified 
b’’ Pacifying the sufferings of the cold hells 
c’’ Dedicating so that the sufferings of the hot hells may be pacified 
(1) Dedicating so that dharmas arisen from the clouds of the 
bodhisattvas’ two accumulations may pacify suffering 
(2) Pacifying the suffering of the adjoining hells 
(3) The actual site of the hells 
(4) Dedicating so that the other sufferings of the adjoining hells are 
pacified 
2’’ Dedicating so that it may be pacified through the force of others 
a’’ Pacifying suffering through the force of Vajrapani 
b’’ Pacifying suffering through the compassion of Avalokiteshvara 
c’’ Pacifying suffering through the force of Manjushri’s miraculous display 
d’’ Aspiring for pacification through the capacities of the other Closest Sons 
[Kshitigarbha, Akashagarbha, Maitreya, etc.] 
b’ Dedicating for the welfare of animals 
c’ Dedicating for the welfare of hungry ghosts 
3’ Dedicating for the welfare of [beings in] the higher realms 
a’ Dedicating so that they may be free of suffering 
1’’ Dedicating so that they may not be born with incomplete faculties and be without 
discomfort while in the womb 
2’’ Dedicating so that they are without the suffering of poverty and mental discomfort 
3’’ Dedicating so that they may be without the sufferings of illness and the suffering of 
encountering aversion 
4’’ Dedicating so that the suffering of beings in all directions and the harm caused by non-
humans is pacified 
b’ Dedicating so that they may accomplish their desired aims 
1’’ Dedicating for the welfare of humans in general 
a’’ Dedicating so that they may obtain excellences 
(1) Dedicating so that they obtain the support of leisures and endowments and 
excellent resources 
(2) Dedicating so that they are without violence and have the excellent magnificence 
(3) Dedicating so that they may have the excellent body and that the inferior become supreme 
(4) Dedicating for the excellent virtues 
b’’ Dedicating so that they enter the correct path 
(1) Wishing for them to have the excelle nt thought and action for accomplishing the 
path of liberation (2) Wishing that all conducive conditions be complete and that they be without 
adverse conditions 
c’’ Dedicating so that they have the temporary endowments and pleasure 
(1) Dedicating so that they have long lives and so that the world-this vessel- be pure 
and clean 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                     CHAPTER X - DEDICATION  
 
521  
(2) Dedicating so that [this world] be full of beneficial beings and for their conduct [to 
abide] in bliss 
(3) Dedicating so that all basic necessities are complete and that harm is pacified 
2’’ Dedicating for the welfare of the ordained in particular 
a’’ Dedicating for the welfare of the Sangha in general 
b’’ Dedicating for the welfare of bhiksus 
c’’ Dedicating for the welfare of bhiksunis 
d’’ Dedicating so that there is excellence of ethics 
e’’ Dedicating so that they experience the effect- bliss 
4’ A presentation of the dedication for the welfare of all sentient beings in brief 
ii) Dedicating for supramundane purposes 
1’ Dedicating so that the aims of the bodhisattvas be accomplished 2’ Dedicating so that the activity of the Buddhas be brought to completion 
3’ Dedicating so that the aims of the hearers and solitary realizers be accomplished 
b) Dedicating for one’s own welfare 
i) Wishing for temporary effects to be obtained 
ii) Wishing to be looked after directly by Manjushri 
iii) Wishing to abide by the bodhisattvas’ conduct 
iv) Wishing for the welfare of others to be brought to completion 
c) Dedicating so that the Teachings- the source of bliss- spread 
3) Paying homage by recalling kindnesses 
B. The chapter’s name 
 
IV. The Conclusion 
A. Who composed the treatise 
B. Who translated it 
 
We will recite Chapter X to dedicate the roots of  virtue and the merit we have acquired through 
studying and listening to this wisd om chapter of Shantideva's text. 
 
(Please refer to the translation of the root text by Toh Sze Gee for recitation of the dedication chapter ) 
 
Some of you may be feeling discouraged or disappo inted that, even after coming to class, you do 
not understand this topic, which is so difficult . You may feel there is no difference whether you 
attend class or not because you still do not unders tand anything. But this is not the case. Even if 
you do not understand everything, it  is definitely beneficial for you to come to class and listen to 
the teachings. It definitely makes a difference.   There are people who mentioned to me how much  they had benefited from attending classes. 
They used to find it so difficult to understand  books and texts on emptiness in the past. After 
attending these classes, they find these same mate rials so much easier to understand when they 
read them again. In fact, they are motivated to continue reading more about emptiness.  
 There are also people who said that,  precisel y because of having attended these classes and 
listening to the teachings, they are able to un derstand the teachings on emptiness that were 
recently given by His Holiness the Dalai Lama in  Dharamsala. Some studen ts told me that, due 
to coming to class, they found their interest in the teachings have increased and they have 
generated greater determination to take  their studies to the next level. 
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre - Geshe Chonyi         Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds - Part 2 
FPMT Basic Program                     CHAPTER X - DEDICATION  
 
522  
I believe these people are merely expressing their own experiences. I do no t think they are out to 
make me happy. 
 
All this has happened because of the coming togeth er of all the conditions: there is a teacher, a 
translator and students. From my side, I am not sure whether all of you benefited from this 
module but I am quite sure that at least one or two persons definitely benefited. By coming to 
class, it increased their enthusiasm for their stud ies and their understanding of the importance of 
studying. Their interest in the Buddhadharma ha s become stronger. Even if only one or two 
persons experience this kind of benefit, I th ink that is a very good thing. I rejoice.  
 
Sometimes, I do question the point of teaching this complicated material  here when people are 
so busy and already have so many difficulties in th eir own lives. The text is tough. People did not 
seem to understand what I was trying to explain.  I wondered then what is the purpose of giving 
such teachings.   It was difficult for me, especially for this IXth chapter. Things must have been difficult for you 
too. Of course, from my side, I cannot really ex plain the topic of emptiness well but when I saw 
that a few people benefited from it, their unders tanding of emptiness improved a little and they 
were a little more encouraged and interested in their studies, my enthusiasm and determination 
was revived. From my side, I had completed my st udies. I always pray for those who are actually 
studying correctly to study well and to continue to put in effort in their studies. I always pray that 
they may be able to complete their studies. An yway, I had spoken on many occasions before on 
how extremely important it is to listen and to study the teachings. Relatively speaking, I had 
studied more than you, so from that point of view, I can tell you from my personal experience 
how extremely important it is.   