Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Engaging in the Deeds of a Bodhisattva/BD_RootText_Shantideva_translTohSzeGee2014.pdf
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:52:17.060833
================================================================================

   
 
 
 
 
 
Engaging in the Deeds of a Bodhisattva  
by  
Shantideva  
 
 
 
 
Translated by Toh Sze Gee  
based on the earlier translations by Stephen Batchelor  
 and other translators  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Extracted from  
A Precious Garland, A Commentary on [Shantideva’s]  
 ‘Engaging in  the Deeds of a Bodhisattva’  
by the Abbot Dragpa Gyaltsen  
translated by Toh Sze Gee  
 
 
 
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© Toh Sze Gee  2006  
Revised 2014  
 
All rights reserved  
 
 
No part of this work may be reproduced in any form or by any 
means, electronic or mechanical, incl uding photocopying, recording, 
or by any information storage and retrieval system or technologies 
now known or later developed, without permission in writing from 
Toh Sze Gee.  
 
1 Engaging in the Deeds of a Bodhisattva  
by  
Shantideva  
 
 
Translat ed by Toh Sze Gee  
based on the earlier  translations by Stephen Batchelor and other translators.  
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter One  
Explanation of the Benefits of the Mind of Enlightenment  
 
Homage to all the b uddhas and bodhisattvas.  
1.1 Respectfully I pay homage to the Sugatas who are e ndowed with the 
dharmakaya,  
As well as to their children, a nd to all who are worthy of homage.  
Here I shall describe how to engage in the vows of the  Sugatas’ children,  
The meaning of which I have summarized in accordance with the scriptures.  
1.2 There is  nothing here that has not appeared in the past  
And I have no skill in the art of rhetoric;  
Therefore, not to enact the welfare of others,  
I composed this in order to acquaint it to my mind.  
1.3 For due to acquaintance with virtue,  
The force of my faith wi ll for the time being increase  because of these.  
If, however, these are seen by others  
Equal in fortune to myself, it will be meaningful.  
1.4 The l eisure s and endowments are very hard to find.  
Since they accomplish the purposes of beings,  
If I do not accom plish benefit upon this,  
How will I acquire this in the future?  
1.5 Just as a flash of lightning brightly illuminates  
For an instant within the clouds on a dark night,  
Likewise in this world, through the might of the Buddha,  
Merit and intelligence occasio nally occur  for once.
Shantideva’s  Engaging in the Deeds of a Bodhisattva          Translation Toh Sze Gee  
 
2 1.6 Hence virtue is perpetually feeble,  
The great power of negativities, horrible.  
Except for a mind of complete enlightenment  
By what other virtue will it be overcome?  
1.7 All the Lords of Subduers who have contemplated for many eons  
Have seen it to be beneficial;  
For by it the immeasurable masses of beings  
Will easily attain the supreme happiness.  
1.8 Those who wish to destroy the multitudes of sufferings of existence,  
Those who wish to dispel the  unhappiness of sentient beings,  
And those who wish to enjoy multitudes of happiness,  
Should never forsake the mind of enlightenment.  
1.9 When  the mind of enlightenment is generated, in that moment  
Those wretched ones fettered in the jail of cyclic existence  
Will be called “ Child  of the Sugat as,” 
And will become objects of reverence by the humans and gods of the world.  
1.10 Like the supreme gold -making elixir,  
It takes the unclean body and transforms it  
Into the priceless jewel, a Victor’s body.  
Therefore , firmly seize this so -called “mind of enlightenment.”  
1.11 Since the sole helmsmen of migrating beings, the limitless mind , 
Has upon thorough investigation seen its preciousness,  
All beings wishing to be free from  the abodes of migration,  
Firmly seize this precious mind of enlightenment.  
1.12 All other vir tues are like the plantain tree,  
For after bearing fruit they will be exhausted.  
But the tree of the mind of enlightenment will constantly bear fruit,  
Whereby it is inexhaustible and flourish es more and more.   
1.13 Like depending on a hero whe n greatly afraid,  
Even if I may have committed very terrible negativities,  
I shall be swiftly liberated in dependence upon it.  
Why then do those who have the imprints not depend on it?  
1.14 Just like the fire at the end of time,  
In an instant it certainly  burns up the great negativities.  
Its unfathomable benefits were explained  
To Sudhana by the wise Protector Maitreya.  
1.15 In brief, you should understand  
The mind of enlightenment to be of two types;  
The mind that wishes enlightenment  
Shantideva’s Engaging in the Deeds of a Bodhisattva        Translation Toh Sze Gee  
 
3 And the mind that engages enlightenment.  
1.16 As is understood by the instances  
Of desiring to go and going,  
So the wise should understand respectively  
The distinction between these two.  
1.17 Although great fruits will arise in cyclic existence  
From the mind that wishes for enlightenment,  
An uninterrupted flow of merit will not arise  
As in the case of the engaging mind.  
1.18 For one who has perfectly adopted this mind  
With the thought never to turn away  
For the sake of totally liberating  
The infinite realms of sentient being s, 
1.19 From that time onwards,  
Even while asleep or lacking conscientiousness,  
A force of merit equal to the sky  
Will continuously ensue.  
1.20 For the sake of those inclined towards the lower,  
This is taught along with the correctness  
By the Tathagata him self 
In the Sutra Requested by Subahu . 
1.21 If even the thought to relieve  
Sentient beings of merely a headache  
Possesses the attitude to benefit  
And possesses boundless merit,  
1.22 Then what need is there to mention  
The desire to dispel the boundless unh appiness of each sentient being  
And to accomplish boundless good qualities  
Of every single one of them?  
1.23 Who has such an altruistic intention as this?  
Do even fathers and mothers have it?  
Do the gods and sages?  
Does even Brahma have it?  
1.24 If those beings have not  
Even dreamt before of such an attitude  
For their own welfare in their dreams,  
How can they generate it for the welfare of others?  
1.25 Such a mind of welfare of sentient beings  
Does not arise even for their own sake;  
Shantideva’s Engaging in the Deeds of a Bodhisattva        Translation Toh Sze Gee  
 
4 An outstanding jewel o f the mind,  
An unprecedented wonder is born.  
1.26 How can I fathom  
The merits of this jewel mind,  
The cause of joy of all migrating beings,  
And the panacea for the suffering of sentient beings.  
1.27 If merely a benevolent intention  
Excels venerating the buddha s, 
Then what need to mention striving to make  
All beings without exception happy?  
1.28 Although wishing to be rid of misery,  
They run towards misery itself.  
Although wishing to have happiness,  
Like an enemy they ignorantly destroy it.  
1.29 For those who are deprived of happiness  
And burdened with many sorrows , 
It satisfies them with all joys,  
Dispels all suffering,  
1.30 And clears away confusion.  
Where is there a comparable virtue?  
Where is there even such a friend?  
Where is there merit similar to thi s? 
1.31 If whoever reciprocates benefit  
Is worthy of some praise,  
Then what need to mention the b odhisattva  
Who does good without its being asked of him?  
1.32 The world honors as virtuous  
A man who procures mediocre food and for an instant gives it  
Disres pectfully to a small number of beings,  
That satisfies them  for only half a day.  
1.33 What need be said then of one  
Who constantly bestows the unsurpassed bliss of the Sugatas for a long time  
Upon countless sentient beings,  
Fulfilling all their hopes?  
1.34 The Buddha has said that someone who generates an evil thought  
Against such a benefactor as a Child of the Victors  
Will remain in hell for as many eons  
As there were evil thoughts.  
Shantideva’s Engaging in the Deeds of a Bodhisattva        Translation Toh Sze Gee  
 
5 1.35 But if one acts out of an attitude of faith,  
Its fruits will multiply far more than that.  
Even in adversity the Children of the Victors generate no negativity,  
Instead their virtues naturally increase.  
1.36 I prostrate to the body of he  
In whom the sacred precious mind is born.  
I seek refuge in that source of happiness  
Who brings to happiness even those who harm him.  
 
 
Chapter Two  
Confessing Negativities  
2.1 In order to uphold that precious mind  
I make excellent offerings to the Tathagatas,  
To the sacred Dharma, the stainless jewel, and  
To the children of the buddhas, the oc eans of excellent qualities.  
2.2 Whatever flowers and fruits there are  
And whatever kinds of medicine,  
Whatever jewels exist in this world,  
And whatever clean refreshing waters;  
2.3 Jewel mountains, and likewise,  
Forest groves, quiet and joyful places,  
Heavenly trees ornamented by and bedecked with flowers,  
And trees with branches laden with good fruit;  
2.4 Fragrances and incense of the realms of gods,  
Wish -fulfilling trees and jewel trees,  
Uncultivated harvests, and all ornaments  
That are worthy to be offe red; 
2.5 Lakes and pools adorned with lotuses  
And the beautiful cry of wild geese,  
Everything unowned  
Within the limitless spheres of space;  
2.6 Taking these with my mind, I offer them  
To the supreme beings, the Munis, as well as their Sons;  
O holy objects  of offering, Compassionate Ones,  
Think mercifully of me and accept these offerings of mine.  
2.7 Not having merit I am destitute  
And I have no other gifts to offer.  
Thus, O Protectors, you who think of others’ welfare,  
Through your power accept these for my sake.  
Shantideva’s Engaging in the Deeds of a Bodhisattva        Translation Toh Sze Gee  
 
6 2.8 Eternally I shall offer all my bodies  
To the Conquerors and their children.  
Please accept me, you Supreme Heroes.  
Respectfully shall I be your subject.  
2.9 Through being completely under your care,  
I shall not fear conditioned existence and sh all benefit sentient beings;  
I shall perfectly transcend my previous negativities  
And henceforth shall commit no more.  
2.10 To very sweetly scented bathing chambers  
With brilliantly sparkling crystal floors  
And exquisite pillars ablaze with gems,  
Having ca nopies above aglow with pearls,  
2.11 I beseech the Tathagatas and their children  
To come and bathe their bodies abundantly  
From many jeweled vases filled with waters scented and enticing,  
To the accompaniment of song and music.  
2.12 Let me dry their bodies  with incomparable cloths,  
Clean and well -anointed with scent,  
And then may I present them  
With fragrant well -dyed garments,  
2.13 Manifold thin and soft clothes.  
I adorn with hundreds of this and that supreme ornaments  
The aryas Samantabhadra, Manjughosha,  
Avalokiteshvara, and so forth.  
2.14 Like polishing pure, refined gold,  
I anoint the bodies of the Lords of Subduers that blaze with light  
With the choicest perfumes whose fragrance permeates  
Throughout the billion world s. 
2.15 And to the highest objects of giving, the Lords of Subduers, I offer  
All enchanting, sweet smelling flowers,  
Such as mandara, lotus, and utpala,  
And beautiful, well -arranged garlands.  
2.16 I also offer clouds of incense  
Whose pervasive sweet aroma steals away the mind.  
I offer to them the delicacies of the gods  
With a variety of foods and drinks too.  
2.17 I also offer them jeweled lamps  
Arranged on golden lotus buds.  
Upon ground anointed with incense  
I scatter loose pleasing flowers.  
Shantideva’s Engaging in the Deeds of a Bodhisattva        Translation Toh Sze Gee  
 
7 2.18 To those w ho have the nature of compassion  
I offer inestimable palaces resounding with melodious praises,  
Beautified by and blazing with hanging ornaments of gems of pearls  
That adorn the infinite space.  
2.19 Eternally shall I offer to the Lords of Subduers  
Jeweled  parasols with golden handles  
And pleasing ornaments embellishing the rims,  
Standing upright, their shapes beautiful to behold.  
2.20 Besides those, may collections of offerings  
Resounding with sweet pleasing music,  
Clouds that appease the suffering of sent ient beings,  
Remain individually.  
2.21 May a rain of flowers and gems  
Descend continuously  
Upon all the Dharma Jewels,  
And upon the reliquaries1 and holy images.  
2.22 In the same way as Manjughosha and so forth  
Have made offerings to the Victors,  
Similarl y do I bestow gifts upon the Tathagatas,  
The Protectors, as well as their children.  
2.23 I eulogize the oceans of excellent qualities  
With oceans of branches of melodious praise;  
May these clouds of pleasant eulogy  
Certainly arise always to them everywhere . 
2.24 With bodies as numerous  
As all the atoms within the field,  
I bow with my body to all buddhas of the three times,  
The Dharma, and the supreme community.  
2.25 I pay homage to the basis of the mind of enlightenment,  
To all supports of offering,  
To all abbots and masters  
And to all the [holders of] supreme conduct.  
2.26 Until the essence of enlightenment,  
I go for refuge to the Buddhas.  
Likewise, I go for refuge to the Dharma,  
And to the assembly of bodhisattvas.  
2.27 With folded hands I request  
The comp lete buddhas and bodhisattvas  
               
1 “Mchod rten ” literally means “support of offerings.”  
Shantideva’s Engaging in the Deeds of a Bodhisattva        Translation Toh Sze Gee  
 
8 Who possess great compassion  
And reside in all directions.  
2.28 Since beginningless cyclic existence,  
In this life and in others,  
Unknowingly, I committed negativities  
And caused them to be done.  
2.29 Overwhelmed by the mista kes of ignorance  
I rejoiced in what was committed,  
But now seeing these mistakes,  
From my heart I confess them to the Protectors.  
2.30 Whatever harmful acts of body, speech, and mind  
I have done by means of afflictions,  
Towards the Three Jewels,  
My parents , my spiritual masters, and others;  
2.31 All the terrible negativities  
Done by me, a wrongdoer,  
Who have the created faults of a multitude of misdeeds,  
I admit to the Guides.  
2.32 I may die  
Before my negativities have been purified;  
Please protect me in such a way  
As will swiftly and surely free me from them.  
2.33 The untrustworthy Lord of Death  
Without waiting, whether or not something has been done;  
Whether one is sick or otherwise,  
Suddenly comes; do not be complacent about life.  
2.34 Leaving all behin d, I must depart alone.  
Through not having understood this  
I committed various kinds of negativities  
For the sake of my friends and foes.  
2.35 Even my foes will become nothing.  
My friends will also become nothing.  
I too will become nothing.  
Likewise all w ill become nothing.  
2.36 Just like an experience in a dream,  
Whatever things I enjoy  
Will become a memory.  
Whatever has passed will not be seen.  
Shantideva’s Engaging in the Deeds of a Bodhisattva        Translation Toh Sze Gee  
 
9 2.37 Even within this brief life  
Many friends and foes have passed away,  
But whatever terrible negativities I c ommitted for them  
Remains before me.  
2.38 Thereby, through not having realized  
That I will suddenly vanish,  
I committed many negativities  
Through ignorance, attachment, and hatred.  
2.39 Remaining neither day nor night,  
This life is always slipping by  
And never lengthening.  
Why will death not come to one like me?  
2.40 While I am lying in bed,  
Although surrounded by my friends and relatives,  
The feeling of life being severed  
Will be experienced by me alone.  
2.41 When seized by Yama’s messengers,  
What benefit  will friends and relatives afford?  
My merit alone shall protect me then,  
But upon that I have never relied.  
2.42 O Protectors! I, so unconscientious,  
Unaware of such terror as this,  
Performed many negativities  
For the sake of this impermanent life.  
2.43 One who is being led today to the spot where his limbs will be mutilated  
Will be petrified.  
With dry mouth, sunken eyes, and so forth  
His entire appearance is transfigured.  
2.44 What need to mention the tremendous despair  
When stricken with the disease of  terror,  
Being clasped by the frightful physical forms  
Of the messengers of Yama?  
2.45 “Who can afford me good protection  
From this terror?”  
With terrified, bulging eyes agape  
I shall search the four directions for refuge.  
2.46 Then seeing no refuge in the  four directions  
I shall become enveloped in gloom.  
If there should be no refuge there,  
At that time what shall I do?  
Shantideva’s Engaging in the Deeds of a Bodhisattva        Translation Toh Sze Gee  
 
10 2.47 Therefore from today onwards I go for refuge  
To the Victors, the protectors of migrating beings,  
Who strove for the purpose of prote cting migrating beings  
And with great power eradicate all fear.  
2.48 Likewise, I perfectly go for refuge  
To the Dharma they have realized,  
That clears away the fears of cyclic existence,  
And also to the assembly of bodhisattvas.  
2.49 I, terrified  
Offer mys elf to Samantabhadra;  
To Manjughosha also  
I offer my body.  
2.50 To the Protector Avalokiteshvara  
Who unmistakenly acts with compassion,  
I utter a mournful cry,  
“Please protect this wrong -doer!”  
2.51 In my search for refuge  
I cry from my heart  
To Akashagarb a, Ksitigarbha,  
And all the Compassionate Protectors.  
2.52 And I go for refuge to Vajrapani,  
Upon the sight of whom all hateful beings,  
Such as the messengers of Yama,  
Flee in terror to the four directions.  
2.53 Previously I transgressed your words,  
But no w upon seeing this great fear  
I go to you for refuge.  
By doing so, please swiftly clear away this fear.  
 
2.54 If I need to comply with a doctor’s advice  
When frightened by an ordinary illness,  
Then what need to mention that it is so when perpetually diseas ed 
By the hundreds of faults of attachment and so forth?  
2.55 If all the people dwelling in Jambudvipa  
Can be crushed by just one of these,  
And if no other medicine to cure them  
Is to be found in all the directions,  
2.56 Then the intention not to act in ac cordance  
With the words that can uproot every misery  
Of the All -Knowing Physician  
Shantideva’s Engaging in the Deeds of a Bodhisattva        Translation Toh Sze Gee  
 
11 Is extremely bewildered and an object of scorn.  
2.57 If I need to be conscientious  
Near a small, ordinary precipice,  
Then how much more so near the precipices of long durati on 
That drop for thousands of yojanas?  
2.58 It is inappropriate to stay happily  
Thinking, “Today alone I shall not die,”  
For inevitably the time will come  
When I shall go out of existence.  
2.59 Who will grant me fearlessness?  
How can I be surely freed from  this?  
If I shall inevitably go out of existence,  
How can I remain in mental happiness?  
2.60 What remains with me now  
From the past experiences that have gone?  
Through my adherence to them  
I have gone against my spiritual masters’ advice.  
2.61 Leaving behi nd this life  
And likewise my friends and relatives,  
If all alone I must go elsewhere  
How appropriate are friends and enemies?  
2.62 “How can I be surely freed  
From non -virtue, the source of suffering?”  
Continually night and day  
Should I only consider this.  
2.63 Through unknowing and ignorance,  
Whatever I have committed,  
Be it a natural misdeed  
Or a stipulated negativity,  
2.64 I confess all of them directly  
In the presence of the Protectors  
With folded hands, prostrating again and again,  
My mind terrified by  suffering.  
2.65 I request the Guides  
To please accept my negativities as being mistakes.  
Since they are not good,  
I shall not do them again.  
 
 
Shantideva’s Engaging in the Deeds of a Bodhisattva        Translation Toh Sze Gee  
 
12 Chapter Three  
Completely Upholding the Mind of Enlightenment  
3.1 With joy I rejoice  
In the virtue that relieves  the suffering of unfortunate rebirths  
Of all sentient beings  
And in the abiding in happiness of those subject to suffering.  
3.2 I rejoice in that accumulation of virtue  
That is the cause for enlightenment,  
I rejoice in the definite liberation of embodied  creatures  
From the suffering of cyclic existence.  
3.3 I rejoice in the enlightenment of the Protectors  
And also in the grounds of their children.  
3.4 With joy I rejoice  
In the ocean of virtue of generating the mind of enlightenment  
That causes all sentie nt beings happiness,  
As well as in the deeds that benefit sentient beings.  
3.5 With folded hands I beseech  
The buddhas of all directions  
To shine the lamp of Dharma  
For all bewildered in the darkness of suffering.  
3.6 With folded hands I beseech  
The Victor s who wish to enter nirvana  
Not to leave migrating beings in blindness  
And to remain for countless eons.  
3.7 Thus by the virtue accumulated  
Through all that I have done,  
May all the suffering of all sentient beings  
Be dispelled.  
3.8 May I be the doctor an d the medicine  
And may I be the nurse  
For all sick migrating beings in the world  
Until their sicknesses are healed.  
3.9 May a rain of food and drink descend  
To clear away the suffering of thirst and hunger,  
And during the eon of famine  
May I myself turn in to food and drink.  
3.10 May I become an inexhaustible treasure  
For those who are poor and destitute.  
Shantideva’s Engaging in the Deeds of a Bodhisattva        Translation Toh Sze Gee  
 
13 May I turn into various articles of all necessities  
And abide close before them.  
3.11 Without any sense of loss  
I shall give my body and resources,  
As well  as all my virtues of the three times,  
For the sake of accomplishing the welfare of all sentient beings.  
3.12 By giving all, I shall transcend sorrow  
And my mind will accomplish nirvana.  
All will be given similarly;  
It is best that I give to all sentient beings.  
3.13 Having already given this body as what makes them happy  
For the pleasure of all embodied beings,  
Depending on what pleases them,  
Constantly killing, abusing, or beating it,  
3.14 Although they may play with my body  
And make it a basis of jest and blame,  
Because I have already given this body of mine to them  
Why do I act with concern?  
3.15 I shall make it do whatever action  
That will not cause any harm.  
When anyone encounters me  
May it never be meaningless for him.  
3.16 If in those who encounter  me 
A faithful or an angry mind arises,  
May that eternally become the cause  
For fulfilling all their aims.  
3.17 May all who say bad things to me  
Or cause me any other harm,  
And those who mock and insult me,  
Have the fortune to become enlightened.  
3.18 May I be a protector for those without one,  
A helmsman for travelers, and  
A ship, a boat, and a bridge  
For all who wish to cross.  
3.19 May I be an island for those who seek one  
And a lamp for those desiring one.  
May I be a bed for all who desire one  
And a slav e for all who want an embodied slave.2 
               
2 This stanza appears to have five lines in the Tibetan.  
Shantideva’s Engaging in the Deeds of a Bodhisattva        Translation Toh Sze Gee  
 
14 3.20 May I be a wish -fulfilling jewel, a good vase,  
Knowledge - mantras that accomplish, and great medicine.  
May I become a wish -fulfilling tree  
And a wish -fulfilling cow for embodied beings.  
3.21 Just like the great e lements, such as earth,  
And like space,  
May I always be many varieties of bases of sustenance  
For the boundless sentient beings.  
3.22 Likewise, until all attain nirvana,  
May I also be the source of sustenance  
For all the realms of sentient beings  
That rea ch unto the ends of space.  
3.23 Just as the previous Sugatas  
Generated the mind of enlightenment,  
And just as they dwelt according to the stages  
In the trainings of a bodhisattva;  
3.24 Likewise for the benefit of migrating beings,  
I shall generate the mind  of enlightenment,  
And likewise I shall  
Learn the trainings according to the stages.  
3.25 Those intelligent ones have concluded lucidly seizing  
The mind of enlightenment in this way,  
But, in order to increase it,  
They should highly praise it in the follow ing manner:  
3.26 Now my life is fruitful.  
I have attained a good human existence,  
Today I have been born in the buddha lineage.  
I have become a child of the Buddha.  
3.27 Now whatever happens,  
I will act to not sully  
This flawless, holy buddha lineage,  
Initiating actions concordant with this lineage.  
3.28 Just like a blind man  
Discovering a jewel in a heap of rubbish,  
Likewise by some coincidence  
This mind of enlightenment has been born within me.  
3.29 This is also the supreme ambrosia  
That overcomes the lor d of death of migrating beings.  
This is also the inexhaustible treasure  
That eliminates all poverty of migrating beings.  
Shantideva’s Engaging in the Deeds of a Bodhisattva        Translation Toh Sze Gee  
 
15 3.30 This is the supreme medicine  
That quells the disease of migrating beings too.  
It is the tree of rest for migrating beings  
Wanderin g and weary on the path of conditioned existence.  
3.31 It is the universal platform that leads all migrating beings  
To freedom from the bad migrations.  
It is the dawning moon of the mind  
That dispels the torment of afflictions of migrating beings.  
3.32 It is the great sun that annihilates  
The cataracts of ignorance of migrating beings.  
It is the quintessential butter  
From the churning of the milk of the holy Dharma.  
3.33 For all those guests who are migrating beings journeying on the path of 
cyclic existen ce 
Who wish to utilize the resources of happiness,  
This will place the great travelers of sentient beings  
In supreme happiness and satisfy them.  
3.34 Today in the presence of all the Protectors  
I invite the migrating beings to be guests  
In happiness until  they attain the state of Sugata.  
May gods, anti - gods, and so forth be joyful.  
 
 
Chapter Four  
Teachings on Conscientiousness  
4.1 Having firmly upheld the mind of enlightenment in this way,  
A Victors’ Child should always make effort  
To not transgress the t rainings  
Without ever wavering.  
4.2 In the case of a reckless undertaking  
Or one not well examined,  
Although a promise may have been made,  
It is reasonable to examine, ”Shall I do it or leave it?”  
4.3 But how can I ever withdraw  
From what has been examine d by the great wisdom  
Of the buddhas and their children,  
And has been examined and examined by myself?  
4.4 If, having made such a promise,  
I do not accomplish it through action,  
Then by deceiving all those sentient beings  
Shantideva’s Engaging in the Deeds of a Bodhisattva        Translation Toh Sze Gee  
 
16 What kind of rebirth will I take?  
4.5 If it has been taught  
That he who does not give away  
The smallest thing he mentally thought to give  
Will become a hungry ghost,  
4.6 Then if I should deceive all migrating beings  
After having from my heart invited them  
To unsurpassable happiness,  
Wha t kind of happy migration will I go to?  
4.7 Only the Omniscient Ones can discern  
The inconceivable manner of the action of  
Those who give up the mind of enlightenment  
But are liberated.  
4.8 This, for a bodhisattva,  
Is the heaviest of downfalls.  
If it were  to occur, the welfare of  
All sentient beings would be weakened.  
4.9 Should others for even a single instant  
Hinder or obstruct his merit,  
By weakening the welfare of sentient beings  
There will be no end to their unfortunate rebirths.  
4.10 If I shall dege nerate  
By destroying the happiness of even one sentient being,  
Then what need is there to mention destroying the happiness  
Of all embodied beings vast as space without exception?  
4.11 Thus if those who have the force of a downfall  
And the force of the min d of enlightenment  
Were to stay revolving within cyclic existence,  
For a long time they would be hindered from attaining the grounds.  
4.12 Therefore just as I have promised  
I shall respectfully accomplish it.  
If from now on I do not strive  
I shall descend  from lower to lower states.  
4.13 Although countless buddhas have passed by  
To benefit all sentient beings,  
Yet I was not an object of their care  
Because of my own misdeeds.  
4.14 If I still act like this,  
Again and again I will likewise experience  
Shantideva’s Engaging in the Deeds of a Bodhisattva        Translation Toh Sze Gee  
 
17 Bad mig rations, sickness, bondage,  
Mutilation, and laceration.  
4.15 If the arising of a tathagata,  
Faith, the attainment of a human body,  
And my being fit to cultivate virtue are rare,  
When will they be obtained again?  
4.16 I am free from sickness like the day,  
Fed and free from harm,  
But life is momentary and deceptive;  
The body is like an object on loan for but a lava3. 
4.17 With such behavior of mine  
I will not obtain even a human body.  
If this human form is not attained,  
There will be solely negativity and no  virtue.  
4.18 If, even when I have the good fortune of virtuous conduct,  
I do not create virtue,  
Then what shall I do when all confused  
By the suffering of the unfortunate rebirths?  
4.19 If I do not create virtues  
But readily amass negativities,  
Then for h undreds of millions of eons  
I shall not even hear the term “good migration.”  
4.20 For this very reason, the Bhagavan said  
That just as in the case of a turtle inserting its neck  
Into a yoke adrift upon the vast ocean,  
It is very hard to attain the human st ate. 
4.21 If even by the negativity committed for an instant  
One will abide in Relentless Torment for eons,  
Then because of the negativities I have accumulated in beginningless cyclic 
existence,  
What need to mention my not going to a good migration?  
4.22 Through experiencing merely that  
I shall not be liberated,  
Because while experiencing that in such a way  
Other negativities will be strongly produced.  
4.23 If, having found such leisure,  
I do not familiarize with virtue,  
There can be no deception other than  this; 
               
3 A unit of time that lasts 1.6 minutes.  
Shantideva’s Engaging in the Deeds of a Bodhisattva        Translation Toh Sze Gee  
 
18 There can be no confusion other than this.  
4.24 If, having understood this,  
Out of confusion I am indolent afterwards,  
When it is time to die  
Tremendous grief will rear its head.  
4.25 If my body burns for a long time  
In the fires of hell which are difficult to bear,  
Inevitably my mind will be tormented  
By the blazing fires of unbearable remorse.  
4.26 Having found by some coincidence  
This beneficial state that is so hard to find,  
If now while having knowledge  
I am once again led into the hells,  
4.27 Then, as though I were confused by mantra,  
This mind will be reduced to nothing.  
Even I do not know what confused me;  
What is there inside me?  
4.28 Since enemies such as hatred and craving  
Have neither arms nor legs,  
And are neither courageous nor clever,  
How have I been used like a slave by them?  
4.29 While they dwell within my mind,  
At their pleasure they cause me harm,  
Yet I patiently endure them without any anger.  
This is an inappropriate state and patience is a contemptible state.  
4.30 Should even all the gods and anti -gods  
Rise up against me as my enemies,  
They cannot lead me to nor place me in  
The fires of Relentless Torment.  
4.31 But this foe, the powerful afflictions,  
In an instant can cast me there,  
Which when met will cause not even the ashes  
Of M ount Meru to remain.  
4.32 All other enemies are incapable  
Of such a length of time  
As can my afflictions,  
The long -time enemy with neither beginning nor end.  
4.33 If I agreeably honor and rely upon [others],  
All will enact benefit and happiness,  
Shantideva’s Engaging in the Deeds of a Bodhisattva        Translation Toh Sze Gee  
 
19 But if I r ely upon these afflictions  
In return I will be harmed by suffering.  
4.34 While in cyclic existence how can I be joyful and unafraid  
If in my heart I certainly prepare a place  
For this incessant enemy of long duration,  
The sole cause for the increase of col lections of harms?  
4.35 How shall I ever have happiness  
If in a net of attachment within my mind  
There dwell the guardians of the prison of cyclic existence  
Who become the slayers who kill me in hell and so forth?  
4.36 Therefore as long as this enemy is no t overcome with certainty before 
my very eyes,  
I shall never give up exerting myself against it.  
Self-important people who become angry even at slight short -lived harm  
Will not go to sleep until it is overcome.  
4.37 If at the time of a violent battle,  
Vigo rously desiring to conquer those afflicted ones who are naturally subject 
to suffering through death,  
Men, disregarding the pain of being pierced by spears and arrows,  
Do not withdraw until the goal is accomplished,  
4.38 Then what need to mention that I sh ould not despair and be indolent,  
Even if I am caused many hundreds of sufferings,  
When now I strive to definitely overcome my natural enemies  
That are the constant cause of all suffering?  
4.39 If even scars inflicted by meaningless enemies  
Are worn upon t he body like ornaments,  
Then why is suffering a cause of harm to me  
Who impeccably strive to fulfill the great purpose?  
4.40 If fishermen, outcastes, farmers, and so forth,  
Thinking merely of their own livelihood,  
Endure the harms of heat and cold,  
Why do I not endure them for the sake of the happiness of migrating beings?  
4.41 When I promised to liberate migrating beings  
Dwelling in the ten directions as far as the ends of space  
From their afflictions,  
I myself was not yet freed from the afflictions.  
4.42 Thus unaware of even my own capacity,  
Was it not somewhat crazy to have spoken like that?  
Since this is the case I should never withdraw  
From vanquishing the afflictions.  
Shantideva’s Engaging in the Deeds of a Bodhisattva        Translation Toh Sze Gee  
 
20 4.43 I shall adhere to this and,  
Resenting them, I shall meet them in battle!  
But af flictions such as these types  
Destroy afflictions and are not included.  
4.44 I would rather be burned and killed,  
And even have my head cut off,  
Than to ever bow down  
To the enemy that is the afflictions in any way.  
4.45 Ordinary enemies when expelled from  one country  
Simply settle down in another and embrace it,  
And when their capability is recovered they then return;  
But the way of this enemy, my afflictions, is different.  
4.46 Afflictions, afflictions! When abandoned by the eye of wisdom  
And dispelled fr om my mind, where will you go?  
Where will you dwell and return to harm me?  
Although this is so, weak -minded, I have been reduced to making no effort.  
4.47 If these afflictions do not abide within objects,  
Not in the collection of sense powers, between the two nor elsewhere,  
Then where do they abide and how do they harm all migrating beings?  
They are like an illusion. Thus I should dispel the fear within my heart and 
strive for the sake of wisdom.  
For no meaning, why am I harmed in hell and so forth?  
4.48 Therefore, having thought about this,  
I should make effort for the sake of accomplishing the trainings explained.  
If the doctor’s instructions are ignored,  
How will a patient in need of treatment be cured by the medicines?  
 
 
Chapter Five  
Guarding Introspecti on 
5.1 Those who wish to guard their trainings  
Should very tightly guard their minds.  
Those who do not guard their minds  
Are unable to guard their trainings.  
5.2 In this [world,] unsubdued and crazed elephants  
Do not cause such harms  
As the harms of Relen tless Torment  
Caused by the unleashed elephant of my mind.  
5.3 But if the elephant of my mind is tightly bound  
Through all by the rope of mindfulness,  
Shantideva’s Engaging in the Deeds of a Bodhisattva        Translation Toh Sze Gee  
 
21 All fears will cease to exist  
And all virtues will come into my hand.  
5.4 Tigers, lions, elephants, bears , 
Snakes, and all my enemies,  
The guardians who are hell beings,  
Evil spirits and likewise cannibals,  
5.5 Will all be bound  
By binding this mind alone,  
And will all be subdued  
By subduing this mind alone.  
5.6 The perfect speech itself indicated,  
“Thus all fears  
As well as all boundless suffering  
Originate from the mind.”  
5.7 Who intentionally created  
The weapons of hell beings?  
Who created the burning iron ground?  
From what did all those hosts of women ensue?  
5.8 The Muni taught that all such things  
Are th e negative mind.  
Hence, within the three worlds  
There is nothing to fear other than my own mind.  
5.9 If the perfection of generosity  
Were the alleviation of migrating beings’ poverty,  
Then since there are still starving migrating beings,  
In what manner did  the previous Protectors perfect it?  
5.10 The perfection of generosity is taught to be  
The mind intending to give all things,  
As well as its result, to all beings;  
Hence it is simply the mind. {151}  
5.11 Where will the fish and so forth be driven  
So that t hey will not be killed?  
Hence, the attainment of the intention of abandonment  
Is explained to be the perfection of ethics.  
5.12 Unruly sentient beings are like space;  
All of them cannot possibly be overcome.  
But if I overcome the mind of anger alone,  
This will be equivalent to vanquishing all those foes.  
Shantideva’s Engaging in the Deeds of a Bodhisattva        Translation Toh Sze Gee  
 
22 5.13 Where could I possibly find enough leather  
With which to cover the surface of the earth?  
Having leather on just the soles of my shoes  
Is equivalent to covering the earth with it.  
5.14 Likewise it is no t possible for me  
To counteract things externally;  
But should I counteract this mind of mine,  
What is the need for counteracting others?  
5.15 Although the result of generating a clear mind  
Is Brahma and so forth,  
The results along with body and speech wil l be  
Weak in conduct, therefore it is not like that.  
5.16 The knower of reality taught  
That even if recitation and hardships  
Are practiced for long periods of time,  
They will be meaningless if the mind is distracted elsewhere.  
5.17 Even those who wish to obtain happiness and overcome suffering  
Will wander with no aim  
If they do not comprehend the secret of the mind – 
The principal Dharma.  
5.18 This being so,  
I shall hold and guard my mind well.  
Except for the mode of conduct of guarding the mind,  
What use  are many other modes of conduct?  
5.19 Just as I would be attentive and conscientious of a wound  
When amidst an unruly, freed crowd,  
So I should always guard the wounds of my mind  
When dwelling among negative people.  
5.20 If I am conscientious of a wound  
Through fear of the small suffering of a wound,  
Then why do I not guard the wounds of my mind  
Through fear of being crushed by the mountains of Mass Destruction?  
5.21 Should I behave in such a way,  
Then whether among negative people  
Or even in the midst of women,  
The steady effort of restraint will not decline.  
5.22 It is better to be without gain,  
Honor, body, and sustenance,  
And it is better to let other virtues degenerate,  
Rather than ever to let the mind degenerate.  
Shantideva’s Engaging in the Deeds of a Bodhisattva        Translation Toh Sze Gee  
 
23 5.23 To you who wish to guard your min ds, 
I thus fold my hands [and urge you],  
“At the cost of your life, guard  
Mindfulness and introspection!”  
5.24 People who are disturbed by sickness  
Lack strength in all actions.  
Likewise, the minds disturbed by confusion  
Lack strength in all actions.  
5.25 Whatever has been heard, contemplated, and meditated  
By those whose minds lack introspection,  
Just like water in a leaking vase,  
Will not remain in mindfulness.  
5.26 Even those who have plenty of hearing,  
Faith, and diligent endeavor  
Will become sullied b y a downfall  
Due to the fault of lacking introspection.  
5.27 The thieves of non -introspection,  
In following upon the degeneration of mindfulness,  
Will steal even the merits I have firmly gathered  
[So that] I shall then proceed to lower realms.  
5.28 This ho st of thieves of the afflictions  
Will search for a good opportunity and occasion.  
Having found it, they will steal my virtue  
And destroy even life in a good migration.  
5.29 Therefore, I shall never let mindfulness depart  
From the doorway of my mind.  
If it goes, I should recall the harms of the lower realms  
And closely place it there.  
5.30 Through the company of gurus,  
Through the subsequent teachings of abbots, and through fear,  
Mindfulness will easily be generated  
In fortunate people who act respectfully.  
5.31 “I am always dwelling in the presence  
Of all those buddhas and bodhisattvas  
Who are endowed  
With unimpeded vision in all.”  
5.32 By thinking in this way,  
I shall likewise obtain possession of shame, respect, and fear.  
Also through doing this,  
Recollec tion of the Buddha will repeatedly occur.  
Shantideva’s Engaging in the Deeds of a Bodhisattva        Translation Toh Sze Gee  
 
24 5.33 When mindfulness abides for the purpose  
Of guarding against [afflictions] from the doorway of the mind,  
Then introspection will come about  
And even that which had gone will return.  
5.34 When, at the beginning,  
Having known that such a mind is with fault,  
At such a time, like a piece of wood,  
I should remain being able to rely [upon the antidote].  
5.35 Never should I look around  
Distractedly for no purpose.  
With a resolute mind  
I should always keep my eyes cast  downwards.  
5.36 But in order to relax the gaze  
For a short while I should look around.  
If someone appears in my field of vision  
I should look at him and say, “It’s good that you have come.” {164}  
5.37 To check if there is any danger on the path and so for th  
I should look again and again in the four directions.  
To rest, I should turn my head around  
And then look behind me.  
5.38 Having examined both ahead and behind,  
I should proceed to either come or go.  
Being aware of the necessity  
I should act like this  in all situations.  
5.39 Having prepared for an action with the thought,  
“My body will remain in such a way,”  
Then periodically I should look to see  
“How is the body abiding?”  
5.40 With utmost effort I should check  
To see that the crazed elephant of my min d 
Is not wandering off but is bound  
To the great pillar of thinking about the Dharma.  
5.41 I who strive by all means for meditative stabilization  
Should not wander off even for a moment.  
Thinking, “What is this mind of mine doing?”  
I should investigate my  mind.  
5.42 But if I am unable to do this when involved in fear or  
Celebrations and the like, then I should relax.  
Thus it has been taught that at times of giving,  
You may be indifferent to ethics.  
Shantideva’s Engaging in the Deeds of a Bodhisattva        Translation Toh Sze Gee  
 
25 5.43 I should undertake whatever deed I have intended to d o 
And think of doing nothing other than it.  
With my mind focused upon that,  
I should set about for the time being to accomplish it.  
5.44 By acting in this way, all will be done well,  
Otherwise neither will be done.  
There will thus be no increase  
In the se condary affliction of non -introspection.  
5.45 If I engage in a variety  
Of senseless talk  
Or in many kinds of spectacular shows,  
I should abandon attachment towards them.  
5.46 If for no reason I dig the earth,  
Cut grass, draw patterns in the earth, and the  like, 
Then, recalling the advice of the Sugatas,  
I should immediately stop out of fear.  
5.47 Whenever I have the desire  
To move or to say something,  
First of all I should examine my mind  
And then, with steadiness, act in the proper way.  
5.48 Whenever ther e is attachment in my mind  
And whenever there is the desire to be angry,  
I should not do anything nor say anything,  
But remain like a piece of wood.  
5.49 Whenever I have excitement, the wish to verbally belittle others, {168}  
Pride and arrogance;  
When I ha ve the thought to describe the faults of others,  
Cunningness and the thought to deceive others;  
5.50 Whenever I am eager for praise  
Or have the desire to blame others;  
Whenever I have the wish to scold and quarrel;  
At such times I should remain like a piec e of wood.  
5.51 Whenever I desire material gain, honor, or fame;  
Whenever I seek servants or a retinue,  
And when in my mind I wish to be served;  
At these times I should remain like a piece of wood.  
5.52 Whenever I have the mind wishing to neglect the welfa re of others  
And to pursue my own welfare,  
Wishing to say something,  
At these times I should remain like a piece of wood.  
Shantideva’s Engaging in the Deeds of a Bodhisattva        Translation Toh Sze Gee  
 
26 5.53 Whenever impatience, laziness, fear,  
And likewise shamelessness or the talking of nonsense,  
And thoughts of partiality arise,  
At these times too I should remain like a piece of wood.  
5.54 Having in this way examined his mind for afflictions  
And for thoughts that strive for meaningless things,  
The hero should hold his mind steady  
By means of the antidotes.  
5.55 Being very resolute a nd faithful,  
Steady, respectful, polite,  
With a sense of shame, fear, and pacification,  
I should strive to make others happy.  
5.56 I should not be disheartened by the whims  
Of the childish who are in discord with one another;  
I should be merciful, thinking , “This mind of theirs  
Is due to the generation of afflictions.”  
5.57 Having control over that which is actually not misdeeds  
In myself and other sentient beings,  
I should always hold my mind  
Like an emanation without an I.  
5.58 By thinking again and aga in that  
After a long time I have obtained the supreme leisures,  
Thus I should hold my mind  
As utterly unshakeable as Mount Meru.  
5.59 If, mind, you are not made unhappy  
When this body is dragged here and there and  
Taken away by vultures attached to flesh,  
Then why do you advise so now?  
5.60 Holding this body as “mine”,  
Why, mind, do you guard it so?  
Since you and it are separate,  
What use can it be to you?  
5.61 Why, confused mind,  
Do you not hold onto a clean, wooden form?  
Just what is the point of guardin g 
This rotting machine that is a collection of filth?  
5.62 First of all, mentally separate  
The layers of skin,  
And then with the scalpel of wisdom  
Also separate the flesh from the skeletal frame.  
Shantideva’s Engaging in the Deeds of a Bodhisattva        Translation Toh Sze Gee  
 
27 5.63 And, having split open even the bones,  
Look right down  into the marrow.  
While examining this ask yourself,  
“Where is its essence?”  
5.64 If, even when searching with such effort  
You see no essence,  
Then why with so much attachment  
Are you still guarding this body now?  
5.65 What use is this body to you  
If its f ilth is unfit for you to eat,  
If its blood is not fit to drink  
And if its intestines are not fit to be sucked?  
5.66 At second best it is only fit to be guarded  
In order to feed the foxes and vultures.  
This body of a human being  
Should only be put to work.  
5.67 Even though you guard it thus,  
Then what will you do  
When it is stolen by the merciless Lord of Death  
And given to the birds and dogs?  
5.68 If servants are not given clothing and so forth  
When they are unable to be put to work,  
Then why do you nourish  it in health  
When, even though caring for the body, it goes elsewhere?  
5.69 Now having paid my body its wages,  
I shall make it enact my welfare.  
I shall not give it anything  
If it is not beneficial.  
5.70 I should conceive of my body as a boat,  
A mere supp ort for coming and going,  
And in order to accomplish the welfare of sentient beings  
Transform it into a wish -fulfilling body.  
5.71 Now, while I have freedom,  
I should always present a smiling face  
And cease to frown and look black -faced;  
I should be a frie nd of migrating beings and be straightforward.  
5.72 I should desist from inconsiderately and noisily  
Moving chairs around and so forth,  
As well as from violently opening doors;  
I should always delight in humility.  
Shantideva’s Engaging in the Deeds of a Bodhisattva        Translation Toh Sze Gee  
 
28 5.73 The stork, the cat, and the thief,  
By ambushing and moving silently,  
Are able to accomplish what they desire to do;  
I should always behave in this way.  
5.74 With respect I should gratefully accept  
Unsought for words that are of benefit  
And that wisely advise and admonish me.  
At all times I sh ould be the pupil of everyone.  
5.75 I should say, “Virtuously said,”  
To all those who speak well,  
And, if I see someone creating merit,  
I should praise him and be well pleased.  
5.76 I should discreetly talk about the good qualities  
And repeat those recoun ted. 
If my own good qualities are spoken about  
I should just know and be aware that I have them.  
5.77 All initiatives are a source of joy  
That would be rare even if it could be bought with money.  
Therefore, the excellent qualities causing others [joy]  
Causes the enjoyment of the happiness of joy.  
5.78 I shall suffer no losses in this life  
And in future lives shall find great happiness.  
But misdeeds will make me unhappy and bring suffering,  
And in future lives I shall find great suffering.  
5.79 When talking  I should speak from my heart and on what is related.  
Making the meaning clear and the speech pleasing.  
I should abandon attachment or hatred,  
And speak in gentle tones appropriately.  
5.80 When beholding someone with my eyes,  
Thinking, “I shall attain budd hahood  
By depending upon this being,”  
I should look at him candidly with love.  
5.81 Always being motivated by affection  
Or being motivated by the antidotes,  
In the fields of excellent qualities, benefit, and suffering,  
Great virtues will come about.  
5.82 I should always perform actions  
Endowed with skill and joy4. 
               
4 “Joy” seems to be a scribing erro r, and should be “faith” instead.  
Shantideva’s Engaging in the Deeds of a Bodhisattva        Translation Toh Sze Gee  
 
29 In all actions  
I should not depend upon anyone else.  
5.83 The perfections such as generosity  
Are progressively more exalted,  
But for a little I should not forsake something greater.  
Principally I should consider the welfare of others.  
5.84 When these are well understood,  
I should always strive for the welfare of others.  
The Far -Seeing Compassionate Ones have allowed  
Those that were forbidden.  
5.85 I should divide my food amongst those who have f allen into error,  
Those without protection, and those abiding in modes of conduct,  
And eat merely what is suitable for myself.  
Except for the three robes I may give away all.  
5.86 This body that is for practicing the sublime Dharma  
Should not be harmed for  only slight benefit.  
If I behave in this way,  
The wishes of all beings will be quickly fulfilled.  
5.87 Those whose attitude of compassion is impure  
Should not give their body away.  
No matter what, both in this and future lives,  
They should give it as caus es for fulfilling the great purpose.  
5.88 The Dharma should not be explained to those who lack respect,  
To those who wrap cloth around their heads although they are not ill,  
To those holding umbrellas, sticks, or weapons, and  
To those with covered heads.  
5.89 The vast and profound should not be taught to lesser beings  
Nor to a woman unaccompanied by a man.  
Out of respect for the Dharmas of lesser and supreme beings as equal,  
I should utilize all.  
5.90 I should not connect the Dharma of a lesser being  
To one who is a vessel for the vast Dharma.  
I should not forsake the conduct,  
Nor deceive by means of sutras or mantras.  
5.91 When I spit or throw away a tooth -stick,  
I should cover it up.  
Also it is deplorable to urinate and so forth  
In water or on land that is utilized.  
Shantideva’s Engaging in the Deeds of a Bodhisattva        Translation Toh Sze Gee  
 
30 5.92 When eating I should not fill my mouth,  
Eat noisily or with my mouth wide open.  
I should not sit with my legs outstretched  
Nor rub my hands together.  
5.93 I should not sit on mounts, upon beds,  
Nor in the same room together with the women  of others.  
Having observed and inquired about  
What causes non -faith in the world, I should abandon it.  
5.94 I should not give directions with one finger,  
But instead indicate the way  
Respectfully with also  
All of my right arm.  
5.95 Nor should I wildly wa ve my arms about;  
Instead I should make my point  
By uttering sounds with mild gestures and a snap of fingers.  
Otherwise I shall lose control.  
5.96 Just as the Protector lay down to pass away  
So should I lie in the desired direction,  
And first of all with i ntrospection  
Make up my mind to quickly rise.  
5.97 From among the limitless deeds  
Of a bodhisattva that have been taught,  
I should certainly practice as much  
Of this conduct that trains the mind.  
5.98 Three times by day and three times by night  
I should r ecite The Sutra of the Three Heaps;  
By relying upon the Victors and the mind of enlightenment  
My remaining downfalls will be purified.  
5.99 Whatever I do on any occasion, [195]  
Whether in terms of myself or others,  
I should make effort and learn  
Whatever training has been taught for that occasion.  
5.100  There is no such thing as something  
That is not learned by the Victors’ Children.  
Thus if I am skilled in abiding in this way  
Nothing will be non -meritorious.  
5.101  Directly or indirectly, I should not do a nything  
Other than the welfare of sentient beings.  
Solely for the welfare of sentient beings  
I should dedicate all towards enlightenment.  
Shantideva’s Engaging in the Deeds of a Bodhisattva        Translation Toh Sze Gee  
 
31 5.102  Never, even at the cost of my life,  
Should I forsake a spiritual friend  
Skilled in the meanings of the Mahayana  
[Who abides in] the supreme modes of conduct of a bodhisattva.  
5.103  I should train in devoting myself to my spiritual master  
In the manner taught in The Biography of Shrisambhava . 
This and other trainings spoken by the Buddha,  
I should understand through reading the sutras.  
5.104  I should read the sutras  
Because it is in them that the practices appear.  
To begin with, I should look at  
The Sutra of Akashagarba.  
5.105  I should definitely look at  
Compendium of Trainings again and again  
Because what is to be co nstantly practiced  
Is clearly and extensively shown there.  
5.106  Alternatively I should sometimes look at  
The condensed Compendium of Sutras.  
Also, I should make an effort to look at  
The second composed by Arya Nagarjuna.  
5.107  I should do whatever  
Is not  forbidden in those [works].  
I should impeccably practice whatever training I see  
In order to guard the minds of worldly people.  
5.108  The defining characteristic of introspection  
In brief is only this:  
To examine again and again  
The states of my body an d mind.  
5.109  Thus I shall put these into action with my body,  
For what can be achieved by merely expressing words?  
Will sick people be benefited  
Merely by reading the medical texts?  
 
 
Chapter Six  
Relying on Patience  
6.1 Whatever wholesome deeds,  
Such as g enerosity and making offerings to the sugatas,  
Have been amassed over thousands of eons,  
Will all be destroyed by anger.  
Shantideva’s Engaging in the Deeds of a Bodhisattva        Translation Toh Sze Gee  
 
32 6.2 There is no negativity like hatred,  
And no fortitude like patience.  
Thus I should cultivate patience  
Persistently through various ways.  
6.3 My mind will not experience peace  
If it holds painful thoughts of hatred.  
I shall find no joy or happiness;  
Unable to sleep, I shall feel unsettled.  
6.4 A master who has hatred  
Is in danger of being killed  
Even by those who for their wealth and h onor 
Depend upon his kindness.  
6.5 By it, friends and relatives are disheartened;  
Though drawn by his generosity they will not rely upon him;  
In brief there is nobody  
Who dwells comfortably with anger.  
6.6 The enemy, anger,  
Creates sufferings such as those . 
But whoever assiduously overcomes it  
Creates happiness in this and other lives.  
6.7 Having found its fuel of mental unhappiness  
In the doing of what I do not wish for  
And in the hindering of what I wish for,  
Hatred develops and then destroys me.  
6.8 Ther efore I should totally destroy  
The fuel of this enemy;  
This enemy has no other function  
Than that of causing me harm.  
6.9 Whatever befalls me,  
I shall not disturb my mental joy.  
Having been made unhappy, I shall not accomplish what I wish for  
And my virtue s will decline.  
6.10 Why be unhappy about something  
If it can be remedied?  
And what is the use of being unhappy about something  
If it cannot be remedied?  
6.11 For myself and for my friends  
I do not want suffering, contempt,  
Harsh words, and unpleasant talk ; 
But for my enemies it is the opposite.  
Shantideva’s Engaging in the Deeds of a Bodhisattva        Translation Toh Sze Gee  
 
33 6.12 The causes of happiness occasionally occur,  
Whereas the causes for suffering are very many.  
Without suffering there is no definite emergence.  
Therefore, mind, you should stand firm.  
6.13 If the followers of Dur ga and the people of Karnata  
Endure the feelings of burns, cuts, and the like meaninglessly,  
Then for the sake of liberation,  
Why have I no courage?  
6.14 There is nothing whatsoever  
That is not made easier through acquaintance.  
So through becoming acquaint ed with small harms,  
I will become patient with great harms.  
6.15 Who has not seen this to be so with meaningless sufferings,  
Such as the feelings of  
[Harms from] snakes, insects, hunger, and thirst  
And of rashes?  
6.16 I should not be impatient [207]  
With  heat and cold, wind and rain, and so forth, and  
Sickness, bondage, beatings, and so forth;  
For if I am, the harm will increase.  
6.17 Some when they see their own blood  
Become especially brave and steady,  
But some when they see the blood of others  
Become unconscious and faint.  
6.18 These come from the states of the mind  
Being either steady or timid.  
Therefore I should disregard harms  
And be unaffected by suffering.  
6.19 Even when those who are skilled are suffering,  
Their minds remain very lucid and undef iled. 
When war is waged against the afflictions  
Much harm is caused at the time of battle.  
6.20 The victorious heroes are those  
Who, having disregarded all suffering,  
Vanquish the foes of hatred and so forth;  
The rest slay corpses.  
6.21 Furthermore, suffe ring has good qualities:  
Through being disheartened with it, arrogance is dispelled,  
Compassion arises for those in cyclic existence,  
Negativities are shunned, and joy is found in virtue.  
Shantideva’s Engaging in the Deeds of a Bodhisattva        Translation Toh Sze Gee  
 
34 6.22 As I do not become angry  
At great sources of suffering such as bile disease,  
Then why be angry at those with mind?  
They too are provoked by conditions.  
6.23 For example, although they are not wished for,  
These sicknesses arise;  
Likewise, although they are not wished for,  
These afflictions forcibly arise.  
6.24 Without thinking, “I shall be angry,”  
People become angry with no resistance,  
And without thinking, “I shall produce,”  
Likewise anger itself is produced.  
6.25 All misdeeds there are  
And all the various kinds of negativities  
Arise though the force of conditions;  
They do not have self -power.  
6.26 These conditions that assemble together  
Have no intention, “I shall produce,”  
And neither does that produced by them  
Have the intention, “I will be produced.”  
6.27 That which is asserted as the “Principal”  
And that which is imputed as the “Self,”  
Do not arise after having purposefully thought,  
“I shall arise.”  
6.28 If they are not produced and non -existent,  
What is asserted to be produced at that time?  
Since it would always be distracted to its objects,  
It follows that it wil l never cease.  
6.29 If the Self were permanent  
It would obviously be devoid of activity, just like space.  
So even if it were to meet with other conditions  
What could the unchanging do?  
6.30 Even if, when acted upon, it remains as before,  
Then what did acti vity do to it?  
If it is said, “This is the activity of that,”  
How could the two ever be related?  
6.31 Hence all are governed by others,  
And through the power of that, they have no power.  
Having understood in this way, I shall not become angry  
At all thing s that are like emanations.  
Shantideva’s Engaging in the Deeds of a Bodhisattva        Translation Toh Sze Gee  
 
35 6.32 OPINION: What will counteract it?  
Counteraction would also be inappropriate.  
RESPONSE: In dependence upon it the continuity of suffering will be 
severed;  
It is not inappropriate.  
6.33 So when seeing an enemy or even a frien d 
Doing something incorrect,  
By thinking, “It arises from such conditions,”  
I shall remain in a happy frame of mind.  
6.34 If things were established with one’s freedom,  
Then since no one wishes to suffer,  
Suffering would not occur  
To any embodied creature.  
6.35 Through lacking conscientiousness  
People even harm themselves with thorns and other things,  
And for the sake of obtaining women and the like  
They become obsessed and starve themselves.  
6.36 And there are some who harm themselves  
By hanging themselves , leaping from cliffs,  
Eating poison and incompatible food  
And unmeritorious deeds.  
6.37 If, when under the influence of afflictions,  
People will even kill their treasured selves,  
How can they not cause harm  
To the bodies of others?  
6.38 Even if I virtuall y cannot develop compassion for such people  
Who through the arisal of afflictions  
Set out to kill me and so forth,  
The last thing I should do is to become angry with them.  
6.39 Even if it were the nature of the childish  
To cause harm to other beings,  
It wo uld be inappropriate to be angry with them,  
For this would be like begrudging fire for having the nature to burn.  
6.40 And even if the fault were incidental [219]  
In sentient beings of definite nature,  
It would be inappropriate to be angry,  
For this would be like begrudging space for allowing smoke to rise in it.  
6.41 If I become angry with the wielder,  
Although I am directly harmed by the stick and so forth,  
Then since he too is incited by hatred,  
Shantideva’s Engaging in the Deeds of a Bodhisattva        Translation Toh Sze Gee  
 
36 I should be angry with the two or with the hatred.  
6.42 Previously I caused similar harm  
To sentient beings.  
Therefore it is right for this harm to occur [221]  
To me who is the agent of harm to sentient beings.  
6.43 Both the weapon and my body  
Are causes of my suffering.  
Since he gave rise to the weapon and I to t he body,  
With whom should I be angry?  
6.44 If in blind attachment I cling  
To this suffering abscess of a human form  
That cannot bear to be touched,  
With whom should I be angry when it is hurt?  
6.45 The childish do not wish to suffer,  
And are greatly attach ed to its causes,  
Thus they are harmed by their own misdeeds;  
Why should they begrudge others?  
6.46 For example, just like the guardians of hell  
And the forest of sword leaves,  
So this is produced by my actions;  
At what should I be angry?  
6.47 Having bee n instigated by my own actions,  
Those who cause me harm come into being.  
If due to this they should proceed to sentient beings’  
Am I not destroying them?  
6.48 By taking them as objects  
I purify much negativity through patience.  
But in dependence upon me t hey will proceed  
To hell suffering for a long time.  
6.49 So since I am causing harm to them  
And they are benefiting me,  
Why, unruly mind, do you become angry  
Erroneously?  
6.50 If I have the excellent quality of thought,  
I will not go to hell.  [224]  
If I a m protecting myself,  
How will they accrue [merit] here?  
6.51 Nevertheless, should I return the harm  
It will not protect them either.  
Shantideva’s Engaging in the Deeds of a Bodhisattva        Translation Toh Sze Gee  
 
37 By doing so my conduct will deteriorate  
And hence this fortitude will be destroyed.  
6.52 Since my mind is not physical  
In no way can anyone destroy it.  
Through it strongly adhering to my body,  
My body is harmed by suffering.  
6.53 Since contempt, harsh speech,  
And unpleasant words  
Do not cause any harm to my body,  
Why, mind, do you become so angry?  
6.54 If others’ disliking me  
Will not devour me  
Either in this or in another life,  
Why do I not want it?  
6.55 Because it will hinder my gain,  
I do not want this.  
I shall discard my gains here  
And my negativities will remain securely.  
6.56 Thus it is better that I die today  
Than live a long time through wrong livelihood.  
Even if I should live a long time,  
There will be the very suffering of death.  
6.57 Suppose someone should awaken from a dream  
In which he experienced one hundred years of happiness,  
And suppose another should awaken fr om a dream  
In which he experienced just a short while of happiness,  
6.58 For both of these people who have awakened  
That happiness will never return.  
Similarly, whether my life has been long or short,  
At the time of death it will be finished like that.  
6.59 Although I may acquire abundant gain  
And enjoy happiness for a long time,  
I shall go forth naked and empty -handed,  
Just like having been robbed.  
6.60 OPINION: If I were to live due to gain,  
Then I shall exhaust negativities and [increase] merit.  
RESPONS E: If I were to get angry on account of gain,  
Will not my merit be consumed and negativities created?  
Shantideva’s Engaging in the Deeds of a Bodhisattva        Translation Toh Sze Gee  
 
38 6.61 If my very life were to degenerate  
For the sake of that,  
Then what will be the use of the life  
Of who commits only negativities?  
6.62 Since sentien t beings will be weakened,  
I shall be angry with those who say unpleasant things.  
Why are you not likewise angry  
With those who say unpleasant things to other people? [229]  
6.63 If you are patient with this lack of faith  
Because it is related to others’ no n-faith,  
Then why are you not patient with unpleasant words  
Since they are related to the arisal of afflictions?  
6.64 Should others talk frivolously about or even destroy  
Holy images, reliquaries, and the sacred Dharma,  
My hatred is inappropriate,  
For the buddhas and so forth can never be harmed.  
6.65 I should counteract anger towards those  
Who harm my spiritual masters, relatives and so forth, and friends,  
By seeing, as in the manner shown before,  
That they arise from conditions.  
6.66 If embodied creatures  are harmed  
By both those with mind and those without mind,  
Why single out and begrudge only those with mind?  
Therefore I should be patient with harm.  
6.67 Should one person do harm out of confusion  
And another is confused and gets angry,  
Then who would be  without fault?  
And who would be at fault? [231]  
6.68 Why did I previously commit those actions  
Because of which others now cause harm?  
If all are related to my actions  
Why should I begrudge them?  
6.69 Having seen thus, no matter what,  
I should strive in t his way for what is meritorious,  
That all will have  
Loving thoughts towards each other.  
6.70 For example, if a fire in one house  
Has moved into another house,  
It is right to remove and get rid of straw and such things  
That the fire will spread to.  
Shantideva’s Engaging in the Deeds of a Bodhisattva        Translation Toh Sze Gee  
 
39 6.71 Likewise when my mind is attached to something  
And the fire of hatred spreads,  
I should immediately get rid of it  
For fear of my merit being burned.  
6.72 Is it not excellent if a man condemned to death  
Is released after having his hand cut off?  
Is it not exc ellent if I am spared from hell  
By way of human suffering?  
6.73 If I cannot endure  
Even just this suffering of the present,  
Then why do I not refrain from getting angry,  
The cause of suffering in hell?  
6.74 For the sake of my desires  
I experienced thousa nds [of eons] in hell,  
But I enacted the purpose  
Of neither others nor myself.  
6.75 But now since great purpose will be established  
From harm which is not as much,  
I should be solely joyful  
Towards such suffering that dispels the harms of migrating beings.  
 
6.76 Should others find joyous happiness  
By praising someone having excellent qualities,  
Why, mind, do you not praise him too  
And be joyful?  
6.77 That joyous happiness of yours  
Is a source of joy without misdeed,  
Permitted by those having excellent quali ties  
And is also a supreme means for gathering others.  
6.78 Furthermore, it is said that others will be happy in this way.  
If you do not want this happiness,  
Then you should stop giving wages and the like.  
Thus you would be adversely affected both in this  and future lives.  
6.79 When people describe my own good qualities  
I want others to be happy too,  
But when they describe the good qualities of others  
I do not even wish them to be happy.  
6.80 Having generated the mind of enlightenment  
Through wishing all sentient beings to be happy,  
Why do you become angry  
Shantideva’s Engaging in the Deeds of a Bodhisattva        Translation Toh Sze Gee  
 
40 If sentient beings find happiness themselves?  
6.81 If I wish for all sentient beings to become  
Buddhas worshipped by the three worlds,  
They why am I tormented  
Due to seeing them receiving just vile gain and honor?  
6.82 If relatives for whom you are caring  
And to whom you practice giving  
Are able to find their own livelihood,  
Would you not be happy, rather than angry?  
6.83 What [kind of person] wishes enlightenment for migrating beings  
If he does not wish  for them to have even this?  
And where is there a mind of enlightenment  
In him who becomes angry at the wealth of others?  
6.84 Whether he obtains it from him  
Or whether it remains in the benefactor’s house,  
In either case you shall get nothing.  
What is th e use whether he is given something or not?  
6.85 So why do I throw away my good qualities,  
Merit and faith?  
Tell me, why am I not angry  
For not holding what will be gain?  
6.86 Not only do you not have any sorrow  
For having committed negativities,  
Do you w ish to compete with others  
Who have created merit?  
6.87 Even if your enemy is not joyful,  
What is there for you to be joyful about?  
Your mind merely wishing  
Did not cause him to be harmed.  
6.88 Even if his suffering is established due to your wish,  
What i s there for you to be joyful about?  
OPINION: I shall be satisfied.  
RESPONSE: How could there be anything more ravaging than that?  
6.89 Having been held by this unbearable and sharp hook  
Cast by the fisherman of the afflictions,  
It is certain that I shall  be cooked  
In the pots of sentient beings’ hell by the hell guardians.  
6.90 The honor of praise and fame  
Will turn into neither merit nor life;  
Shantideva’s Engaging in the Deeds of a Bodhisattva        Translation Toh Sze Gee  
 
41 It will turn into neither strength nor freedom from sickness for me,  
And also will not transform into physical h appiness.  
6.91 If I were to understand my welfare,  
What is there in them that is my welfare?  
If I desire just mental happiness,  
Then I should devote myself to gambling and so forth, and also drinking.  
6.92 If for the sake of fame [241]  
I lose my wealth or get myself killed,  
What can mere words do then?  
Once I am dead, to whom will they give pleasure?  
6.93 When their sandcastles collapse,  
Children howl in despair;  
Likewise when my praise and reputation decline  
My mind becomes like a child.  
6.94 Since short -lived sounds are without mind,  
They cannot possibly think of praising me.  
It makes others happy,  
That fame is counted as a cause of joy.  
6.95 Whether this praise is directed at myself or someone else  
How shall I be benefited by others’ joy?  
Since that joy i s theirs alone  
I shall not obtain even a part of it.  
6.96 If I am happy due to his happiness,  
Then I must act similarly towards all.  
And if this were so then why am I unhappy  
When others are happy due to joy?  
6.97 Therefore the happiness that arises  
From t hinking, “I am being praised,”  
Is thus incorrect;  
It is only the behavior of the childish.  
6.98 Praise and the like distract me  
And also destroy my disillusionment.  
I start to envy those who have excellent qualities  
And success is destroyed.  
6.99 Therefo re, are not those who are closely involved  
In destroying my praise and the like  
Also engaged in protecting me  
From falling into the unfortunate realms?  
Shantideva’s Engaging in the Deeds of a Bodhisattva        Translation Toh Sze Gee  
 
42 6.100  I who seek freedom  
Do not need to be bound by material gain and honor.  
So why should I be angry  
With those who free me from this bondage?  
6.101  Why should I be angry  
At the very doors that do not let me in,  
Which are like buddhas bestowing blessings  
To those who wish to enter the chamber of suffering?  
6.102  Saying, “This hinders my merit,”  
With him t oo it is incorrect to be angry.  
If there is no fortitude similar to patience  
Should I not abide in that?  
6.103  If by my own fault  
I am not patient with this,  
Then it is only I myself hindering  
Involvement in the cause of merit.  
6.104  If without it somethin g does not occur  
And if with it, it does come to be,  
Then since this would be the cause of it,  
How can I call it “a hindrance”?  
6.105  A beggar who came at the time  
Was not a hindrance to generosity,  
And I cannot say that those who give ordination  
Are hindr ances to becoming ordained.  
6.106  There are indeed beggars in this world,  
But rare are those who inflict harm;  
If I have not harmed others  
Few beings will cause me harm.  
6.107  Therefore, just like a treasure appearing in my house  
Idly without me accomplish ing it,  
I should be happy at the enemy  
For he assists me in my deeds of enlightenment.  
6.108  Because I am able to practice this,  
He is worthy of being the very first to be given  
The fruit of my patience,  
For in this way he is the cause of it.  
6.109  OBJECTI ON: Why should this enemy be venerated,  
Since he has no intention for me to practice patience?  
RESPONSE: Then why venerate the sacred Dharma  
That is a fit cause for practice?  
Shantideva’s Engaging in the Deeds of a Bodhisattva        Translation Toh Sze Gee  
 
43 6.110  OBJECTION: Since he intends to cause me harm,  
He is not to be venerated.  [247] 
RESPONSE: If, like a doctor, someone strives to benefit me  
Then how can I practice patience?  
6.111  Thus since patience is produced  
In dependence upon a very hateful mind,  
He is a cause of patience,  
Whereby he is worthy of veneration just like the sacr ed Dharma.  
6.112  Therefore the Muni taught  
The field of sentient beings and the so -called “field of Victors.”  
Many who have pleased them  
Have thereby reached perfection.  
6.113  A buddha’s qualities are accomplished  
From sentient beings and the Victors alike , 
So what kind of system is it that  
I do not respect sentient beings in the same way I respect the Victors?  
6.114  They are not similar in the excellent qualities of their intentions  
But in the results.  
Sentient beings also have excellent qualities  
And the y are therefore equal.  
6.115  Whatever veneration of one with a loving mind  
Is the greatness of sentient beings.  
Whatever merit of faith in the buddhas  
Is the greatness of buddhas.  
6.116  Therefore, they are asserted to be equal  
In the share they have in est ablishing a buddha’s qualities.  
They are not equal with the buddhas  
Who are boundless oceans of excellence.  
6.117  Even if the three realms were offered  
For the sake of venerating  
Some person in whom a mere share of the good qualities  
Of the unique Assembly  of Supreme Excellent Qualities appears, it would be 
little.  
6.118  Thus since sentient beings have a share  
In giving rise to the supreme qualities of the buddhas,  
It is correct to venerate sentient beings  
Due to similarity through just these.  
6.119  Furthe rmore, what way is there to repay  
Those without dissimulation who are a friend  
And grant immeasurable benefit,  
Shantideva’s Engaging in the Deeds of a Bodhisattva        Translation Toh Sze Gee  
 
44 Other than by pleasing sentient beings?  
6.120  Because benefiting them will repay  
Those who give up their holy bodies and enter Relentless Tormen t, 
Therefore even if they cause me great harm  
I shall behave impeccably in all.  
6.121  Because those who are my Lords, for the time being  
Disregard even their own bodies,  
Then why does the confused I  
Act proud and not behave with the attributes of a servan t towards them?  
6.122  Because of their happiness the Munis will be pleased.  
But if they are harmed they will be displeased.  
By making them happy I shall delight the Munis,  
And by harming them I shall harm the Munis.  
6.123  Just as anything desirable would g ive my mind no pleasure  
If my body was ablaze with fire,  
Likewise when sentient beings are harmed  
There is no way for the Great Compassionate Ones to be pleased.  
6.124  Due to having harmed migrating beings,  
I have displeased the Great Compassionate Ones.  
Therefore today I confess individually all my negativities.  
I request your forgiveness, Munis, for this displeasure I have caused.  
6.125  From now on, in order to delight the Tathagatas, [252]  
I shall be subdued and be a servant to the world.  
Although many beings may kick and smash my head or kill me,  
I shall not retaliate and may I delight the Protectors of the World.  
6.126  There is no doubt that those with the nature of compassion  
Regard all these migrating beings as themselves.  
These very ones seen in the  entities of sentient beings are the Protectors 
themselves;  
Why then do I not respect them?  
6.127  It delights the tathagatas  
And perfectly accomplishes my own purpose as well.  
It dispels the suffering of the world.  
Therefore I should always practice it.  
6.128 For example, should even some of the king’s men  
Cause harm to many people,  
Farsighted men would not retaliate  
Even if they were able to.  
Shantideva’s Engaging in the Deeds of a Bodhisattva        Translation Toh Sze Gee  
 
45 6.129  For they are not alone;  
The might of the king is their might.  
Likewise I should not underestimate  
Weak harmer s. 
6.130  For the guardians of hell and the Compassionate Ones  
Are their army.  
Just as subjects behave towards a fierce king,  
I should please sentient beings.  
6.131  Even if such a king were to become angry, [255]  
Could he cause the harm of hell,  
Which is wh at I would have to experience  
By displeasing sentient beings?  
6.132  And even if such a king were to be pleased,  
He could not possibly grant me buddhahood,  
Which is what I would obtain  
By pleasing sentient beings.  
6.133  Let alone my future attainment of bud dhahood,  
Which comes from pleasing sentient beings,  
Why do I not see that there will be great glory,  
Fame, and happiness in this very life?  
6.134  While in cyclic existence patience causes  
Beauty, freedom from sickness, and fame.  
Because of these I shall live for a very long time  
And win the prosperous pleasures of the wheel -turning kings.  
 
 
Chapter Seven  
Teachings on Joyous Effort  
7.1 With patience I should undertake joyous effort;  
Enlightenment will dwell in those who strive.  
Just as there is no movement  without wind,  
So merit does not occur without joyous effort.  
7.2 What is enthusiasm? It is enthusiasm about virtue.  
Its discordant classes should be explained.  
They are laziness, adherence to what is negative,  
And despising oneself out of despondency.  
7.3 Because of relishing the pleasurable taste of indolence  
And craving based on sleep,  
From not being disillusioned with the suffering of cyclic existence,  
Laziness grows very strong.  
Shantideva’s Engaging in the Deeds of a Bodhisattva        Translation Toh Sze Gee  
 
46 7.4 Enmeshed in the snare of disturbing conceptions,  
You have entered the snare of birth.  
Why are you still not aware  
That you have gone into the mouth of the Lord of Death?  
7.5 Do you not see  
That he is systematically slaughtering your species?  
Any craving based on sleep  
Is like a buffalo with a butcher.  
7.6 While the Lord of Death is looking,  
Having blocked off every route,  
How can you enjoy eating?  
And thus how can you enjoy sleep?  
7.7 For as long as death is quickly approaching,  
Then I shall accumulate the collections.  
Even if I were to abandon laziness then,  
At that improp er time what will be the use?  
7.8 When this has not been done, when this is initiated,  
And when this is only half done,  
Suddenly the Lord of Death will come.  
And the thought will occur, “Oh no, I’m doomed!”  
7.9 Their faces flowing with tears  
And their eye s red and swollen with sorrow,  
My relatives will finally lose hope  
And I shall behold the faces of the messengers of Yama.  
7.10 Tormented by the memory of my negativities  
And hearing the sounds of hell,  
In terror I shall clothe my body in excrement.  
What is the use of such a delirious state?  
7.11 If even in this life you shall be gripped with fear  
Like that of a live fish being rolled,  
What need even to mention the unbearable sufferings of hell  
[Due to] the negativities you have committed? [261]  
7.12 Why d o you remain at ease like this  
Having committed the actions of hell  
Where your delicate flesh will burn  
When touched by streams?  
7.13 Much harm befalls those who want results without striving,  
As well as those sensitive ones.  
While clasped by death, I sha ll wail like the gods,  
“Oh no, I shall be destroyed by suffering!”  
Shantideva’s Engaging in the Deeds of a Bodhisattva        Translation Toh Sze Gee  
 
47 7.14 Relying upon the human boat,  
Free yourself from the great river of suffering!  
As it is hard to find this boat later,  
Do not sleep at this time, fool!  
7.15 Having rejected the supreme j oy of the sacred Dharma  
That is an infinite cause of joy,  
Why do you enjoy being distracted by the causes for suffering,  
Frivolous amusements and the like?  
7.16 Without despondency, I should gather the masses of army  
And diligently take control of myself.  
Through equalizing self with others and  
Exchanging self for others,  
7.17 I should not be despondent by thinking,  
“How can I ever attain enlightenment?”  
Thus the tathagatas who speak what is true  
Have uttered this truth:  
7.18 “If they develop the strength of exertion,  
Even those who are flies, mosquitoes, bees, and likewise worms  
Will win the unsurpassable enlightenment  
Which is hard to attain.”  
7.19 Since I have been born human by race  
And recognize what is beneficial and what is harmful,  
If I do not fors ake the deeds of enlightenment,  
Why will I not attain enlightenment?  
7.20 OPINION: Having to give away my legs, arms,  
And so forth frightens me.  
RESPONSE: Without analyzing what is heavy and what is light,  
I am reduced to fear through confusion.  
7.21 Over  countless billions of eons  
I will be cut, stabbed, burned,  
And chopped up many times [266]  
But I will not attain enlightenment.  
7.22 Yet this suffering  
For my accomplishing enlightenment will have a limit;  
It is like the suffering of having an incision ma de 
In order to eliminate the harm of pain destroying it inside.  
7.23 Even all doctors eliminate illness  
With unpleasant medical treatments,  
So in order to overcome manifold sufferings  
I should put up with little discomfort.  
Shantideva’s Engaging in the Deeds of a Bodhisattva        Translation Toh Sze Gee  
 
48 7.24 But the Supreme Physician d oes not employ  
Such ordinary remedies;  
With a very gentle procedure  
He remedies the boundless great ailments.  
7.25 At the beginning, the Guide applies  
The giving of such things as vegetables.  
Later, having become accustomed to that,  
One may progressively g ive away even one’s flesh.  
7.26 At such a time when I have generated a mind  
That regards my body as being like vegetables,  
Then what hardship will there be  
When it comes to giving away my flesh?  
7.27 Due to having abandoned negativities there is no suffer ing  
And due to skill there is no unhappiness.  
Thus mind and body are harmed  
By wrong conceptions and negativities.  
7.28 If their bodies are happy due to their merits  
And their minds are happy due to their skill,  
Then, even if they remain in cyclic existen ce for the sake of others,  
Why would the Compassionate Ones be disheartened?  
7.29 Due to the strength of the mind of enlightenment,  
He exhausts his previous negativities  
And gathers oceans of merit.  
Hence he is said to excel the hearers.  
7.30 So, having mo unted the horse of the mind of enlightenment  
That dispels all disheartenment and weariness,  
And proceeds from happiness to happiness,  
Which ones who know of this mind would lapse into despondency?  
7.31 The army for the sake of accomplishing the welfare of sentient beings  
Are interest, steadfastness, joy, and relinquishment.  
Interest is developed through fear of suffering  
And contemplating its benefits.  
7.32 Thus I shall abandon its discordant classes  
And make effort in order to increase joyous effort  
Through the powers of interest, pride, joy, and relinquishment,  
Diligence and mastery.  
7.33 I shall destroy  
The boundless misdeeds of others and myself.  
At that time each of these misdeeds  
Will be exhausted in an ocean of eons.  
Shantideva’s Engaging in the Deeds of a Bodhisattva        Translation Toh Sze Gee  
 
49 7.34 But if within myself I do not perceive  
Even a fraction of the endeavor for exhausting these misdeeds,  
Then I have become an abode for boundless suffering;  
Why does my heart not burst?  
7.35 I shall accomplish many  
Excellent qualities for others and myself.  
And I will acquaint mysel f  
With each of these qualities through an ocean of eons,  
7.36 But I have never developed acquaintance  
With even a fraction of these excellences, [274]  
How strange it is to make without purpose  
This birth I have somehow found.  
7.37 I have not made offering s to the Bhagavan,  
I have not given the pleasure of great festivals,  
I have not performed actions for the teachings,  
I have not fulfilled the wishes of the poor,  
7.38 I have not granted fearlessness to the frightened  
And I have not given happiness to the w retched.  
All I have given rise to are  
The agonies in the mother’s womb and suffering.  
7.39 If in the past and even now  
Such deprivation are arising  
Because of my lack of interest in the Dharma,  
Who would reject this interest in the Dharma?  
7.40 The Muni h imself has said  
That interest is the root of every class of virtue;  
Its root is constant acquaintance  
With the ripening results.  
7.41 Suffering, mental unhappiness,  
The various kinds of fear,  
As well as separation from what is desired  
Will arise from negat ive deeds.  
7.42 By performing virtues intended in the mind,  
Wherever I go, due to those merits,  
There I shall be honored with  
The excellences that are their results.  
7.43 Although one who commits misdeeds wishes for happiness,  
Wherever he goes,  
There thos e misdeeds  
Will completely destroy him with the weapons of suffering.  
Shantideva’s Engaging in the Deeds of a Bodhisattva        Translation Toh Sze Gee  
 
50 7.44 As a result of virtue, I will become a spiritual child of the Sugatas 
dwelling in the hearts of vast, fragrant, and cool lotuses,  
The food of the Victors’ pleasant speech will cause  my splendor to grow,  
My supreme body will emerge from a lotus that will unfold due to the light of 
the Munis and  
I will abide in the presence of the Victors.  
7.45 As a result of many non -virtues, I will be very wretched due to all my 
skin without excepti on being ripped off by the henchmen of Yama, 
[275]  
Molten copper melted by tremendous heat will be poured into my body,  
Pierced by flaming swords and daggers, my flesh will be cut into hundreds of 
pieces,  
And I shall plummet upon the fiercely blazing iron ground.  
7.46 Therefore I should be interested in virtue  
And with great respect acquaint myself with it.  
Having undertaken through the procedure of Vajradhvaja,  
I should cultivate pride.  
7.47 At the beginning having examined the endowments,  
I should either undertake it or not undertake it.  
It is best not to undertake it,  
But once I have undertaken it I should not withdraw.  
7.48 I will familiarize with that in other rebirths  
And negativities and suffering will increase.  
Also others and the time of the result  
Will be inferior and will not be accomplished.  
7.49 Apply pride to the three:  
Actions, afflictions, and ability.  
Thinking, “I alone shall do it,”  
Is the pride of action.  
7.50 Afflicted, powerless beings in this world  
Are unable to accomplish their own welf are. 
Migrating beings are not able like me,  
Therefore I shall do this.  
7.51 If others are doing inferior work,  
Why do I sit around?  
I do not perform it out of pride;  
It would be best for me to have no pride. [280]  
7.52 When encountering a dead snake,  
Even crows will act as though they are garudas.  
If I am weak  
I shall be harmed by even a small downfall.  
Shantideva’s Engaging in the Deeds of a Bodhisattva        Translation Toh Sze Gee  
 
51 7.53 How do the faint -hearted who have given up exerting themselves  
Find liberation from destitution?  
By generating pride and exertion,  
Even the great will  find it hard to overcome me.  
7.54 Therefore with a steady mind  
I shall overcome the downfalls.  
If I am defeated by a downfall,  
My wish to be victorious over the three realms will become a joke.  
7.55 I will conquer everything  
And nothing at all shall conqu er me!  
I, a son of the Lion -like Victor,  
Shall dwell in this pride.  
7.56 Any migrating being is destroyed by pride.  
Afflicted, he has no pride.  
Those with pride do not succumb to the power of the enemy.  
They have come under the power of the enemy of pride.  
7.57 Inflated by afflicted pride,  
I shall be led by pride to the bad migrations.  
It destroys the joyous festival of being human.  
I shall become a slave, eating the food of others,  
7.58 Stupid, ugly, feeble, and  
Despised everywhere.  
Tough people inflated by pride  
Are also included among those having pride.  
Tell me, what is the inferior like!  
7.59 Whoever seizes pride in order to conquer the enemy of pride,  
He is the one having pride, the victorious hero.  
Whoever definitely destroys the rampage of this enem y of pride,  
Completes the results of a Victor in accordance with the wishes of migrating 
beings.  
7.60 When amidst a class of afflictions,  
I shall be persistent with them in a thousand ways;  
Like a lion among foxes and the like, [281]  
I will not be injured by the host of afflictions.  
7.61 Just as men will guard their eyes  
In the occurrence of great danger,  
Likewise I shall not come under the power of the afflictions,  
Even when danger occurs.  
Shantideva’s Engaging in the Deeds of a Bodhisattva        Translation Toh Sze Gee  
 
52 7.625 It would be better for me to be burned,  
To be killed, or to h ave my head cut off,  
Rather than bowing down  
To the enemy of afflictions.  
Likewise in all situations  
I should do nothing other than what is fit.  
7.63 Just like those who desire the pleasurable result of play,  
This [bodhisattva] adheres  
To whatever task he  may do.  
He is not satiated by it; it makes him happy.  
7.64 Although people work in order to be happy,  
It is uncertain whether or not they will be happy;  
But how can those whose work itself is happiness  
Find happiness without doing the work?  
7.65 If I am n ot satiated by desirable objects,  
Which are like honey smeared upon a razor’s edge,  
Then why am I satiated by merit  
Which is ripening and pacification in happiness?  
7.66 Thus in order to complete this task,  
I shall engage in it  
Just as an elephant tormente d at midday  
Enters into a lake.  
7.67 When my strength is related to degeneration,  
I should leave whatever I am doing in order to return to it.  
If something is finished well, I should put it aside [289]  
With the wish for more and more later.  
7.68 Just as a seasoned soldier engages  
In a fencing battle with the enemy,  
So shall I avoid the weapons of the afflictions  
And attack the enemies that are the afflictions.  
7.69 If someone dropped his sword during a battle,  
He would quickly pick it up out of fear.  
Likewise if I lose the weapon of mindfulness,  
Afraid of hell, I should quickly retrieve it.  
7.70 Just as poison spreads throughout the body  
In dependence upon the blood, [290]  
Likewise if it finds an opportunity  
Misdeeds will permeate my mind.  
               
5 This stanza does not appear in the Sanskrit version according to Wallace’s translation.  
Shantideva’s Engaging in the Deeds of a Bodhisattva        Translation Toh Sze Gee  
 
53 7.71 Just as a man carrying a jar full of mustard oil  
In the presence of someone wielding a sword  
Who is being threatened that he will be killed if he spills it will be frightened,  
Likewise, those who have the modes of conduct should be attentive.  
7.72 Therefore, just a s I would hastily stand up  
If a snake came into my lap,  
Likewise if any sleep or indolence occur  
I shall quickly turn them back.  
7.73 Each time a misdeed occurs  
I should deride myself,  
And then contemplate for a long time  
“No matter what, I shall not let t his happen in the future.”  
7.74 “Likewise in all situations  
I shall acquaint myself with mindfulness.”  
With this cause I shall wish for  
Encounters or appropriate actions.  
7.75 In order to have strength for all  
I should recall before undertaking any action  
The advice on conscientiousness thus,  
And then rise with lightness.  
7.76 Just as the wind blowing back and forth  
Controls a piece of cotton,  
So shall I be mastered by enthusiasm,  
And in this way I will accomplish all.  
 
 
Chapter Eight  
Teachings on Concentra tion  
8.1 Having developed joyous effort in that way,  
I should place my mind in meditative stabilization;  
The man whose mind is distracted  
Dwells between the fangs of afflictions.  
8.2 Through isolation of body and mind  
No distractions will occur;  
Therefore , I should abandon the world  
And completely discard conceptualizations.  
8.3 Because of attachment and due to craving for material gain and the like,  
The world is not abandoned.  
Therefore, I shall entirely abandon these;  
The skilled analyze in this way.  
Shantideva’s Engaging in the Deeds of a Bodhisattva        Translation Toh Sze Gee  
 
54 8.4 Having understood that afflictions are completely destroyed  
By special insight endowed with calm abiding,  
First of all I should search for calm abiding.  
Further, this is achieved with joy by those unattached to the world.  
8.5 Because of the attachment one  impermanent being  
Has for impermanent beings,  
He will not see his beloved ones  
For thousands of lives.  
8.6 Not seeing them I will not be happy.  
Also my mind will not be set in equipoise;  
Even if I see them there will be no satisfaction,  
Whereby, as befor e, I will be tormented by craving.  
8.7 Through being attached to sentient beings,  
I will be completely obscured from the perfect reality.  
My mind of disillusion will also be destroyed.  
In the end I will be tormented by sorrow.  
8.8 By only thinking of the m, 
This life will pass without any meaning.  
Friends and relatives lacking permanence  
Will even destroy the everlasting Dharma.  
8.9 If I behave in the same way as those equal in fortune to the childish  
I will certainly proceed to lower realms.  
If I am led t here to those unequal in fortune, {300}  
What is the use of entrusting myself to the childish?  
8.10 One moment they are friends  
And in a while they become enemies.  
Since they become angry even at the sources of joy,  
It is difficult to please ordinary peopl e.  
8.11 They are angry when something of benefit is said  
And they also turn me away from benefit.  
If I do not listen to what they say,  
Becoming angry, they will proceed to lower realms.  
8.12 They are envious of superiors, competitive with equals,  
And pro ud towards inferiors. They are conceited when praised,  
And if anything unpleasant is said they get angry;  
When is any benefit obtained from the childish?  
8.13 Through associating with the childish,  
Non-virtue will certainly ensue,  
Such as praising myself a nd belittling others  
And discussing the joys of cyclic existence.  
Shantideva’s Engaging in the Deeds of a Bodhisattva        Translation Toh Sze Gee  
 
55 8.14 Others and I relying [upon each other] in this way  
Will bring about nothing but ruin.  
They will not enact my purpose  
And I too will not enact their purpose.  
8.15 I should flee far awa y from childish people.  
When they are encountered, I should please them joyfully.  
I should behave well, merely ordinarily,  
Without becoming greatly familiar.  
8.16 In the same way a bee takes honey from a flower,  
I should take merely the purpose of Dharma  
And remain unfamiliar  
As though I have never seen all of them before.  
8.17 “I have many possessions as well as honor,  
And many people like me,”  
Nurturing conceit in this way  
I shall be made terrified after death.  
8.18 So, thoroughly confused mind,  
By the  combination of whatever attachments  
To this and that, {301} multiplying into thousands,  
Suffering will ensue and arise.  
8.19 Hence, the wise should not be attached;  
Fear is produced from attachment.  
Firmly understand well  
That it is the nature of these t hings to be discarded!  
8.20 Although I may have many possessions,  
Be famous and well spoken of,  
I do not know where  
The collection of possessions and renown will go.  
8.21 If there is someone who derides me,  
What is there for me to be happy about in bein g praised?  
And if there is another who praises me,  
What is there for me to be unhappy about in being derided?  
8.22 If even the Victor is unable to please  
The beings of various inclinations,  
Then what need to mention about a negative person such as I?  
There fore, I should give up worldly thought.  
8.23 They deride sentient beings who have no possessions  
And say bad things about those who do; {306}  
How will they who are by nature difficult to get along with  
Produce happiness?  
Shantideva’s Engaging in the Deeds of a Bodhisattva        Translation Toh Sze Gee  
 
56 8.24 It has been said by the tatha gatas,  
“Never befriend the childish,”  
Because without their welfare,  
These childish ones will not be happy.  
8.25 When shall I come to dwell with these delights  
Of deer, birds, and trees in the forests  
That say nothing unpleasant  
When associated with?  
8.26 I shall dwell in caves,  
In empty shrines or at the feet of trees.  
When shall I not look back  
And be without attachment?  
8.27 When shall I come to dwell  
In places not held to as “mine,”  
Which are by nature spacious  
And where I may behave6 freely withou t attachment?  
8.28 When shall I come to live without fear  
Having slight things such as a begging bowl,  
Wearing clothes not wanted by all  
And not even hiding this body?  
8.29 Having gone to the charnel grounds,  
When shall I deduce  
That this body of mine an d the skeletons of others  
Bear the property of disintegration?  
8.30 This very body of mine will also become so.  
Because of its odor, not even the foxes  
Will come close to this body of mine;  
There will come a time when such will happen.  
8.31 Although this  body arose as a unit,  
The bones and flesh with which it was born  
Will break up and separate.  
What need is there to mention other friends?  
8.32 At birth I was born alone,  
And at death too I shall die alone; {307}  
If the suffering doom cannot be taken on b y others,  
Of what use are hindering friends?  
8.33 In the same way as those who have embarked on the road  
Own a place of stay,  
               
6 Spod  is emended to read spyod . 
Shantideva’s Engaging in the Deeds of a Bodhisattva        Translation Toh Sze Gee  
 
57 Likewise those who have embarked on the path of existence  
Own an abode of birth.  
8.34 Until the time comes for it  
To be supported  by four pall -bearers, from that,  
While the world is completely stricken,  
Till then I shall retire to the forest.  
8.35 Befriending no one and begrudging no one,  
This body will dwell alone in solitude.  
If I am already counted as dead even before,  
Even when I die there will be no mourners.  
8.36 There will be no one around  
To harm me with their mourning,  
Thus there will be no one to distract me  
From my recollections of the Buddha and the like.  
8.37 Therefore I shall dwell alone,  
Happy and contented due to in significant difficulties,  
In very delightful forests,  
Pacifying all distractions.  
8.38 Having given up all other thoughts,  
With only one thought in me,  
I shall strive in order to set my mind in equipoise  
And in order to subdue it.  
8.39 Both in this worl d and the next  
Desires give rise to great misfortune,  
Establishing in this one killing, bondage, and flaying,  
And hells and the like in the next.  
8.40 For their sake many requests  
Are first made through male and female messengers.  
Negativities and notorie ty too {312}  
Are not shunned for their sake.  
8.41 You even engage in fearful deeds for them  
And will even exhaust your wealth.  
You greatly enjoy  
Completely embracing them.  
8.42 If they are nothing other than skeletons,  
Rather than being so desirous and c ompletely obsessed  
Towards that which neither is under your control nor belongs to you,  
Why do you not go to the state beyond sorrow?  
Shantideva’s Engaging in the Deeds of a Bodhisattva        Translation Toh Sze Gee  
 
58 8.43 In the first place, making effort, you lifted her face and drew it 
[towards you].  
However she bashfully looked down . 
Previously whether anyone looked or not,  
Her face was covered with a veil.  
8.44 But now why do you run away  
Upon directly beholding  
This face of afflictions  
As it is being removed by the vultures?  
8.45 You completely guarded it  
Even when others cast th eir eyes upon it.  
Why, miser, do you not guard it  
While they are devouring it?  
8.46 If, having seen this heap of flesh,  
The vultures and others eat it,  
Why do you make offerings of flower garlands, sandalwood, and ornaments  
To the food of others?  
8.47 If you are frightened by the skeletons you see  
Even though they do not move,  
Why are you not frightened by that similar to a zombie  
Which is moved around by a few intentions ? 
8.48 You are attached to it even when it is covered.  
Why do you not desire it w hen it is uncovered?  
If you have no need for it,  
Why do you embrace it when it is covered?  
8.49 If both excrement and saliva  
Arise solely from food,  
Why do you dislike excrement  
And find joy in saliva?  
8.50 Cotton too is soft to the touch, {313}  
But whil e you find no delight in a pillow,  
You think, “It does not smell,”  
Lustful One, you are confused as to what is unclean!  
8.51 Thinking, “I cannot copulate with this cotton,”  
Although it soft to the touch,  
Confused, negative, and lustful people  
Become angry  towards it.  
8.52 If you have no attachment to the unclean,  
Then why do you copulate with another  
Which is a cage of bone tied together with muscles,  
Shantideva’s Engaging in the Deeds of a Bodhisattva        Translation Toh Sze Gee  
 
59 Plastered over with the mud of flesh?  
8.53 You yourself have many unclean things  
That you constantly have  to utilize;  
Out of obsession for the unclean  
Also in other bags of filth, [why do] you desire it?  
8.54 “I delight in this flesh.”  
If this is what you wish to touch and behold,  
Why do you not desire flesh in its natural state  
Devoid of mind?  
8.55 Any min d that you may desire  
Cannot be touched or beheld,  
And whatever you are able to [touch] will not be consciousness;  
What is the use of embracing the meaningless?  
8.56 It is not so strange that you do not realize  
The bodies of others to be of an unclean nat ure, 
But it is indeed strange that you do not realize  
You yourself to be just unclean.  
8.57 Having forsaken the young lotus flower  
Unfolded by beams of sunlight free from cloud,  
Why, with a mind adhering to the unclean,  
Do you take joy in a cage of filth?   
8.58 Since you do not desire to touch  
A place that is sullied by filth,  
Then why do you desire to touch the body  
From which that arose?  
8.59 If you are not attached to what is unclean,  
Why do you copulate with others {314}  
Which arise from the field of the unclean  
And are produced by its seeds?  
8.60 You have no desire for a small dirty maggot  
Which has come from filth.  
[Why] do you desire the body which is in the nature of many impurities,  
And is also produced from filth?  
8.61 Not only do you not dispa rage 
The uncleanliness of you yourself,  
But out of obsession for unclean bags of filth,  
You desire others as well.  
8.62 Even attractive things such as camphor,  
Cooked rice, and vegetables,  
Shantideva’s Engaging in the Deeds of a Bodhisattva        Translation Toh Sze Gee  
 
60 Make the ground dirty and filthy  
Should they be spat out after bei ng put into the mouth.  
8.63 Although such uncleanliness is obvious,  
If I have doubt, then I should look at the unclean bodies  
That have been disposed of  
At the charnel grounds.  
8.64 Although they understand that they will generate great fear  
Of that fro m which the skin is rent open,  
In any case they will again generate joy  
Towards those themselves.  
8.65 The scents which anointed the bodies  
Are sandalwood and the like, not that of others.  
Why are you attached to others  
Because of scents of something else ? 
8.66 Since it has a naturally foul odor,  
Isn’t it good to be unattached to it?  
Why do those who crave for the meaningless things of the world  
Anoint it with pleasant scents?  
8.67 However, if that pleasant scent is sandalwood,  
How can it arise here in the  body?  
Why am I attached to others  
Because of scents of something else?  
8.68 If the naked body in its natural state {315}  
Is very frightening due to its long hair and nails,  
And yellowish foul -smelling teeth  
Being coated with the odor of dirt,  
8.69 Why do I clean it with effort,  
Like cleaning a weapon that will cause me harm?  
Hence this world is completely disturbed by insanity  
Due to the effort of those who are confused about themselves.  
8.70 When my mind is despondent in the charnel grounds  
Through hav ing beheld nothing but skeletons,  
Will there be any joy in the charnel grounds  
Which are cities filled with moving skeletons?  
8.71 In this way, the unclean  
Is not found without paying a price;  
Through accomplishing their purpose I exhaust myself  
And will  be harmed in the hells and the like.  
Shantideva’s Engaging in the Deeds of a Bodhisattva        Translation Toh Sze Gee  
 
61 8.72 A child is unable to increase his wealth,  
So with what can he be happy when he is in the prime of life?  
When life is spent due to accumulating wealth and the like,  
Having aged, what use will sex be?  
8.73 Some lust ful negative people  
Wear themselves out by working all day  
And when they return home  
Their exhausted bodies lie prostrate like corpses.  
8.74 Some have the suffering of afflictions of long -distance travel,  
And of being faraway.  
Although they long for women,  
They will not see them for entire years.  
8.75 Those who wish for benefit, out of confusion,  
Even sell for the sake of that,  
But not attaining that, they are driven  
By the winds of others’ actions that lack purpose.  
8.76 Some sell their own bodies  
And wit hout any power are exploited by others.  
Even when their wives give birth  
Their children fall at the foot of trees and in isolated places.  
8.77 Fools who are deceived by desire,  
Wishing for a livelihood, although afraid of losing their lives,  
Go to war, th inking, “I shall make a living.” {316}  
They become slaves for the sake of profit.  
8.78 Some lustful people even have their bodies cut,  
Some are impaled on the points of sticks,  
Some are stabbed with daggers,  
And others are burnt – such things as these are s een. 
8.79 Due to the torment of collecting, guarding, and losing it,  
I should understand wealth to be infinite problems.  
Those who are distracted by their attachment to wealth  
Have no opportunity to attain freedom from the sufferings of [cyclic] 
existence.  
8.80 Desirous people  
Have many disadvantages such as these and little benefit,  
In the same way ox and the like drawing carriages  
Eat a few mouthfuls of grass.  
8.81 Even ox and the like can achieve [this . 
Those who are pained by their actions  
Destroy the perfect leisures and endowments so difficult to find  
Shantideva’s Engaging in the Deeds of a Bodhisattva        Translation Toh Sze Gee  
 
62 For the sake of something of little benefit which is not so rare.  
8.82 The objects of desire will certainly disintegrate  
And then I shall fall into the hells and the like.  
The hardship of exhaustion aris es 
For the sake of what is not very great.  
8.83 If buddhahood itself is achieved  
With just one millionth of that difficulty,  
The desirous have greater suffering than  
Practitioners of enlightenment, but there is no enlightenment.  
8.84 Having contemplated th e sufferings of hell and the like,  
For the desirous ones,  
Weapons, poison, fire, ravines, and foes  
Do not compare.  
8.85 Having in this way developed disillusion to objects of desire,  
I should generate joy for solitude.  
Within pacified forests  
Devoid of d isputes and afflictions,  
8.86 The fortunate ones, at joyful mansions of vast flat stones  
Cooled by the sandalwood moonlight and  
By the stirring peaceful forest breeze free from noise,  
Think of what is of benefit for others and stroll there.  
8.87 They dwell  for as long as they wish  
In empty houses, at the foot of trees and in caves,  
Having abandoned the suffering of owning and guarding [possessions],  
They are carefree without concern.  
8.88 Utilizing freely without attachment,  
Having no ties with anyone,  
Even  lords have difficulty finding  
That which is the enjoyment of happy contentment.  
8.89 Having through such ways as these  
Thought about the excellences of isolation,  
I should completely pacify conceptualizations  
And meditate on bodhichitta.  
8.90 First of all  I should make an effort  
To meditate upon the equality between self and others:  
I should protect all as I do myself  
Because of equal happiness and suffering.  
Shantideva’s Engaging in the Deeds of a Bodhisattva        Translation Toh Sze Gee  
 
63 8.91 Although there are many different divisions and aspects such as the 
hands,  
They are same in b eing the body that is to be thoroughly protected.  
Likewise all the different migrating beings in their happiness and suffering  
Are the same in wishing to be happy just as I do.  
8.92 My suffering  
Does not cause any harm to the bodies of others.  
But that is  my suffering.  
Due to adhering as “I,” it becomes unbearable.  
8.93 Likewise the suffering of others  
Does not befall me.  
Nevertheless, that suffering of me,  
Due to adhering as “I,” will be hard to bear.  
8.94 I should dispel the suffering of others  
Because it is suffering, just like my own suffering,  
And I should benefit others  
Because they are sentient beings, just like my body.  
8.95 When both others and I  
Are similar in wishing to be happy,  
What is the difference with me?  
Why do I strive for my happiness alone?  
8.96 And when both I and others  
Are similar in not wishing to suffer,  
What is the difference with me?  
Why do I protect myself and not others?  
8.97 OBJECTION: I do not protect them  
Because their suffering does not cause me harm.  
RESPONSE: Then why p rotect [myself] against future suffering  
If it causes me no harm? {333}  
8.98 The conceptualization thinking  
That I shall experience that is wrong.  
The person who died thus is one  
And that reborn is another.  
8.99 If whenever there is suffering  
That itself m ust protect from that,  
The suffering of the foot is not that of the hand,  
Why then does it protect from that?  
8.100  OBJECTION: Although this may not be reasonable,  
It is engaged in due to apprehending a self.  
RESPONSE: Whatever unreasonable self and others  
Shantideva’s Engaging in the Deeds of a Bodhisattva        Translation Toh Sze Gee  
 
64 Should at all costs be abandoned.  
8.101  That called “continuum” and “collection”  
Are like falsities such as a rosary and an army.  
The possessor of suffering does not exist,  
Who has control over this?  
8.102  The owner of suffering being non -existent,  
There can be no distinction in all.  
Because it is suffering, I shall dispel it:  
Therefore, what is the point in that?  
8.103  OBJECTION: Why should I avert the suffering of all?  
RESPONSE: There is no ground for argument;  
If I avert it, I should avert all.  
If not, I am just like sentient beings.  
8.104  OBJECTION: Since compassion will multiply suffering greatly,  
Why should I diligently develop it?  
RESPONSE: If one were to contemplate the suffering of migrating beings,  
How could the suffering of compassion be more?  
8.105 If by one suffering  
Much suffering would be destroyed,  
Kind people would produce it  
For themselves and others.  
8.106  Thus Supusha -chandra,  
Although aware of the harm the king would cause him,  
Did not prevent his own suffering  
Because it would eradicate  the suffering of many. {334}  
8.107  One whose continuum is familiarized in this way,  
Since he takes joy in pacifying others’ sufferings,  
Will enter even Relentless Torment  
Just as a swan enters a lotus pool.  
8.108  Will not the ocean of joy  
If all beings a re free  
Satisfy me?  
What is the use of desiring liberation?  
8.109  Due to that, although working for the welfare of others,  
There is no conceit or amazement.  
Because of the joy in others’ welfare unequivocally,  
There is no hope for ripening effects.  
8.110  Therefore just as I protect myself  
From unpleasant things however small,  
Shantideva’s Engaging in the Deeds of a Bodhisattva        Translation Toh Sze Gee  
 
65 In the same way I should act towards others  
With a mind of protection and a compassionate mind.  
8.111  Although not [my] possessions,  
Through familiarity  
I have come to regard  
The drops  of sperm and blood of others as “I”.  
8.112  So in the same way, why should I be unable  
To apprehend the bodies of others as “I”?  
It is not difficult to posit  my body as also “other.”  
And to be an ocean of excellences with respect to others,  
I shall cultiva te completely discarding cherishing myself  
And adopting others.  
8.114  In the same way as the hands and so forth  
Are asserted as limbs of the body,  
Likewise why are embodied creatures  
Not asserted as limbs of migrating beings?  
8.115  Through familiarization a mind of “I” arises  
Towards this body devoid of a self;  
In a similar way, why would a mind of “I” not be produced  
Towards other sentient beings also through familiarization?  
8.116  Although I enact others’ welfare in this way,  
Conceit or amazement will not  arise.  
It is just like not hoping for a return  
Due to having fed myself.  
8.117  Therefore, just as I protect myself  
From unpleasantness however slight,  
In the same way I should familiarize myself  
With a mind of protection towards migrating beings and a co mpassionate 
mind.  
8.118  Hence, out of his great exalted compassion  
The Protector Avalokiteshvara even blessed his name  
To dispel the fear  
Of being among migrating beings.  
8.119  I should not turn away from what is difficult;  
By the power of familiarization  in this way  
I will become unhappy even when someone  
Whose name when heard once frightened me is not around.  
8.120  Whoever wishes to quickly protect  
Himself and others  
Should practice that holy secret – 
Shantideva’s Engaging in the Deeds of a Bodhisattva        Translation Toh Sze Gee  
 
66 The exchanging of self for others.  
8.121  Because of attachment to my body,  
Even a small object of fear frightens me;  
Who would not abhor as an enemy  
This body that gives rise to fear?  
8.122  Wishing for a procedure to alleviate  
The sicknesses of hunger, thirst, and the like of the body,  
I kill birds, fish a nd deer  
And ambush [travelers] at the roads. {344}  
8.123  For the sake of profit and honor  
I kill even my father and mother  
And appropriate the property of the Three Jewels.  
Thus I will burn in Relentless Torment.  
8.124  What wise man would desire,  
Protect a nd venerate this body?  
Who would not scorn it  
And regard it as an enemy?  
8.125  “If I give them, what shall I enjoy?” — 
Such thinking for my own purpose is the way of ghosts;  
“If I enjoy them, what shall I give?” — 
Such thinking for others’ purpose is a quali ty of the gods.  
8.126  If, for myself, I cause harm to others,  
I shall fall into the hells and the like;  
If for the sake of others, I cause harm to myself,  
I shall acquire all that is magnificent.  
8.127  Desiring eminence for myself  
I shall become of unfortu nate migrations, bad and stupid;  
If it is shifted to others  
I shall acquire honor in good migrations.  
8.128  If I employ others for my own purposes,  
I myself shall experience servitude and the like;  
If I use myself for the sake of others,  
I shall experience  lordliness and the like.  
8.129  Whatever joy there is in this world  
All comes from desiring others to be happy,  
And whatever suffering there is in this world  
All comes from desiring myself to be happy.  
8.130  What need is there to say much?  
The childish wor k for their own purpose;  
Shantideva’s Engaging in the Deeds of a Bodhisattva        Translation Toh Sze Gee  
 
67 The Muni worked for others’ purpose.  
Look at the difference between these two!  
8.131  If I do not correctly exchange my happiness  
And the sufferings of others,  
I shall not accomplish the state of buddhahood  
And even in cyclic existe nce shall have no happiness. {345}  
8.132  Let alone what is beyond this world –  
Because of servants not doing work  
And because of masters not giving pay,  
Even the purpose of this life will not be fulfilled.  
8.133  [By rejecting the method that] establishes foreseeable and unforeseeable 
happiness,  
The happiness of success will be completely cast away.  
And because of inflicting suffering on others,  
The confused will take upon terrible suffering.  
8.134  If whatever harms,  
Fear and suffering in the worlds  
All ari se from grasping at a self,  
Then of what use7 is that great ghost to me?  
8.135  If I do not completely forsake it  
I shall not be able to abandon suffering,  
Just as I cannot avoid being burnt  
If I do not cast aside fire.  
8.136  Therefore, in order to pacify t he harms inflicted upon me  
And in order to pacify the sufferings of others,  
I shall give myself up to others  
And cherish them as I do myself.  
8.137  “I am under the ownership of others,”  
Of this, mind, you must know certainly;  
Now, except for the purpose of  all sentient beings,  
You must not think of anything else.  
8.138  I should not accomplish my purpose  
With these eyes and so forth that are under the ownership of others.  
I should not do anything with eyes and so forth for [others’] purpose  
That is contrary to them.  
8.139  Thus sentient beings should be taken as principal.  
Whatever I behold upon my body,  
I should appropriate and use  
               
7 Go emended to read ko. 
Shantideva’s Engaging in the Deeds of a Bodhisattva        Translation Toh Sze Gee  
 
68 For the benefit of others.  
8.140  Taking someone inferior and so forth to be himself,  
And taking himself to be the other,  
[A bodhi sattva] should meditate upon envy, competitiveness, and pride,  
With a mind free of conceptualization. {355}  
8.141  He is honored, but we are not;  
We have not found [possessions] as he has.  
He is praised, but we are disparaged;  
He is happy, but we suffer.  
8.142 We do the work  
While he abides in comfort.  
He is renowned as great in this world,  
But we as inferior with no good qualities.  
8.143  We have no good qualities; what to do?  
All of us are to be endowed with good qualities;  
There are those in comparison to  whom he is inferior,  
And there are those in comparison to whom we are supreme.  
8.144  The morality, views, and woes  
Are not under our control but due to the force of afflictions.  
He must heal us in whatever way he is able to, and  
Willingly we must accept a ny harm involved.  
8.145  However we are not his objects of healing,  
So why does he belittle us?  
What use are his good qualities to us?  
He has good qualities.  
8.146  With no compassion for the migrating beings  
Who dwell in the mouth of poisonous bad migratio ns, 
Externally he is proud of his good qualities  
And wishes to harm the wise.  
8.147  In order that we may surpass  
He who is regarded as equal to us,  
We shall definitely attain possessions and honor for ourselves,  
Even through dispute.  
8.148  By all means we shall make clear to the entire world  
The good qualities we have,  
But we shall not let anyone hear  
Of any of his good qualities.  
8.149  Also we shall hide our faults;  
We will be venerated, not him; {356}  
Shantideva’s Engaging in the Deeds of a Bodhisattva        Translation Toh Sze Gee  
 
69 We will find a great deal of possessions today;  
We wil l be honored, not him.  
8.150  For a long time I shall look with pleasure  
At his being made sinful;  
He will become the laughing stock of all migrating beings,  
And be derided among [all].  
8.151  It is said that this afflicted one  
Is competing with us,  
But how can he be equal to us  
In hearing, wisdom, form, class, or wealth?  
8.152  Thus, upon hearing of our good qualities  
That have been made known to all,  
We shall thoroughly enjoy the delight  
Of the excitement giving rise to goose pimples.  
8.153  Even though he h as some possessions,  
If he is working for us,  
We shall give him just enough to live on  
And by force we will take [the rest].  
8.154  His comfort will decline  
And I shall involve him with harm.  
For hundreds [of lifetimes] in cyclic existence  
He caused harm to  me. 
8.155  Mind, because of desiring to enact your own purpose,  
Such great weariness you have gone through  
Over countless past eons  
Has only achieved suffering.  
8.156  Therefore I shall definitely engage myself  
In the purpose of others.  
Since the words of t he Muni are infallible,  
I shall behold its good qualities in the future.  
8.157  If in the past you had practiced  
This act, a situation dissimilar to  
The happiness of fulfillment of a Buddha  
Could not have been possible.  
8.158  Therefore, just as you held as “I” these drops of sperm and blood of others, {357}  
Likewise familiarize with others.  
You shall steal whatever appears on your body  
And use it for the benefit of others.  
Shantideva’s Engaging in the Deeds of a Bodhisattva        Translation Toh Sze Gee  
 
70 8.160  “I am delighted but others are sad,  
I am high but others are low,  
I benefit myse lf but others do not.”  
Why am I not jealous of myself?  
8.161  I must separate myself from happiness  
And involve myself with the sufferings of others.  
“Why am I doing this?”  
At that time I should examine my faults.  
8.162  Although others may do something wro ng, 
I shall transform it into a fault of my own;  
But should I do something even slightly wrong,  
I shall openly admit it to many people.  
8.163  By further describing the renown of others,  
I should make it outshine my own. {363}  
Just like the lowest of servan ts, 
I should employ myself for all purposes.  
8.164  I am naturally fault -ridden.  
I should not praise myself for a portion of an incidental good quality,  
I shall never let even a few people know  
Of my good qualities no matter how.  
8.165  In brief, may the har ms that  
You have caused to others for my sake  
Descend upon me myself  
For the sake of sentient beings.  
8.166  I should not be aggressive,  
Acting in a brutal way;  
Instead, like a newly married bride,  
I should stay bashful, timid, and restrained.  
8.167  Thus, you should [think] and abide in this way  
And not act so.  
If you transgress being under control,  
You will be subjugated.  
8.168  However, although having been advised,  
If mind, you do not act in such a manner,  
Then since all faults will base themselves in you , 
You will only be destined to subjugation.  
8.169  That previous time when you could overcome me  
Is different;  
I see it and now wherever you go  
I shall destroy all your arrogance.  
Shantideva’s Engaging in the Deeds of a Bodhisattva        Translation Toh Sze Gee  
 
71 8.170  Even now may I cast aside the intention thinking about  
“My own welfare. ” 
By having sold you to others,  
Without becoming discouraged8, may I offer sustenance.  
8.171  If, having become non -conscientious,  
I do not give you to all living beings,  
Then it is certain that you will deliver me  
To the guardians of the hells.  
8.172  For a ges have you delivered me like this  
Whereby I have suffered lengthily;  
Now, recalling all my grudges,  
I shall overcome your intentions of self -purpose.  
8.173  However, if I wish to be happy,  
I should not be happy with myself.  
However, if I wish to be protec ted, 
I should constantly protect others.  
8.174  To whatever degree  
I take great care of this body,  
To that degree I shall fall  
Into a state of extreme anxiety.  
8.175  Having fallen in this way, if desires  
Are unable to be fulfilled  
Even by everything upon th is earth,  
What else will be able to [fulfill] desires of that?  
8.176  Being unable [to fulfill them, and craving for objects of] desire,  
Afflictions and degeneration of attitude will arise.  
One will not know the exhaustion of success  
Of not depending on an ything.  
8.177  Therefore, I shall never allow an opportunity  
For the desires of the body to increase.  
Not holding to the attractive  
Is a good possession.  
8.178  In the end it will turn to dust.  
Unable to move, it is propelled by another.  
Why do I hold onto  
This terrible unclean form as “self”?  
8.179  Even when it is alive, it is better off dead.  
Of what use is this machine to me?  
               
8 Sngon  emended to read skyo. 
Shantideva’s Engaging in the Deeds of a Bodhisattva        Translation Toh Sze Gee  
 
72 How is it different from a clod of earth and the like?  
Alas, why do I not dispel this pride!  
8.180  Having accumulated suffering for  no purpose  
Because of honoring this body,  
Of what use is attachment and anger  
For this thing that is similar to a piece of wood?  
8.181  Whether I am sustaining my body in this way,  
Or whether it is being eaten by vultures and the like,  
If it has no attach ment or hatred, {365}  
Why then am I so attached to it?  
8.182  If it knows no anger when derided  
And no pleasure when praised,  
For what purpose  
Am I wearing myself out like this?  
8.183  OPINION: Anyone who desires this body  
And I are friends.  
RESPONSE: Since all desire their own bodies,  
Why do I not find joy in theirs?  
8.184  Therefore, in order to benefit migrating beings  
I shall give away this body without any attachment.  
Although this has many faults  
I should uphold it like a worker’s tool.  
8.185  So enough of this childish behavior!  
I shall follow in the footsteps of the skillful,  
Having recalled the advice concerning conscientiousness,  
I shall turn away sleep and lethargy.  
8.186  Just like the compassionate Sons of the Victor,  
I shall bear the rigors of what  is appropriate;  
If I do not make a constant effort day and night,  
When will my suffering ever come to an end?  
8.187  Therefore, in order to dispel the obscurations  
I shall withdraw my mind from wrong paths  
And constantly place it in equipoise  
Upon the corr ect object of observation.  
 
 
Chapter Nine  
The Perfection of Wisdom  
Shantideva’s Engaging in the Deeds of a Bodhisattva        Translation Toh Sze Gee  
 
73  9.1 The M uni taught all these branches  
For the purpose of wisdom.  
Therefore, those who desire to pacify suffering  
Should generate wisdom.  
9.2  The concealer (the conventional) and the ultimate  
Are asserted to be the two truths.  
The ultimate is not an object of uti lization of the mind . 
The mind  is said to be a concealer.  
9.3 With respect to them, the people18 are seen  
To be of two types: yogis and ordinary folks.  
Among them, the ordinary people  
Are damaged by the people who are yogis.  
9.4 Even yogis, due to differe nces of their minds,  
Are damaged by the successively higher ones  
Because [emptiness is established] by means of analogies that both assert.  
And, for the sake of a result, one [engages]  without analysis . 
9.5 People19 see entities20 
And conceive them to be re al, 
Not like illusions , therefore here  
Yogis and people debate.  
9.6 Although forms and so forth are established by  a direct perceiver,  
It is so by renown, not by a valid cognizer.  
They are false, just like the unclean and so forth  
That are renowned to b e clean and so forth.  
9.7 For the sake of engaging mundane beings,  
The Protector taught entities. In thusness,  
They are not momentary.  
“There is contradiction even conventionally.”  
9.8 There is not the fault in yogis’ conventionalities.  
That is the seein g of thusness relative to mundane beings;  
Otherwise, their definite understanding of women as unclean  
Would be damaged by mundane beings.  
 
               
18 ‘Jigs rten , literally meaning “support for the transitory,” is translated as “people” here. A person serves 
as the support for the transi tory aggregates.  
19 ‘Jigs rten pa  is translated as “people,” although it can in a more restrictive sense refer to mundane 
people who conceive things as truly existent.  
20 “dngos po” (Sanskrit: bhava), translated as “entity” here, refers to something which is  able to perform 
its function, but in the expression  “Propounders of Entities,” the propounders of truly existent entities are 
being referred to, so much so that in some instances, “entity” almost becomes synonymous with “”true 
existence.”  
Shantideva’s Engaging in the Deeds of a Bodhisattva        Translation Toh Sze Gee  
 
74 9.9 Merit [arises] with respect to illusory victors,  
Just as with respect to entities.  
“If sentient beings are like  illusions,  
Then, having died, how are they reborn?”  
9.10 For as long as those conditions are assembled,  
For that long will illusion s also arise.  
Why should sentient beings be truly existent  
Due merely to long continuity?  
9.11 With regard to killing a bei ng who is an illusion  and the like,  
There is no negativity because it has no mind.  
With regard to those who possess illusion minds,  
Merit and negativity arise.  
9.12 Because mantras and so forth lack the ability,  
Mind of illusions does not occur . 
The illu sions that arise from  
Various conditions are also varied . 
9.13 Nowhere is there  
A single condition that is able to generate  all.  
“If ultimate is nirvana and  
Samsara is conventional, in that case,  
9.14 Since even a buddha would be circling,  
What would be the use of bodhisattva conduct? ” 
If the conditions are not severed,  
Also illusion s are not averted.  
9.15 Since the conditions are severed,  
There would be no occurrence  even conventionally.  
“If even a mistaken consciousness  does not exist,  
Then what w ould observe the illusion?”  
9.16 If the illusion itself does not exist for you,  
Then what would be observed at that time?  
“They exist other  than those;  
Those aspects are mind itself.”  
9.17 If the mind itself is an illusion,  
What would be seen by what at th at time?  
The Protector of the World also  
Taught that “Mind does not see mind.”  
9.18 Just as the blade of a sword  
Does not cut itself, mind is similar.  
“It is just like a butter lamp  
That perfectly illuminates the entity that is itself.”  
Shantideva’s Engaging in the Deeds of a Bodhisattva        Translation Toh Sze Gee  
 
75 9.19 A butter lam p is not an object to be illuminated  
Because [darkness] is not obscured by darkness.  
“There is blue, as in crystal, and  
Blueness that does not rely on something other.  
9.20 Likewise, some entities are seen in reliance  
On something other and [some] are seen without reliance.”  
It is not the case that the blueness in that which was not blue  
Made itself into the nature by itself.  
9.21 “A butter lamp illuminates.”  
When it is said that consciousness knows,  
Through being known by what  
Is it said that “Awarene ss illuminates”?  
9.22 If that is not seen by any,  
Whether that illuminates or does not illuminate  
Is like the gracefulness of the daughter of a barren woman;  
It is meaningless even to express it.  
9.23 “If a self -cognizer does not exist,  
How would a consci ousness be remembered?”  
It would be remembered through relation  
When experiencing another, like the poison of a rat.  
9.24 “Because those possessing other conditions see it,  
Their  own [mind] is clear as its  [object ].” 
Through applying the eye medicine of a ttainment  
Vases would be seen, but not the eye medicine.  
9.25 Seeing, hearing, and knowing  
Are not what are refuted here.  
Here that which is the cause of suffering — 
The conception of these as truly existent —is that to be averted.  
9.26 “Illusions are not o ther than the mind;  
Yet they are also not considered to be not other.”  
If they are entities, how could they not be other?  
If you say “They are not other,” they would not exist as entities.  
9.27 Just as illusions are not truly existent but are objects of  viewing,  
Likewise are the viewers.  
“Cyclic existence has as its support entities,  
Other [than] that it would be like space.”  
9.28 Since non -entities depend on entities,  
How would they have function?  
Your mind would be alone,  
Without companions.  
Shantideva’s Engaging in the Deeds of a Bodhisattva        Translation Toh Sze Gee  
 
76 9.29 If the mind were free from apprehended s,  
At that time all would be tathagatas.  
If so, what excellence would there be  
In considering mind -only?  
9.30 “Even if you know them to be like illusions,  
How would the afflictions be averted?  
Even when the very creator of  an illusory woman [realizes it],  
He would produce attachment.”  
9.31 That creator has not abandoned the latencies of the afflictions  
With respect to the object of knowledge.  
Therefore when he sees it,  
His latencies of emptiness are weak.  
9.32 Through cult ivating the latencies of emptiness  
The latencies of entities will be abandoned, and  
Through familiarizing with “Nothing whatsoever exists,”  
Later on that too will be abandoned.  
9.33 When it is said “Nothing exists,”  
The entity that is investigated is not observed.  
At that time, how does a non -entity with a separated support  
Abide before the mind?  
9.34 When neither entity nor non -entity  
Abides before the mind,  
Since there is no other aspect at that time,  
And the objects of observation are absent, [elaborat ions] are utterly pacified.  
9.35 Just as wish -fulfilling jewels and wish -granting trees  
Completely fulfill hopes,  
Likewise through the trainees and the force of prayers,  
The exalted bodies of the victors appear.  
9.36 For example, having accomplished  
The Garuda Shrine, he passed away.  
Yet, even though he passed away a long time ago,  
It still pacifies poisons and the like.  
9.37 Likewise, the shrine of a victor is also accomplished  
In accordance with the deeds of enlightenment, and  
Although the bodhisattv a has [actualized]  nirvana,  
He enacts all welfares.  
9.38 “How will the possession of results come about  
By making offerings to one without mind?”  
Because it has been explained that  
Abiding and having attained nirvana are similar.  
Shantideva’s Engaging in the Deeds of a Bodhisattva        Translation Toh Sze Gee  
 
77 9.39 Either conventionall y or in thusness it is suitable;  
That there is a result is [taught] in the scriptures.  
For example, it is just as there is a result  
With respect to truly existent buddhas.  
9.40 “By21 seeing the truths, one will be freed;  
What is the use of seeing emptiness? ” 
It is because it is taught in the scriptures that  
Without this path there is no enlightenment.  
9.41 If the Mahayana is not established,  
How are your own scriptures established?  
“Because these are established for both of us.”  
Initially these were not est ablished for you.  
9.42 Your conviction in those due to whatever conditions  
Is also identical for the Mahayana.  
If something were true due to being accepted by two others,  
Then the Vedas and the rest would also be true.  
9.43 “Because the Mahayana is dispu table.”  
Because there is dispute with the Tirthikas regarding the scriptures, and  
Also between you and others regarding other scriptures,  
You should discard them.  
9.44 While the root of the teachings is fully -ordained monks,  
Even those fully -ordained mo nks themselves abide with difficulty.  
The nirvana of those whose minds are together with the observation  
Abide also with difficulty.  
9.45 If “due to having exhaustively abandoned the afflictions, they are freed,”  
[It follows that] as soon as that [happens]  they become foe-destroyers . 
Although devoid of afflictions,  
The potencies of actions are seen in those.  
9.46 “It is definitely said that  
‘It is not just temporary and there is no craving for appropriation.’”  
Although the craving is not afflicted , 
Just as for confusion, why would there not be [the afflicted and the 
unafflicted] ? 
9.47 Due to the condition of feeling, there is craving.  
Feelings exist even in them.  
A mind that is together with observation  
Abides in some.  
               
21 Ba’i emended t o read pas. 
Shantideva’s Engaging in the Deeds of a Bodhisattva        Translation Toh Sze Gee  
 
78 9.48 Having ceased in a mind that is separated from emptiness,  
They will be produced once again,  
As in the case of the absorption without discrimination.  
Therefore, one should meditate on emptiness.  
9.49 If any speech engaging the sutra sets  
Is asserted to have been spoken by the Buddha,  
Why do you not assert that regarding most of the Mahayana  
Since they are similar to your sutras?  
9.50 If, due to not being realized,  
All become faulty,  
Then, due to one sutra being similar,  
Why were not all spoken by the Victor?  
9.51 Mahakashyapa and the o thers  
Did not manage to fathom that speech.  
Who would consider them as not to be held  
Due to your not realizing it?  
9.52 The accomplishment of dwelling in cyclic existence  
Free from the extremes of attachment and fear  
For the welfare of those suffering o ut of confusion  
Is the result of emptiness.  
9.53 In that way, it is not correct to  
Repudiate the position of emptiness.  
Therefore, one should meditate on emptiness  
Without harboring any doubt.  
9.54 The antidote to the darkness of the afflictive obscurati ons and  
Obscurations to knowledge is emptiness.  
Why do those who wish for omniscience quickly  
Not meditate on that?  
9.55 If terror will be produced from  
The entity which generates suffering,  
Then why produce fear with respect to  
Emptiness —that which pac ifies suffering?  
9.56 If some self existed,  
Then one will fear anything whatsoever.  
But since no such self exists,  
Who becomes afraid?  
9.57 The teeth, hair, and nails are not the self.  
The self is not the bones or blood.  
The mucus is not it, nor is the ph legm,  
Neither is the lymph or pus.  
Shantideva’s Engaging in the Deeds of a Bodhisattva        Translation Toh Sze Gee  
 
79 9.58 The self is not the fat or sweat.  
The lungs and liver are also not the self,  
Nor are the other inner organs  the self.  
The self is not the excrement or urine.  
9.59 The flesh and skin are not the self.  
The warmth and w inds are also not the self.  
The orifices are not the self. In all ways  
The six primary consciousnesses are also not the self.  
9.60 If a knower of sound were permanent,  
Then at all times there would be the apprehension of sound.  
If there is no object of kn owing,  
Then due to cognizing what is it called a “knower”?  
9.61 If there is a knower without [an object of] knowing,  
Then it follows that wood would also be a knower.  
Therefore, it is definitely said,  
 “Without an object of knowing  abiding  close by, ther e is no knower.”  
9.62 “That very one knows form.”  
At that time, why would he also not hear?  
“Because there is no sound close by.”  
Therefore, a knower of that also would not exist.  
9.63 How would that which is the nature of  
Apprehending sound apprehend fo rm? 
That a single one is imputed as  
A father and a son is not absolute.  
9.64 Thus, the lightness, motility, and darkness  
Are not a son, and also not a father.  
That is not seen to be in the nature  
Possessing the apprehension of sound.  
9.65 If that itself,  like an actor, is seen by way of another mode,  
Then it would not be permanent.  
If that itself  is another mode,  
Then the oneness would be something that did not exist previously . 
9.66 If the other modes are not true,  
Then tell us, what would be its nature?  
“The knower itself.” In that case,  
It follows that all persons would be one.  
9.67 Also that with mind and that without mind  
Would become one because they are similar in existing.  
When the particularities are erroneous,  
What is their similar support at tha t time?  
Shantideva’s Engaging in the Deeds of a Bodhisattva        Translation Toh Sze Gee  
 
80 9.68 Also that without mind is not the self  
Because it is without mind, like a vase22 and so forth.  
“Nonetheless, because it possesses mind, it knows.”  
It follows that the unknowing would disintegrate.  
9.69 If the self does not change,  
Then what is the use of intention acting on it?  
That which is unknowing and free from activity in that way — 
Space —would also act as the self.  
9.70 “If a self does not exist,  
A relationship between action and result would not be appropriate.  
Having done an action, one w ould disintegrate,  
Whereby whose action would it be?”  
9.71 Since it is established for both of us  
That the bases of the action and of the result are different  
And that there is no self that does it,  
Is it not meaningless to argue about these ? 
9.72 This s eeing,  “That possessing the cause  
Is along with result ,” is impossible.  
In dependence on a single continuity , 
The “doer” and the “utilizer” are indicated.  
9.73 The minds of the past and of the future  
Are not the self because they do not exist.  
If the mind that has been produced is the self,  
Then when that disintegrates, there would no longer be the self.  
9.74 For example, when the trunk of a banana tree  
Is separated into parts, there is nothing at all.  
Likewise, when sought with analysis,  
The self is also n ot real.  
9.75 “If sentient beings do not exist,  
For whom is compassion [cultivated]?”  
[They] are those who are imputed by confusion  
Asserted for the sake of the result.  
9.76 “If sentient beings do not exist, whose results are they?”  
That they are true, no netheless, is asserted from confusion.  
In order to totally pacify suffering,  
One should not reject the confusion of results.  
9.77 The pride that is the cause of suffering  
Is confusion regarding the self, therefore it will increase [suffering].  
               
22 Sanskrit: cloth  
Shantideva’s Engaging in the Deeds of a Bodhisattva        Translation Toh Sze Gee  
 
81 “Apart from that, there is no turning away.”  
Meditation on selflessness is the best.  
9.78 The body is not the feet or calves.  
The thighs and loins are also not the body.  
Neither are the abdomen and back the body.  
The chest and shoulders are not the body either.  
The r ibs and hands are also not the body.   
9.79 The armpits and upper arms are also not the body.  
Even the inner organs are not it.  
The head and neck  are also not the body.  
With regard to those, what is the body?  
9.80 If this body were to abide  
With its parts  in all of them,  
Although the parts abide in the parts,  
In what does that itself abide?  
9.81 If the body in its entirety  
Were to abide in the hands and so forth,  
Then  there would be as many bodies  
As there are hands and so forth . 
9.82 If a body does not exist in the outer or the inner,  
How would a body exist in the hands and so forth?  
If that different from the hands and so forth does not exist,  
How would it exist?  
9.83 Therefore, [although] the body does not exist, due to confusion  
Regarding the hands a nd so forth, there would be a mind [thinking of] the 
body,  
Like, due to the feature of being arranged in the shape,  
An awareness of a human being [is produced] with respect to a cairn.  
9.84 As long as the conditions are assembled,  
For that long the body wi ll appear as though it were a person.  
Likewise, as long as the hands and so forth exist,  
For that long will a body appear there.  
9.85 Similarly, because they are a collection of fingers23, 
Also what would the hand24 be? 
Because they too are a collection of s egments,  
By dividing the segments also into their parts,  
               
23 Sanskrit: toes  
24 Sanskrit: foot  
Shantideva’s Engaging in the Deeds of a Bodhisattva        Translation Toh Sze Gee  
 
82 9.86 The parts are also divided into particles;  
Those particles are also divided into directional parts;  
Because the directions too, divided, are free from parts;  
Like space, therefore, particles al so do not exist.  
9.87 Hence, which discerning one  
Would be attached to dream -like form?  
When, like that, the body does not exist,  
What is a man? What is a woman?  
9.88 If suffering exists as [its own] thusness25, 
Why would it not damage intense joy?  
If happ iness exists, why do those tormented by sorrow and so on  
Not find joy in the delicious and so forth?  
9.89 “Because it is overwhelmed by the strong,  
It is not experienced.”  
How can that which is not  
The nature of experience be feeling?  
9.90 You say, “The suffering exists subtly.  
Is not the gross26 [aspect] of this dispelled?  
It is mere joy other than that.”  
The subtle is also that.  
9.91 “The conditions contradictory to it are produced,  
Thereby suffering is not produced.”  
Conceiving it to be feeling,  
Is it not established as ‘strongly adhered to’?  
9.92 Because of that, as an antidote to this,  
This analysis is to be cultivated.  
The concentration that arises from the field  
Of thorough investigation is the food of a yogi.  
9.93 If there is a gap between the sens e power and the object,  
Where would they meet?  
Also if there is no gap, being a unit  
What would meet with what?  
9.94 A particle does not enter a particle.  
They are without an interval and are equal.  
They do not enter, do not mix, and  
Those that do not mix  do not meet.  
               
25 “To exist as its own thusness” is to exist truly.  
26 Rigs emended to read rags. 
Shantideva’s Engaging in the Deeds of a Bodhisattva        Translation Toh Sze Gee  
 
83 9.95 How could it be right to say  
“The partless [particles] also meet?”  
If you have seen those which meet  
And are partless , demonstrate it.  
9.96 It is not correct for there to be a meeting  
With primary consciousness, which is without body.  
Because there is no entity also [with respect to] a collection, [there is also no 
meeting with a collection, because it has no entity],  
Just as was thoroughly analyzed before.  
9.97 Thus, if contact does not exist,  
Then from what would feelings arise?  
For th e sake of what is there this fatigue?  
Due to what would what be damaged ? 
9.98 When there is no one who feels and  
Feelings also do not exist,  
Having seen this situation at that time,  
Why would you not turn away from craving?  
9.99 Even though they are seen o r touched,  
Due to a nature similar to a dream or illusion,  
Because they are produced simultaneously with the mind,  
Feelings are not seen by it.  
9.100  Also, due to being produced before or after them,  
It would remember them but not experience them.  
They d o not experience their own natures,  
Nor are they experienced by others.  
9.101  There is no one who feels,  
Hence feelings are not reality.  
Thus, due to this what damage is there  
To this collection  that is devoid of a self ? 
9.102  The mentality  does not abide  in the sense  powers,  
Not in forms and so forth, nor amidst them.  
A mind is not inner, not outer, and  
It is also not found somewhere else.  
9.103  It is not the body, it is not other,  
It is not mixed with it, nor is it at all separate from it.  
It is not in t he slightest; therefore,  
A sentient being is a natural nirvana.  
9.104  If the consciousness existed before the object of knowing,  
Through observing what would it be produced?  
If the consciousness and the object of knowing are simultaneous,  
Shantideva’s Engaging in the Deeds of a Bodhisattva        Translation Toh Sze Gee  
 
84 Through observing  what would it be produced?  
9.105  Well then, if it exists after the object of knowing,  
From what is consciousness produced at that time?  
In that way, it is not that  
The production of all phenomena will be realized.  
9.106  “In that case, conventionalities w ould not exist.  
How could there be two truths with respect to them?  
Moreover, they are also conventional due to another.  
How could sentient beings pass beyond sorrow?”  
9.107  This is a conceptualization that is another mind,  
It is not our conventionality.  
After that, if ascertained, it exists;  
If not, conventional existence would be non -existence.  
9.108  The conception and that which is conceived,  
The two, are mutually dependent.  
In dependence on how they are renowned,  
All of the analyzed are expressed.  
9.109  “When one analyzes by way of analysis  
That analyzes,  
At that time because that analyzer also  
Would be analyzed, it would be endless.”  
9.110  When the objects of analysis are analyzed,  
A support for the analysis does not exist.  
Because the support does not  exist, they are not produced.  
That also is expressed as nirvana.  
9.111  The two being truly existent from their point of view  
Abides with great difficulty.  
“An object is established through the power of a consciousness.”  
What support would exist with resp ect to an existent consciousness ? 
9.112  “Nevertheless, the consciousness is established from the object of 
knowing27.” 
What can be supported on an existent object of knowing?  
Existing by the force of one another,  
Both would also not exist.  
9.113  If he is wi thout a son, he is not a father.  
From where would that son arise?  
Without a son, there is no father;  
Likewise the two do not exist.  
               
27 Pa emended to read bya.  
Shantideva’s Engaging in the Deeds of a Bodhisattva        Translation Toh Sze Gee  
 
85 9.114  “Just as28 a sprout is produced from a seed and  
The seed is realized from just that, likewise,  
Due to a consciousness t hat is produced from an object of knowing,  
Why would its existence not be realized?”  
9.115  If, by a consciousness that is different from the sprout,  
“The seed exists” would be realized,   
Then by what would the existence of a consciousness  
Realizing the ob ject of knowing be realized?  
9.116  Sometimes, by a direct perceiver of  
Worldly beings, all causes are seen.  
The divisions of the stems and so forth of lotuses  
Are generated by the divisions of causes.  
9.117  If you ask, “By what are the divisions of cause s created?”  
They arise from the divisions of previous causes.  
“Why are causes able to generate results?”  
They arise from the very strength of previous causes.  
9.118  If Ishvara is the cause of migrating beings,  
For the time being, what is Ishvara? Say it!  
If you say, “He is the elements,” it is indeed like that;  
Why exhaust yourself even with respect to a mere name?  
9.119  However, since earth and so forth are many,  
Impermanent, without movement, not a god,  
To be walked on, and unclean,  
They are not Ishvara h imself.  
9.120  Ishvara is not space because it is devoid of movement.  
He is not the self because that has already been refuted before.  
“He is a creator who is not [an object of] thought.”  
Also what is the use of expressing that which is not [an object of] t hought?  
9.121  Also what is that asserted to generate?  
Are not the entity of the self,  
Earth and so forth, and Ishvara also permanent?  
Consciousness is produced from an object of knowing and  
9.122  Beginningless happiness and suffering come from karma.  
What  is generated by him? Say it!  
If the cause does not have a beginning,  
How could there be a beginning of results?  
9.123  Why would he not always create?  
If he does not rely on others and29 
               
28 Bzhan  emended to read bzhin . 
Shantideva’s Engaging in the Deeds of a Bodhisattva        Translation Toh Sze Gee  
 
86 There does not exist other that is not created by him,  
On what would t hat [produced] by him rely?  
9.124  If there is reliance, then the very collection  
Would be the cause, not Ishvara.  
When assembled, he lacks the power to not produce them, and  
When absent, he lacks the power to produce them.  
9.125  If it is created even tho ugh Ishvara does not desire it,  
It follows that he would be under the control of another.  
Even if he desires it, it would be contingent on desire.  
If it is created , how could that be Ishvara?  
9.126  Those who propound permanent particles,  
Also have already been overcome earlier on.  
The Samkyas assert that a permanent Principal  
Is the cause of migrating beings.  
9.127  The state of equilibrium of the qualities  
Called “lightness, motility, and darkness”  
Is called the “Principal.”  
The non -equilibrium is said t o be going.  
9.128  It is inappropriate for the three natures [to exist]  
Unitarily. Due to that it does not exist.  
Likewise, the qualities do not exist  
Because they too have three aspects individually.  
9.129  If the qualities do not exist, also the existence of 
Sound and so forth becomes extremely farfetched.  
With respect to mindless cloth and so forth,  
It is also not possible for happiness and so forth to exist.  
9.130  If entities exist in the nature of their causes.  
Have entities not already been analyzed?  
Your causes are also happiness and so forth themselves.  
Woolen blankets and  so forth also would not arise from it.  
9.131  From woolen blankets there is happiness and so forth.  
Since they do not exist, happiness and so forth would not exist.  
Happiness and so forth have never  
Been observed to  be permanent.  
9.132  If the manifestation happiness and so forth exist,  
Why is the experience not apprehended?  
If it becomes subtle,  
Then how is it gross  and also subtle?  
                                             
29 One line “ de ni gzhan la ltos pa min ” is missing in  this edition of the Tibetan text.  
Shantideva’s Engaging in the Deeds of a Bodhisattva        Translation Toh Sze Gee  
 
87 9.133  Since having given up being gross, they becom e subtle,  
Those gross and subtle ones are just impermanent.  
Likewise, why do you not assert  
All entities  to be  impermanent?  
9.134  If a gross [object] is not other than happiness,  
Happiness would just be an impermanent manifestation.  
If you assert “That whi ch does not exist whatsoever  
Will not be produced because  it does not exist,”  
9.135  Although you do not assert that  
The non -manifest is produced, they abide.  
If the result abides in the cause,  
To eat food would  be to eat excrement.  
9.136  You should buy cotton seeds  
With the price of cotton cloth and wear them.  
If [you say] “D ue to confusion the worldly do not see  it,” 
Those who know  reality would posit it.  
9.137  Why do those knowing [reality],  
Who exist among the worldly, also not see it?  
“The worldly is not a valid cognizer.”  
Also seen manifestations  would not be true.  
9.138  “If valid cognizers are not valid  cognizers,  
Would that comprehended by them not be false?  
In view of that, meditation on emptiness  
Would be incorrec t because of that.”  
9.139  Without contacting the entity that is imputed  
The absence [with respect to] the  entity , which is that, would not be 
apprehended.  
Therefore, what would be the  entity  that is false?  
The absence of the  entity  that is that would clearly be false.  
9.140  Due to tha t, regarding the death of a son in a dream,  
The conceptualization thinking “He does not exist,”  
Blocks the conceptualization that he exists;  
But that too is false . 
9.141  Due to that, by thorough analysis in this way,  
Nothing exists without a cause.  
They al so do not abide individually,  
Nor in conditions  that are an aggregation of all.  
9.142  Also, not coming from something else,  
They do not abide, they do not go.  
Shantideva’s Engaging in the Deeds of a Bodhisattva        Translation Toh Sze Gee  
 
88  How does that which is considered to be true  
By confusion differ from an illusion?  
9.143  Examin e whatever is emanated  
By an illusionist and  
Whatever is emanated by causes:  
Where would they come from and also where would they go to?   
9.144  Whatever [results] seen due to proximity,  
But not if they are absent,  
Are fabrications, similar to reflections . 
How would they be truly existent?  
9.145  With respect to entities that exist,  
What need is there for a cause?  
Yet even if it does not exist,  
What need is there for a cause?  
9.146  Even by billions of causes,  
A non -entity is not transformed.  
How would that state be an entity?  
It would transform into an entity; also what other would be?  
9.147  If, when non -existent, it is not possible for an entity to exist,  
Then at what point would an entity become existent?  
Without an entity becoming produced,  
It would not b ecome free from being a non -entity.  
9.148  If it does not become free from being a non -entity,  
The state of existing as an entity  would be impossible.  
An entity also does not become a non -[entity]  
Because it follows it would be two natures.   
9.149  In that case, there is no cessation and  
Also entities do not exist. Therefore,  
All these migrating beings are  
Always not produced and not ceased.  
9.150  Migrating beings are like a dream;  
When analyzed, they resemble a plantain tree.  
Also having passed and not ha ving passed beyond sorrow,  
Are not different in thusness.  
9.151  With respect to entities that are empty in that way,  
What attainment is there? What loss is there?  
Who is honored or  
Despised by whom?  
9.152  Where does happiness or suffering come from?  
What is there to be displeased about? What is there to be pleased about?  
Shantideva’s Engaging in the Deeds of a Bodhisattva        Translation Toh Sze Gee  
 
89 When searched for in thusness,   
What craves and what does it crave for?  
9.153  Upon analyzing, what is this transitory support  of the living  
That will die here?  
Who will arise, and who has arisen?  
Who is a companion? Also who is a friend?  
9.154  May those who are like me  
Apprehend all as being like space.  
Those who desire happiness themselves,  
By means of the causes of conflict and delight,  
9.155  Are agitated and joyful.  
They liv e with great difficulty  
Through sorrow, struggles, disputes,  
Cutting and stabbing each other, and negativities.  
9.156  After repeatedly going to the good migrations and  
Enjoying much happiness,  
They die and fall into the sufferings of the bad migration s,  
Which are unbearable for a long time.  
9.157  There are many pitfalls in cyclic existence.  
Due to mutual contradiction also on that,  
Like this, without suchness in that.  
In cyclic existence, there is no such thusness.  
9.158  Pass beyond the confines o f the ocean of suffering,  
Which is incomparable and unbearable also in that.  
Strength is weak in that;  
And the life span there is short as well.  
9.159  There, too, in activities for life and freedom from sickness,  
In hunger and fatigue,  
In sleep and de triment, and likewise  
In meaningless associations with the childish,  
9.160  Life passes by swiftly without purpose.  
Discrimination is very difficult to gain.  
How could there be a method to overcome  
Habituation with distractions in that?  
9.161  There, too , maras strive in order that  
One falls into the great bad migrations.  
At that, wrong paths are abundant,  
And doubt is difficult to overcome .  
 
Shantideva’s Engaging in the Deeds of a Bodhisattva        Translation Toh Sze Gee  
 
90 9.162  Leisure is hard to gain again.  
The occurrence of a buddha is extremely rare.  
The river of afflictions w ill be difficult to abandon.  
Alas, suffering flows!  
9.163  These abiding in the river of suffering,  
Who, although suffering immensely in that way,  
Do not see their own suffering.  
Alas, they are pitiful.  
9.164  It is like one who repeatedly washes himsel f  
And then enters fire again and again,  
So he prides himself in being happy,  
Although he abides in immense suffering.  
9.165  Those abiding in that way, behaving as though  
There is no aging and death;  
First they are killed, and then they proceed to  
The unbearable, falling into the bad migrations.   
9.166  In that manner, when may I pacify  
Those tormented by the fire of suffering,  
With the rain of accumulations of happiness  
Springing forth excellently from the clouds of my merit?  
9.167  When shall I res pectfully collect the accumulation of merit  
In a manner of non -objectification  
And teach emptiness  
To those ruined by objectification?  
 
 
Chapter Ten  
Dedication  
10.1 By whatever virtue there is due to my having composed  
Engaging in the Deeds of a Bodhisat tva,  
May all migrating beings  
Engage in the deeds of the bodhisattvas.   
10.2 However many sick people there are  
Suffering in body and mind in all directions,  
Due to my merit may they obtain  
An ocean of happiness and joy.  
10.3 For as long as they remain  in cyclic existence  
May their happiness never decline.  
May migrating beings obtain  
Shantideva’s Engaging in the Deeds of a Bodhisattva        Translation Toh Sze Gee  
 
91 An uninterrupted flow of unsurpassable30 happiness.  
10.4 However many hell beings there are  
Throughout the realms of the worlds, {493}  
May those embodied beings  
Be delight ed by the happiness of Sukhavati.  
10.5 May those wretched due to cold obtain warmth.  
May those wretched due to heat be cooled  
By the infinite rivers arising from  
The great clouds of the bodhisattvas.  
10.6 May the forest of sword -like leaves  
Also become a pleasant grove.  
May the shalmali trees too  
Grow into wish -fulfilling trees.  
10.7 May they be beautified by the melodious calls of  
Wild duck, geese, and swans.  
May the regions of hell become charming  
Due to pools of large and sweetly fragrant lotuses.  
10.8 May the heaps of coals also become piles of jewels.  
May the burning iron ground be revealed31 as crystal floors.  
May the mountains of Mass Destruction [Hell] become  
Celestial mansions of offerings filled with sugatas.  
10.9 May the rain of glowing cinders, burning rocks, and weapons  
From now on become a rain of flowers.  
May the striking of each other with weapons  
From now on be a playful tossing of flowers.  
10.10  May those drowning in the fire -like River Without Ford  
Their flesh entirely disintegrated and th eir bones the color of kunda flowers,  
Attain bodies of gods by the force of my virtue, and  
Then dwell with goddesses in gently flowing streams.  
10.11  Wondering “Why are the henchmen of Yama and the terrible ravens and 
vultures afraid?  
Whose strength is the  fine strength that utterly dispels darkness and generates 
happiness and joy?”, {494}  
Upon looking upward they behold Vajrapani abiding blazing in the midst of 
space.  
By the force of their strong joy, may they be freed from negativities and be in 
his comp any.  
               
30 Byang chub sems dpa’  emended to read bla na med pa . 
31 Bstar  emended to read bstan . 
Shantideva’s Engaging in the Deeds of a Bodhisattva        Translation Toh Sze Gee  
 
92 10.12  Having seen the fire of the hells splattered and extinguished  
By a falling rain of flowers mixed with scented water,  
Immediately satiated with bliss and wondering what [had caused] this,  
May the hell beings behold Padmapani.  
10.13  Friends, disc arding fear, come from the distance! Why flee when 
directly in front of us  
Is the one by whose strength we are freed from suffering and the force of joy 
emerges,  
The one who thoroughly protects all migrating beings, and has generated 
bodhichitta and mercy , 
The youthful one with a blazing topknot who removes all fears?  
10.14  “Behold him in an attractive mansion resounding with the melodious 
eulogies of thousands of goddesses  
With hundreds of gods paying homage at his lotus feet with their crowns and,  
His e yes moist with compassion, a rain of clusters of many flowers falling 
upon his head.”  
Upon seeing Manjugosha in this way, may the hell beings exclaim!  
10.15  Thus, by my roots of virtue,  
Having seen the comfortable, cool, and fragrant rain falling  
From the  unobscured clouds of bodhisattvas such as Samantabhadra,  
May the sentient beings of hell become joyful.  
10.16  May the animals be freed from  
The fear of being eaten by one another.  
May the hungry ghosts be as happy  
As the human beings of Unpleasant Sound.  {495}  
10.17  May the hungry ghosts be satiated  
By the flow of milk descending from  
The hand of Arya Lord Avalokiteshvara, and  
By washing in it may they always be refreshed.  
10.18  May the blind see and  
The deaf always hear sounds.  
Just as it was for Mayad evi, 
May pregnant women give birth without being harmed.  
10.19  May the naked obtain clothing,  
The hungry obtain food, and  
The thirsty obtain water and  
Delicious drinks.  
10.20  May the destitute obtain wealth.  
May the wretched with sorrow find joy.  
May the depressed be comforted and  
Attain perfect steadfastness. {502}  
Shantideva’s Engaging in the Deeds of a Bodhisattva        Translation Toh Sze Gee  
 
93 10.21  However many sick sentient beings there are,  
May they quickly be freed from their illnesses.  
May all the diseases without exception  
Of migrating beings never occur again.  
10.22  May the  frightened be fearless.  
May those bound be released.  
May the weak be strong. And  
May their minds be mutually friendly.  
10.23  May all travelers be happy  
In every direction whatsoever.  
May their aims for which they travel  
Be effortlessly accomplished.  
10.24 May those who sail in boats and ships  
Fulfill their wishes.  
Having happily returned to shore,  
May they be joyfully united with their relatives.  
10.25  May anguished wanderers who have gone astray in deserts  
Meet with other travelers, and,  
Without fear of  robbers, thieves, tigers, and others,  
May they proceed32 easily without fatigue.  
10.26  May the unprotected children and elderly,  
Lost and anxious in desolate [places] and the like,  
Those intoxicated with sleep and the insane,  
Be watched over by the gods.  
10.27  May [beings] be liberated from the non -leisures and  
Be endowed with faith, wisdom, and mercy, and  
Through food and conduct becoming perfect,  
May they always recollect their lives.  
10.28  May everyone, just like Space Treasury,  
Have uninterrupted resou rces. 
Without conflict and without harm,  
May they enjoy themselves in freedom.  
10.29  May the sentient beings with little splendor  
Become greatly magnificent.  
May the poor forms of ascetics  
Become fine and perfect forms. {503}  
10.30  However many women th ere are in the world,  
May they all become men.  
               
32 ‘Dod emended to read ‘gro. 
Shantideva’s Engaging in the Deeds of a Bodhisattva        Translation Toh Sze Gee  
 
94 May the lowly attain high [status] and  
May the proud be subdued.  
10.31  Due to this merit of mine,  
May all sentient beings without exception  
Abandon all negativities and  
Always create virtue.  
10.32  May they nev er be parted from the mind of enlightenment,  
Exert themselves in the bodhisattva conduct,  
Be cared for by the buddhas, and  
Abandon the actions of the maras.  
10.33  May all these sentient beings  
Have immeasurably long lives.  
May they always live in happines s and  
Not even know the term “death.”  
10.34  May gardens of wish -fulfilling trees  
Be full in all directions  
With buddhas and the buddha’s children  
Filled with the hearing33 and the proclaiming of the Dharma.  
10.35  May the ground everywhere be pure,  
Without  pebbles and so forth,  
As even as the palm of the hand,  
The nature of vaidurya, and soft.  
10.36  For all the circles of retinues that exist,  
May many bodhisattvas  
Abide, adorning the surface of the earth  
With their excellence.  
10.37  May all embodied being s 
Continually hear the sound of the Dharma  
Coming from the birds and the trees,  
From every ray of light, as well as from the sky.  
10.38  May they always meet  
Buddhas and the buddhas’ children. {504}  
May they present offerings to the gurus of migrating bei ngs 
With infinite clouds of offerings.  
10.39  May the gods also send down timely rain and  
May crops be plentiful.  
May kings act in accordance with the Dharma.  
May worldly beings also prosper.  
               
33 Snyan  emended to read nya. 
Shantideva’s Engaging in the Deeds of a Bodhisattva        Translation Toh Sze Gee  
 
95 10.40  May medicines be potent and  
The recitation of secret mantr as be effective.  
May dakinis, rakshasas, and so forth  
Be endowed with minds of compassion.  
10.41  May sentient beings never suffer,  
[Commit negativities, or become ill.]  
May they not be afraid or despised, and  
May they never have unhappy minds.  
10.42  May the monasteries flourish and excellently remain  
Due to reading and recitation.  
May the sangha always be concordant and  
May the aims of the sangha also be accomplished.  
10.43  May monks who wish to train  
Also find solitude.  
Having abandoned all distractions,  
May they meditate with serviceable minds.  
10.44  May nuns have material things and  
Abandon quarrelling and afflicting harm.  
Likewise, may all the ordained  
Not degenerate their morality.  
10.45  Through being disenchanted by corrupt morality,  
May negativities  forever be exhausted.  
Also having attained good migrations,  
May disciplined conduct not decline even there.  
10.46  May the wise be honored and  
May they also receive alms.  
May their continua be completely pure and  
May they be renowned in all directions.  
10.47 May [beings] not experience the suffering of the bad migrations and  
Also not undergo any austerities. {505}  
With bodies superior to those of gods,  
May they quickly achieve buddhahood.  
10.48  May all sentient beings many times  
Make offerings to all the b uddhas.  
Due to the infinite34 bliss of the buddhas,  
May they always be endowed with happiness.  
10. 49  May bodhisattvas accomplish  
The welfare of migrating beings as intended.  
               
34 Bsam  emended to read mtha’  
Shantideva’s Engaging in the Deeds of a Bodhisattva        Translation Toh Sze Gee  
 
96 May sentient beings also acquire  
Whatever the protectors intended.  
10.50  Likewise,  may solitary realizers  
As well as hearers be happy.  
10.51  May I too, until I attain the Very Joyous Ground  
By the kindness of Manjugosha,  
Always recollect my former lives and  
Always receive ordination.  
10.52  May I be robust,  
Even though the food may be s imple, and live.  
In all my lives may I find  
Ideal isolated places.  
10.53  Whenever I desire to look or  
Even if I wish to ask the slightest question,  
May I behold without any hindrance  
The protector Manjugosha himself.  
10.54  In order to accomplish the welfa re of all sentient beings  
Who extend to the ends of space in the ten directions,  
May my deeds also be just like  
The deeds of Manjugosha.  
10.55  For as long as space endures and  
For as long as sentient beings remain,  
For that long may I abide and  
Elimina te the sufferings of migrating beings.  
10.56  May the sufferings of migrating beings,  
No matter how many there are, all ripen upon me. {514}  
Due to the bodhisattva sangha,  
May migrating beings enjoy happiness.  
10.57  May the sole medicine for the sufferin gs of migrating beings,  
The source of all happiness – 
The teachings – together with gain and honor  
Remain for a very long time.  
10.58  I prostrate to Manjughosha  
By whose kindness virtuous minds arise. {516}  
I prostrate also to my virtuous friends  
By whos e kindness I develop.   
 
 
 
Shantideva’s Engaging in the Deeds of a Bodhisattva        Translation Toh Sze Gee  
 
97 Colophon  
This translation of the root  verses was extracted from A Precious Garland , A 
Commentary on [Shantideva’s] ‘Engaging in the Deeds of a Bodhisattva’  by the Abbot 
Dragpa Gyaltsen , translated by Toh Sze Gee  and used for the F PMT Basic Program at 
Istituto Lama Tzong Khapa, 2006.  Revised 2014.  