Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Engaging in the Deeds of a Bodhisattva/BP2 M5 L46 final .doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:52:21.646061
================================================================================


Transcript of the teachings by Khen Rinpoche Geshe  Chonyi  on  Engaging  in
the Bodhisattva Deeds, 2014

Root text: Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds by  Shantideva,  translated  by
Toh Sze Gee. Copyright: Toh Sze Gee, 2006; Revised edition, 2014.

Lesson  46                                                                28
August 2014


Relationship between the four types of joyous effort and the four powers
Chapter seven: Verses 7. 52 –7. 59
Increasing the strength of joyous effort—the antidote
        A. Increasing the strength of the conditions  conducive  to  joyous
           effort
      2.  Extensive explanation
           B.   The power of stability
                   2.  Being proud of one’s capacity (V. 7.52 – 7.59)


RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN THE FOUR TYPES OF JOYOUS EFFORT AND THE FOUR POWERS

The favourable conditions for the generation of joyous effort are  the  four
powers:
   1. The power of aspiration (or the power of esteem)
   2. The power of steadfastness (or the power of stability)
   3. The power of joy
   4. The power of relinquishment (or the power of suspension)
Of these four powers, we have finished with  the  power  of  aspiration.  In
short, whatever practice we are going to  undertake,  the  success  of  that
practice comes about on  the  basis  of  having  the  strong  aspiration  or
yearning for the outcome or goal of that practice.  On  the  basis  of  this
power of aspiration, the power of steadfastness (or stability) follows.

There are also different types of joyous perseverance.

Is there then a link between the four powers and these  different  types  of
joyous effort? This is something we should analyse and think about.

I would think that there is a relationship  between  the  first  power,  the
power of aspiration, and the armour-like joyous effort. This is because  the
armour-like joyous effort is a form of joyous effort that  is  developed  or
generated prior to engaging in the actual activity or practice that one  has
decided to do. Having this strong belief in and aspiration for the  goal  to
be achieved through the chosen practice, one then  produces  a  very  strong
enthusiasm and joy in one’s heart. This occurs prior  to  actually  engaging
in whatever practice one is going to do.

This is something that you can think  about:  Is  there  any  connection  or
relationship  between  the  armour-like  joyous  effort  and  the  power  of
aspiration?

Then there is the power of steadfastness or stability that is  applied  when
one is actually engaging in that virtue. So there is a relationship  between
the power of stability and the joyous effort of  application.  What  is  the
joyous effort of application? The joyous effort of application is  the  mind
of enthusiasm  and  delight  that  is  experienced  while  one  is  actually
engaging in virtue.

In our earlier discussion on the power of  stability,  we  were  advised  to
consider carefully before we undertake any endeavour, in this case,  virtue.
We should analyse and think  carefully  whether  we  can  do  the  task  and
whether we will be  able  to  complete  the  task.  After  having  made  the
decision and started on the chosen practice, the power of stability is  used
to  apply  oneself  to  such  virtue  until  one  brings  the  practice   to
completion. I would think that this is the relationship  between  the  power
of stability and the joyous effort of application.

The  joyous  effort  of  non-inferiority  or  non-discouragement   is   also
sometimes called the joyous effort of non-disturbance in that  the  mind  is
not disturbed. In my own view, there is also  a  relationship  between  this
joyous effort of non-discouragement and the power of stability.

While accumulating virtue or  engaging  in  a  particular  practice,  it  is
possible that along the way, you  may  feel  discouraged  or  your  mind  is
disturbed for whatever reason. At that point, it is especially important  to
calm yourself down to generate  the  extraordinary  courage  required.  That
means you need to have extraordinary enthusiasm for the  practice  that  you
are already doing so that you can continue with that practice and  bring  it
to completion. This is what I think. You have to  analyse  and  think  about
this.

The fourth type of joyous effort is the joyous effort of non-complacency  or
non-contentment. I think there is a relationship between the  joyous  effort
of non-contentment and the power of joy.

The joyous effort of non-contentment is a mind that  is  enthusiastic  about
virtue and is delighted with the practice but it  is  a  mind  that  is  not
easily contented. It is a mind that doesn’t  allow  you  to  feel,  “I  have
already done this,” i.e., it may be a very  small  practices  but  you  feel
satisfied with that. Rather it is a mind of delight and enthusiasm  that  is
not satisfied with what one has achieved but strives to  do  more.  I  would
think that maybe that is the relationship between the joyous effort of  non-
contentment and the power of joy.

As for the power of relinquishment (or the power  of  suspension),  I’m  not
exactly sure but perhaps one can relate this power to the joyous  effort  of
non-discouragement. I cannot say for sure but when you think about  it,  one
can come up with  an  explanation  and  can  reasonably  make  a  connection
between  the  power  of  relinquishment  and  the  joyous  effort  of   non-
discouragement.

In order to be able to make a connection  between  these  things,  first  we
must know what the four powers are on their own. Then we also need  to  know
the four types of joyous effort. On the basis of knowing these two  sets  of
phenomena, we can then analyse  to  see  whether  there  is  any  connection
between them.
                                 ~~~~~~~~~~~

We  were  looking  at  the  power  of  steadfastness  or  stability  and  in
particular we were looking at the three types of pride:
1. pride of karma (or action)
2. pride about ability (or being proud of one’s capacity)
3. pride about afflictions (or being proud of the afflictions)
In developing the power of stability,  one  has  to  cultivate  these  three
types of pride.

I think the pride of action essentially means that whatever virtuous  action
or karma that one is accumulating or  creating,  one  has  this  idea,  “I’m
going to do this on my own. I  don’t  need  any  friends  or  companions  to
accompany me along the way nor do I need their help. I would rather do  this
on my own.” This is the pride of action. It is  essentially  a  very  strong
kind of courage, i.e., the determination,
“I will do this by myself alone.”

You must understand the context for this discussion.  We  are  talking  here
about the trainings of the bodhisattvas.  Of  course,  bodhisattvas  already
have the  wholehearted  resolve,  i.e.,  they  have  already  taken  on  the
personal responsibility to accomplish the welfare of sentient  beings.  They
always have the thought, “I will do this by myself alone.”

One needs this pride about one’s capacity or  ability  without  which  there
will be problems. What are the faults for not having the pride  about  one’s
capacity?

INCREASING THE STRENGTH OF JOYOUS EFFORT —THE ANTIDOTE (cont’d)

A.  Increasing the strength of the conditions conducive to joyous effort
      2.  Extensive explanation
            B.  The power of stability
                   2.  Having  undertaken  joyous  effort,  stabilizing  its
engagement
                       B.  Explaining each individually
                              2.  Being proud of one’s capacity
                                    A.  The shortcomings of taking no  pride
in one’s capacity
      Verse 7.52
      When encountering a dead snake,
      Even crows will act as though they are garudas.
      If I am weak
      I shall be harmed by even a small downfall.


      Verse 7.53 a, b
      How do the faint-hearted who have given up exerting themselves
      Find liberation from destitution?

Khen Rinpoche: I don’t know how the example works here,  crows  acting  like
garudas? What does that mean? What is the text trying to tell us  from  this
example? Does anyone have any ideas?

Student 1:  The crow wants to eat the snake. As  the  crow  knows  that  the
snake is already dead, it is no longer afraid  and  becomes  braver  than  a
garuda.  So the example means that if I am weak and not  like  a  garuda,  I
will be defeated by a small downfall.

Student 2: The translation I have here says, “When crows encounter  a  dying
snake,/ They will act as though they were  eagles./  Likewise  if  my  self-
confidence is weak, I shall be injured by the slightest downfall.”

The analogy is that normally the crow is fearful of the snake  for  whatever
reason. Because the snake is already weak, either because  it  is  dying  or
already dead, therefore the crow can pretend to be very  courageous  like  a
garuda. They have a lot of confidence because they know that the  snake  can
no longer harm them.

I wonder whether the analogy of the dying snake  could  refer  to  the  task
that we actually have  to  apply  ourselves  to.  Those  tasks  are  not  as
difficult as we think they are, but if our self-confidence is weak, then  we
don’t think we could tackle those practices. Then we will be injured by  the
slightest downfall.

Khen Rinpoche: Now everybody is acting like the crow. (Laughter).

Student 3: My thinking is that the dying snake is like  our  self-confidence
and the  crow  is  actually  the  downfall.   For  example  when  our  self-
confidence is like a dying snake, it is as if  our  confidence  is  actually
weakening. Then the crow is the downfall that can actually attack us.

Khen Rinpoche: See, for this one example, different  people  give  different
commentaries and have different understanding. I also  don’t  know  exactly.
Her (Student 3) idea is totally different from that  of  the  two  (earlier)
students. Her idea is the opposite.

Here the meaning is that in order to  vanquish  the  afflictions,  one  must
have very strong courage and the pride about one’s  capacity,  thinking,  “I
can vanquish the afflictions. I can definitely do  it.”  You  need  to  have
that kind of courage. If one’s courage  is  small  and  weak,  one  will  be
affected by even a small downfall. If  one  doesn’t  have  the  pride  about
one’s capacity and one’s courage is weak, even a small fault or mistake  can
throw one into the lower realms.

Whether it is  accomplishing  virtue  or  abandoning  non-virtue,  if  one’s
determination is weak and one doesn’t have courage  then  one  will  not  be
able to abandon non-virtue and one will not be able  to  accomplish  virtue.
As such, one will be harmed in this life and in future lives and it will  be
difficult to break  free  from  cyclic  existence  to  achieve  freedom  and
liberation. That is the meaning.

Based on that meaning, how then should one  interpret  the  analogy  as  the
analogy has to fit with the meaning? If that is the  case,  what  Student  3
had said may be applicable in that the dead snake here could refer to  one’s
lack of determination or courage. If one does not have any determination  or
courage, even a small little bird like a crow can harm it.

Khen Rinpoche: Does that make sense?

Student 4: I am thinking that it is the other way round. The small  downfall
is like the dying or dead snake. That means it is easy to  attack  it.  When
you meet a small downfall, you can easily overcome  it.  But  if  you  don’t
have determination, when difficulties come, you will run away. In the  first
place, you had started out without the right  mind-set,  recognising,  “This
is  like  going  to  be  difficult.”   Then  if  you   don’t   have   strong
perseverance, whenever a small downfall comes along—that is like  the  dying
snake or dead  snake—you  can  easily  overcome  it  but  when  the  greater
difficulties come along, you cannot overcome them.

Khen Rinpoche: What is the dead snake representing?

Student 4: A small downfall.

Khen Rinpoche: The crow?  It is yourself?

Student 4: Yes. That means if you don’t have  determination,  you  can  only
overcome a small downfall like the dying  snake.   When  you  meet  a  small
downfall, you act as if you are like a garuda. If you  don’t  develop  self-
confidence right from the beginning, knowing that the task  ahead  is  going
to be difficult, then you can only overcome slight downfalls like the  dying
snake.

Khen Rinpoche: OK. I didn’t really get you  exactly.  Anyway  I  don’t  know
exactly which way is better.

The pride in one’s capacity is the confidence in one’s ability  to  vanquish
the afflictions. If one has strong confidence in one’s ability  to  vanquish
the afflictions, one will not be harmed by even great downfalls. But if  one
doesn’t have any confidence or if one’s courage is weak,  then  one  can  be
harmed even by small downfalls. Then you don’t have to talk  about  the  big
downfalls. Even the small downfalls can cause harm.

In Gyaltsab Je’s commentary, Verses 7.52  and  7.53  a,  b  come  under  the
outline, “The shortcomings of taking no pride in  one’s  capacity.”  If  you
think about how the outline is phrased and then the example  given,  usually
crows will have difficulties dealing with or  taking  advantage  of  snakes.
But if the snake is dead, then the crows can do whatever they want with  it.
Likewise I guess  it  means  that  if  one’s  determination,  confidence  or
courage and one’s pride about one’s capacity  is  non-existent  or  is  very
weak, then one can be harmed by even something very insignificant.

                                    B.  The  benefits  of  taking  pride  in
one’s capacity
      Verse 7.53 c, d
      By generating pride and exertion,
      Even the great will find it hard to overcome me.


      Verse 7.54
      Therefore with a steady mind
      I shall overcome the downfalls.
      If I am defeated by a downfall,
      My wish to be victorious over the three realms will become a joke.

By generating the pride about one’s capacity, one applies and exerts  it  in
confessing  one’s  negativities  and  restraining  oneself  from   all   the
downfalls. As such, one will not be harmed even by great downfalls  and  one
will not be thrown into the lower realms.
By generating this pride about one’s capacity, one  can  even  overcome  the
root downfalls.

Without this pride about one’s capacity, without such confidence,  one  will
be harmed even by small downfalls. Then at the same time,  if  one  were  to
say, “I want to achieve the state of omniscience, full enlightenment  and  I
want to conquer the three realms,” that would become a joke.

                                    C.  Abiding in pride as an antidote
      Verse 7.55
      I will conquer everything
      And nothing at all shall conquer me!
      I, a son of the Lion-like Victor,
      Shall dwell in this pride

I guess “I will conquer everything/ And nothing at all  shall  conquer  me!”
means  “I  will  abandon  all  the  afflictions  and  all  the  objects   of
abandonment. I will do this.”

“I, a son of the Lion-like Victor,/ Shall dwell  in  this  pride”:  Here  it
says, “I will abide in this pride about my own ability  like  the  child  of
the Victorious One, the Buddha, who has  overcome  or  vanquished  the  four
maras.”

This section is on being proud of one’s capacity, the pride  about  ability,
which essentially  is  the  courage  and  confidence  in  one’s  ability  to
vanquish the afflictions, thinking, “I am going to vanquish the  afflictions
and I can vanquish the afflictions. I am able to do this.”  It is this  kind
of confidence.

The next section talks about why it  is  wrong  to  follow  after  afflicted
pride, i.e., the pride that is an affliction.

                                    D.   It is unreasonable to be  proud  of
the afflictions
                                           1.    Decrying   pride   in   the
afflictions
      Verse 7.56
      Any migrating being is destroyed by pride.
      Afflicted, he has no pride.
      Those with pride do not succumb to the power of the enemy.
      They have come under the power of the enemy of pride.

The three types of pride that we were just talking about are:
1. the pride of action
2. the pride about ability (or being proud of one’s capacity)
3. the pride about afflictions (or being proud of the afflictions)

These three types of pride are not the pride that is one  of  the  six  root
afflictions,  although the word is the  same.  The  pride  that  is  a  root
affliction is an object of abandonment, whereas the  three  types  of  pride
that were just discussed here are not objects of abandonment.

We talked about the fully completed  Buddhas,  the  foe  destroyers  or  the
arhats. They have vanquished the enemy of  the  afflictions,  which  include
the affliction of pride. The pride about afflictions (or being proud of  the
afflictions) is the kind of pride that the bodhisattva cultivates.  This  is
not the  pride  that  is  a  root  affliction.  It  is  essential  that  the
bodhisattvas cultivate this pride about ability so that  they  can  vanquish
the afflictions. This pride is not an afflicted  pride,  nor  an  object  of
abandonment. In fact, they need this pride about ability because  when  they
generate this pride, they can also vanquish the ordinary afflicted pride.

You need to know that there is a  difference  between  the  ordinary  pride,
i.e., the pride that is an affliction, and the pride about ability  that  we
have been talking about. Although it is called the pride about  ability,  it
is not the actual afflicted pride. So, you must not confuse these two  kinds
of pride: pride about ability and afflicted pride.

There is a difference between the  pride  about  ability  and  the  ordinary
pride in terms of what they do to the mind. The pride about ability  is  the
confidence that thinks, “I can vanquish the afflictions and I will  vanquish
the afflictions.” With this pride  about  ability,  the  mind  doesn’t  come
under the control of the afflictions.

But when afflicted pride manifests, the mind comes under the control or  the
influence of the afflictions. That will lead to many problems. As  such,  it
is wrong to follow after ordinary or afflicted  pride.  What  then  are  the
faults of ordinary or afflicted pride? What do they do to us?

                                          2. The disadvantages of that
      Verse 7.57
      Inflated by afflicted pride,
      I shall be led by pride to the bad migrations.
      It destroys the joyous festival of being human.
      I shall become a slave, eating the food of others[1],


      Verse 7.58 a, b
      Stupid, ugly, feeble,
      And despised everywhere.


These are the faults or problems of following after pride.

                                            3.   The    reasonableness    of
abandoning it
      Verse 7.58 c, d, e
      Tough people inflated by pride
      Are also included among those having pride.
      Tell me, what is the inferior like!
It is said that if the mind is puffed  up  with  arrogance  or  pride,  such
people can never taste the Dharma. They will be despised by others and  will
become lowly persons.

This afflicted pride or ordinary pride is not the pride about  ability  that
is cultivated by the bodhisattvas.  Why? Because if you were  to  say  that,
then you will not be able to find anybody on earth who would say that it  is
difficult to cultivate the pride about ability. I  guess  this  is  what  is
meant by the last line of Verse 7.58, “Tell me, what is the inferior like!”

The next verse talks about the benefits of having the pride about ability.

                                   E.  The benefits of pride as an antidote
      Verse 7.59
      Whoever seizes pride in order to conquer the enemy of pride,
      He is the one having pride, the victorious hero.
      Whoever definitely destroys the rampage of this enemy of pride,
      Completes the results of a Victor in accordance  with  the  wishes  of
        migrating beings.

This is the advice on how to generate the pride about ability  in  order  to
vanquish the afflictions.

“He is the one having pride, the victorious hero,” refers to the person  who
has very strong pride about ability. The  person  who  develops  this  pride
about ability to vanquish or conquer his own afflictions is a hero.  She  is
called a  hero  because  she  sets  out  to  vanquish  or  conquer  her  own
afflictions. People who act in such a  way  to  vanquish  their  afflictions
achieve the provisional goal  of  high  status  and  the  goal  of  definite
goodness, i.e., liberation and full enlightenment.

With that, I have finished with the pride about ability.

In short, there is a big difference between  the  pride  about  ability  and
normal afflicted pride. One should not confuse  the  two.  The  pride  about
ability is something to be cultivated and afflicted pride is  an  object  of
abandonment. Cultivating the pride about ability brings many  benefits.  But
if one follows afflicted pride, then there are hosts  of  disadvantages  and
faults. As such, the bodhisattvas cultivate the pride about ability.

Having said  all  this,  maybe  you  can  think  about  this:  What  is  the
difference between the pride of action and the pride about ability?

Khen Rinpoche: That is the question. Can anybody  help?  Does  anybody  have
the answer on what is the difference between these two?

Student 5: The pride of action refers to determination and the  pride  about
ability refers to confidence.

Khen  Rinpoche:  So  the  first  is  determination  and  the  next  one   is
confidence. Good. Does anybody have any other idea?
Next is the section on the third type of pride, which is being proud of  the
afflictions or the pride about afflictions.  Earlier on with respect to  the
pride about ability, that is a confidence in  being  able  to  vanquish  the
afflictions. It is a very strong determination thinking,  “I  will  vanquish
the afflictions.”

Then on the basis of  that  pride,  when  one  engages  in  vanquishing  the
afflictions, at  that  time  there  is  also  a  very  strong  determination
thinking, “I will not let the afflictions affect me. I  will  not  let  them
take hold in my mind at all. Rather I will destroy  them  completely.”  That
is the pride about afflictions. So it is a  very  stable  determination  and
courage.
                                ~~~~~~~~~~~~

Question: I would like to clarify whether the four types of joyous effort:
1. the armour-like joyous effort
2. the joyous effort of application
3. the joyous effort of non-discouragement
4. the joyous effort of non-contentment
can be classified under the three types of joyous effort which are:
1. the armour-like joyous effort
2. the joyous effort of gathering virtue
3. the joyous effort of acting for the welfare of living beings?

Ven. Gyurme: In short, you are asking  whether  the  four  types  of  joyous
effort can be subsumed into the three types of joyous effort?

Answer: Whether it is the armour-like joyous effort  in  the  three-fold  or
four-fold divisions of joyous effort, they are the  same  thing  and  it  is
related to the power of aspiration. The armour-like  joyous  effort  is  the
mind which occurs prior to engaging in any virtue. Based on that,  then  you
engage in virtue.

Then there is the joyous  effort  of  application.  When  you  are  joyously
applying yourself  to  something—you  could  be  starting  on  a  particular
practice, gathering virtue, acting for the welfare of  sentient  beings—then
the power of stability becomes very important.

Whether you are engaging in virtue or working for the  welfare  of  sentient
beings, you need the pride of action, the pride about ability and the  pride
about afflictions. You need the power of stability and these three types  of
pride in order to be able to complete that practice or virtue.

In order to complete that virtue or practice,  the  power  of  joy  and  the
power relinquishment (or suspension) also come in as well.

When we say we exerting joyous effort in virtue, what does this  mean?  That
would mean that either you  are  gathering  virtue,  i.e.,  doing  something
virtuous, or you are doing something to benefit sentient beings.   In  order
to be successful in this, we need the four powers.

Among the four types of  joyous  effort,  you  have  the  joyous  effort  of
application, the joyous effort of non-discouragement and the  joyous  effort
of non-contentment.  These occur when you are applying yourself  in  virtue.
You have already engaged in or started the process, so these three types  of
joyous effort have to be cultivated when you are engaging in virtue.

Now if you think about it, you can make a connection between the  three-fold
division and the four-fold division of joyous effort.

You can already make a connection between the types  of  joyous  effort  and
the four powers. The more  information  you  have,  the  more  there  is  to
analyse. When there is more  to  be  analyse,  you  can  begin  to  see  the
connection between different things and your perspective becomes deeper  and
more expansive. Basically that comes from thinking.

Student 6: If I can simplify it a little bit,  for  the  armour-like  joyous
effort, it is the same whether it is the three-fold or four-fold division.

But under the four-fold division  of  joyous  effort—the  joyous  effort  of
application, the joyous effort of non-discouragement and the  joyous  effort
of  non-contentment—these  can  be  grouped  under  the  joyous  effort   of
gathering virtue under the three-fold division. Of course these  three  also
relate to working for the welfare of living beings.

Khen Rinpoche: To make it easy, prior to whatever virtue you  are  going  to
engage in, you must have a very strong interest and a very  strong  yearning
for it. You must want it so much. Whether  we  call  it  armour-like  joyous
effort or the power of aspiration that is what is being  referred  to.  That
is why when you are thinking about doing something, to achieve it  you  must
want it badly.

The armour-like joyous effort and the power  of  aspiration  have  to  occur
prior to the actual engagement in  virtue.  When  you  start  to  engage  in
virtue, that virtue could be either virtue as in gathering virtue or  virtue
as in the sense of working for others.

But whatever you set out to do—whether you are gathering virtue  or  whether
you are working for the welfare of  sentient  beings—in  order  to  complete
that task, you need the other three powers:
1. the power of stability (or steadfastness)
2. the power of joy
3. the power of relinquishment (or suspension)

Whether it is gathering virtue or whether you are accomplishing the  welfare
of sentient beings, if you think of them in terms of the four-fold  division
of joyous effort:
 • You need the joyous effort  of  application,  i.e.,  you  need  to  apply
   yourself to the task.
 • Then you cannot be discouraged. So you need the  joyous  effort  of  non-
   discouragement.
 • You need to enjoy doing the task at hand and you also need to  strive  to
   do even more. So you need the joyous perseverance of non-contentment.
With these three types of joyous effort, you are then able to  complete  the
chosen task whether it is gathering virtue or accomplishing the  welfare  of
others.
Question: In the presentation of the  twelve  links,  projecting  karma  and
actualising karma were presented. What  is  the  role  of  completing  karma
there? In the presentation of the effects of  karma,  projecting  karma  and
completing karma were presented. What  is  the  role  of  actualising  karma
there?

Khen Rinpoche: Somebody come up to answer that question.

The question is: If we look  at  the  presentation  of  karma  in  terms  of
projecting karma and completing karma, what is the function  of  actualising
karma?

Khen Rinpoche: Come on. Those (students who have)  already  graduated  (from
Basic Program should answer this question).

Student 7: Actualising karma is very strong and it will make  sure  it  will
bring forth the effect of the projecting karma.

Khen Rinpoche: I have mentioned  before,  after  you  have  accumulated  the
projecting karma but in  order  to  bring  forth  its  effect,  it  must  be
nourished by craving and grasping. When that projecting karma  is  nourished
by craving and grasping to the point when it is certain to give rise to  its
effect, it becomes …?

Student 8: The projecting karma is no more during the time  of  the  causal-
period consciousness, so what  karma  is  being  nourished  by  craving  and
grasping?

Khen Rinpoche: Essentially once projecting karma is accumulated,  it  ceases
and does not exist. But the potential or seed of that projecting karma  that
was left in the mental continuum is nourished by craving and grasping.

It is complicated when we talk  about  completing  karma.  In  Vashubandhu’s
Abidharmakosha, one accumulates many virtuous karma to be born  as  a  human
being. But it is stated in the text that one karma  projects  and  the  rest
completes. It is also stated that one  rebirth  is  not  propelled  by  many
karmas.

Then in  the  Compendium  of  Knowledge  (Abhidharmasamuccaya),  the  higher
Abhidharma by Arya Asanga, the assertions are very different. He  said  that
while one karma can project one rebirth, one karma  can  also  project  many
rebirths. He also said that one rebirth can be propelled by many karma.

Anyway these are the statements to think about. In  future  we  can  discuss
this further. This is what is mentioned in the texts. We can think about  it
and maybe next time we can analyse and discuss further.

In the next lesson, we should be able to finish the rest of chapter seven.


Interpreted by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme; transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek,  Vivien  Ng
& Rachel Tan; edited by Cecilia Tsong.
-----------------------
[1] Ven. Gyurme explains “eating the food of others” refer to leftovers.

