Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Engaging in the Deeds of a Bodhisattva/BP2 M5 L23 final.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:52:18.678534
================================================================================


Transcript of the teachings by Khen Rinpoche Geshe  Chonyi  on  Engaging  in
the Bodhisattva Deeds, 2014

Root text: Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds by  Shantideva,  translated  by
Toh Sze Gee. Copyright: Toh Sze Gee, 2006; Revised edition, 2014.

Lesson                                                                    23
29 April 2014


All phenomena are merely imputed by thought. Chapter Five: Verses  5.26-5.37
a, b. 2.  The  method  for  guarding  the  mind:  guarding  mindfulness  and
introspection (cont’d). B. Extensive explanation. 2.1. The disadvantages  of
lacking introspection. 2.2. Guarding mindfulness as  a  method  of  guarding
introspection. 3. The way to train in the conduct of guarding  the  mind  by
means of mindfulness and introspection.


Questions posed by Khen Rinpoche in the last lesson:
 • Why are the twelve links of dependent origination placed in a  particular
   order?
 • How does craving and grasping nourish the karma?

Student:  The  twelve  links  of  dependent  origination  are  placed  in  a
particular order for the purpose of meditation.

Khen Rinpoche: What if someone were to ask you: If the  actual  sequence  in
which the links operate is not the same, what is the reason  for  not  using
this order but presenting the order in that particular  way  for  meditation
purposes?

Student: I do not have the answer to that.

But regarding the question on how  craving  and  grasping,  which  are  non-
virtuous, nourish the actualising karma, I think the answer is the  grasping
to the “I”. When we experience the process of the twelve  links  and  we  go
through the death process, at  the  time  of  death,  we  have  this  innate
grasping of the “I” that will nourish potential existence. Because  of  this
strong grasping at the “I”, we have a strong attachment  to  having  another
rebirth.

Khen Rinpoche: When does that happen?

Student: I am not very sure. In order for the throwing karma  into  a  human
rebirth to operate, we need to have virtuous projecting karma. With the  two
causes, the projecting causes and the actualising causes, we  have  a  human
rebirth.

Khen Rinpoche: Is everyone listening? What is the  question?   What  is  the
answer?

                                 ~~~~~~~~~~~

ALL PHENOMENA ARE MERELY IMPUTED BY THOUGHT

Aryadeva’s Four Hundred Verses states,

      Because thought exists, therefore phenomena exist.

Essentially,  phenomena  cannot  exist  when  there  is  no  thought  merely
positing phenomena. An  existent  that  is  not  merely  posited  or  merely
imputed by thought is like a person in  a  dream,  a  dream  person.  It  is
important for us to understand that all  phenomena  are  merely  posited  or
merely imputed by thought.

An existent that is not merely imputed by thought is likened to an  illusory
elephant or a dream person. What exactly is a dream person? A  dream  person
is nothing more than the  mere  appearance  of  that  person  to  the  dream
consciousness, i.e., a mistaken consciousness. There is  nothing  else  that
you can call a dream person other than this mere appearance. When the  dream
consciousness ceases to exist, the dream person will  also  not  appear  nor
will it exist.

When you think of the example of mistaking a coil of rope  to  be  a  snake,
the  appearance  of  the  snake  to   that   mistaken   consciousness   that
misperceives the coil of rope to be a snake is  nothing  more  than  a  mere
appearance to that mistaken mind. It is nothing more than that.

When we talk about a dream person or the snake that is wrongly imputed on  a
coil of rope, there is an appearance of a  dream  person  and  there  is  an
appearance of a  snake.   How  do  they  actually  exist?  Their  manner  of
existence  is  none  other  than  their  appearances   to   the   respective
consciousnesses that perceive them. They are nothing more than that.

The dream person cannot exist without the mistaken dream consciousness  that
it is appearing to. It has to depend on that dream  consciousness,  i.e.,  a
dream person is just that mere appearance to the dream  consciousness.  From
this example,  it  is  very  clear  that  without  depending  on  the  dream
consciousness, you cannot posit or talk about a dream person.

Just like this example, when you talk about form, sound,  smell,  taste  and
touch, all these are nothing more than mere appearances to the thought  that
apprehends them.
Form, sound, smell, taste and touch are posited by their mere appearance  to
thought. Without form, sound, smell, taste and touch appearing  to  thought,
you cannot posit them.

We have to think about this using the earlier analogies. We can use form  as
an example. You cannot posit form without  depending  on  the  thought  that
form appears to. What is form? Form is none other than that which is  merely
imputed by the thought it appears to.

In short, nothing can exist without  being  posited  by  thought.  When  you
point to something that can exist without being merely imputed  by  thought,
this leads to the fallacy  that  that  particular  object  or  phenomena  in
question is truly existent or exists from its own side. There  cannot  be  a
form that exists without being merely imputed by thought. As such,  form  is
something that is merely imputed by thought.

It is essential, on a regular basis, to think about how  all  phenomena  are
merely posited by thought but this is a challenging task.

Form is posited as none  other  than  that  which  appears  to  the  thought
apprehending form.  It  is  merely  imputed  by  the  thought  consciousness
apprehending it. As it is established and imputed by  thought  to  be  form,
form exists as form.

What is the difference then between  form  and  a  dream  person?  They  are
similar in that both form and a dream person are merely imputed by  thought,
i.e., they are merely posited through their appearance to the  consciousness
apprehending them. But while form is form, a dream person is not  a  person.
One is an existent, i.e., form exists but a dream person does not  exist  as
a person.

What determines that something is an existent while others  are  not  as  in
this case of the dream  person  not  being  a  person?  This  requires  much
further thought.

What I have stated is a brief explanation of how all  phenomena  are  merely
imputed by thought. I have tried to explain it briefly through  the  use  of
an analogy. First, I gave you an  analogy  and  then  I  try  to  apply  the
analogy to the meaning. By using the analogy of  a  dream  person,  a  dream
person  is  none  other  than  a  mere  appearance  to  the  mistaken  dream
consciousness that it appears to. There is nothing that one can posit to  be
a dream person other than that.

This analogy is to help you understand how all phenomena are merely  imputed
by thought. Whether it is form, sound, smell,  taste  and  touch,  they  are
merely  posited  through  their  appearance  to  the  thought  consciousness
apprehending them. It  is  important  to  constantly  think  about  how  all
phenomena are merely imputed by thought by using these analogies.

                                 ~~~~~~~~~~

In the last lesson, we saw how our wisdom will degenerate when  we  fail  to
apply mindfulness and introspection (or vigilance). There are many kinds  of
wisdom: the wisdom arising from hearing, the wisdom arising from  reflection
and the wisdom arising from meditation. When we look at the  knowledge  that
we may have gained through the course of  our  studies,  it  is  subject  to
degeneration and can be forgotten when we do not  exercise  mindfulness  and
introspection.

We need to remember whatever we have heard or learnt. We need to be  mindful
of the knowledge that we have gained otherwise we will forget them. This  is
why there are people who say that they have done a fair bit of studying  but
they do not remember what they have learnt. This is a clear sign  that  they
have not applied mindfulness.

2.  THE  METHOD  FOR   GUARDING   THE   MIND:   GUARDING   MINDFULNESS   AND
   INSTROSPECTION (cont’d)

        B.   Extensive explanation
     1. The disadvantages of lacking introspection
        C.  Ethics will not become pure
      Verse 5.26
      Even those who have plenty of hearing,
      Faith and diligent endeavour
      Will become sullied by a downfall
      Due to the fault of lacking introspection.

When one lacks introspection, one will not be able to develop pure ethics.

This verse is saying that when you have done  extensive  studies,  you  will
know the essential points of your practice with regard to what you  have  to
cultivate and what you have to abandon. On top of that, you  have  faith  in
karma and its effects and you  may  be  joyously  exerting  effort  in  your
practice. To a certain extent, you may have these qualities.

Even when one has all these qualities but if one does not  have  mindfulness
and introspection, one’s ethics will degenerate. When one  is  not  careful,
attachment  and  desire  will  creep  into  the  mind,  one’s  ethics   will
degenerate and one becomes stained by downfalls.

The point behind this verse is the great need for introspection for  without
it, the virtues that one has accumulated can be destroyed.

        D.  Virtues accumulated in the past will be destroyed.
      Verse 5.27
      The thieves of non-introspection,
      In following upon the degeneration of mindfulness,
      Will steal even the merits I have firmly gathered
      [So that] I shall then proceed to lower realms.


Attachment and anger are likened to  robbers  and  jealousy  and  pride  are
likened to thieves. The verse is saying that when one  lacks  introspection,
the inner robbers and thieves of attachment, anger, jealousy  and  so  forth
will sneak into our mind and steal our merit just  as  robbers  and  thieves
plunder the wealth and possessions of others. When our merit are  stolen  by
these inner robbers and thieves, when our merit is depleted, we will not  be
able to get a good rebirth and we will end up  being  reborn  in  the  lower
realms.

        E. The accomplishment of virtues not previously performed  will  be
        hindered
      Verse 5.28
      This host of thieves of the afflictions
      Will search for a good opportunity and occasion.
      Having found it, they will steal my virtue
      And destroy even life in a good migration.

With the  lack  of  introspection,  besides  depleting  the  merit  one  has
accumulated, it will also hinder the cultivation of new virtues.

Before robbers strike, they usually size up their victims and the  situation
first. They look at their targets, analysing whether they will  be  able  to
overcome them and rob them of their wealth. When they think  that  they  are
able to do this, they will then look for a suitable time, analysing  whether
it is better to strike in the day or night.  After  much  consideration  and
having determined that they are  likely  to  succeed,  only  then  will  the
robbers strike.

Likewise the inner robbers and thieves of anger,  attachment,  jealousy  and
pride are always on the lookout to see  when  they  can  harm  us.  Once  an
opportunity arises, they manifest readily. When they manifest, even when  we
are in the midst of doing something virtuous, they will stop and prevent  us
from accumulating virtue.

The afflictions are likened to robbers who are always on the  lookout.  When
they find an opportunity, they strike  and  deprive  us  of  our  merit  and
deprive us of a good rebirth.

Verse 5.26 talks about how, in the absence of introspection,  the  merit  we
have accumulated in the past could be destroyed.

Here verses 5.27 and 5.28 are saying that when  we  lack  introspection,  we
will not be able to cultivate new virtue, i.e.,  we  will  not  be  able  to
accumulate virtue that we have not accumulated earlier.

This  concludes  the   explanation   of   the   disadvantages   of   lacking
introspection.  The  next  section  is   the   method   for   guarding   our
introspection through guarding our mindfulness.

2.   Guarding mindfulness as a method of guarding introspection
       A.  Brief presentation
      Verse 5.29
      Therefore, I shall never let mindfulness depart
      From the doorway of my mind.
      If it goes, I should recall the harms of the lower realms
      And closely place it there.


Here guarding mindfulness  is  said  to  be  the  method  for  guarding  our
introspection.

When you talk about the mind as being a house, there will  be  an  entrance.
In order to protect the house, you usually place a guard  at  the  entrance.
The guard here is mindfulness.

What are you guarding the house against? You are guarding the house  of  the
mind to check whether the mind is engaging erroneously with  the  object  or
not, just as you would place a guard at  the  entrance  in  order  to  check
whether there are any  robbers or thieves approaching or not.

Here the mindfulness is like the  guard  that  stops  the  mind  from  being
distracted, attaching and involving itself with objects such as form,  sound
and so forth. When we discover that the  mind  is  distracted  by  different
kinds of objects, engaging them erroneously, then we have to mindfully  pull
the mind back to a virtuous object of observation.
By thinking, “If I do not pull my mind back and just let  it  go  astray,  I
would have to suffer in the lower realms,” you pull back  the  attention  of
the mind, place it on a virtuous object of observation  and  be  mindful  of
that, i.e., when mindfulness degenerates, you have to  bring  the  attention
of the mind back to a virtuous object of observation.

Next is the extensive explanation of how guarding mindfulness is the  method
for guarding introspection. This has three parts:
1. The external condition: relying on the virtuous spiritual teacher
2. The internal condition: having correct mental attention
3. The way alertness is developed through mindfulness

       B.  Extensive explanation
             1.  The external condition: relying on the  virtuous  spiritual
teacher
      Verse 5.30
      Through the company of gurus,
      Through the subsequent teachings of abbots, and through fear,
      Mindfulness will easily be generated
      In fortunate people who act respectfully.

For  beginners,  a  method  to  guard  their  mindfulness,  which  is  still
unstable, is to be in the proximity of virtuous friends, their gurus  or  to
mix with friends who are abiding in the pure trainings. The  qualified  guru
shows what is to be abandoned and what is to be cultivated. The  trainee  or
the disciple has to put that into practice correctly.

     2. The internal condition: having correct mental attention
     Verse 5.31
     “I am always dwelling in the presence
     Of all those buddhas and bodhisattvas
     Who are endowed
     With unimpeded vision in all.”


     Verse 5.32 a, b
     By thinking in this way,
     I shall likewise obtain possession of shame, respect, and fear.


The verse is telling us that we should  always  remind  ourselves  that  the
buddhas and bodhisattvas are always  around  us  and  with  their  unimpeded
vision, they can see everything we are doing. Therefore they  know  when  we
are engaging in non-virtue. We cannot  pretend  otherwise  and  cheat  them,
thinking that they would not see what we have been up to.  Keeping  that  in
mind, we restrain ourselves from non-virtue.

We should think that we are in their presence all the time. Just as  we  are
about to engage in  non-virtue,  out  of  consideration  for  ourselves  and
feeling a sense of shame, we should  abstain  from  committing  non-virtues.
Out of respect for our training and generating a sense of embarrassment,  we
should  abstain  from  non-virtue  on  account  of  others  and   fear   the
consequences of engaging in non-virtue.

This is how we can protect and guard our mindfulness and introspection.
Khen Rinpoche: I went to someone’s house once. She had some pictures of  His
Holiness and some other gurus in  the  room.  She  would  put  the  pictures
inside the cupboard and cover them up.

So I asked her, “Why do you cover them up?” She said, “I need to watch TV
at night but sometimes the TV is showing something that is not so good.”
She thought it would not be appropriate so she covered up and locked up the
pictures.

As I knew her well, I told her, “Even if you cover them up, they will  still
see so it is better not to cover them up.” I just made fun of her!

When you  have  a  good  understanding  of  what  the  buddhas  really  are,
understanding  that they are omniscient and mindful that  the  buddhas  have
unimpeded vision of everything that exists, that they are there and can  see
you all the time, it makes a huge difference to your practice  of  restraint
from non-virtue.

     3. The way introspection is developed through mindfulness
        A.  The way mindfulness arises
      Verse 5.32 c, d
      Also through doing this,
      Recollection of the Buddha will repeatedly occur.

When you are able to remember the  buddhas  in  the  way  suggested  in  the
previous verse, i.e., by recalling that the  buddhas  are  omniscient,  that
they are always there, that they see everything we do and so forth, then  we
will be able to remember also the Dharma and  the Sangha.  With  this  habit
of remembering them, it is said that one will  easily  generate  mindfulness
of the Three Jewels.

        B.  The way introspection arises from that
      Verse 5.33
      When mindfulness abides for the purpose
      Of guarding against [afflictions] from the doorway of the mind,
      Then introspection will come about
      And even that which had gone will return.

When you place the guard of mindfulness of not  forgetting  what  is  to  be
cultivated and what is to be discarded at the doorway of your  mind,  it  is
said that the introspection investigating  whether  your  body,  speech  and
mind are actually engaging in non-virtue or not will naturally  arise.  When
you have such strong mindfulness placed at the door of your mind, even  when
your introspection degenerates a little, you will  be  able  to  bring  back
easily the introspection you have lost.

When you have strong and continual mindfulness, you will  be  able  to  stop
the mind from being distracted from  the  object  of  observation  and  from
remaining distracted for a long time without even realising  it.  This  will
not happen. When there is strong mindfulness, the introspection that  checks
and investigates whether the mind is distracted or not  will  arise  of  its
own accord.

The point is that when mindfulness degenerates,  it  is  more  difficult  to
have introspection. It is more difficult to be  aware  that  one’s  mind  is
already distracted. But when there is strong mindfulness, it is much  easier
to be vigilant, i.e., it is much easier to  catch  the  mind  straying  away
from the object of observation.

Verse 5.33 goes with the outline, “The way introspection arises from  that.”
That  is  referring  to  mindfulness.  When  there  is  strong  mindfulness,
introspection follows naturally and easily. This is the point.

We have finished with the section on the  manner  of  generating  the  inner
condition of mindfulness and introspection.

What follows is the way to train in the conduct  of  guarding  the  mind  by
means of mindfulness and introspection. This has three major outlines:
A.   The way to train in the ethics of refraining from negative actions
B.   The way to train in the ethics of gathering virtuous dharmas
C.   The way to train in the ethics of working for the benefit  of  sentient
beings

The way to train in the ethics of refraining from negative  actions  or  the
ethics of restraint will be covered in two parts:
1.  Making effort to purify all conduct of the three doors
2.  Guarding against all deterioration

Making effort to purify all conduct of the three doors is  in  turn  covered
in three parts:
A.  Examining the conduct of body and speech
B.  Examining the conduct of the mind
C.  Explaining the contexts for permitted and prohibited actions

Examining the conduct of body and speech is covered in four points:
1. Examining one’s motivation before acting with the body
2. Advice related to actions like looking, etc
3. Application to other behaviours
4. Examining the posture

3.   THE WAY TO TRAIN IN THE CONDUCT  OF  GUARDING  THE  MIND  BY  MEANS  OF
   MINDFULNESS AND INTROSPECTION

   A.  The way to train in the ethics of refraining from negative actions
     1. Making effort to purify all conduct of the three doors
        A. Examining the conduct of body and speech
           1.  Examining one’s motivation before acting with the body
      Verse 5.34
      When, at the beginning,
      Having known that such a mind is with fault,
      At such a time, like a piece of wood,
      I should remain being able to rely [upon the antidote].

Before carrying out an action with our  body  or  speech,  first  we  should
investigate what is  the  motivation  of  our  wanting  to  engage  in  that
particular action.  Is  it  virtuous  or  non-virtuous?  Upon  checking  our
motivation, if we discover that it is non-virtuous  with  the  understanding
that if we were to proceed with that action, it would bring  about  negative
consequences  in  this  life  and  our  future  lives,  we  should  restrain
ourselves thoroughly, i.e., we should  abide  firmly.  Abiding  firmly  here
means restraining or stopping ourselves from  doing  that  action  with  our
body or speech.

We should not follow through with that intention,  restrain  ourselves  and,
at the same time, we should try to eradicate those non-virtuous thoughts.

Most of our physical and verbal actions are manifestations of our  thoughts.
As such, we should remain mindful and vigilant because when we act  out  our
thoughts physically and verbally, this will lead  to  negative  consequences
and we will hurt or harm others.

This verse is advising us to investigate and examine  our  motivation.  When
examining  our  motivation,  if  we  discover  that  it  is  a  non-virtuous
motivation that is making us  want to commit that action with our  body  and
speech, we  should  restrain  and  stop  ourselves  from  acting  out  those
thoughts.


           2. Advice related to actions like looking etc.
              A.  A general presentation of where to direct one’s gaze
      Verse 5.35
      Never should I look around
      Distractedly for no purpose.
      With a resolute mind
      I should always keep my eyes cast downwards.

The verse is saying that at all times, we should not  look  at  things  that
are not  in  accord  with  the  Dharma,  things  that  are  meaningless  and
pointless and things that will cause  our  minds  to  be  distracted.  While
keeping the mind focussed  on  a  chosen  virtuous  object  of  observation,
physically one’s gaze should not be placed beyond the space that is just  in
front of us, i.e., one should not be looking around and looking afar.

Why is there this advice of focusing our gaze in the area  in  front  of  us
rather than looking elsewhere?  Because when we look around in a  distracted
manner and we  are  unable  to  hold  the  mind  on  a  virtuous  object  of
observation, then when our gaze happens to fall upon an object of desire  or
upon an object or person that upsets us,  incorrect  mental  attention  will
arise. This in turn brings  about  the  manifestation  of  the  afflictions,
causing suffering and problems.

Therefore at a mental level, we have  to  be  mindful  and  not  forget  the
chosen virtuous object of observation. Physically  we  should  look  at  the
space in front of us without looking around and without looking afar.

              B. How to act when fatigued
      Verse 5.36 a,b
      But in order to relax the gaze
      For a short while I should look around.

While the behaviour mentioned in the earlier verse should be adopted at  all
times, but at times when one is feeling tired and exhausted, if one were  to
keep looking at  things  in  that  manner,  one  may  end  up  feeling  very
disturbed. At those times when one needs a rest, one can  occasionally  look
further ahead and look  around  without  losing  one’s  mindfulness  of  the
virtuous object of observation.

              C.  How to act when in the presence of other beings
      Verse 5.36 c,d
      If someone appears in my field of vision
      I should look at him and say, “It’s good that you have come.”


      Verse 5.37 a,b
      To check if there is any danger on the path and so forth
      I should look again and again in the four directions.

In the course of adopting such a  physical  demeanour—not  looking  far  but
usually casting your gaze downwards—if for whatever reason, someone were  to
appear before you, rather than pretending that you did not see  him  or  her
because you are engaging in this mode of  conduct,  you  should  acknowledge
the presence of the person. The text says you should greet  the  person  and
say, “It is good that you have come,” or you can  acknowledge  the  presence
of the person by saying, “Hello,” or, “Welcome.”

If you were to walk down a dangerous road where you  may  encounter  robbers
or wild animals and you persist in looking downwards as you  walk,  you  are
likely to end up in trouble. In  such  dangerous  places,  you  have  to  be
vigilant and be aware of your surroundings by looking around.  But  it  does
not mean that  as  you  look  around  you  allow  yourself  to  be  mentally
distracted.  You  can  look  around  but  you  should  never   be   mentally
distracted.

These are all advice pertaining to the need  for  constant  mindfulness  and
awareness.

                                 ~~~~~~~~~~

Question:  With  regard  to  the  term,  “merely  imputed  by  thought,”  is
“thought”  here  synonymous  with  the  mind  or  consciousness  or  are  we
referring specifically to the conceptual consciousness? In  lorig,  we  tend
to  use  “thought”   or   “thought   consciousness”   interchangeably   with
“conceptual consciousness.”  Can I just use, “merely imputed by mind”?

Answer: In the treatises, sometimes it is  written  as  “merely  imputed  by
mind.”

At other times, for  example  in  Aryadeva’s  Four  Hundred  Verses,  it  is
written as “merely imputed by thought.” You may also see the  term,  “merely
imputed by name,” and sometimes you  see  the  phrase,  “in  the  nature  of
mind.”

In the phrase, “merely imputed by thought,” can we take  “thought”  here  to
be the “thought” that is mentioned  in  the  study  of  mind  and  awareness
(lorig) where consciousness is divided into  the  conceptual  and  the  non-
conceptual? In lorig, there is the definition of the conceptual  mind  as  a
mind that  apprehends  a  sound  generality  and  a  meaning  generality  as
suitable to be mixed.

When we talk about “thought,” thought only exists at the level  of  sentient
beings.

Is there any  issue  or  problem  with  identifying  this  “thought”  to  be
conceptual thought or conceptuality? In the case of a  sentient  being,  the
state of mind in the continuum of a sentient being is either  conceptual  or
non-conceptual, isn’t it? In the phrase, “merely  labelled  by  thought,”  I
personally think there should not be a problem  with  identifying  “thought”
in the phrase, “merely labelled by thought,”  to  be  conceptuality  or  the
conceptual consciousness.

                                 ~~~~~~~~~~

Sharing session on the meditation program

There will be sharing session on Sunday, 4th May 2014 at  1.30pm  for  those
who have committed to the meditation program. During this  sharing  session,
you can talk about your experiences, how it is going so  far,  problems  you
may be encountering and so forth. The  session  will  last  for  about  1  ½
hours.


Interpreted by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme; transcribed by Phuah  Soon  Ek,  Patricia
Lee & Julia Koh; edited by Cecilia Tsong.



