Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Engaging in the Deeds of a Bodhisattva/BP2 M5 L31 final.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:52:21.634897
================================================================================


Transcript of the teachings by Khen Rinpoche Geshe  Chonyi  on  Engaging  in
the Bodhisattva Deeds, 2014

Root text: Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds by  Shantideva,  translated  by
Toh Sze Gee. Copyright: Toh Sze Gee, 2006; Revised edition, 2014.

Lesson                                                                    31
    5 June 2014


Chapter Six: Verses 6.8 - 6.13. B. Engaging the mind in the methods for
accomplishing patience. 1. Arresting the causes of anger. B. Instructions
on making effort in the methods for overcoming anger. C. The actual method
for overcoming that. D. Having examined in detail the causes that give rise
to anger, making effort to abandon them. 1. A general presentation of the
divisions of anger in terms of the objects that give rise to anger. 2.
Arresting fury towards that which brings unwanted things. A. Arresting fury
towards those who wrong you. 1. Being patient with those who would create
suffering for you. A. Cultivating the patience that accepts suffering.


Question: Is it correct to say that the anger of a  lower-level  bodhisattva
towards a higher-level bodhisattva destroys one great eon of merit,  whereas
the anger of a higher-level bodhisattva towards  a  lower-level  bodhisattva
destroys one hundred great eons of merit?

Answer: When a  non-bodhisattva  gets  angry  at  a  bodhisattva,  the  non-
bodhisattva will destroy the merit that he has accumulated over  a  thousand
eons.

When a lower-level bodhisattva gets angry at a higher-level bodhisattva,  he
destroys merit accumulated over a hundred eons.

Student: So it is the other way round.

Khen Rinpoche: I said that in the last  class,  remember?  I  think  I  said
that. This is what I thought I said.

Student: My understanding was that the lower-level bodhisattva has to  start
from scratch.

Khen Rinpoche: I thought I also said that when a  bodhisattva  who  has  not
yet obtained a prediction of his enlightenment gets angry at  a  bodhisattva
who has  obtained  a  prediction  of  his  enlightenment,  then  the  former
bodhisattva would have to train on the path all over again.

It is mentioned clearly that in the cases of merit that is accumulated  over
a thousand eons and over a  hundred  eons  being  destroyed  by  anger,  the
object of anger has to be a bodhisattva.

I don’t remember exactly but what I remember saying was that when a  higher-
level bodhisattva gets angry at a lower-level bodhisattva,  his  anger  will
destroy the merit that was accumulated over a hundred eons. I have to  check
the text again on this point. When we are talking about the  destruction  of
the merit accumulated over a hundred eons, it pertains to either the  lower-
level bodhisattva or the higher-level bodhisattva.

Khen Rinpoche: I will check whether it is  the  higher  bodhisattva  getting
angry at a lower bodhisattva who  destroys  a  hundred  eons  of  virtue  or
whether it is the lower bodhisattva getting angry at a  higher  bodhisattva.
I need to check.  In  the  last  class  I  mentioned  that  the  lower-level
bodhisattva getting angry  at  a  higher-level  bodhisattva    destroys  one
hundred eons of merit?

Student: No, it was the other way  round:  a  higher-level  bodhisattva  who
gets angry at a lower-level bodhisattva destroys one hundred eons of merit.

Khen Rinpoche: Then that must be correct . What I said  last  time  must  be
correct.

In the last class I said that a higher bodhisattva who gets angry towards  a
lower bodhisattva destroys one hundred eons of merit?

Just now I asked whether it was a lower-level bodhisattva getting  angry  at
a higher-level bodhisattva, everyone said yes!

I thought I said something like that. If I said a  higher  bodhisattva  gets
angry at a lower bodhisattva, a hundred eons of  merit  is  destroyed,  then
makes some sense. So what is your question?

Student: My qualm is this: a higher-level bodhisattva  getting  angry  at  a
lower-level bodhisattva destroys more  merit  (i.e.,  one  hundred  eons  of
merit) than a  lower-level  bodhisattva  getting  angry  at  a  higher-level
bodhisattva who destroys only one eon of merit. What is the logic of this?

Answer: Last time when I said that one eon of merit is destroyed,  this  was
an explanation of how the bodhisattva who has not obtained a  prediction  of
enlightenment has to train all over again.

Delaying the achievement of the next path by one eon is  not  equivalent  to
having destroyed one great eon worth of merit.

You then have to ask, “Why is this so?” The postponement of the  achievement
of the path of preparation by one eon is stated for ease of illustration  to
get the point across but it is not definitive.

When a lower-level bodhisattva who has not  obtained  a  prediction  of  his
enlightenment gets angry at a higher-level bodhisattva who  has  obtained  a
prediction of her enlightenment, the result is that the  former  bodhisattva
has to train again.

What is the meaning of ‘to train again’? It is  mentioned  clearly  that  to
train again does not mean  that  that  bodhisattva  on  the  great  path  of
accumulation has to fall back to the Mahayana small  path  of  accumulation.
It means that his achievement of the next path is delayed.

Student: So he remains on the great path of accumulation?

Khen Rinpoche:  Yes.

Question: I thought that that bodhisattva has to start  from  scratch.  Then
the question  is  this:  if  a  higher-level  bodhisattva  on  the  path  of
preparation getting angry at  a  lower-level  bodhisattva  on  the  path  of
accumulation destroys one hundred great eons of merit, will  his  attainment
also be delayed by one hundred great eons?

Answer:  This is not clear in the text. When  we  say  that  a  higher-level
bodhisattva gets angry at a  lower-level  bodhisattva  and  his  anger  will
destroy the merit accumulated over a hundred eons, then perhaps we may  also
have to say that his achievement of the next level would be delayed by  that
number of eons. Why? Because he has  to  accumulate  that  amount  of  merit
again.

Khen Rinpoche:  Anyway qualms are never-ending. It is good to have qualms.

This is quite difficult to explain. I don’t know exactly. I  have  mentioned
that  when  a  higher-level  bodhisattva  gets  angry   at   a   lower-level
bodhisattva, then one hundred eons of merit is destroyed. It could be  that.
I don’t know, I need to check.

Regarding the three countless great eons, one countless great  eon  is  made
up of many great eons.

Khen Rinpoche:  Ven Gyurme  (the  interpreter)  thinks  that  one  countless
great eon is just one eon. This is why he has this qualm.

Question: So one countless great eon and one great eon which is made  up  of
80 intermediate eons are different?

Khen Rinpoche:  Yes. Of course.

Question:  How long then is one countless great eon?

Khen Rinpoche: I don’t  know  how  to  count  this  as  you  have  to  count
exponentially from 1, 10, 100 and so forth. You have to do  this  ten  times
then you restart one great countless great eons. Up to ten or twenty  times,
I am not sure. The figure cannot fit into your  calculator.   I  also  don’t
know how to count this.

|A non-bodhisattva gets angry at |Destruction of merit equal to making|
|another non-bodhisattva         |a full prostration to a stupa (the  |
|                                |sutras say that the number of atoms |
|                                |covered by the body during such a   |
|                                |prostration is equal to the number  |
|                                |of times one will be reborn as a    |
|                                |wheel-turning king).                |
|A non-bodhisattva gets angry at |Destruction of merit accumulated    |
|a bodhisattva.                  |over a thousand great eons          |
|A lower-level bodhisattva gets  |His achievement of the next path is |
|angry at a higher-level         |delayed. E.g., a bodhisattva on the |
|bodhisattva                     |great Mahayana path of accumulation |
|E.g., a bodhisattva who has not |who is due to enter the Mahayana    |
|received a prediction of his    |path of preparation gets angry at   |
|enlightenment gets angry at a   |another bodhisattva who is already  |
|bodhisattva who has received a  |on the path of preparation. Instead |
|prediction of his enlightenment |of entering the path of preparation,|
|                                |his realisation is delayed for one  |
|                                |great eon and he has to retrain for |
|                                |this path all over again.           |
|A higher-level bodhisattva gets |Destruction of merit accumulated    |
|angry at a lower-level          |over a hundred great eons.          |
|bodhisattva.                    |                                    |

                                ~~~~~~~~~~~~

B.  ENGAGING THE MIND IN THE METHODS FOR ACCOMPLISHING PATIENCE (cont’d)

   1. Arresting the causes of anger
      B.  Instructions on making effort in the methods for overcoming anger
      Verse 6.8
      Therefore I should totally destroy
      The fuel of this enemy;
      This enemy has no other function
      Than that of causing me harm.

The cause of anger is due to the building up of mental unhappiness.  In  the
last lesson, we saw how mental unhappiness  is  likened  to  the  food  that
builds up our physical strength, which is like  the  very  fuel  that  makes
anger arise and become very powerful.

When we do not eat, our  physical  strength  and  health  will  deteriorate.
Likewise when we remove our mental unhappiness, then anger  would  not  have
any strength to arise. Therefore we have to strive to stop  and  remove  our
mental unhappiness. Why? Because mental unhappiness is the cause  of  anger,
the very thing that leads to anger.

When we do not stop our mental unhappiness, it  will  grow  and  when  anger
arises with hatred, it will destroy us  in  this  life  and  in  our  future
lives. Anger has  no  other  function  than  to  destroy  us  in  this  way.
Therefore we must strive in the methods to overcome the enemy of anger.

As to the actual method for overcoming anger, there are two parts:
1.   why it is unreasonable to nurture displeasure
2.   the reasons for that

      C.  The actual method for overcoming that
                    1.   It is unreasonable to nurture displeasure
      Verse 6.9
      Whatever befalls me,
      I shall not disturb my mental joy.
      Having been made unhappy, I shall not accomplish what I wish for
      And my virtues will decline.

Whatever suffering or problems befall us,  we  have  to  voluntarily  accept
them and hold on to this pledge not to  be  mentally  disturbed  or  unhappy
about the situation.

The vast majority of people are of the view that when you do  not  retaliate
when harmed, voluntarily accept problems when they arise  or  when  you  are
patient, then you will lose out as people will look down  on  you  and  take
advantage of you. This will lead to more people harming you. They will  also
cause problems for you because they see that you can be taken advantage  of.
Putting  aside  practising  patience,  most  people  think  that  you   must
retaliate because when you do not fight back or retaliate, you will  not  be
able to protect yourself.

When people are in danger, when they face  problems  or  harm  from  others,
they feel that it is necessary to put on  a  fierce  demeanour,  i.e.,  they
must show that they are ready to  fight  back  and  retaliate.  Most  people
would  do  this  because  they  think  that  this  is  the  way  to  protect
themselves. They must do this. Otherwise they will be taken advantage of.

Khen Rinpoche: You must show your muscle. When  someone  bullies  you,  then
you show your muscle.

When someone is out to harm us or do something bad to us, usually we do  not
like it. We become mentally unhappy. But what does  that  do  to  our  mind?
When we become unhappy, the only result  is  that  we  feel  disturbed.  The
other party remains and is not harmed in any way.

We put on a fierce demeanour, wanting  to  retaliate  or  defend  ourselves.
When we look at our usual reaction in a superficial way, it looks as  if  we
are protecting ourselves. We  may  have  saved  ourselves  from  that  small
problem but that is just superficial.

We feel we are protecting ourselves but when we  analyse  further,  actually
we have destroyed ourselves. This is because  when  our  mental  unhappiness
builds up in our mind, it becomes anger and hatred. When the  anger  in  our
mind manifests, it burns up the merit that we have accumulated over  a  very
long period of time.

When we do not think about it but just  look  at  things  superficially,  it
looks as if there is some benefit  to  protecting  ourselves.  But  when  we
analyse the actual result of retaliating—whereby we get angry  and  act  out
that anger—what we are doing is just hurting ourselves in the long run.  For
that reason, the text says that it is  inappropriate  to  be  unhappy  about
things.

            2.  The reasons for that
      Verse 6.10
      Why be unhappy about something
      If it can be remedied?
      And what is the use of being unhappy about something
      If it cannot be remedied?

You become unhappy because of a particular problem or situation.  There  are
various factors and conditions that bring  about  your  mental  unhappiness.
Then the question should be, “Is there anything that you can do  about  it?”
That is to say: can  the  conditions  bringing  about  your  unhappiness  be
removed? Verse 6.10 is saying that when something  can  be  done  about  the
situation or problem, there is nothing to be unhappy about.

But even when nothing can be done about the situation or problem, i.e.,  you
cannot change the conditions or factors leading  to  your  unhappiness,  all
the more there  is  no  reason  to  be  unhappy.  What  benefit  would  your
unhappiness serve?

For example, you are carrying a bag as you are walking along. You  drop  the
bag and immediately you are upset.  Sometimes we do  get  upset  over  these
small things. But if you think about it, when you drop  your  bag,  all  you
have to do is to pick it up. Then the  problem  is  solved.  In  this  case,
something can be done—you just pick up the bag so  why  are  you  upset?  In
this case, since something can be done,  i.e.,  just  picking  up  the  bag,
there is no reason to be unhappy.

Another scenario: the thing that you dropped happens to  be  your  treasured
mug that you like very much—not very expensive but expensive  enough—and  it
is broken into pieces. Of course, you will be upset  and  unhappy.  In  this
case, as the mug is already broken, is there anything you can do  about  it?
Nothing! If you were to get upset, what will happen? Your  mind  is  unhappy
and you feel very disturbed but is that going to restore your mug?

In short, whether the situation can be remedied or not, there is  no  reason
to be unhappy:
 • When it can be remedied, then there is really no reason to be unhappy.
 • But when it cannot be remedied, there is also no  reason  to  be  unhappy
   because it serves no benefit.

So whatever it is, there is no real, appropriate or logical reason to  being
unhappy. Being unhappy brings about no benefit at all!  What  it  brings  is
only further unhappiness. The only result is  that  we  are  disturbing  our
mind.

When we think  about  this  advice,  it  is  both  profound  and  effective.
Whenever we see, read or hear something  like  this,  we  should  understand
that it is a message for ourselves.  We  should  not  think  that  it  is  a
general message for everyone else. This is one  problem.  When  we  read  or
hear something like this, we regard it as if  it  is  an  ordinary  lecture,
“This is a lecture for the public. The advice is directed at  someone  else.
It is not for me”. When we look at this advice with  such  an  attitude,  it
will never benefit us.  Actually it  is  talking  about  us  and  we  should
relate it to ourselves, “This is advice for me.” Only  then  will  there  be
benefit and only then can there be change.

It is a completely different matter if you  are  faultless,  i.e.,  free  of
faults. If you do not have such problems and you  do  not  have  the  faults
mentioned in these teachings, then it  is  a  completely  different  matter.
Then you can think that this advice is meant for someone else. But when  you
do have such faults, then you have to understand that the advice is for  you
and it is for your own mind.
Khen Rinpoche: This is directed at me, for myself.  If you don’t  have  this
problem, then of course you can think, “This is not for me. It is  addressed
to somebody else.” But if you have the problem, always  point  to  yourself,
“This is talking to me, to myself. Other people  are  fine.  I  am  the  one
Shantideva is talking that.” Then that is more effective. But  most  of  the
time, we think, “It is just talking about someone else.” So you just  listen
and relax.

Having examined in detail the causes that give rise to anger, making  effort
to abandon them has three parts:
1. A general presentation of the divisions of anger in terms of the  objects
   that give rise to anger
2. Arresting fury towards that which brings unwanted things
3. Arresting fury towards that which hinders one’s desires

      D.  Having examined in detail the causes  that  give  rise  to  anger,
        making effort to abandon them
             1.  A general presentation of the divisions of anger  in  terms
        of the objects that
                  give rise to anger
      Verse 6.11
      For myself and for my friends
      I do not want suffering, contempt,
      Harsh words, and unpleasant talk;
      But for my enemies it is the opposite.

With respect to  the  objects  that  can  give  rise  to  your  anger,  some
commentaries talk about 24 different objects:
 • 12 objects that you do not like such as pain, suffering and so forth
 • 12 objects that obstruct you from achieving what you want

The 12 undesirable situations or objects are:
1. the four that pertain to ourselves
2. the four that pertain to people who we consider  to  be  in  our  circle,
   including servant, friends and loved ones
3. the four that pertain to our enemies

Let us look at the four situations that affect us or the four  objects  that
pertain to ourselves. Essentially these have to do with  the  eight  worldly
dharmas.

We do not like it when:
1. suffering occurs
2. we do not get respect or material goods and possessions
3. somebody says harsh or nasty words to or criticises us
4. we have a bad reputation with others talking behind our backs

These four objects pertain to ourselves. When  we  come  into  contact  with
these four situations, we become  unhappy.  They  are  the  causes  for  our
mental unhappiness which when left unchecked becomes anger.

Next are the  four  situations  or  objects  that  pertain  to  our  circle.
Essentially they are the same four objects as  above  only  they  happen  to
people who we consider to be in our  circle.  Then  we  become  unhappy  and
upset. People in  our  circle  include  our  gurus,  parents,  partners  and
children. So we become unhappy and upset when these people:
1. experience suffering
2. do not receive respect or material gain
3. are criticised
4. have a bad reputation

When these four situations happen to people we consider to be in our  circle
and who matter to us, we become  unhappy  and  upset  and  that  unhappiness
eventually turns into anger.

But when these four situations happen to our enemies,  we  are  very  happy.
When there is anything that  prevents  these  four  from  happening  to  our
enemies, again we get upset at those obstacles.

These are the 12 undesirable situations or objects.

The other 12 are the desirable situations or objects that  we  want  and  in
relation to which we can get upset.  When  anyone  or  any  situation  comes
along stopping or obstructing these 12 desirable objects, we  get  upset  at
the obstruction, be it a person or a situation.
1. We want pleasure and we want  to  be  happy.  When  anything  hinders  or
   obstructs that, we become unhappy with that obstruction.
2. We want to be praised. When anything obstructs  us  from  being  praised,
   then we are upset at that obstruction.
3. We want respect and material  gains.  When  anything  obstructs  us  from
   achieving these, we get upset at that obstruction.
4. We want a good reputation with people saying good things about  us.  When
   there is any obstruction to us having a good reputation, we get upset  at
   that obstruction.
These are the four obstructions that pertain to the objects we want.

We also want people who are in  our  circle  such  as  our  gurus,  friends,
relatives and loved ones to experience these four objects.  When  anyone  or
any situation  obstructs  our  circle  of  people  from  experiencing  these
objects, we also get upset.

But we do not want these four situations to happen to our enemies.  For  our
enemies, what we actually want is  the  opposite  of  these  four.  So  when
anything prevents the opposite of these four situations  from  happening  to
our enemies, then we get upset.

So in brief,
1. There are 12 undesirable situations or objects
2. There are the obstructions or hindrances to the 12  desirable  situations
   or objects.

For each of these 12, there are
1. the four that pertain to ourselves
2. the four that pertain to our circle
3. the four that pertain to our enemies

If we or our loved ones experience suffering which is  undesirable,  we  get
upset and angry. Therefore we need to meditate on the patience that  accepts
suffering that will be covered under five outlines:
1. Reflecting on the fact contaminated phenomena are  not  beyond  being  of
   the nature of suffering.
2. Reflecting on the benefits of meditating on suffering
3. Reflecting on the fact that if one is familiar with such attitudes,  they
   are not difficult to implement
4. The benefits of making effort in abandoning the afflictions
5. An extensive explanation of the benefits of meditating on suffering


      2.  Arresting fury towards that which brings unwanted things
            A.   Arresting fury towards those who wrong you
                    1.   Being patient with those who would create suffering
        for you
                            A.    Cultivating  the  patience  that   accepts
        suffering
                                 1.  Reflecting  on  the  fact  contaminated
                    phenomena are not     beyond  being  of  the  nature  of
                    suffering
     Verse 6.12 (a,b)
     The causes of happiness occasionally occur,
     Whereas the causes for suffering are very many.

It is the nature of being in samsara that the things we  want  do  not  come
about and happen easily. The causes of the happiness  that  we  are  looking
for are not plentiful. For example, what we  want  is  happiness,  pleasure,
praise, good reputation, material gain and respect. Although we  want  these
things, the causes for us to experience them are very few and far between.

On the other hand, the opposite of these  four  objects,  i.e.,  the  things
that we do not want, although we do not want them, happen  very  frequently.
This is just the nature of being in samsara.

So there are many causes for suffering. It says here, “very many.”  As  long
as we are in samsara, the causes of suffering are very many  and  they  come
about without any choice. We do not have any control over them.

Why do the causes for happiness very rarely occur? Why  are  there  so  many
causes of the suffering we do not like? In order to explain  this,  we  have
to examine their causes.

While we are in samsara, all of  us  hardly  engage  in  or  accumulate  the
causes for happiness; hence the lack of happiness. All of  us  are  engaging
in negativities. We accumulate much more non-virtue  and  negativities  than
virtue. Hence we experience more problems and suffering. This  is  the  very
nature of our existence in samsara. There is nothing that we  can  do  about
it. As long as we are in samsara,  definitely  we  are  creating  more  non-
virtue than virtue. The result is that we experience more problems, so  many
more problems than happiness.

Is there anything we can do about this? There is nothing much  that  we  can
do because this is the  very  nature  of  samsara.  This  is  why  there  is
samsara. So there is nothing to be done other than to accept  it.  Therefore
we need to cultivate the patience to accept suffering.

The teachings give the example of  excrement.  Excrement  is  excrement.  It
will never smell nice.  I think it  was  Maitreya  who  used  this  example:
excrement is excrement. There will never come  a  day  when  excrement  will
smell nice. Its very nature is to stink. Samsara is like  that.  It  is  the
nature of samsara. Once you are in samsara, you will only find problems  and
you can do nothing about them. If you happen to come across  the  stench  of
excrement without choice, you could be either very disturbed by  it  or  you
can tell yourself, “Excrement is excrement. This is why it is  smelly.  What
can I do about it?”

Khen Rinpoche: I thought this was a good example. I saw  this  from  one  of
the texts. Don’t have expectations. We are living in samsara and we have  so
many expectations, “I want happiness and I want it all the time!” We  expect
so much. It is like expecting poo to have a  good  smell.  That  will  never
happen. I think the meaning is something like that.

                    2. Reflecting on the benefits of meditating on suffering
      Verse 6.12 (c, d)
      Without suffering there is no definite emergence.
      Therefore, mind, you should stand firm.


      Verse 6.13
      If the followers of Durga and the people of Karnata
      Endure the feelings of burns, cuts, and the like meaninglessly,
      Then for the sake of liberation,
      Why have I no courage?

We know how to meditate on suffering. We don’t like suffering  and  when  we
think of suffering,  we  get  disenchanted  with  it.  It  is  necessary  to
generate the thought of wanting to definitely emerge from or to get  out  of
this situation of being in samsara. On the basis of that, we will develop  a
wish to be liberated.

Aryadeva mentioned in  his  Four  Hundred  Verses  that  when  there  is  no
suffering, when we do not  think  of  suffering  and  when  we  do  not  get
disenchanted with suffering, there is no way we will  be  liberated  because
we will not work for freedom.

One great master said that when you possess  a  stable  disenchantment  with
cyclic existence/samsara, then there is  the  peace  of  nirvana.  There  is
liberation for you. On the other hand, when you  think  highly  of  samsara,
then you will continue to circle over and over again in samsara. This  means
that there is no liberation for you.

Whether  or  not  a  person  achieves  nirvana  or  liberation  depends   on
suffering. Suffering must be the condition. Depending on  suffering  as  the
condition, when a person generates the thought  of  definite  emergence  (or
renunciation), i.e., wanting to be free from  suffering,  then  that  person
can achieve freedom from suffering.  So  in  order  to  achieve  nirvana  or
liberation, one must have suffering as the  condition.  Therefore  there  is
benefit and a purpose to thinking about or meditating on suffering.

Khen Rinpoche: Therefore if you love liberation, you  must  love  suffering.
It is something like that.

Therefore  the  text  says,  “Without  suffering  there   is   no   definite
emergence,” i.e., there is no thought of definitely  wanting  to  emerge  or
free oneself from the cyclic existence of suffering. “Therefore,  mind,  you
should stand firm,” and not be disturbed when suffering occurs as  there  is
benefit to be reaped from it.

The teachings are saying that when suffering occurs, the best  thing  to  do
is to accept it and be patient with it. We experience suffering  because  of
the ripening  of  non-virtuous  karma  that  we  accumulated  in  the  past.
Sometimes we suffer and we get into problems because of the  involvement  of
another person. This person exists as the condition for  us  to  suffer.  We
feel that our suffering is due to this person. Sometimes  when  we  practise
the Dharma, we also experience problems and suffering.

Whether we are experiencing a problem that is the result of the ripening  of
some non-virtuous karma that we accumulated in the past  or  whether  it  is
due to  another  person  acting  as  the  condition  for  us  to  experience
suffering, in both cases, there is nothing much we can do  about  it.  Those
situations just happen without any wish or control from our side.  At  those
times, there is nothing to be done other than to accept and put up with  the
situations.

The teachings are telling us that we must voluntarily accept  the  situation
and problem and be able to bring the experience of the  suffering  into  our
own practice.

What if we refuse to accept the situation? Let’s say we make  the  decision,
“I don’t want to accept this situation. I am not going to put  up  with  it.
This is nonsense. I cannot accept it. Why should I accept  it?”   What  will
be the result of that course of action? Definitely we will  be  unhappy  and
that unhappiness will boil over and become anger. This is one outcome.

Secondly sometimes  due  to  not  accepting  the  situation,  suffering  and
problems, we become  discouraged,  disheartened  and  disinterested  in  our
practice. We just give up our practice. The refusal to accept and to put  up
with the suffering becomes a huge obstacle to continuing our practice.

It becomes problematic when  we  do  not  mentally  voluntarily  accept  the
situation. When we do not accept the problem, we do not want to put up  with
it or we do not know how to accept it, we will be very  unhappy  and  upset.
And this is in addition to the already existing problem. Even as  we  refuse
to accept the situation and  are  unhappy  with  it,  the  original  problem
remains. It will not go  away  on  its  own  accord.  That  is  already  one
problem. By not accepting the situation, we are adding  another  problem  on
top  of  the  original  problem.  This  additional  problem  is  our  mental
unhappiness about the original problem.

When we are mentally unhappy, many  disturbing  thoughts  arise.  We  become
more and more disturbed, more and more upset and angrier  and  angrier.  So,
in addition to the already existing problem, we are  adding  on  our  mental
suffering, worry and anxiety. This  makes  the  whole  situation  even  more
intolerable. When we reach this stage, we now have  two  problems  by  which
time it has become too late for us to talk about how we are going to  accept
suffering. It becomes too difficult.

Due to the ripening of our non-virtuous karma together  with  the  gathering
of various conditions, problems arise. We can mentally  accept  the  problem
by thinking, “This is the nature of samsara.  It  is  like  that.  There  is
nothing I can do about it. I will mentally accept it and put  up  with  it.”
It is true that by mentally accepting the  problem  and  the  suffering,  it
does not make the problem go away. The  problem  is  still  there.  This  is
true. But at least we are  not  giving  ourselves  additional  suffering  by
making ourselves unhappy.

So the advice for us here is that when problems arise and suffering  ensues,
try not to be mentally disturbed and  do  not  let  the  suffering  get  the
better of us. Do not let the suffering disturb or overwhelm  us.  We  should
not give ourselves additional problems. We  should  not  let  the  situation
disturb our Dharma practice. Rather we should use the situation  to  enhance
our practice by generating an even greater determination to practise.

There are people who think, “I  have  problems  because  of  practising  the
Dharma.” When you do not know how to think, then this is  really  a  problem
and things can get very bad. What I  say  is  this:  For  us  to  experience
problems due to our Dharma practice, this will hardly happen. It is  because
we are not practising Dharma. If you were to experience problems because  of
your Dharma practice, then it could be a sign that your Dharma  practice  is
really very pure. Only then will you experience problems.  It  doesn’t  mean
that all Buddhists—people who  practise  the  Dharma,  who  call  themselves
practitioners—do not have problems.

Khen Rinpoche: This means don’t worry. You come to class. You come to  puja.
If you get sick, it is not due to that. So don’t worry. You won’t get  those
problems.

For those who practise  the  Dharma  purely  and  properly,  yes.  They  may
experience problems in the form of sicknesses, discomforts  like  headaches,
body aches and so forth.  For  them,  those  difficulties  are  purification
because that suffering is in place of the negativities that  otherwise  will
cause them to be reborn in the hells or the lower realms  for  a  very  long
period of time. Due to  their  pure  practice,  an  immeasurable  amount  of
negativities is purified such that only a small amount is  left  that  takes
on the aspect of problems in this  life.  For  them,  when  they  experience
sicknesses and problems, they actually feel very happy.

So if any of you were to get sick, please don’t tell me that  you  got  sick
because you practised the Dharma. Just say that  you  got  sick  because  of
your karma.
Khen Rinpoche: I heard some people say, “I read  the  Diamond  Cutter  Sutra
then I have this problem.” Some people say that.


Interpreted by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme; transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek,  Vivien  Ng
& Aki Yeo; edited by Cecilia Tsong.
