Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Engaging in the Deeds of a Bodhisattva/BP2 M5 L04 (final2).doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:52:18.633477
================================================================================


Transcript of the teachings by Khen Rinpoche Geshe  Chonyi  on  Engaging  in
the Bodhisattva Deeds, 2014

Root text: Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds by  Shantideva,  translated  by
Toh Sze Gee. Copyright: Toh Sze Gee, 2006; Revised edition, 2014.

Lesson    4                                                               18
February 2014


Reflecting on impermanence. Chapter One: Verses  1.15  –  1.20.  Identifying
the nature of bodhicitta. Establishing the reasons of its benefits.


REFLECTING ON IMPERMANENCE

I spoke about the need to reflect on impermanence. If  you  remember,  there
is this statement from the treatise on logic that says,

      Because it is impermanent, it is suffering.
      Because it is suffering, it is selfless.

We must reflect on impermanence. Otherwise it will be difficult to  practise
any Dharma and it will be difficult to make one’s Dharma practice pure.

When we talk about impermanence, we are not simply talking about death.  The
actual meaning  of  impermanence  is  momentary  disintegration,  i.e.,  how
change occurs in each and  every  moment.  It  is  not  simply  saying  that
impermanence means,  in the case  of  our  own  life,  that  death  suddenly
descends upon us.

The reason why life ends with death is because life is changing from  moment
to moment and until death comes, one is getting closer and  closer  to  that
state. The understanding one should have is that, in each and  every  single
moment, one is moving closer and closer to death, the end of this life.

Death is something that most people fear and  dislike  but  nevertheless  we
are helplessly moving closer and closer to death in each  and  every  moment
due to our own karma and afflictions.  We have no choice.

We came into this life and took on this  body  and  mind.  These  aggregates
came about under the  control  of  karma  and  afflictions.  We  are  moving
towards death in  each  and  every  single  moment.  It  is  our  karma  and
afflictions that is responsible for this. It is our  karma  and  afflictions
that have thrown us powerlessly into having this set of body  and  mind.  It
is that same karma and afflictions that are responsible for  this  body  and
mind and ourselves  disintegrating,  changing  from  moment  to  moment  and
ultimately dying. Because  we  are  under  the  control  of  our  karma  and
afflictions, therefore our existence is in the nature of suffering.

We are impermanent and undergo momentary change as do  our  body  and  mind.
Since this is the reality, there is no reason to grasp at  and  be  attached
to our body and mind by holding on  to  them  as  if  they  were  not  ever-
changing. Our very existence is in the nature of suffering so  there  is  no
reason to be  attached  to  or  hold  on  to  it  as  if  it  was  something
pleasurable.

Sometimes it  is  also  explained  that  because  the  body  and  mind,  the
aggregates, are  in  the  nature  of  suffering,  therefore  they  are  also
unclean, filthy and dirty. Things that are dirty  and  filthy  cause  us  to
generate a sense of revulsion when we come into contact with them.  When  we
relate this to our body and  mind  because  they  are  dirty  or  filthy  by
nature, again there is no reason to grasp at and be  attached  to  them.  So
the contaminated body and mind are objects of revulsion and not  objects  of
attachment because they are by nature filthy and dirty.

How then is the complex of our body and mind selfless?  Our  body  and  mind
are  the   results  of  our  past  karma  and  afflictions.  Similarly,   we
ourselves, the ‘I’, the person, are also the  products  of  that  karma  and
afflictions. This being the case, therefore it  is  inappropriate  to  grasp
strongly to the notion of the body and mind as being possessed by this  ‘I’,
that “they belong to me; they are mine.” and so forth. It  is  inappropriate
to grasp strongly to the body and mind as being mine because  on  the  basis
of that, we generate very strong attachment.

When we have a good understanding and reflect  well  on  these  points,  how
this body and mind that we have:
• are in the nature of impermanence
• are in the nature of suffering
• are by nature dirty and filthy
• are selfless,
then we will be able to work with and reduce our attachment.

In the past few lessons, we have seen how we have a suitable working  basis,
i.e., a suitable body and mind, for generating  virtuous  thoughts  and,  in
particular, for generating the mind of  enlightenment.  But  this  does  not
mean that we will necessarily do so. It is  very  important  to  contemplate
and meditate on death  and  impermanence.  Otherwise  there  is  no  way  to
generate the mind of enlightenment.

                                 ~~~~~~~~~~

In the last lesson, we saw the benefits we will experience when we are  able
to generate the mind of  enlightenment.  In  short,  when  we  are  able  to
generate bodhicitta:
• It will purify very powerful negativities.
• We will accumulate a great deal of positive potential and merit.
• Our own wishes will also be fulfilled.
The benefits of having generated bodhicitta is that  we  can  easily  finish
the accumulation of merit and we can also  easily  purify  those  even  very
powerful negativities.

In the last lesson, we also looked at some of the analogies that  illustrate
the  benefits  of  bodhicitta.  We  have  completed  that  section.  So   if
bodhicitta is to be generated, what exactly  is  its  nature?  What  is  its
entity and what are its divisions?

IDENTIFYING THE NATURE OF BODHICITTA

Divisions of the nature
In verse 1.15, we see how bodhicitta is divided by way of its entity.  There
are two types of bodhicitta.

      Verse 1.15
      In brief, you should understand
      The mind of enlightenment to be of two types;
      The mind that wishes enlightenment
      And the mind that engages enlightenment.

In order for it to be a mind generation, two aspirations must be present:
1. the aspiration for enlightenment
2. the aspiration for the completion of the welfare of sentient beings
There is a thought that thinks, “I must achieve full enlightenment in  order
to fully accomplish all the aims and welfare of others.”  Here  others  mean
all sentient beings. This mind is called a mind generation.

As to how to bring about this mind generation, we  discussed  this  when  we
studied the lam-rim, the stages of the path to enlightenment. As  you  know,
in  order  to  generate  this  mind  generation,  one  must  train  in   the
instructions for generating such a mind through:
1. the seven-fold cause and effect personal instructions or
2. the instruction of exchanging self and others.
Mind generation does not come about easily. There  is  a  process  that  one
must follow.

~ Divided by way of its entity
When mind generation is divided by way of its entity, there are two:
1. the aspirational mind generation
2. the engaged mind generation


• When we divide bodhicitta by way of it entity, there are  two  types,  the
  aspirational mind generation and the engaged mind generation.
• When we divide bodhicitta by way of its boundaries, there are four  types.


• When we divide bodhicitta by way of examples, there are 22 types.

In the module on the Heart Sutra  (Module  4),  we  looked  briefly  at  the
presentation of the Mahayana paths and grounds.  I  think  all  of  you  can
still remember that presentation. In terms of the five paths, we have:
1. the Mahayana path of accumulation
2. the Mahayana path of preparation
3. the Mahayana path of seeing
4. the Mahayana path of meditation
5. the Mahayana path of  no-more learning


~ Divided in terms of its boundaries
When we divide mind generation in terms of its boundaries:
• The mind generation in the continuum of the ordinary bodhisattva on the
  Mahayana path of accumulation and path of preparation is called the mind
  generation of aspiring conduct.
• The mind generation in the continuum of the superior bodhisattva from the
  first to the seventh grounds is called the mind generation of pure noble
  intention.
• The mind generation in the continuum of the superior bodhisattva on the
  eighth to the tenth grounds is called the mind generation of full
  maturation.
• The mind generation in the continuum of the buddha superior on the buddha
  ground is called the mind generation free from all obscurations.

~ Divided by way of examples
When we divide mind generation by way of examples, there are  22  types.   I
believe we had looked at the first three types:
1. earth-like mind generation
2. gold-like mind generation
3. moon-like mind generation

~~ Mahayana path of accumulation
The Mahayana path of accumulation is divided into three:
1. The Mahayana small path of accumulation, i.e., the mind generation in
   the continuum of the bodhisattva on the Mahayana small path of
   accumulation is called the earth-like mind generation.
2. The Mahayana middling path of accumulation, i.e., the mind generation in
   the continuum of the bodhisattva on the Mahayana middling path of
   accumulation is call the gold-like mind generation.
3. The Mahayana great path of accumulation, i.e., the mind generation in
   the continuum of the bodhisattva on the Mahayana great path of
   accumulation is called the moon-like mind generation. Here we are talking
   about the waxing moon.

~~ Mahayana path of preparation
The mind generation in the continuum of  the  bodhisattva  on  the  Mahayana
path of preparation is called the fire-like mind generation

~~ From the first ground onwards
When the practice of  generosity  starts  on  the  first  ground,  the  mind
generation in the continuum of that superior being is called  the  treasure-
like mind generation.

This gives you an idea of the development of the  mind  generation.  In  the
presentation of the ten grounds, there is a perfection associated with  each
ground. Likewise there is a name for the  mind  generation  associated  with
each of those grounds. So  there  are  ten  types  of  mind  generation.  In
particular, on the tenth ground, there are five  types  of  mind  generation
associated with the tenth ground.

Finally,  we  have  the  last  three  mind  generations   that   are   named
preparation, actual and conclusion.
• The preparation refers to the mind generation during the last moment of  a
  sentient being.
• The actual refers  to  the  uninterrupted  path  that  is  the  meditative
  equipoise of a buddha.
• The conclusion refers to the wisdom of the post-meditative session in  the
  continuum of a buddha.

Khen Rinpoche:  If you are hearing this for the first time, of  course,  you
would not understand what I just said. But don’t worry.  Just  leave  it  at
that for the time being. Now I am just throwing out the  idea.  Don’t  worry
if you do not understand.

For our purposes here, we have to proceed according to  our  root  text.  We
have to know:
• What exactly is mind generation?
• What is its entity?
• If the mind generation is divided by way of its entity, there are two
  types: the aspirational mind generation and the engaged mind generation
• If the mind generation is divided by way of its boundaries in terms of
  the paths and grounds, there are four types.
• If the mind generation is divided by way of examples, i.e., the kind of
  minds it accompanies, there are 22 types.

At the moment, we cannot go into all this in detail.  Perhaps,  sometime  in
the future.

The point of me giving you a bit more information is  to  show  you  that  a
text like this is not as simple as it seems.  Some  people  may  think  that
this is an easy text, one that we can simply read and understand.

Khen Rinpoche: I wanted to highlight that you  should  not  think  it  is  a
simple text. Last time I explained the word,  Sugata,  even  with  just  one
simple word, you can explain it for 10, 20 hours depending on how one  wants
to elaborate on the explanation.

|Divisions of mind generation                                         |
|Entity   |Aspirational mind generation (exists from the Mahayana path|
|         |of accumulation up to the end of the continuum of a        |
|         |sentient being)                                            |
|         |Engaged mind generation  (exists from the Mahayana path of |
|         |accumulation up to the buddha ground)                      |
|Boundarie|Ordinary bodhisattva on the Mahayana path of accumulation  |
|s        |and path of preparation – mind generation of aspiring      |
|         |conduct                                                    |
|         |Superior bodhisattva on the 1st to 7th grounds – mind      |
|         |generation of pure noble intention                         |
|         |Superior bodhisattva on the 8th, 9th and 10th grounds –    |
|         |mind generation of full maturation                         |
|         |Buddha superior on the buddha ground - mind generation free|
|         |from all obscurations                                      |
|Examples |On the Mahayana small path of accumulation:  earth-like    |
|         |mind generation                                            |
|         |On the Mahayana middling path of accumulation: gold-like   |
|         |mind generation                                            |
|         |On the Mahayana great path of accumulation: moon-like mind |
|         |generation                                                 |
|         |On the Mahayana path of preparation: fire-like mind        |
|         |generation                                                 |
|         |5. – 14. On the first ground: treasure-like mind generation|
|         |There are ten grounds with a perfection associated with    |
|         |each ground. There is a name for the mind generation that  |
|         |is associated with each of these grounds.                  |
|         |15. – 19. On the tenth ground, there are five types of mind|
|         |generation.                                                |
|         |20.   The preparation refers to the mind generation during |
|         |the last moment as a sentient   being.                     |
|         |21.  The actual refers to the uninterrupted path that is   |
|         |the meditative equipoise of a buddha.                      |
|         |22. The conclusion refers to the wisdom of the             |
|         |post-meditative session in the continuum of a buddha.      |

Explaining the divisions by way of analogy
Next is an explanation of the two-fold divisions of bodhicitta by way of  an
example or analogy.

      Verse 1.16
      As is understood by the instances
      Of desiring to go and going,
      So the wise should understand respectively
      The distinction between these two.

For instance, someone who is seated generates the thought, “I want to go  to
this place,” but he  remains  seated.  Then  there  is  another  person  who
generates this thought and acts on it by getting up and  proceeding  towards
that destination. While he is proceeding towards his destination,  there  is
still the thought, “I want to go to this place.”

In these two instances, the two  people  are  similar  in  having  the  same
thought of wanting to go to a  particular  place,  but  one  remains  seated
while the other has acted upon that thought.

Likewise both the aspirational mind generation and engaged  mind  generation
are the thought, “I must achieve full enlightenment in order to achieve  the
welfare of sentient beings.” They are similar in that respect, but in  order
to be an engaged mind generation, it has to be conjoined with  the  practice
of the bodhisattvas such as  the  perfection  of  generosity.  If  the  mind
generation is not conjoined with such  a  bodhisattva  practice,  it  is  an
aspirational mind generation.

If you prefer simplicity and you do not want to make things too  complicated
for yourself, you could just leave it as that, i.e.,
• If the mind generation is conjoined with the bodhisattva deeds, it  is  an
  engaged mind generation.
• If the mind generation is not conjoined with the bodhisattva deeds, it  is
  an aspirational mind generation.

But then the question will arise, “What does it  mean  when  you  say,  ‘the
mind generation that is conjoined  with  the  practice  of  the  bodhisattva
deeds, such as the practice of generosity’?”

Then you must answer that question. If you were to say that,  in  order  for
it to be an engaged mind  generation,  it  has  to  be  conjoined  with  the
practice of the bodhisattva  deeds  such  as  the  practice  of  generosity,
another question arises, “Does that  mean  it  has  to  involve  the  actual
giving of some object as a gift?”
What is the meaning of the  mind  generation  that  is  conjoined  with  the
bodhisattva deed of giving?

At a simple level, you could just leave it as the mind  generation  that  is
conjoined and that is not conjoined with the  bodhisattva  deeds  just  like
when we talked about the 22 types of bodhicitta. We left it at that. But  if
you were asked what exactly this  means, then you need to think  further  in
order to arrive at an answer.

The great masters debated and thought about  this.  They  said  that  it  is
better to distinguish the aspirational  mind  generation  from  the  engaged
mind  generation  by  seeing  whether  that  mind  generation  is   directly
conjoined with the bodhisattva deeds or not. The word,  ‘directly,’  has  to
be there. Whether it is an aspirational mind generation or an  engaged  mind
generation, they are all necessarily conjoined with  the  bodhisattva  deeds
in one  way  or  another.  Therefore  it  would  be  better  to  insert  the
additional word, ‘directly,’ into the definition.

If you settle for that, then another question arises, “What is  the  meaning
of ‘directly conjoined’?”

Khen Rinpoche: This is how the debate comes about.

When we say a mind generation is directly  conjoined  with  the  bodhisattva
deeds, this means that there is the aspiration for full  omniscience,  i.e.,
there is this mind aspiring to attain omniscience  in  order  to  accomplish
the welfare of others. This aspiration for omniscience has to be manifest.

Take, for instance, the bodhisattva superior who is in meditative  equipoise
directly perceiving emptiness. From the perspective of that wisdom,  nothing
else  appears  to  this  superior  bodhisattva  except  emptiness.  In   the
continuum of this bodhisattva superior, no other minds are  manifest  except
this wisdom of meditative equipoise.

Then another question arises, “In the continuum of the  bodhisattva  who  is
in  meditative  equipoise  directly  focussing  on   emptiness,   is   there
bodhicitta or not?”

Khen Rinpoche: What do you think?

The question is this: Is  there  bodhicitta  in  the  continuum  of  such  a
bodhisattva superior who is in meditative equipoise? The  answer  is  either
yes or no.

If you were to say,  “No,”  then  the  question  arises,  “But  isn’t  he  a
bodhisattva?”

If you  were  to  say,  “Yes,”  then  another  question  arises,  “How  does
bodhicitta exist  in  the  continuum  of  such  a  bodhisattva  superior  in
meditative equipoise?”  If your answer is yes, you have to  explain  how  it
exists.

The mind of enlightenment or bodhicitta is a mind. If such a mind exists  in
the continuum of a bodhisattva superior in meditative  equipoise,  you  must
explain how it exists. You cannot say that bodhicitta exists in the form  of
an imprint or predisposition. If it is a mind, you have to  explain  how  it
exists as a mind.
Scholars of the past had different positions with regard to this issue.
• There were some who asserted, “No, bodhicitta does not  exist  because  in
  order for it to exist, it must be manifest.”
• There were others who asserted that, in such  a  case,  bodhicitta  exists
  but it is not manifest.

According to the textbooks of Sera Je College, we assert that it exists  but
it is not directly conjoined with the bodhisattva deeds.  As  such,  of  the
two—the aspirational  mind generation and the  engaged  mind  generation—the
bodhicitta  existing  in  the  continuum  of  the  bodhisattva  superior  in
meditative  equipoise  has  to  be  posited  to  be  an  aspirational   mind
generation.

In summary:
• A mind generation is a mind that  thinks,  “I  must  achieve  omniscience,
  i.e., full enlightenment, in order to accomplish the welfare  of  sentient
  beings.”
• When you divide such a mind generation by way of  its  entity,  there  are
  two divisions: (1) the aspirational mind generation and  (2)  the  engaged
  mind generation.
• An aspirational mind generation is a mind generation that is not  directly
  conjoined with the bodhisattva deeds.
• An  engaged  mind  generation  is  a  mind  generation  that  is  directly
  conjoined with the bodhisattva deeds.
• What is the boundary of the aspirational  mind  generation?  It  does  not
  exist in the continua of those who have not entered the Mahayana path  and
  it does not exist on the buddha ground. It exists from the  Mahayana  path
  of accumulation up to the end of the continuum of a sentient being.
• What is the boundary of the engaged mind generation? It does not exist  in
  the continua of those prior to entering  the  path.  It  exists  from  the
  Mahayana path of accumulation up to the buddha ground, i.e., buddhahood.

Does bodhicitta mind generation  exist  in  the  continuum  of  the  Buddha?
According to Gyaltsab Je’s commentary on Engaging in the Bodhisattva  Deeds,
the answer is yes. Otherwise  if  you  were  to  say  that  mind  generation
bodhicitta does not exist in the continuum of the  Buddha,  you  would  also
have to assert that the Buddha does not have refuge,  the  Buddha  does  not
havenot have bodhisattva vows, the Buddha does  not  have  pratimoksha  vows
and that the  Buddhathe Buddha does not have tantric vows. Gyaltsab Je  said
very  clearly  that   you   must   assert   that   the   Buddha   has   mind
generationbodhicitta. This is the  position  of  Gyaltsab  Je  but  one  can
deliberate on and discuss this further.

What is mind  generationbodhicitta?  It  is  the  mind  that  possesses  two
aspirations: (1) the aspiration to accomplish the welfare of others and  (2)
the aspiration to attain omniscience or full enlightenment.  The  Buddha  is
already fully enlightened so does the Buddha still  have  an  aspiration  to
attain omniscience?

Khen Rinpoche: This is exercise for your brain.

Likewise with refuge. Refuge possesses two characteristics. It is the  faith
in the power and the ability of the Three Jewels  to  protect  us  from  the
fears of the suffering of the lower realms and the suffering of samsara.
So this is something to think about. Does the Buddha have  mind  generation?
If yes, does the Buddha have the aspiration to omniscience?

Khen Rinpoche: Is your brain functioning or not functioning?

It is clear now that  the  aspirational  mind  generation  is  not  directly
conjoined with the bodhisattva deeds. Having said that, with regard  to  all
the benefits of  bodhicitta  that  were  explained  earlier,  is  there  any
difference between the benefits of the aspirational mind generation and  the
engaged mind generation?

Explaining the different benefits of the aspirational  mind  generation  and
the engaged mind generation
~ The benefits of the aspirational mind generation

      Verse 1.17
      Although great fruits will arise in cyclic existence
      From the mind that wishes for enlightenment,
      An uninterrupted flow of merit will not arise
      As in the case of the engaging mind.

The  aspirational  mind  generation  is  not  directly  conjoined  with  the
bodhisattva deeds. As such, it is a mere aspiration and a pledge to  achieve
full  enlightenment.  Nevertheless,   merely   generating   this   mind   of
enlightenment definitely brings about full enlightenment. It is a cause  for
full enlightenment. It can still give rise to great  results  even  in  this
life and bring about the happiness of humans and gods. It is the  cause  for
such good rebirths. It is also the cause to eliminate all poverty.

The benefits of aspirational  mind  generation  are  stated  in  the  sutra,
Liberation of the Superior Maitreya:

      Son of the lineage, it is like this. For example, the precious diamond
      though broken outshines the supreme ornaments of  gold  and  it  still
      keeps the name, “precious diamond,” and eliminates all poverty.


      Son of the  lineage,  likewise,  the  precious  diamond  of  the  mind
      generation for omniscience, even without significance,  outshines  all
      the goldlow of the qualities of the hearers and solitary realisers. It
      keeps the name of “bodhisattva” and eliminates all poverty  of  cyclic
      existence.

The person who generates such a  Mahayana  mind  generation,  regardless  of
whether the mind generation  is  directly  conjoined  with  the  bodhisattva
deeds or not, immediately outshines all the hearers and  solitary  realisers
and acquires the name or title of   “bodhisattva.”

There is a difference in the benefits of the  aspirational  mind  generation
and the engaged mind generation. As it says in the verse, “An  uninterrupted
flow of merit will not arise/ As in the case of the engaging mind,”  so  the
benefits of generating the aspirational mind generation  are  not  like  the
benefits of generating the engaged mind generation.

Although “an uninterrupted flow of merit will not arise/ As in the  case  of
the engaging  mind,”  nevertheless  there  are  many  benefits  from  merely
generating the  aspirational  mind  generation.  It  is  a  cause  for  full
enlightenment, one  acquires  the  name,  “bodhisattva,”  it  can  eliminate
poverty of cyclic existence and so forth. There are many benefits. So it  is
incorrect to say that there is no benefit to simply generating the  mind  of
enlightenment alone. Therefore do not forsake this  mind  of  enlightenment.
When one’s mind  generation  is  directly  conjoined  with  the  bodhisattva
deeds, the ensuing benefits will be even greater.

~ The benefits of the engaged mind generation
      Verse 1.18
      For one who has perfectly adopted this mind
      With the thought never to turn away
      For the sake of totally liberating
      The infinite realms of sentient beings,


      Verse 1.19
      From that time onwards,
      Even while asleep or lacking conscientiousness,
      A force of merit equal to the sky
      Will continuously ensue.

When one’s mind  generation  is  directly  conjoined  with  the  bodhisattva
deeds, what kind of benefits will ensue? For a person with the engaged  mind
generation—even when he may be drunk, asleep or abiding in a state  of  non-
conscientiousness—“a force of merit equal to  the  sky”  is  said  to  arise
continually. Whatever such a person may do, there  is  always  “a  force  of
merit equal to the sky” that “will continuously ensue.”

The aspirational mind generation is just the mere thought, “I  must  achieve
omniscience in order to accomplish the welfare of others,”  whereas  in  the
case of the engaged mind generation, one actually directly  engages  in  the
deeds of the bodhisattva. So an  aspirational  mind  generation  is  a  mere
cause for enlightenment whereas the engaged mind  generation  completes  the
causes for enlightenment.

THE REASONS FOR SUCH BENEFITS

Next is  establishing  that  there  are  such  benefits  through  scriptural
authority and by means of logic and reasoning.

Establishing the benefits by quoting scripture
The next verse is establishing the benefits through scriptural authority  by
stating the source. Is this scriptural authority a proof  for  the  benefits
of  aspirational  mind  generation  or  engaged  mind  generation?  I’m  not
entirely sure but it may be better if we understand it  to  be  establishing
the benefits of the aspirational mind generation.


      Verse 1.20
      For the sake of those inclined towards the lower,
      This is taught along with the correctness
      By the Tathagata himself
      In the Sutra Requested by Subahu.


                                 ~~~~~~~~~~

Question: What is a waxing moon?

Answer: When you look at the moon from the 1st to  the  15th  of  the  lunar
calendar, the moon becomes bigger and bigger. This is a waxing moon. On  the
15th day, the moon is at its fullest,  completely  round.  After  the   15th
day, you would not call it  a  full  moon  as  the  moon  gradually  becomes
smaller and smaller.

Question: Regarding the benefits of  bodhicitta  and  engaging  in  the  six
perfections, for someone like myself who has  not  even  reached  the  small
scope, I can,  at  best,  only  contemplate  the  seven  causes  and  effect
instructions and the practice of the six perfections. What should I do  when
I go home after listening to these teachings?

Answer: This text is an instruction for  a  practitioner  of  the  Mahayana,
i.e., for someone who can meditate  on  bodhicitta.  Amongst  practitioners,
there are trainees of various differing abilities; those  with  the  highest
faculties, those with middling faculties and those with dull faculties.

Ideally, if you follow the scheme of  things,  first  you  have  to  develop
renunciation and the determination to be free from  samsara  and  so  forth.
But even if one cannot do that, the point here is that  while  one  has  the
opportunity with this suitable working basis, one should try  to  accumulate
as much merit as possible.

When you look at the training of a person of  small  capacity,  one  of  the
essential trainings is to reflect on death and impermanence. What should  be
the outcome of doing such a reflection?  This  reflection  should  help  the
person become a better human being with more  of  a  good  heart.  When  one
realises death and impermanence, one comes to see the impermanence of  one’s
friends, enemies and those who are not related to oneself in any  way.  They
are all impermanent and they are all going to die. In that  sense  there  is
no real purpose to having attachment to one and strong aversion  or  dislike
for the other.

Based on the reflection on death and  impermanence,  the  result  should  be
that one aspires to be a better person; at least, not to harm others and  as
much as possible to develop love and  compassion.  One  of  the  results  of
contemplating death and impermanence is to arrive at this  conclusion.  This
is the best way to extract the essence from this human life of freedoms  and
endowments. The way to make it meaningful is to cultivate a good  heart  and
to develop love for others.

When you look at  the  training  of  the  person  of  medium  capacity,  the
essential point  is to realise  that  everything  in  samsara  does  not  go
beyond the nature  of  suffering,  i.e.,  everything  in  samsara  does  not
transcend suffering and is in the nature of suffering.  We  contemplate  the
points we had discussed earlier: the  impermanence  of  composed  phenomena,
how they are in the nature of suffering and how contaminated  phenomena  are
unclean and dirty. Because they lack a self there is no reason to  grasp  at
or be attached to them. Through such reflections,  one  reverses  and  turns
away from grasping and attachment.  One cultivates love in their place.

What  is  found  in  the  training  of  the  persons  of  small  and  medium
capacities— whether it be  meditating  on  death  and  impermanence  or  the
suffering of samsara—are methods for us to become a better person, a  better
human being with a good heart and  to  translate  that  into  having  better
relationships within the family and with one’s  friends  and  so  forth  and
ideally, finally, with all sentient beings.  But this is not easy.

I guess the practice has to start like that. When translated into  practice,
this is how we have to start. You have to start with one’s own  family.  The
result of cultivating such  a  practice  is  first  to   see  happiness  and
harmony within one’s family  where   everybody  is  happy.  This  cannot  be
achieved when there is disharmony  and  fighting  within  the  family.  Then
saying one is practising bodhicitta for the benefit of all sentient  beings,
that becomes just talk.

By thinking of death and impermanence, we can try to be a better  person,  a
more caring and loving person. Also, by being mindful that  life  is  short,
you work at abandoning negativities.

Khen Rinpoche: This is the practice. Go  home  and  start  from  your  home.
Don’t fight at home!

Interpreted by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme; transcribed by Phuah  Soon  Ek,  Patricia
Lee and Julia Koh; edited by Cecilia Tsong.


