Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Engaging in the Deeds of a Bodhisattva/BP2 M5 L02 final.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:52:18.739382
================================================================================


Transcript of the teachings by Khen Rinpoche Geshe  Chonyi  on  Engaging  in
the Bodhisattva Deeds, 2014

Root text: Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds by  Shantideva,  translated  by
Toh Sze Gee. Copyright: Toh Sze Gee, 2006; Revised edition, 2014.

Lesson    2                                                               11
February 2014


The four seals. Chapter 1, Verses 1.1 to 1.5: Expression of homage  (meaning
of Sugata, the excellent abandonments and  excellent  realisations).  Pledge
of composition. Expression of humility. Actual explanation of the stages  of
the path.


THE FOUR SEALS

I had talked about the four seals in the  past.  All  of  you  should  think
about them on a regular basis. The four seals are:
1. All compounded phenomena are impermanent.
2. All contaminated phenomena are in the nature of suffering (or misery).
3. All phenomena are selfless and empty.
4. Nirvana is peace.

The  treatises  on  logic  composed  by  the  great  logicians  Dignaga  and
Dharmakirti stated that because it is impermanent, therefore it  is  in  the
nature of suffering. What they are saying is similar to the four seals.  But
what they said is not meant  to  be  taken  literally,  i.e.,  just  because
something is impermanent, it is in the  nature  of  suffering.  We  have  to
understand the import of that statement.

Why is it that contaminated phenomena are in the nature of  suffering?  This
is because they are impermanent. This is what we have to  figure  out.  Once
we understand this, then we move on to the next seal.

      (Because it is in the nature of suffering, therefore) it is selfless.

There are many ways to interpret and to understand this statement.  This  is
something  we  need  to  think  about  and  come  to  an  understanding  for
ourselves.

      Because it is impermanent, it  is  in  the  nature  of  suffering  (or
      misery).
      And because it is in the nature of suffering, it is selfless.

Once you understand all these assertions, you will come  to  understand  how
nirvana is peace. Although there is no direct  statement  alluding  to  this
but, in meaning, it can be understood that:

      Because it is selfless, therefore nirvana is peace.


This is an extremely important and fundamental point to understand. In  fact
this  vital point is the very root of  the  entire  Buddhadharma.  When  you
understand for yourself how nirvana (or liberation) actually exists and  how
it is possible for you to achieve it,  this  is  when  you  truly  begin  to
experience the teachings of the Buddha. Whatever learning and  studying  you
do is to move your mind towards that understanding. Once you gain that  kind
of conviction, it helps you to have belief and faith in the  Dharma  and  to
aspire to actualise it.

The four seals attest a doctrine to be a Buddhist doctrine so they are  very
important and you should reflect on them continually.

                                 ~~~~~~~~~~

I have talked about the title of the text and the translator’s  homage.  Now
we start with the actual text that starts with the author paying homage.

EXPRESSION OF HOMAGE

      Verse 1.1
      Respectfully I pay homage to the Sugatas  who  are  endowed  with  the
      dharmakaya,
      As well as to their children, and to all who are worthy of homage.
      Here I shall describe how to  engage  in  the  vows  of  the  Sugatas’
      children,
      The meaning  of  which  I  have  summarized  in  accordance  with  the
      scriptures.


What are the objects to whom the author is paying homage? The  objects  that
he is paying homage to are the Three Rare Sublime Ones or the Three  Jewels,
together with all those who are worthy of homage. After  paying  homage,  he
states his intention of composing this text.

Meaning of “Sugata”
In the commentary there is an explanation of the word  Sugata.  In  English,
it is translated as ‘gone to bliss.’ In  Tibetan,  it  is  made  up  of  two
words, de and sheg.
• De is translated as ‘bliss.’ Essentially it means something that  is  good
  and wonderful.
• Sheg means to go, to have gone, or to have become that.

~ The excellent abandonments
The  goodness  referred  to  in  de  or  bliss  refers  to   the   excellent
abandonments and the excellent realisations. In terms of  the  abandonments,
they are usually described in terms of three characteristics or features.

|Three features of the     |                                    |
|excellent  abandonments   |                                    |
|Abandonment               |Having abandoned the afflictive     |
|                          |obscurations.                       |
|Well abandoned            |Abandoning the objects of           |
|                          |abandonment such that they will     |
|                          |never arise again.                  |
|Thorough abandonment      |Abandoning the two obscurations     |
|                          |completely.                         |


Why are there these three features? There is a purpose  behind  these  three
features.

• The first feature  of  abandonment  is  abandonment,  which  means  having
  abandoned the afflictive obscurations. This is to  set  the  Buddha  apart
  from   non-Buddhist   practitioners   who   have   achieved   the   actual
  concentrations, such as the concentrations of the formless realm and  even
  the highest level of samsara called the peak of  samsara.  These  sentient
  beings do not have any  manifest  afflictions.  They  have  achieved  this
  quality. But the abandonment achieved by the Buddha is very different from
  this.

•  The  second  feature  of  abandonment  is   well   abandoned   (or   good
  abandonment). This is to distinguish the quality of abandonment  that  the
  Buddha has achieved from that achieved by some Hinayana superiors. In  the
  explanation of the Hinayana paths, there are individuals who have achieved
  the Hinayana superior paths. Among those who have  achieved  the  superior
  paths,  some  are  called  stream-enterers  and  some  are  called   once-
  returners.[1] Although the stream-enterers and once-returners are Hinayana
  superiors,  they  have  not  yet  abandoned  the  seeds  of   the   innate
  afflictions, i.e., the innate apprehension of a self.  Because this is so,
  they do take rebirth  in  cyclic  existence  unlike  the  Buddha  who  has
  achieved good abandonment whereby his objects of  abandonment  will  never
  return and arise again.

• The third feature of abandonment is thorough  abandonment  (or  literally,
  abandonment without leaving anything behind).  This is to distinguish  the
  quality  of  the  abandonment  that  the  Buddha  has  achieved  from  the
  abandonment achieved  by  the  hearer  foe  destroyers  and  the  solitary
  realiser foe destroyers. Thorough abandonment means having abandoned  both
  the afflictive obscurations and non-afflictive obscurations (or  knowledge
  obscurations).[2] This kind of abandonment that the Buddha has achieved is
  something that the hearer arhats and the solitary realiser arhats have not
  achieved.

So apart from the quality of abandonment that the Buddha  has  achieved,  we
can talk  about  this  quality  of  abandonment  in  terms  of  their  three
features, i.e., abandonment, well abandoned and thorough abandonment.  These
three features of the excellent abandonments that the  Buddha  has  achieved
are to enable us:
• to understand that  the  Buddha’s  quality  of  excellent  abandonment  is
  different from the abandonment achieved by those who have reached the peak
  of samsara.
• to distinguish the Buddha’s quality  of  excellent  abandonment  from  the
  quality of abandonment achieved by the stream-enterers and once-returners.
• to distinguish the Buddha’s quality  of  excellent  abandonment  from  the
  abandonment achieved by the hearer arhats and solitary realiser arhats.

When you know some of these points, then when you think about the Buddha  in
terms of what he has abandoned, you can see that the  quality  of  excellent
abandonment that the Buddha  has  achieved  is  very  different  from  those
achieved by non-Buddhists.

In order to appreciate these points, first one would have to  know  some  of
these things and you can only do so through learning. In order  for  you  to
fully appreciate the points that I have just explained,  you  have  to  know
the presentation of the concentrations of the form and formless realms,  the
process for reaching the peak of samsara, the presentation of  the  Hinayana
path, the different kinds of Sangha, what exactly  is  a  stream-enterer,  a
once-returner and a Hinayana foe destroyer (or  hearer  arhat  and  solitary
realiser arhat). Ideally we should be explaining all these topics but it  is
not possible to do so because we do not have the time.

If you want a simple explanation, you can take the Sugata to mean  ‘gone  to
bliss,’  with  bliss  referring  to  the  excellent  abandonments  and   the
excellent realisations.

Khen Rinpoche: So it can be very simple or it can be very complicated.

~ The excellent realisations
When you look at bliss in terms of the excellent realisations, again we  can
look at them in terms of three features.

|Three features of    |                                         |
|excellent            |                                         |
|realisations[3]      |                                         |
|1.  Exalted knower   |The omniscient wisdom of the Buddha that |
|                     |directly sees the meaning of             |
|                     |selflessness. This knower is superior to |
|                     |a non-Buddhist.                          |
|2.  Stable exalted   |The stable wisdom of the Buddha that     |
|knower               |directly sees the meaning of selflessness|
|                     |and is the antidote to the innate        |
|                     |afflictions and their seeds. This knower |
|                     |is superior to the superior beings of the|
|                     |Hinayana path, the stream-enterers and   |
|                     |once-returners.                          |
|3.  Thorough exalted |The wisdom possessed by a buddha that    |
|knower               |completely understands all the three     |
|                     |paths (the paths of the hearers, solitary|
|                     |realisers and bodhisattvas) who is also  |
|                     |able to teach it directly to others. The |
|                     |Sugata is thus superior to the arhat or  |
|                     |foe destroyer.                           |

These terms are found in the texts of Dignaga and Dharmakirti.  The  purpose
of explaining the excellent realisations in terms of the three  features  is
the same as before.  It  is  to  set  apart  the  quality  of  the  Buddha’s
realisations from others.  For  those  individuals  who  have  achieved  the
formless realm absorptions, including those who  have  reached  the  highest
level of samsara, the peak of samsara, that is quite a feat in  itself.  But
compared to the  excellent  realisations  of  the  Buddha,  it  is  nothing.
Although these individuals have  achieved  the  highest  possible  level  of
existence in samsara, they have  not  realised  thusness  (or  selflessness)
directly.

• The first feature is an exalted knower that directly  knows  or  perceives
  thusness (or selflessness, the truth).
• The second feature is the stable exalted knower. The  Hinayana  superiors,
  the stream-enterers and once-returners have perceived the truth  directly.
  However their direct realisation of selflessness is not as stable  as  the
  realisation of the Buddha. Why? Because although they  have  realised  the
  truth directly, they have not yet abandoned  or  destroyed  the  seeds  of
  their innate self-grasping. So unlike the Buddha, the stream-enterers  and
  once-returners have not achieved a stable realisation.
• The Buddha has a  wisdom  that  is  termed  the  thorough  exalted  knower
  because he sees each and every thing exactly as it is, including the paths
  of the three vehicles.  As such, he can work perfectly for the benefit  of
  sentient beings unlike the hearer arhats and solitary realiser arhats.

So in this verse the “Sugatas” refer to the Buddha Jewel who is  the  object
of homage.

      Respectfully I pay homage to the Sugatas  who  are  endowed  with  the
      dharmakaya,

“The dharmakaya” here refers to the Dharma Jewel.

The dharmakaya is the truth body, which consists of the  nature  truth  body
and the wisdom truth body.
• The nature truth body is the naturally pure sphere that  is  free  of  all
  the stains.
• The wisdom truth body is the wisdom or exalted knower in the continuum  of
  the Buddha superior.
These two truth bodies are the ultimate true  cessations  and  the  ultimate
true paths respectively.  These  are  the  final  and  the  ultimate  Dharma
Jewels.

 “Who are endowed with the dharmakaya” is  referring  to  a  person  who  is
endowed with the dharmakhaya. This person refers to the Sangha Jewel.

So this first line, “Respectfully I  pay  homage  to  the  Sugatas  who  are
endowed with the dharmakaya” is referring to  the  objects  of  homage.  The
objects of homage are the final Buddha Jewel, the  final  Dharma  Jewel  and
the final Sangha Jewel, i.e., the final Three  Jewels  are  the  objects  of
homage.

“As well as  to  their  children”:  “Children”  in  general  refers  to  the
bodhisattva  but  here  it  is  referring  in  particular  to  the  superior
bodhisattvas.

“To all those who are worthy of homage”: “Those who are  worthy  of  homage”
are basically the Buddha, Dharma and Sangha of the Mahayana.

I think this verse of homage is paid primarily from  the  perspective  of  a
Mahayana refuge. The objects of homage are the  final  Buddha  Jewel,  final
Dharma Jewel and the final Sangha Jewel. In addition to that,  the  superior
bodhisattvas and so forth of the Mahayana are also included as  the  objects
of homage.

The first line, “the Sugatas who are endowed with the dharmakaya,”  is  also
referring to the four bodies (or four kayas) of the Buddha, Whilst  directly
indicating  the  dharmakaya,  the  two  form  bodies  are   also   indicated
indirectly. The two  form  bodies  are  the  complete  enjoyment  body,  the
sambhogakaya and the emanation body, the nirmanakaya.

There are many explanations about what a buddha is. The whole  point  is  to
help us  understand who we are taking refuge in. We always  go  for  refuge,
“I take refuge in the Buddha, …” and whether we use the words,  “Buddha”  or
“Sugata” or the “One Gone  to Bliss,”  or we talk about full  enlightenment,
we are essentially talking about  the  same  thing.  This  explanation  here
helps us to gain a better understanding of our objects of refuge.

Pledge of composition

After paying homage to the Three Jewels,  what  follows  is  the  pledge  of
composition.

      Here I shall describe how to  engage  in  the  vows  of  the  Sugatas’
      children,
      The meaning  of  which  I  have  summarized  in  accordance  with  the
      scriptures.

“Here I shall describe how to engage in the vows of the  Sugatas’  children”
is the pledge of composition.

“The meaning of which I have summarized in accordance with the  scriptures”:
The author is saying that he pledges to give a summary of the paths  of  the
bodhisattvas, i.e., how one generates the mind of enlightenment and, on  the
basis of that, how one trains in the bodhisattva deeds.

How will he go about his explanations? The author said that he is  doing  it
in accordance with the Buddha’s intent and with what  is  laid  out  in  the
teachings of the Buddha. He is not composing this text according to his  own
whims and fancy,  writing  whatever  comes  to  mind.  He  is  not  creating
something new.

If he is going to compose this text in accordance with  the  intent  of  the
Buddha and with what is already laid out in the Buddha’s teachings, what  is
the point then of writing this text since its contents are  already  in  the
teachings? Shantideva’s purpose was to summarise the key points of the  path
so that one can easily understand or realise the intent of  the  Buddha  for
oneself.

Expression of humility

      Verse 1.2
      There is nothing here that has not appeared in the past
      And I have no skill in the art of rhetoric;
      Therefore, not to enact the welfare of others,
      I composed this in order to acquaint it to my mind.

 “There is nothing here that has not appeared in the past” is an  expression
of humility. Shantideva is saying that he is not an expert  in  the  meaning
of the teachings.

“I have no skill in the art of rhetoric”:  He  also  says  that  he  is  not
skilled “in the art of rhetoric,” i.e., he is not an expert in language  and
the use of words.

The point behind this expression of humility is that pride  is  an  obstacle
to one gaining qualities. So whether one is composing a  text,  studying  or
whatever one is engaged in doing, it is important to  do  so  without  pride
arising.

“Therefore, not to enact the welfare of others”: He is saying  that  he  did
not compose this text in order to help others realise  quickly  the  meaning
and intent of the teachings of the Buddha.

“Not to enact the welfare of others” refers to those who  have  the  ability
to understand the Buddha’s teachings on their own. Shantideva is saying,  “I
did not compose this text for their benefit but, rather, I composed this  in
order to acquaint it with my mind.”

      Verse 1.3
      For due to acquaintance with virtue,
      The force of my faith will for the  time  being  increase  because  of
      these.
      If, however, these are seen by others
      Equal in fortune to myself, it will be meaningful.

Whether composing a text or engaging in some other activity,  besides  doing
so   without any pride, one should also engage in the activity happily  with
a sense of enthusiasm and delight. One may not have pride, but when  one  is
not enthusiastic or feel discouraged, it is also difficult to achieve  one’s
goal.

Shantideva is saying that he himself will benefit from  composing  the  text
because when he composes such a text, which talks  about  the  practices  of
the bodhisattvas, it  increases  his  own  faith  in  those  practices.   If
somehow his composition should be read or seen by others who are similar  to
him, it is likely that they will also reap the same benefit. So he  composed
this text with that kind of enthusiasm and delight.

We  had  just  looked  at  the  author’s  expression  of  humility  and  his
expression of the purpose of composing the text.  The  lesson  we  can  draw
from this is that in whatever we do, there should be an absence of pride  on
our part. At the same time, we must have courage. We  must  not  be  narrow-
minded and be easily discouraged. When one is narrow-minded and  lacking  in
courage, I don’t think we would be a suitable receptacle  for  qualities  to
arise. So whatever we do, we should not be proud but instead, engage in  our
activities with enthusiasm, delight and confidence.


ACTUAL EXPLANATION OF THE STAGES OF THE PATH

Next is the actual explanation of the stages of the path that consists of:
1. exhorting one to take  the  essence  of  one’s  basis  endowed  with  the
   freedoms and endowments and
2. explaining the method to take the essence.

Exhorting one to take the essence of  one’s  basis  with  its  freedoms  and
endowments
      Verse 1.4
      The leisures and endowments are very hard to find.
      Since they accomplish the purposes of beings,
      If I do not accomplish benefit upon this,
      How will I acquire this in the future?

The topic, the human life of  freedoms  and  endowments,  has  already  been
discussed in the module[4] on the stages of the  path  to  enlightenment  in
the section on the path that is shared with the person  of  small  capacity.
Since we have already covered this, I don’t think  there  is  any  need  for
further explanation here.

Khen Rinpoche: By now, when you merely hear a single sentence,  dal  jor  di
ni nye par shin tu ka, you should have the complete  understanding  of  that
subject in your mind.

For example, the first line says, “the  leisures  and  endowments  are  very
hard to find.” You should be able to expand on this sentence on your own.

Khen Rinpoche: So when you read that sentence,  you  have  to  remember  the
entire lam-rim!

When we talk about meditation, this is what meditation  is.  Based  on  some
short verses, you analyse and reflect on their meaning. The text  is  saying
that our human  life  of  freedoms  and  endowments  is  very  difficult  to
achieve. When you look at this sentence, the question should arise  in  your
mind, “Why  is  achieving  a  human  life  of  freedoms  and  endowments  so
difficult? What are the reasons proving  that  it  is  indeed  difficult  to
obtain?” It is  put  to  us  here  that  the  human  life  of  freedoms  and
endowments that we have achieved is very difficult  to  come  by.   This  is
just a statement but what is the reason that  this  is  so?  The  reason  is
this: this human life of freedoms and  endowments  is  difficult  to  attain
because its causes are difficult to achieve.

In general, without a cause, there will not be an effect. Look  at  how  the
law of causality works in the  external  world,  e.g.,  there  is  no  smoke
without fire. There is no  sprout  without  a  seed.  Likewise  the  law  of
causality also applies in the internal world of the mind.

If  causes  are  needed  to  actualise  this  human  life  of  freedoms  and
endowments, then the next question that arises is this: What are the  causes
for a human life of freedoms and endowments? It is not  so  straight-forward
and requires much analysis and reflection.

To become an ordinary human being, one has to refrain from at least one non-
virtue. But with regard to a human life of freedoms and endowments,  we  are
not talking about being born as an ordinary  human  being.  We  are  talking
about being born as a human being with eighteen  qualities,  i.e.,  a  human
being who is free of eight features and who is endowed  with  ten  features.
This is the kind of human rebirth we  are  talking  about  here,  i.e.,  the
perfect human rebirth. Such a human  life  of  freedoms  and  endowments  is
extremely difficult to come  by.  Why?  Because  its  causes  are  extremely
difficult to actualise.

In order to be born as a human being with these eighteen qualities:
• First we must live a very pure  ethical  life,  i.e.,  observe  very  pure
  ethics.
• Our practice of ethics must also be complemented  with  the  practices  of
  generosity and so forth.
•  In  addition  to  that,  these  practices  must  be  completed  by   pure
  aspirational prayers, i.e., the aspiration to be able  to  obtain  such  a
  rebirth again in the future.

We should ask ourselves when we look at our own mind whether we  have  these
causes or not; whether we find it easy or difficult to create these causes.

When you look at the words, “the leisures  and  endowments,”  their  meaning
should immediately arise very clearly in your mind.  This  can  only  happen
for someone who meditates and reflects regularly. A person who  reflects  on
this regularly will be very familiar with this because he has thought  about
it. When he thinks about the words, “the  leisures  and  endowments,”  their
meaning will immediately come to mind. This person will understand,  “Oh,  I
really have this human life of freedoms and endowments”. This is the  result
of reflection and meditation.

For those who do not meditate and who do  not  reflect,  putting  aside  the
meaning of the words arising clearly in their minds, they would not even  be
able to count what the eighteen features are. For example,  when  they  look
at the words, “leisures and endowments,” only then will they start  counting
and even  counting  becomes  difficult.  If  merely  counting  the  eighteen
qualities is challenging, one can forget about understanding the meaning  of
these words. When one does not really know the meaning of these  words,  how
can change occur in the mind?

When one is habituated to reflection and meditation, by  simply  seeing  and
thinking of the word, “leisures,” immediately one feels, “Now I really  have
this wonderful opportunity to practise the Dharma because I am free  of  all
these major  hindrances  and  obstacles.”  Because  one  has  this  kind  of
understanding, one would be able to generate a great sense of  joy that  one
has attained something truly wonderful.

This is something that everyone  has  to  do  for  themselves—to  sit  down,
reflect and think: Will I get such an opportunity again  in  my  next  life?
The only way to answer that question is to look deeply inside your own  mind
to see whether you have the ability to create the causes or  not.  Then  you
will know whether you will get such a life again in the future.
You have to know what the causes are. When you look at  your  mind  and  you
realise that you find it difficult to create the causes or if you  lack  the
causes for such a rebirth again, you have to identify what  the  causes  are
and start working on actualising them.

At this juncture, when you have found such a life with  all  its  conditions
for practice, if you do not make use of this opportunity, it  will  be  very
difficult for you to obtain such conditions again in the future. It will  be
very difficult. You have to think about this for yourself  and  then  really
persuade yourself to make the most of this opportunity while you can.

In short, this verse  1.4  is  exhorting  and  imploring  us  to  take  this
opportunity now. We have to take this opportunity to make use of this  human
life of freedoms and endowments that we have achieved.

Having persuaded ourselves to take advantage of this opportunity, how do  we
go about doing so? What is the best way to extract the meaning  and  essence
out of this human life of freedoms and endowments?  The  explanation  starts
with verse 1.5.

There is a general explanation of how to extract the essence and then  there
is the detailed  explanation  of  the  individual  topics  under  which  the
benefits of bodhicitta will be explained.

As mentioned before, it will not be  possible  for  us  to  study  the  text
together with all the outlines from the commentary.  Anyway  today  we  have
finished with the exhortation to extract the essence from  this  human  life
of freedoms and endowments. In the next lesson, we will look at  the  actual
way of extracting the essence and,  in  particular,  we  will  look  at  the
benefits of bodhicitta.

                                 ~~~~~~~~~~~

The three things that we need to actualise in order to obtain a  human  life
of freedoms and endowments in the future are:
1. Pure morality. You need very pure morality. What is the measure of  “pure
   morality”? What does that mean? We have to think about this.
2. The practice of pure morality must be complemented with the practices  of
   the other perfections such as generosity and so forth. Having said  that,
   we can ask ourselves this: In order to achieve a human life  of  freedoms
   and endowments, do we need to practise all the perfections?
3. We need to make very “pure”  aspirational  prayers.  Again  what  exactly
   does this mean?
So there are many things to think about.

Khen Rinpoche: These three  questions  are  for  the  senior  students,  the
graduates from the Basic Program class.
• What is pure morality?
• One’s practice of morality must be complemented  with  generosity  and  so
  forth. Does this include all the other perfections?
• We need to make pure stainless  aspirational  prayers.  What  does  “pure”
  here mean?
These points appear throughout the teachings. When you look at the  lam-rim,
the stages of the path to enlightenment, in the section on  the  human  life
of freedoms and endowments, the discussion of these three points are  there.
You need to think about them.

It is said in the teachings, in order to become a human being, you  need  to
practise morality. But in order  to  have  a  human  life  of  freedoms  and
endowments:
• You need to practise very pure morality.
• You need to practise generosity and so forth.
• You need to make pure stainless prayers.

These three are said to be very difficult to achieve and very  difficult  to
practise. Because the causes are difficult to  achieve,  you  know  that  it
will be very difficult for you to  achieve  such  a  rebirth  again  in  the
future. When you realise that now, that it will be very  difficult  for  you
to achieve such a rebirth again in the future and you  do  want  to  achieve
such a rebirth in the future, then naturally you would want to practise  the
causes for achieving such a rebirth again in the future.  You  would  strive
to actualise the causes. When you happen to be someone who really  wants  to
have such an opportunity again in your future life and you know you have  to
create the causes, automatically you would work at creating  the  causes  on
your own. You do not need someone to push you or remind you.   You  will  do
it on your own.

                                 ~~~~~~~~~~

MEDITATION PROGRAMME

Remember we announced towards the end of the previous module  that  we  will
start a voluntary meditation program? It is completely  voluntary  and  will
last for a minimum of one year.

If you want to take part in this one-year voluntary  meditation  program  on
the lam-rim, the stages of the path to enlightenment, you have  to  register
and put your name down. Registration will start fairly soon, perhaps in  the
next lesson.

If you register, you must commit to meditate and reflect on the lam-rim  for
a minimum of 15 to 20 minutes a day. Regardless of whether  you  succeed  or
not, whether you find that you can meditate or not, once you  register,  you
have to do it every day. The point is to  do  it  every  day.  That  is  the
commitment.

Before you can start meditating, first you must make a promise or  a  pledge
to yourself. You must have the intention and the  willingness  to  meditate.
You must be able to tell yourself, “This is something I will do  every  day.
It will be part of my life. For 15 to 20 minutes a  day,  at  this  time,  I
will sit down in this particular place and I will do it!”

The meditation is to be done on your own at home. We will not  be  doing  it
together as a group. It is to be done at home on your own  every  day.  This
is completely voluntary. Only sign up if you can commit to  it  and  see  it
through. Perhaps we can  start  registration  in  the  next  class.  In  the
meantime, think about it.
We are not necessarily looking for many people. This is not the  point.  The
point is that you must want to do it and you must  do  it  voluntarily.  You
must feel happy doing it. Even if it is  just  a  few  people—two  or  three
people—that is fine.

The point is that we have to start  because  Lama  Zopa  Rinpoche  has  been
advising us and the centre quite a few times to do it. So it  is  not  right
if we do not do it. So we have to start.

Now we are only concerned about whether  you  want  to  do  it  or  not  and
starting the programme. This is not the time  to  think  about  whether  you
will get any results out of the  meditation  or  whether  realisations  will
arise. These are question marks but if  you do not even  start,  then  there
is no basis for even thinking about or considering these questions: “Will  I
get any results out of this? Will I  get  any  realisations?”  There  is  no
basis even to think about these questions when you  won’t  even  start.  You
should start and then we can talk about it one year later.

The plan is that for those who sign up for the  program  perhaps  every  now
and then, say, in intervals of three  to  four  months,  you  can  all  come
together, share your experiences and discuss about the practice.

Khen Rinpoche: After three months,  you  can  share  with  each  other  your
meditation experience. You may have very interesting experience. Anyway,  we
have to try. Those who wish to try, give  your  name  and  contact  details.
After that, we will discuss how to start and when to start. I think  I  will
make some guidelines.


Interpreted by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme; transcribed by Phuah  Soon  Ek,  Patricia
Lee and Julia Koh; edited by Cecilia Tsong.



-----------------------
[1] The stream-enterer refers to a superior being on the  Hinayana  path  of
seeing who will never be reborn in the three lower realms again.  The  once-
returner refers to a superior being on the Hinayana path of  meditation  who
will return to the desire realm only one more time.  (First  Basic  Program,
Module 5, Lesson 2, page 1).
[2] All the  faults  we  possess  are  included  in  the  two  obstructions:
obstructions to liberation  (also  known  as  afflictive  obstructions)  and
obstructions  to  omniscience  (or  non-afflictive  obscurations,  knowledge
obscurations). Obstructions to  liberation  such  as  ignorance,  anger  and
attachment prevent us from attaining liberation from samsara.  The  imprints
of these afflictions are obstructions to omniscience; they prevent  us  from
realising all objects  of  knowledge  directly  and  simultaneously.  (First
Basic Program, Module 5, Lesson 2, page 2).


[3] From First Basic Program, Module 5, Lesson 2, pages 1 & 2.
[4] Second Basic Program, Module 1.

