Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Engaging in the Deeds of a Bodhisattva/BP2 M05 L08 final.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:52:25.460148
================================================================================


Transcript of the teachings by Khen Rinpoche Geshe  Chonyi  on  Engaging  in
the Bodhisattva Deeds, 2014

Root text: Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds by  Shantideva,  translated  by
Toh Sze Gee. Copyright: Toh Sze Gee, 2006; Revised edition, 2014.

Lesson                                                                     8
4 March 2014


Meditation on the body. Chapter Two:  Verses  2.10–2.22.  Mentally  emanated
offerings: surpassable offerings and unsurpassable offerings.


MEDITATION ON THE BODY

As I said in the previous lesson, many of our problems and  suffering  arise
from our four  erroneous  conceptions.  The  method  to  weaken  these  four
erroneous  conceptions  is  the  practice  of  the   close   placements   of
mindfulness. They are:
1. the close placement of mindfulness of the body
2. the close placement of mindfulness of feelings
3. the close placement of mindfulness of the mind
4. the close placement of mindfulness of phenomena

|Close placement of mindfulness  |Overcomes  the erroneous conception |
|                                |of:                                 |
|Close placement of mindfulness  |Conceiving that which is unclean to |
|of the body                     |be clean                            |
|Close placement of mindfulness  |Conceiving that which is in the     |
|of feelings                     |nature of suffering to be happiness |
|Close placement of mindfulness  |Conceiving that which is impermanent|
|of the mind                     |to be permanent                     |
|Close placement of mindfulness  |Conceiving that which is selfless to|
|of phenomena                    |have a self                         |

When you look at the four features  of  impermanence,  misery,  selflessness
and being empty, one can reflect on and apply them to the complex  of  one’s
contaminated body and mind. One can reflect on how:
• one’s body is by nature unclean
• it is impermanent
• it is in the nature of suffering (or misery)
• it lacks a self

When you look at the very nature of your  body,  it  is  in  the  nature  of
suffering or misery. No matter what you do to cherish and take care of  your
body, from its own side, all it does is give  you  problems  and  suffering.
All it takes is a small problem or some small harm and your body will  start
to give you problems of much pain.

Although you put in so much effort to take care of your body  by  giving  it
food, clothing and so forth, what is the level of pleasure or happiness  you
get in return? The amount of resources and effort you  put  into  cherishing
your body are completely overwhelmed by just a small harmful condition.  The
effort, time and resources that you put into  cherishing  your  body  cannot
protect it from even a small harmful condition. This  is  a  sign  that  the
body you have has the nature of suffering. You just  need  a  small  harmful
condition to experience pain. Despite putting in so much time and  resources
into taking care of your body in order to get some pleasure from  it,   from
the side of the body, it gives you neither happiness nor pleasure.

The body itself is a source of suffering, therefore it  has  the  nature  of
suffering. It is the  very  basis  for  all  the  physical  problems,  i.e.,
physical pain and suffering, to arise. The reason  why  we  have  all  these
problems is because the basis to experience  these  problems  is  there.  As
soon as we take on a body like the one we have, all  it  needs  is  a  small
condition to occur for suffering to arise quickly and easily.  This  is  one
of the meanings of pervasive  compounded  suffering  (or  the  suffering  of
conditionality).

We eat in order to alleviate the suffering of hunger. Hunger  is  unpleasant
and is a kind of suffering. But this kind of  suffering  cannot  be  removed
because the body itself cannot remove  this  kind  of  suffering.  The  body
needs to rely on the external condition of food. As it is in the  nature  of
suffering, it is not able to bestow pleasure from its own side.

In the case of alleviating the suffering of hunger, the external  condition,
food, gives the pleasure that comes from  eating.   Although  in  this  case
food is an external condition for experiencing the pleasure that comes  from
eating, there is a limit to what food can do. This is because we  cannot  go
on eating non-stop. From the side of the body, there is a limit to  what  an
external favourable condition can do in terms of enabling us  to  experience
pleasure.

However, when it comes to the conditions that produce  suffering,  the  more
conditions for suffering there are, the more suffering we  will  experience.
The body has the nature of suffering because  the  more  harmful  conditions
there are, the more suffering the body experiences.

There is a limit to how much pleasure the body can experience,  even  though
there may be an abundance of favourable external conditions. After a  while,
the pleasure that is derived from these external  conditions  stops  and  it
does not increase. This is the feeling of pleasure.

The teachings advise us that a method to stop any  attachment  and  grasping
for the body is the meditation on how the body is unclean,  impermanent,  in
the nature of suffering and lacks a self.

It is very important that we continuously think about the  four  seals  that
attest to  the particular doctrine that  is  the  buddhadharma.  These  four
seals are very powerful:
   1. All composed phenomena are impermanent.
   2. All contaminated phenomena are in the nature of suffering or misery.
   3. All phenomena are selfless and empty.
   4. Nirvana is peace.
In the first turning of the wheel of Dharma, Buddha taught  the  four  noble
truths, saying, “This is true suffering, this is true origin,  this  is  the
true path and this is true cessation.” We have  to  understand  the  essence
behind these four noble truths.

OFFERINGS (cont’d.)

We have finished with the offering of one’s body. Next is  making  offerings
that  are  mentally  emanated,  of   which   there   are   surpassable   and
unsurpassable offerings.

Mentally emanated offerings
~ Surpassable offerings
There are twelve kinds of surpassable offerings.

1. Ablutions
      Verse 2.10
      To very sweetly scented bathing chambers
      With brilliantly sparkling crystal floors
      And exquisite pillars ablaze with gems,
      Having canopies above aglow with pearls,

Before one offers an ablution  or  bath,  first  one  has  to  generate  the
bathhouse that should be visualised  as  very  beautiful  and  pleasant  and
anointed with sandalwood fragrance. It has a  crystal  floor,  shining  with
lights and so forth.

Next you offer a bath.


      Verse 2.11
      I beseech the Tathagatas and their children
      To come and bathe their bodies abundantly
      From many jewelled vases filled with waters scented and enticing,
      To the accompaniment of song and music.

In order to do the bath offering, one invites  all  the  buddhas  and  their
children to take their place inside the bathhouse  and  you  visualise  that
they actually enter the bathhouse. You then offer the bath  to  the  buddhas
and their children with precious vases made from gold and  so  forth  filled
with scented water  and  beautiful  flowers.  The  whole  bath  offering  is
accompanied by song and music.

One can visualise performing the actual bath offering  by  oneself.  In  the
context of tantra, when one is doing the bath offering,  one  emanates  from
one’s heart various offering goddesses holding  vases  in  their  hands  and
they are the ones who offer the bath to the Tathagatas and their children.

After the bath offering is done, one visualises  the  water  that  has  been
offered flowing into oneself and all sentient  beings  in  the  six  realms,
purifying every one of our  negativities and  obscurations.  In  particular,
one can visualise that the water flows on to the  local  gods,  spirits  and
harm-doers, pacifying all their harmful intentions. In the  place  of  their
harmful intentions, visualise  that  these  harmful  spirits  and  so  forth
developing bodhicitta instead.

What is the reason for offering an ablution or bath to the buddhas?   It  is
not because the buddhas’ exalted bodies are  stained.  The  buddhas’  bodies
are unstained. We do the practice of offering ablutions in order  to  purify
the stains of our body, speech and mind. In particular, we  offer  ablutions
in order to purify the ordinary and impure appearances in our own minds.

      Verse 2.12 ab
      Let me dry their bodies with incomparable cloths,
      Clean and well-anointed with scent,
      After offering ablution,  one  visualizes  drying  their  bodies  with
      unequalled cloths that is soft, clean and fragrant.

What do you do with the cloths that you used  to  wipe  their  bodies?  What
about the old garments of the Tathagatas and their children?  You  visualise
they dissolve into either yellow or red light and that this light  dissolves
into you at the  point  between  your  eyebrows.  Then  visualise  that  you
receive all the qualities of the buddhas.

2. Clothing
      Verse 2.12 cd
      And then may I present them
      With fragrant well-dyed garments,


      Verse 2.13 a
      Manifold thin and soft clothes.

You offer garments after drying the  bodies  of  the  Tathagatas  and  their
children. In terms of the aspects of the bodies to  which  we  are  offering
garments:
• There are  some  bodies  that  are  in  the  aspect  of  being  devoid  of
  attachment. To these guests, you offer the three robes of a monk.
• There are some bodies that are in the  aspect  of  having  attachment.  To
  these guests, you offer clothes that are expensive, pure, soft, of various
  designs and so forth.

Think that by offering these garments to the guests, all the Tathagatas  and
their  children,  one  is  now  clothed  with  the  garments  of  shame  and
embarrassment.  There  is  a  difference  between  shame  and  embarrassment
although both are similar in that they function to help us refrain from non-
virtue.
• Shame is the mental factor that causes one to abstain from  non-virtue  on
  account of oneself.
• Embarrassment is the mental factor that causes one to  abstain  from  non-
  virtue on account of others.

3. Ornaments
      Verse 2.13 bcd
      I adorn with hundreds of this and that supreme ornaments
      The aryas Samantabhadra, Manjugosha,
      Avalokiteshvara, and so forth.

One offers ornaments to those  beings  who  are  in  the  aspect  of  having
attachment. There are many different kinds of ornaments  such  as  earrings,
necklaces, bracelets, anklets, belts and so forth. For example, as  you  can
see in the thangka, Chenrezig has all these various kinds of ornaments.  One
also offers these to Samantabhadra, Manjugosha and so forth,  i.e.,  to  the
eight great close sons. One can also offer to the buddhas in the  aspect  of
the enjoyment body. One prays and dedicates the act  of  offering  ornaments
so that one can actualise the signs and exemplifications of the Buddha.

4. Scents
      Verse 2.14
      Like polishing pure, refined gold,
      I anoint the bodies of the Lords of Subduers that blaze with light
      With the choicest perfumes whose fragrance permeates
      Throughout the billion worlds.

In the context of tantra, one visualises offering goddesses  emanating  from
one’s heart and in their hands, they  hold  vessels  containing  perfume  or
scented water. They then anoint the  bodies  of  the  Tathagatas  and  their
children.

After making this offering of anointment to the bodies of the  buddhas,  one
prays to actualise this particular feature of the body of a buddha  body  in
the future, i.e., having a body that is the colour of refined gold.

5. Flowers
      Verse 2.15
      And to the highest objects of giving, the Lords of Subduers,
      I offer all enchanting, sweet smelling flowers,
      Such as mandara, lotus, and utpala,
      And beautiful, well-arranged garlands.

It is said that one offers flowers like mandara, lotus, utpala and so  forth
because these flowers give off a pleasant fragrant scent.  One  should  also
offer flower garlands that are well arranged and beautiful.
• When one offers loose flowers to those buddhas who are in  the  aspect  of
  being free of attachment, one should visualise that  these  loose  flowers
  transform into beautiful celestial mansions, parasols and victory banners.


• It is said that when one offers flower garlands to those buddhas  who  are
  in the aspect of possessing attachment, for example, in the  form  of  the
  complete enjoyment body, one offers  these  flower  garlands  directly  to
  them.

After offering flowers, one can make  the  prayer  and  dedicate  the  merit
towards being able to actualise the realisations of the  seven  branches  of
enlightenment:
1. the branch of enlightenment that is correct mindfulness
2. the branch of enlightenment that is a fine  discrimination  of  phenomena
   directly realising selflessness
3. the branch of enlightenment that is effort
4. the branch of enlightenment that is joy
5. the branch of enlightenment that is pliancy
6. the branch of enlightenment that is meditative stabilisation
7. 7.    the branch of enlightenment that is equanimity


6. Incense
      Verse 2.16 a,b
      I also offer clouds of incense
      Whose pervasive sweet aroma steals away the mind.

One offers very fragrant incense. It is mentioned  in  some  teachings  that
you can visualise billowing clouds of incense smoke going  out  to  the  ten
directions and transforming into the seven kinds of jewels.  You  offer  all
of that to all the buddhas.

One can also think that all the suffering that exists  in  your  own  mental
continuum and in the continua of others are  cleared  away.  One  prays  and
dedicates that, due to offering this  incense,  may  one  gain  the  ethical
discipline that is pleasing to all the buddhas.

7. Food
      Verse 2.16 cd
      I offer to them the delicacies of the gods
      With a variety of foods and drinks too.

One prays that by offering pleasant and delicious  foods,  one  may  achieve
the supreme fruit of concentration.

8. Light
      Verse 2.17ab
      I also offer them jewelled lamps
      Arranged on golden lotus buds.

The container is made of precious substances and adorned  with  lotuses  and
so forth. Inside the precious containers are shining jewels  such  as  lapis
lazuli  and  sapphire.  These  jewels  radiate  light  that  eliminates  all
darkness, filling the entire space with light. You offer that.

When you are making a light offering, although the  offering  that  you  are
holding in your hand may be small, the teachings mentioned that  you  should
visualise that:
• the container is as large as the three billion-fold world systems
• the wick is very big
• the amount of candle wax or butter (in  the  case  of  a  butter-lamp)  is
  equal to the entire ocean
• the light that comes from the light offering fills all of space
Then you offer that.

You dedicate the merit of offering light to  eliminating  the  confusion  of
not knowing and to develop the mind that knows all phenomena. May  the  mind
be filled with the illumination of wisdom.

9. Offering an inestimable palace
      Verse 2.17cd
      Upon ground anointed with incense
      I scatter loose pleasing flowers.




      Verse 2.18
      To those who have the nature of compassion
      I offer inestimable palaces resounding with melodious praises,
      Beautified by and blazing with hanging ornaments of gems of pearls
      That adorn the infinite space.

One dedicates the merit of offering the inestimable mansion to  be  able  to
actualise the great city of liberation.

10. Parasols
      Verse 2.19
      Eternally shall I offer to the Lords of Subduers
      Jeweled parasols with golden handles
      And pleasing ornaments embellishing the rims,
      Standing upright, their shapes beautiful to behold.


I think it is alright if you were to visualise offering goddesses  emanating
from your heart and, in their hands, they hold various  beautiful  parasols,
offering them to the buddhas and bodhisattvas. You pray  that,  due  to  the
offering of these parasols, may you be protected from  the  heat  of  cyclic
existence and the lower realms and may you come under the protection of  the
Three Jewels.

11. Music
      Verse 2.20
      Besides those, may collections of offerings
      Resounding with sweet pleasing music,
      Clouds that appease the suffering of sentient beings,
      Remain individually

It is said in the  commentary,  “I  also  present  the  offering  clouds  of
instruments and pleasant melodies that clear away the suffering of  sentient
beings and satisfies them just by their hearing the melodies.”

12. An unbroken continuum of blessings in the form of offerings
      Verse 2.21
      May a rain of flowers and gems
      Descend continuously
      Upon all the Dharma Jewels,
      And upon the reliquaries and holy images.

One makes offerings to the Dharma Jewel.  There  is  the  scriptural  Dharma
Jewel and the realisational Dharma Jewel.
• The scriptural Dharma Jewel is the twelve branches of scriptures  together
  with the volumes of texts.
• The realisational Dharma Jewel is the qualities  of  abandonment  and  the
  qualities of realisations in the continua of the buddhas and bodhisattvas.



Then you have the reliquaries or stupas. There are many different  kinds  of
stupas such as the eight types of stupas.  The  holy  images  are  basically
representations of the body of the Buddha, in the form  of  statues  and  so
forth.

One makes these offerings continuously not only to the buddhas but  also  to
the Dharma Jewel and all the holy objects such as  stupas,  statues  and  so
forth. It is said that when making offerings, one’s offerings should  be  as
plentiful as  possible,   pleasant,  beautiful  and  of  the  best  possible
quality. As such, offerings  that  are  mentally  transformed  and  mentally
emanated are very important.

This concludes the section on surpassable offerings.

~ Unsurpassable offerings
      Verse 2.22
      In the same way as Manjughosha and so forth
      Have made offerings to the Victors,
      Similarly do I bestow gifts upon the Tathagatas,
      The Protectors, as well as their children.

The bodhisattvas abiding on the ten grounds are able to make many  offerings
that are mentally emanated and transformed. Here one visualises that one  is
making the same kind of offerings.

For  example,  when  the  bodhisattva  Samantabhadra  makes  offerings,   he
emanates innumerable rays of light that goes out to the  innumerable  buddha
fields. At the tip of  each  ray  of  light  are  Samantabhadras  and  those
Samantabhadras again emanate from their heart innumerable  rays  of  lights.
At the tip of those light rays emanated by  those  Samantabhadras  are  also
Samantabhadras.  Then  from  the  heart  of  those   Samantabhadras,   again
innumerable rays of lights are emanated. At the tips  of  those  light  rays
are the various types of offerings.  Bodhisattva  Samantabhadra  then  makes
those offerings.

It is said that these  great  bodhisattvas  make  such  extensive  offerings
through mental transformation. This verse is saying  that  we  should  think
like that  when  we  are  making  similar  offerings.  When  we  are  making
unsurpassable offerings, we should think that we are  making  the  offerings
in the same way as bodhisattva Samantabhadra.

It is  also  taught  that  one’s  meditation  on  love  and  bodhicitta  are
unsurpassable  offerings.  When  you  visualise   your   roots   of   virtue
transforming into various offering substances, that offering also become  an
unsurpassable offering. All your activities of listening to  the  teachings,
studying  the  Dharma,  practising,  meditating  and  so  forth   can   also
constitute unsurpassable offerings.

It is mentioned in The Stages of the Path to Enlightenment  literature  that
making mentally transformed offerings is supreme. I  guess  this  is  taught
from the perspective of those practitioners who are living  a  simple  life.
It is said that one can accumulate lots of merit by  making  these  mentally
transformed offerings.

Sometimes  when  we  make  offerings  of  actual  substances,  it   can   be
accompanied by arrogance, pride, attachment or miserliness.  In  this  text,
Shantideva, who was a practitioner  living  a  materially  very  simple  and
contented  life,  emphasises  mentally   transformed   offerings   for   his
particular lifestyle.

It is also mentioned in The Stages of the Path to  Enlightenment  literature
that making offerings is a supreme method for  achieving  enlightenment  and
also a supreme method to help one actualise bodhicitta. It  is  taught  that
one should not look down on the practice of making  offerings.  Rather,  one
should familiarise oneself with the practice of making  offerings  and  also
make mentally transformed offerings.

When we are making offerings that are mentally transformed, essentially  you
just imagine what you are going to offer. Let us say you are going to  offer
some precious stones or precious jewels. You visualise them  in  your  mind,
having them  appear  clearly  and  then  you  offer  them.  This  is  not  a
challenging or extremely difficult task but you accumulate a  lot  of  merit
in the process.

When you are making offerings to  the  buddhas,  there  are  many  different
kinds of offerings that can be made. Depending on what is mentioned  in  the
particular prayer that you are  reciting,  there  are  all  these  different
verses on making offerings of various offering substances.

Whatever  offering  substances  are  mentioned,  you  bring  them  to  mind,
visualising and then offering them. This is what you have to think when  you
are reciting those verses on making offerings.  When  you  are  able  to  do
this, you can easily accumulate a huge amount of merit and purify your  mind
of obscurations. This creates the cause to achieve enlightenment.

The bodhisattva on the first ground is able to emanate a hundred bodies  and
with those hundred bodies, he goes to a hundred buddha pure lands and  makes
offerings. The bodhisattva on  the  second  ground  is  able  to  emanate  a
thousand bodies.  He  goes  to  a  thousand  buddha  pure  lands  and  makes
offerings. Bodhisattvas who are on the tenth  ground  are  able  to  emanate
bodies equal to the innumerable buddha fields and make offerings  there.  If
these bodhisattvas on the paths and grounds have to make such offerings,  it
goes without saying  that  we  need  to  put  in  more  effort  into  making
offerings since we only have one body!

The Stages of the Path to Enlightenment literature  mentions  the  power  of
the merit field and the power of holy objects. It  is  said  that  when  one
makes any kind of offerings to the merit field or to holy objects,  it  does
not matter what motivation one may have, i.e., it does  not  matter  whether
one dedicates the merit that one accumulates through making  such  offerings
to enlightenment or not, all the offerings one makes to the merit field  and
holy objects automatically becomes causes for full  enlightenment.  This  is
the exception and is due to the power of the merit field and holy objects.

Since such an opportunity exists, we should seize  it.  Therefore,  whenever
you have the opportunity, when you make offerings to the merit field  or  to
holy objects, even though you may have something small in your  hand,  as  I
said earlier, you should visualise making extensive offerings. Then you  can
easily accumulate a lot of merit.

So far we have read many verses of making offerings. They pertain to  making
surpassable and unsurpassable offerings  including  the  offering  of  one’s
body. When you have time, you can recite these verses slowly  and  visualise
accordingly. You can accumulate a lot of merit in that way.

                                 ~~~~~~~~~~~

Question: You mentioned that impermanence in samsara is caused by karma  and
delusions. Can I say that impermanence in samsara is  not  caused  by  these
two causes alone?  Because  the  blessings  of  the  Buddha  cause  virtuous
thoughts in the minds of sentient beings, the  impermanence  in  samsara  is
also caused by the enlightened activities of the Buddha.  Are  the  virtuous
thoughts that are  caused  by  the  enlightened  activities  of  the  Buddha
samsara or not?

Khen Rinpoche: Are you asking whether virtuous thoughts are samsara or  not?
In the first place we don’t know what samsara is. Last time I  asked,  “What
is samsara?”

Answer: First we have to pinpoint what constitutes samsara.

With regard to virtue, it is not the case  that  if  it  is  virtue,  it  is
necessarily not included in  the  twelve  links  of  dependent  origination.
There are many virtuous projecting karmas and virtuous  actualising  factors
that are included in the twelve links.

For example, the projecting karma for a human  rebirth  and  the  projecting
karma for rebirth as a god are virtuous but nevertheless they  are  included
in the  twelve  links.  Such  virtuous  projecting  karmas  are  nonetheless
propelled by the ignorance that is included in  the  twelve  links.  Is  the
virtuous karma in our continuum included in samsara or not?  Is  it  samsara
or not? What is samsara?

Khen Rinpoche: Think!

Question: Pertaining to lesson 6, you  mentioned  that  bodhicitta  is  mind
generation and that mind  generation  is  bodhicitta.  They  are  the  same.
However is it correct to say that with respect to a buddha, mind  generation
is not necessarily bodhicitta? Because when you look at  the  boundaries  of
mind  generation  and  bodhicitta,  bodhicitta  exists  from  the  path   of
accumulation up to the end of the continua of sentient beings  whereas  mind
generation exists from the path of accumulation up to the buddha ground.

This means that on the buddha ground, a buddha has mind generation but  does
not have bodhicitta. If a buddha has  mind  generation  and  does  not  have
bodhicitta, that means mind generation is not necessarily bodhicitta.  Am  I
right to say that?

Khen Rinpoche: Correct.

Answer: In Sanskrit,  bodhicitta  can  mean  Mahayana  mind  generation.  In
Tibetan it is thekchen semkye, i.e.,  literally  Mahayana  mind  generation.
When you translate thekchen semkye into English, you cannot translate it  as
bodhicitta. You have to say Mahayana mind generation. In English,  the  mind
of enlightenment (or bodhicitta) and mind generation are different words.

Question: You said we needed three conditions to achieve the  perfect  human
rebirth.  One  of  it  is  the  practice  of  pure  morality  that  must  be
complemented with the practices of the other perfections. In The  Foundation
of All Good Qualities, there is a verse that reads,

      Even if I develop only bodhicitta, but  I  don’t  practise  the  three
      types of morality,
      I will not achieve enlightenment.
      With my clear recognition of this,
      Please bless me to practise the bodhisattva vows with great energy.

 Is the pure morality that we need to achieve  the  precious  human  rebirth
the same as  these  three  types  of  morality  that  is  mentioned  in  The
Foundation of All Good Qualities?

Answer: I don’t think you can link it in that way because the verse  in  The
Foundation of All  Good  Qualities  that  says,  “Even  if  I  develop  only
bodhicitta, but I don’t practise the three types of morality,/  I  will  not
achieve enlightenment,” “the three types of  morality”  here  refer  to  the
bodhisattva ethics.

The pure morality that is one of the conditions for achieving a  human  life
of freedoms and endowments is  primarily  referring  to  guarding  well  the
ethical discipline of abandoning the ten non-virtues.

Interpreted by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme; transcribed by Phuah  Soon  Ek,  Patricia
Lee, Julia Koh; edited by Cecilia Tsong.

