Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Engaging in the Deeds of a Bodhisattva/BP2 M5 L42 final.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:52:12.881161
================================================================================


Transcript of the teachings by Khen Rinpoche Geshe  Chonyi  on  Engaging  in
the Bodhisattva Deeds, 2014

Root text: Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds by  Shantideva,  translated  by
Toh Sze Gee. Copyright: Toh Sze Gee, 2006; Revised edition, 2014.

Lesson                                                                    42
8 August 2014


Chapter seven: Verses 7. 11 – 7. 10
1. Abandoning the laziness that relishes the taste of idleness
    • Abandoning laziness by reflecting on the disadvantages of it in future
      lives (V. 7.11- V.  7.14)
2. Abandoning the laziness that clings to unwholesome activities (V. 7.15)
3. Abandoning the laziness that is disheartened about virtue (V. 7.16 – V.
   7.19)


Those of you who are part of the  lam-rim  analytical  meditation  programme
started off with the topic of correctly relying on the virtuous friend.  Now
you are meditating  on  the  topics  of  the  human  life  of  freedoms  and
endowments and death and impermanence.

In the meditation  on  death  and  impermanence,  the  outline  starts  with
reflecting on the disadvantages  of  not  remembering  death.  I  think  six
disadvantages are  mentioned  in  the  lam-rim.  We  could  relate  them  to
whatever we have covered so far in Chapter Seven of this text as  a  few  of
the verses discuss the drawbacks of not remembering death.

It was mentioned in the teachings that laziness is one of  the  things  that
prevents us from practising the Dharma and  from  accomplishing  virtue.  We
know we have to engage in  virtue  but  we  don’t  get  down  to  doing  it.
Laziness plays a part in stopping us from engaging in virtue.

In the last lesson, we talked about the laziness that is  an  attachment  to
idleness. We derive pleasure from hanging around,  doing  nothing,  sleeping
and so forth. We feel that such activities bring us joy.  There  is  a  mind
that is attached to the joy that comes from these activities.

It is taught that one of the best remedies  or  antidotes  to  reverse  this
kind of laziness is the meditation on death and impermanence.

In the discussion on the drawbacks or the faults of not remembering our  own
impending death and our own impermanence, one  of  the  faults  is  that  we
don’t remember the Dharma. That is the first disadvantage that is  mentioned
in the lam-rim literature.

Even if we  remember  the  Dharma,  we  don’t  practise  it.  That  is  also
attributed to not remembering death and impermanence.

And even if we remember the Dharma, even if  we  practise  the  Dharma,  the
practice doesn’t become pure. That is another fault of not  remembering  our
own death and our own impermanence.

Even when we do remember the Dharma, practise it and somehow  that  practice
is pure practice, we can’t sustain it.  We  are  not  able  to  sustain  the
practice continuously.  That  again  is  due  to  not  remembering  and  not
meditating on death and impermanence.

As such,  we  live  our  lives  like  that—not  remembering  the  Dharma  or
remembering it but not practising it or practising it but the practice  does
not become pure. Even if the practice is pure, it is  not  complete  and  we
can’t sustain it.  The teachings  said  that  this  is  how  our  lives  are
wasted. At the end of such a wasted life, there  is  only  regret.  We  will
have to die with sorrow and regret. This is said  to  be  another  fault  or
drawback of not remembering our own death and impermanence.

There is nothing here that we don’t know already. What I have just said,  we
know all that. So it is not about listening. That doesn’t do the  job.  From
our own side, what we need to do is to think about it. Not just think  about
it but to think about it continuously all the time.

This is an extremely important point. This is the story of our lives—all  of
us here without exception, you, me and everybody else out there. The  moment
we don’t think of our own death and  impermanence,  then  that  is  how  our
whole life is wasted.

Guntang Rinpoche said in his poem:

      Perhaps twenty years of remembering that
      One should do a practice,
      Perhaps twenty years of being forever
      About to do a practice,
      Perhaps another ten years of saying,
      ‘I never did a practice’ —
      That’s the story of an empty and wasted human life.[1]

Such advice is really very helpful and very good.

Similarly the first few verses of Chapter Seven of this text are  also  very
effective and essential if we think about them. We talked  about  reflecting
on death and impermanence. That reflection pertains  to  our  own  impending
death. It is essential for us to think of our own impending  death  and  our
own impermanence. Without reflecting on our own  death,  without  meditating
on our own impermanence, there is no space for us to do any  practice.   The
Dharma practice that is done doesn’t become practice at all.
We are like fish caught in the net thrown by the  fishermen  at  sea  (Verse
7.4). If you are a fish,  once  you  get  stuck  in  the  net  cast  by  the
fisherman, you are definitely going to die. There  is  no  way  for  you  to
escape. It is a matter of time that you will definitely die.

We are like the  fish.  The  fisherman  is  analogous  of  our  afflictions;
primarily our anger and attachment. Propelled by our anger  and  attachment,
we are cast into the net of of samsaric suffering. The net is  analogous  of
samsara. As long as we are born into samsara, death  is  definite.  It  will
definitely happen to us. We can use this particular analogy  to  reflect  on
our own situation. It can be helpful.

Another approach that can be useful is  to  think  about  our  fellow  human
beings. If we look at our lives and our own experience, how  many  people—be
they loved ones, friends or people we meet—who we know  in  our  lives  have
already passed away?  Perhaps we could count  mentally  the  people  in  our
lives that have already passed away. In that  way  perhaps  we  will  notice
that when it comes to dying, there is  no  certainty  that  people  who  are
older will necessarily die first. People die at  different  ages.  Some  die
when they are young. Some die when they are old. Perhaps it  may  be  useful
to think about that.

In our lives, we have already witnessed relatives, loved ones,  friends  and
people we know who have already died. We  also  see  people  dying.  Yet  we
don’t seem to be moved by it. While  we  have  seen  and  are  still  seeing
people around us slowly dying, somehow we are not moved enough  to  practise
the Dharma.

The teachings (Verse 7.5) gave the example of us being  likened  to  cattle,
cows, buffaloes, goats and sheep. Flocks of these animals are being  led  to
the slaughter house. Then the butcher kills the animals one  by  one.  While
the butcher is killing the animals in front of them, the other  animals  are
so ignorant and not cognizant of their  own  fate.  They  are  just  happily
grazing, eating, lying around and sleeping. We are just like those  animals.
While it is definite that we are going to  die,  we  just  hang  around  and
allow ourselves to be distracted by all kinds of  activities  that  keep  us
from doing our practice.

We are also like someone who is travelling along a  particular  road  (Verse
7.6). We know we have no choice but to travel along that  road  because  all
other roads are completely blocked. We also know that there is  an  assassin
who is out there to get us somewhere along that road. Yet we have no  choice
but to travel on that road as it is the only  road  that  is  opened.  As  a
traveller on that road, knowing that there is an assassin who  is  going  to
kill us, there is no room to feel at ease. Instead we will feel worried  all
the time.

Likewise the teachings used this example to say, “How could it  be  possible
for us to feel relaxed, laze around and be attached to all kinds  of  things
that are not worthwhile. We are attached to various things even as  we  know
that the Lord of Death is waiting for us and can strike at any time.

In this example, a person is travelling  on  that  road  because  all  other
roads are blocked. This is an analogy of the fact that death is certain  and
there is no way to stop death. We have no choice but to travel on  the  road
to death. Somewhere along that road, the Lord of Death is ready and  waiting
to pounce on us. We are just like that person in that we are moving  towards
the Lord of Death without any choice whatsoever.

The teachings say that if we are cognizant of this fact—if we  really  think
about our own impending death—then there is no way we will  live  our  lives
the way we do, i.e., lazing around and being happy to  just  pass  the  day.
When the day is over and night comes, we sleep. Then we just carry on  doing
what we  are  doing  the  next  day.  The  teachings  say  that  anyone  who
recognises the fact of his impending death will never ever  live  life  like
that.

These are the different examples that we could reflect on in order  to  have
the feel of the certainty of our own  death.  Not  only  are  we  definitely
going to die, our death will happen to us very soon.

If you remember, the teachings do mention that the  Lord  of  Death  doesn’t
wait for you to retire from your job before taking you away (Verse 7.8).  He
doesn’t wait for you to finish whatever plans you may  have  or  the  things
you want to do. He can just come and claim you any time.

We face so many conditions—conditions that are unfavourable  for  sustaining
life and conditions that are  favourable  for  dying  quickly—all  kinds  of
difficulties in life, different kinds of  diseases  and  sicknesses  and  so
forth.

In our previous lesson, we also saw how thinking of wanting to  practise  at
the time of death without actually having done so while we  were  alive  and
well is not the correct thing to do. It is wrong to do that because by  then
it will be too late.

If one doesn’t practise when one is well, then on the day  of  one’s  death,
one may think, “I must practise Dharma. I must  do  something.”   Shantideva
says that is wrong and incorrect.  The  time  to  think  of  practising  the
Dharma is not on the day of death. The  time  to  think  about  practice  is
right now!

If one didn’t practise Dharma when one is alive and if one thinks  that  one
could practise the Dharma at the time of death, then one has  to  understand
that it is probably very difficult to do so at that  time.  As  it  says  in
verse 7.10, at the time of death, if you  are  someone  who  didn’t  do  any
practice or didn’t do much practice before the day of your  death,  then  on
that day, you may suddenly  remember  all  the  things  that  you  feel  you
shouldn’t have done in your life. You  may  remember  all  the  negativities
that you have created. Your mind will be quite upset and  disturbed  because
there is so much regret. I think it is really quite  difficult  to  practise
any Dharma at that time.

If you are slated to go to the lower realms, then  at  the  time  of  death,
when the karma ripens, you will have  karmic  appearances  such  as  hearing
wailing or unpleasant sounds that are indicative of your  impending  rebirth
in  the  lower  realms.  When  you  hear  these  sounds,  it  can  be   very
frightening. The mind will be so worried and you will be so  frightened.  It
becomes almost impossible for you to practice any  Dharma  or  to  think  of
virtue then.

Those who didn’t get to do the practice when they were alive and didn’t  get
to do anything really meaningful and beneficial, then at the time of  death,
many a times such people become seriously disturbed. When you look at  their
physical demeanour and what they are saying,  you  can  see  what  they  are
thinking inside. They come across as if they are crazy people freaking  out.
In such a state of mind, what practice can they do and what virtue can  they
remember?  This is what is being described in the teachings.

There are people who don’t practise and at the time  of  death,  they  freak
out. Often they cannot even  recognise  the  people  around  them.  If  they
cannot even recognise the people around them,  how  can  they  remember  the
Dharma?

Therefore while we are still alive, while we still  have  some  control  and
freedom to practise and while we still have the conditions to  do  so,  then
we have to start practising now. We should think of our own impending  death
to persuade ourselves to practise.

In the previous class, we didn’t have much time to talk about each of  these
verses individually (i.e., Verses 7.4 – 7.10). Essentially what I have  just
said is their meaning.

                                 ~~~~~~~~~~

Question: In the chapter on patience, verse 6.95 says:

      Whether this praise is directed at myself or someone else
      How shall I be benefited by other’s joy?
      Since that joy is theirs alone
      I shall not obtain even a part of it.


Here it is questioning whether we are attached to the words  or  the  sounds
of the praise or the happiness in the mind of the person praising us.

If the person is happy to praise us, it is said that there is  no  way  that
we can partake of his happiness. I think that to rejoice in the  person  who
praises others, which is a virtuous thing to do, one gains virtue from  such
rejoicing. This is supported by Verses 6.76 and 6.77:

      Verse 6.76
      Should others find joyous happiness
      By praising someone having excellent qualities,
      Why, mind, do you not praise him too
      And be joyful?


      Verse 6.77
      That joyous happiness of yours
      Is a source of joy without misdeed,
      Permitted by those having excellent qualities
      And is also a supreme means for gathering others.


I feel that Verses 6.95 and V6.76 and V6.77 are contradictory  and  I  would
like to clarify this point.

Khen Rinpoche: I have no idea. You say these two are contradictory.

Student 1: Verse 6.95 is saying that praise is not good whereas Verses  6.67
and 6.77 are saying that you should rejoice  when  someone  praises  someone
else.  If I put them together, they seem to be contradictory.

Khen Rinpoche: Somebody answer her question. A  short  answer  as  she  says
they are contradictory.

Student 2: For Verses 6.76 and 6.77, the outline says, “It is  inappropriate
to be jealous when your enemies are praised.” So  it  is  saying  that  when
somebody praises your enemy, you should not be  jealous  whereas  for  Verse
6.95, it is talking about  yourself  not  being  attached  to  the  mind  of
somebody who is happy praising you. Do you see the difference?

Student 1: I feel that this applies very much to oneself.  In the  situation
where someone that you don’t like is  being  praised,  you  should  actually
rejoice at those praises. The mind that you should change is your own  mind.
But when the praises  are  directed  at  yourself,  then  you  should  think
otherwise. So you have to be flexible, in that sense, …

Khen Rinpoche: The section on Verses 6.76 and 6.77 is talking about  how  we
should react when we hear our enemy or the people whom we don’t  like  being
praised by others. The usual reaction is that we  don’t  like  it  when  our
enemies are praised so we get upset. Therefore we need to be patient.

What is an upset mind? An upset mind is the mind that is disturbed.  How  do
you counteract that? You counteract  it  by  checking  whether  that  praise
accords with facts and reality or not. If the enemy deserves the praise  for
something that accords with reality, something that is good  and  is  really
happening, the teaching tells us that we should acknowledge  that  fact.  By
acknowledging that the praise is deserved and accords with reality  then  we
don’t become disturbed or we are less disturbed. The point  is  that  it  is
all about dealing with our own mind. It is our practice.

Verse 6.95 on the other hand relates to oneself being the object of  praise.
The problem is that when we are praised, our usual reaction is that  we  get
very excited. That is what our usual reaction is. We  become  very  arrogant
and proud because of the praise and we become attached to it.  That  is  the
problem that needs to be addressed, that needs to be stopped because  it  is
an obstacle for us.

The point here then is not to get attached to the praise. The verse  relates
to dealing with whatever attachment that may arise  when  we  ourselves  are
praised. Getting attached to the praise that we may receive from  people  is
something that needs to be dealt with. So in that section, there is  a  list
of suggested antidotes or remedies.
The point is to think that even if we do receive some  praise,  that  praise
doesn’t make us live longer, become physically stronger, make  our  problems
such as sicknesses go away and so forth. These are just the  different  ways
to counteract whatever attachment that may arise when we are praised.

Khen  Rinpoche:  I  thought  we  had  completed  the  chapter  on  patience.
(Laughter).

                                 ~~~~~~~~~~

ABANDONING THE LAZINESS THAT RELISHES THE TASTE OF IDLENESS (cont’d)

The particular section  that  we  are  dealing  with  now  talks  about  the
laziness that relishes the taste of idleness,  i.e.,  idle  chatter,  lazing
about sleeping. This kind of laziness harms us and  causes  us  problems  in
this life and would also bring about problems in our future lives.

So next is about abandoning this laziness by thinking  about  the  suffering
that we have to experience in the next life.

      Verse 7.11
      If even in this life you shall be gripped with fear
      Like that of a live fish being rolled,
      What need even to mention the unbearable sufferings of hell
      [Due to] the negativities you have committed?

A fish jumps out of the water for whatever reason. From the  shore  you  can
see that the fish is flipping about and struggling. You  can  see  that  the
fish is really suffering.

Likewise because of laziness and not having engaged in  virtue,  because  of
not practising when we were alive, because of  the  immeasurable  amount  of
negativities that we have accumulated, needless  to  say  we  will  have  to
experience far more unbearable suffering such as being  burnt  in  the  hell
realms. How is it possible for us to endure that kind of pain?

Furthermore on the day of our death, we  will  find  the  whole  process  of
dying very difficult and unbearable, just like a fish struggling when it  is
out of water.

      Verse 7.12
      Why do you remain at ease like this
      Having committed the actions of hell
      Where your delicate flesh will burn
      When touched by streams?

It is said that the hell fires are many times hotter than the  hottest  fire
we humans know of. On top of that, it is said that the bodies of  those  who
are born in hell, especially their skin, are very delicate.  Their  dedicate
skin is like that of a newborn child.  When  we  have  such  delicate  skin,
coupled with the fire of hell, which is so many times hotter than  the  fire
of this human world, how is it possible for us to endure it?
The point here is that we should practise Dharma and not be lazy. We  should
see all these verses so  far  as  somebody  imploring  us  to  practise  the
Dharma. It is a contradiction to want happiness on the one hand and  on  the
other, not wanting to engage in the causes of happiness,  i.e.,  virtue.  So
there is a big contradiction there.

      Verse 7.13
      Much harm befalls those who want results without striving,
      As well as those sensitive ones.
      While clasped by death, I shall wail like the gods,
      “Oh no, I shall be destroyed by suffering!”

Those who are cognizant of their own impermanence and impending  death,  who
recognise that if they don’t practise the Dharma and engage in virtue,  they
would have a horrible and fearful death and experience unbearable  suffering
in future lives—it is said that those who are cognizant of all  these  facts
are the ones who really exert joyous effort day and night,  even  giving  up
sleep and only engaging in virtue.

The teachings say that we are not really interested in accomplishing  virtue
such as going into isolation or doing retreat, be it for  years  or  months.
We don’t put in that  kind  of  effort  and  we  don’t  have  that  kind  of
determination. Whether it is studying or learning the Buddhadharma,  we  are
also pretty much like that. We don’t really want to do it with  a  heartfelt
wish, so we don’t really strive and put in the  effort.  That’s  us.  Forget
about practising day and night, we don’t even put in the  effort  to  strive
for a month. How can we say we practise day  and  night?  Even  a  month  is
difficult for us.

Yet at the same time, we have big goals and we aim very high.  For  example,
we want to be an expert in this or that but the effort we  put  in  and  the
determination  we  generate  are  not  commensurate  with  it.  We  want  to
experience the path. We want realizations. We want this, that and the  other
but we don’t want to work for them and  our  efforts  are  not  commensurate
with our goals.

We may even think of wanting to get a good rebirth. Some  people  think,  “I
want to go to the pure land,” but at the same time, they do not do  anything
to achieve that. We wish to achieve all kinds of results, yet we do  not  do
anything to achieve them or put in the effort that is commensurate with  our
goals. So there is a contradiction there.

Khen Rinpoche: It is a contradiction!

Next  the  text  says  that  if  we  cannot   tolerate   or   endure   small
inconveniences and  small  hardships,  then  life  would  be  just  one  big
problem. As we saw earlier, anybody who  is  born  in  cyclic  existence  is
destined to die. Death is an inevitable part of samsaric life.

Despite that being the case, you can see that  there  are  many  people  who
behave as if they are gods of the desire realm who have very long lives  and
many enjoyments. They just laze around enjoying themselves. There  are  many
people in samsara who are not gods of the desire realm behaving as  if  they
are desire realm’s gods. They are content and happy just to  pass  each  day
and night enjoying and living life as if they are not going to die.
The teaching says that people who have this kind of mindset  and  behave  in
such a way are objects of compassion.

      Verse 7.14
      Relying upon the human boat,
      Free yourself from the great river of suffering!
      As it is hard to find this boat later,
      Do not sleep at this time, fool!

The verse is saying that having obtained this human life now, we should  use
it to free ourselves from the three realms of samsara. This  is  essentially
the meditation on how this human life of freedoms  and  endowments  that  we
have obtained now is greatly meaningful and is difficult to find  again.  By
reflecting on these two points,  we  encourage  and  persuade  our  mind  to
practise the Dharma.

With that we finish with the antidotes or remedies  to  the  first  type  of
laziness.

Essentially  the  first  type  of  laziness  is  actually  the  laziness  of
procrastination, but that is not how it is  referred  to  in  Gyaltsab  Je’s
commentary. Its meaning is that due to one’s attachment to  activities  such
as  idle  chatter,  sleep  or  simply  lazing  around  doing  nothing,   one
procrastinates and do not practise the Dharma.

ABANDONING THE LAZINESS THAT CLINGS TO UNWHOLESOME ACTIVITIES

The second type of laziness described in Verse 7.15  is  the  laziness  that
clings to unwholesome activities.


      Verse 7.15
      Having rejected the supreme joy of the sacred Dharma
      That is an infinite cause of joy,
      Why do you enjoy being distracted by the causes for suffering,
      Frivolous amusements and the like?

Verse 7.15 is saying that the sublime Dharma is the source  of  endless  and
the highest joy. Having found the Dharma now, why are we  wasting  our  time
by not practising it?

 • The verse is telling us that it is wrong to not practise the  Dharma  but
   just live a busy life full of hustle and bustle. Being attached to such a
   life will only lead to all kinds of  problems  in  this  and  our  future
   lives.
 • The teachings say that  most  people  in  this  world  live  their  lives
   revolving around the enemy and the loved one. When an enemy arises,  they
   will always think of ways to defeat, get around or overcome the enemy. At
   the same time, they will think of how to support and take care  of  their
   loved ones. Arising from these two ways  of  relating  with  people  come
   anger and attachment. This is  how  people  live  their  lives  revolving
   around hatred and attachment.
 • Many people also live their whole lives revolving around making money day
   and night and accumulating wealth. This is how  they  are  distracted  in
   their entire life.
 • Also most of us  live  our  lives  revolving  around  idle  chatter  that
   invariably links to either hatred or attachment.
 • Also many people have very strong concepts of the past and future,  i.e.,
   whatever is happening in the present situation, they will  always  relate
   it to what had happened in the past and then project what will happen  in
   the future.  As  a  result,  there  is  a  lot  of  mental  agitation  or
   excitement, a lot of discursive thoughts. That is another  way  in  which
   people fritter away and waste their lives.

The teachings describe how most people live and waste  their  lives  due  to
attachment to all these various things. As such, there is  a  need  to  deal
with our attachment to them.

ABANDONING THE LAZINESS THAT IS DISHEARTENED ABOUT VIRTUE

Next is abandoning the laziness that is disheartened about  virtue  (or  the
laziness of discouragement).
.
      Verse 7.16
      Without despondency, I should gather the masses of army
      And diligently take control of myself.
      Through equalizing self with others and
      Exchanging self for others,

      Verse 7.17
      I should not be despondent by thinking,
      “How can I ever attain enlightenment?”
      Thus the tathagatas who speak what is true
      Have uttered this truth:

      Verse 7.18
      “If they develop the strength of exertion,
      Even those who are flies, mosquitoes, bees, and likewise worms
      Will win the unsurpassable enlightenment
      Which is hard to attain.”


      Verse 7.19
      Since I have been born human by race
      And recognize what is beneficial and what is harmful,
      If I do not forsake the deeds of enlightenment,
      Why will I not attain enlightenment?


You know what these verses are saying—if  you  work  for  it,  you  will  be
enlightened.

According to  Gyaltsab  Je’s  commentary,  Verse  7.16  is  related  to  the
laziness  of  discouragement  whereas  there  are  other  commentaries  that
classify under the previous type of laziness, the laziness  that  clings  to
unwholesome activities.

Khen Rinpoche: I better stop here now. You all  look  lazy.  I  myself  also
feel lazy so …

Interpreted by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme; transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek,  Vivien  Ng
& Rachel Tan; edited by Cecilia Tsong.
-----------------------
[1] Pabongka Rinpoche, Liberation in the Palm of Your Hand, (Boston:  Wisdom
Publications 1993), page 348.

