Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Engaging in the Deeds of a Bodhisattva/BP2 M5 L29 final.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:52:21.903025
================================================================================


Transcript of the teachings by Khen Rinpoche Geshe  Chonyi  on  Engaging  in
the Bodhisattva Deeds, 2014

Root text: Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds by  Shantideva,  translated  by
Toh Sze Gee. Copyright: Toh Sze Gee, 2006; Revised edition, 2014.

Lesson                                                                    29
  29 May 2014


Chapter Five: Verses 5.94 - 5.109. 3. The way to train  in  the  conduct  of
guarding the mind by means of mindfulness  and  introspection  (cont’d).  C.
The way to train in the ethics  of  working  for  the  benefit  of  sentient
beings. 3. Looking after the minds of sentient beings and  training  in  the
conduct that is  unsullied  by  wrongdoing.  4.  The  branch  or  method  of
excellent trainings. B. The conclusion, as  it  is  necessary  to  put  into
practice the meaning without leaving it on the level of mere words.


Question: In the Lam Rim Chen Mo, it  is  mentioned  that  at  the  time  of
death, attachment to a self does not occur among non-returners, but  stream-
enterers and once-returners are not mentioned. Non-returners will  never  be
reborn in the desire realm so why do they not  have  this  attachment  to  a
self at the time of death?  What makes them so different  from  the  stream-
enterers and once-returners?

Khen Rinpoche: For non-returners, they do not have to come back so  they  do
not need this attachment. If you want to  come  back,  then  you  need  this
attachment. You don’t  want  to  come  back,  then  you  do  not  need  this
attachment.

Question: Do non-returners still take rebirth due to karma and delusions?

Khen Rinpoche: Being a non-returner mean that  they  do  not  need  to  come
back. You don’t want to come back to Singapore so you do not need a visa!

Question: But do they take rebirth? If they still take rebirth,  what  makes
them so special?

Khen Rinpoche: They do not take rebirth in the desire realm.  Being  a  non-
returner means that he or she does not come back to, i.e., take rebirth  in,
the desire realm anymore.

Question: Not taking rebirth in the desire realm means that  they  will  not
take rebirth with an attachment to the self?

Khen Rinpoche: In the presentation of the Hinayana path of the  hearers  and
solitary realisers, there are four types of superiors: (1)  stream-enterers,
(2) once-returners, (3) non-returners and (4) foe destroyers.

The non-returners will never ever be reborn again in the  desire  realm  due
to karma and afflictions.

According to the lower Abidharmakosha,  stream-enterers  and  once-returners
are  Hinayana  superiors  as  they  have  achieved   the   arya   path   but
nevertheless, they still have to take rebirth in the desire  realm.  As  for
the non-returners, because they have abandoned the manifest  afflictions  of
the desire realm, therefore they do not take rebirth  in  the  desire  realm
due to karma and afflictions. Non-returners do not  have  the  craving  that
will nourish the karma to be reborn in the desire realm.

                                 ~~~~~~~~~~

3.  THE WAY TO TRAIN IN THE  CONDUCT  OF  GUARDING  THE  MIND  BY  MEANS  OF
   MINDFULNESS AND INTROSPECTION (cont’d)

   C.  The way to train in the ethics of working for the benefit of sentient
      beings
      3.   Looking after the minds of sentient beings and  training  in  the
         conduct that is unsullied by wrongdoing
              A.   Extensive explanation
                     2.   The way to act when the  path  and  so  forth  are
      being sought
      Verse 5.94
      I should not give directions with one finger,
      But instead indicate the way
      Respectfully with also
      All of my right arm.


      Verse 5.95
      Nor should I wildly wave my arms about;
      Instead I should make my point
      By uttering sounds with mild gestures and a snap of fingers.
      Otherwise I shall lose control.

If someone were to ask us for directions, we should point  out  the  correct
direction to him not just with one finger but respectfully  with  our  right
hand. The verse advises us to  indicate  the  direction  with  a  respectful
attitude, both physically and verbally.

Khen Rinpoche: I have a story of when I was in Dharamsala. Have I  told  you
this before? I don’t remember.

A long time ago, maybe around 1982, I was staying at Tushita  in  Dharamsala
for two months doing what is called in Tibetan pen tsam.  You would call  it
a retreat. What kind of retreat? I was in retreat just memorising  text  day
and night. I needed to complete certain texts so I was memorising the  whole
day.

I was there for two months, around December and January, and  at  that  time
it was winter so it was quite cold there.

On one of the mornings, there was sunshine so I came out  from  my  room.  I
sat outside the gompa and rested there  because  of  the  sunshine.  It  was
around eight in the morning.

Then one English nun who I knew before  brought  a  group  of  people,  some
Koreans or Chinese, I’m not sure, to  Tushita.  I  was  just  sitting  there
under the sun. She was bringing these people and coming from  behind  me.  I
think she was looking for Ven. Roger.

She asked me, “Where is Ven. Roger’s room?”  Because I felt very cold and  I
didn’t want to move as I wanted the sun … (Khen Rinpoche  pointed  with  his
finger) ... I could see the room was nearby so I just pointed that that  was
the room.

She was so mad and upset. “You must stand up and show me the  way!”  Because
you really could see that the room was just in front, I simply  said,  “That
is the room.” But somehow she was  not  pleased  with  that.  Of  course,  I
wasn’t really helping. Also my problem was because I felt cold, I wanted  to
relax. So I just did this. (Khen Rinpoche pointed with one finger).

She became very upset and very unhappy for a long time. She did not want  to
talk to me and I also didn’t talk to her. I didn’t want to talk  to  her  so
it became like that. After one or two months,  then  things  became  OK.  We
became friends and we had dinner together.

Sometimes we can say it is partly our actions.  Because  I  was  not  really
helping. I was just sitting there, pointing.  When  you  want  to  please  a
person, then you must stand in a respectful  way  and  maybe  bow  down!  Of
course, then the person will be extremely pleased. “Venerable, this  is  the
way. Welcome to Tushita.”  (Laughter).

But I didn’t do that, so this was what happened.

When you are busy and feeling stressed, then someone  asks  you,  “Where  is
the toilet?”  Your  action  of  pointing  with  one  finger  is  not  really
pleasant. There is something wrong with pointing with this  (index)  finger.
I don’t know what this finger means.

Pointing with this finger is quite aggressive you know. When you are  angry,
you point  like  that  (pointing  with  index  finger)  and  not  like  that
(pointing with thumb).  When you are angry,  you  tend  to  point  with  the
index finger, “You, you, you!” So the advice here is not to point  with  one
finger.

I don’t know the meaning of each finger. Who made up the  meaning,  I’m  not
sure. This means something (points to  one  finger),  this  means  something
(points to the next finger),  this  means  something  (points  to  the  next
finger), this means something (points to  the  last  finger).   Who  created
this idea, I don’t know.

I don’t know whether it is good or not good to tell this  story.  I  am  not
sure.

My teacher who is now 90 years old came  twice  to  Singapore.  Once  Angela
(name of student) was cooking momos, dumplings with meat. He does take  meat
so she cooked these momos at my place and offered them to him.

After that, she asked my teacher, “How were  the  momos?”  Then  my  teacher
gestured like this (Khen Rinpoche extended his middle finger). I don’t  know
what that gesture means.

After that I asked her and she said, “This is not a good sign.”
But my teacher didn’t mean that. What he meant was, “It is not the best  and
not the worse. Just medium!”  He gestured like this not only once.  He  kept
saying and gesturing with his middle finger.  Then  she  was  laughing.  She
said it was not a good sign. He said that there was nothing wrong. Who  made
up this thing? He meant, “Not the best, just medium.”

Therefore it is best to use the whole hand with all  the  fingers  extended.
Then you don’t have so many different meanings.

Essentially this verse is an advice to indicate directions to others with  a
respectful physical and verbal attitude so as  not  to  cause  non-faith  to
arise in the other person.

Verse 5.95 also indicates that when you are showing directions to people  or
trying to make a point, you should not  wave  your  arms  about  wildly  and
speak too loudly. When there is a need to perform certain hand  gestures  to
indicate the way, to attract attention and so forth, you can  do  so  gently
without waving the arms about wildly.  When there is a need,  you  can  even
snap your fingers gently to attract attention.

If the person you are communicating with is within earshot,  then  there  is
no need for you to shout or speak loudly. When  you  do  so,  there  is  the
possibility of causing disturbance to others. Of course it  is  a  different
matter if the person you are trying to communicate with is far away.

Khen Rinpoche: Basically, it is saying, “Don’t be kiasu!”[1] Sometimes  when
you go to a restaurant, you see some people who  gesture  nicely  like  this
(raises his hand) but some other people wave  wildly.  Sometimes  they  even
shout and clap their hands together. When others see  such  behaviour,  such
aggressive gestures, it does not look nice.  If  you  were  to  behave  like
that, people will not feel that you are a good person. They will  have  this
negative mind, “Oh, this person is like that.” This is the idea.

In short,  these  are  advices  to  stop  others  from  generating  negative
thoughts towards us. Also  such  behaviors  or  actions  can  be  considered
unacceptable. The discussion here is  in  the  context  of  advice  for  the
bodhisattvas. Bodhisattvas need to behave in a proper way because when  they
do not do so, some people may generate non-faith and be  disturbed.  Due  to
that, these people will fall into the lower realms.

                     3.   The way to lie down
      Verse 5.96
      Just as the Protector lay down to pass away
      So should I lie in the desired direction,
      And first of all with introspection
      Make up my mind to quickly rise.

The advice here is for us to lie down adopting the  posture  of  the  Buddha
when he displayed the deed of passing away  into  parinirvana.   You  should
lie on your right side with your legs straight, resting your  head  on  your
right hand. You then place your left hand on your body. Usually it  is  more
uncomfortable somehow to lie on your right side rather than on your left.

Khen Rinpoche: I noticed this myself. When I sleep this way  (i.e.,  on  the
left side), it seems easier to fall asleep. It feels more comfortable.  When
I sleep this way (i.e. on the right side), it is not as comfortable.

Anyway, it seems as if one does not feel as relaxed when lying on the  right
side.

Do you have the same feeling? No? According to scientists it is because  the
tummy is on the left side. So when you sleep on the left  side,  your  tummy
is resting there and it feels more comfortable. When you sleep on the  right
side, your tummy is a little bit uncomfortable.

I guess because of that, when we fall sleep lying  on  our  right  side,  it
does make a difference as we are better able  to  maintain  our  mindfulness
and introspection. Our sleep  does  not  become  too  deep  with  a  sinking
feeling. If we were to lie on our left side, we will be absorbed  completely
in sleep. Because it is so comfortable lying on our  left  side,  our  sleep
becomes very heavy and this makes it very difficult for us to  wake  up.  It
is also said that such a posture leads to unpleasant dreams or nightmares.

So if you were to adopt the practice of lying on your  right  side,  because
the sleep is not completely relaxed, it will not be heavy and it  will  help
you to maintain your mindfulness and introspection. There may also be  fewer
occurrences of bad dreams.

While you are lying down on your right  side  trying  to  fall  asleep,  the
advice is that for as long as you are not  asleep,  you  should  maintain  a
virtuous state of mind and then let yourself fall asleep with this state  of
mind. At the time of falling asleep, you should also apply  mindfulness  and
introspection  to  check  whether  any  afflictions  are  manifest.  If  any
afflictions are manifesting, you should try your best to make them  go  away
and then try to fall asleep with a virtuous state of mind.

At the time of falling asleep, you should also bring to  mind  the  idea  of
illumination, i.e., you should think of something that is bright and  clear.
This will also help in not having very deep  sleep.  And  prior  to  falling
asleep, you must also have the thought of wanting to wake up early the  next
morning.

We had seen in the module on the mind and its  functions  that  sleep  is  a
changeable mental factor. As such, when you are able to fall asleep  with  a
virtuous state of mind, then the entire sleep becomes virtuous.

When we try to fall asleep whilst adopting the posture of  the  Buddha  when
he demonstrated the deed of passing away  into  parinirvana,  thinking  that
was how the Buddha laid down when he passed away, there  is  the  additional
benefit  of  remembering  the  Buddha.  When  we  remember  the  Buddha,  we
accumulate merit. It is said that when we are  able  to  fall  asleep  while
remembering the Buddha, we will not  be  subject  to  any  harms,  including
harms from non-human entities.

There is this advice of conflating the four major periods in one’s  life—(1)
when we are born, (2) when we are growing up, (3) when we are an  adult  and
aging and (4) when we die—into a single day, i.e., these four major  periods
can be looked at from the perspective of one day.

 • Waking up in the early morning is like a child being born.
 • When you wake up and go to work, your working day is  like  the  rest  of
   your adult life.
 • After a full day at work, you are tired and you come home to  rest.  This
   is like when you are old, perhaps in retirement.

Khen Rinpoche: So night time is your old age.

 • On days when you are very tired, you just lie in bed, too tired to  move;
   this is like a very sick old person on the verge of death.
 • As you fall asleep, all the  sense  consciousnesses  become  dormant  and
   dissolve. Only the mental consciousness remains. This is like  dying  and
   then ending up dead.
 • During sleep, you have dreams. This dreaming state is likened to being in
   the intermediate state after you have died.
 • Then the next morning when you wake up again,  this  is  like  taking  on
   another rebirth and entering into a new life.

So even in one day you can look at it in terms of being born,  living  life,
aging and then dying. Waking up fresh on a new day is actually  like  a  new
rebirth.  Although  you  may  feel  that  you  are  the  same  person,  that
everything is the same,  actually  yesterday  has  already  passed  and  the
person of today is a different person from  the  person  of  yesterday.  The
time and everything are different although you feel that they are the  same.


Death in a sense is like sleeping because when you fall  asleep,  the  gross
elements and the gross consciousnesses dissolve and become dormant.  But  it
is  not  as  if  the  stream  of  consciousness  is  cut.  The   stream   of
consciousness is still there when you wake up the next day.  Death  is  like
that. In that sense perhaps there is nothing to fear about  death  as  dying
is like going to sleep.

During  the  time  of  dying,  the  grosser   elements   and   the   grosser
consciousnesses dissolve. What is left in the end is  the  extremely  subtle
stream of consciousness that will move on to the next existence.  You  don’t
fear falling asleep. If you think about it in this  way,  perhaps  there  is
also nothing much to fear about death itself.  It is not as if you  will  go
out of existence at the time of death.

After  death,  depending  on  the  virtue  or  non-virtue  that   you   have
accumulated, you get either a good rebirth or a bad  rebirth.  Depending  on
the kind of rebirth you get, then there are all kinds  of  happiness  to  be
experienced or suffering to be endured.

If you have lived your life practising  the  Dharma,  cultivating  the  good
heart or engaging in virtue, then there is nothing to fear about  dying.  If
you have lived your life like that, then dying is like falling asleep.  Then
you get another good rebirth. What  you  need  to  fear  is  when  you  have
created non-virtue.

              B.  Synopsis
      Verse 5.97
      From among the limitless deeds
      Of a bodhisattva that have been taught,
      I should certainly practice as much
      Of this conduct that trains the mind.

In general, when you look at the trainings of the bodhisattvas such  as  the
six perfections and the four ways of gathering sentient  beings  into  their
fold, they are really extensive. In short, they  are  all  instructions  for
modifying the behaviour of your body, speech and mind. Even  if  you  cannot
engage in these extensive trainings at the present time, you  can  train  to
modify your physical, verbal and mental behaviour as  taught  here  in  this
text.

4.   THE BRANCH OR METHOD OF EXCELLENT TRAININGS

   A. Extensive explanation
      1. The cause for purifying the trainings
      Verse 5.98
      Three times by day and three times by night
      I should recite The Sutra of the Three Heaps;
      By relying upon the Victors and the mind of enlightenment
      My remaining downfalls will be purified.

When we have taken the bodhisattva vows, we have  to  avoid  committing  the
root downfalls and faults. When a root downfall occurs, we are  supposed  to
confess to a person who holds the bodhisattva  vows.  After  confessing,  we
should retake the bodhisattva vows. When a  bodhisattva  root  downfall  has
occurred, we need to retake the vows to revive the vows.

When a secondary transgression or fault occurs, it says here that we  should
confess them through the  recitation  of  The  Sutra  of  the  Three  Heaps,
commonly known as the Confession of Downfalls to the 35  Buddhas.  What  are
the three heaps referred to in The Sutra of the Three Heaps?  They  are  (1)
confession, (2) rejoicing and (3)dedication.

When we are doing the Confession to the 35  Buddhas,  we  visualise  the  35
Buddhas and in their presence, we go for  refuge  and  generate  bodhicitta.
This constitutes the power of the foundation. In this practice,  we  confess
our negativities and whatever downfalls and secondary transgression we  have
committed.

      2. The basis of the trainings
      Verse 5.99
      Whatever I do on any occasion,
      Whether in terms of myself or others,
      I should make effort and learn
      Whatever training has been taught for that occasion.

When bodhisattvas engage in activities to accomplish their own  purposes  or
the purposes of others, they have to do it through their  body,  speech  and
mind. So all activities engaged in with their body, speech and  mind  should
be in accordance with what is taught in this text.

As we have  seen  so  far,  there  are  many  advices  given  in  this  text
pertaining to the kind of physical demeanour and attitude we  should  adopt,
how we should speak and how we should think.

      Verse 5.100
      There is no such thing as something
      That is not learned by the Victors’ Children.
      Thus if I am skilled in abiding in this way
      Nothing will be non-meritorious.

Bodhisattvas work for the benefit of  others.  In  order  to  work  for  the
benefit of others, they have to know many things;  in  fact,  they  have  to
know everything. There is nothing that the bodhisattvas  should  not  learn.
It is taught that the bodhisattvas have to know the paths  of  the  hearers’
and solitary realisers’. They also have to  meditate  on  these  paths.  The
reason is that the bodhisattvas also have to take care  of  the  welfare  of
those who are of the lineage of  the  hearers  and  solitary  realisers.  In
order to take care of and to help such  people,  the  bodhisattvas  have  to
know those paths before they can help them.

The bodhisattvas, in working for the benefit of others, need  to  learn  and
know everything that could possibly be known. Of course, they  would  do  so
with  mindfulness  and  introspection.  In   fact,   everything   that   the
bodhisattvas do— including moving around, waving their hands, gesturing  and
so forth—is the cause for enlightenment and the cause for accomplishing  the
welfare of sentient beings.  As  such,  the  bodhisattvas  accumulate  great
merit with everything they  do.  With  mindfulness  and  introspection,  the
bodhisattvas are able to learn  many  things  and  use  their  knowledge  to
benefit sentient beings. It is  said  that  the  bodhisattvas  are  able  to
transform even actions that are usually non-virtuous into virtue.

In short, this verse is saying that because the bodhisattvas  need  to  work
for the benefit of  all  sentient  beings,  therefore  they  have  to  learn
everything.

      3. The specifics
        A. Dedicating virtues for the welfare of all sentient beings
      Verse 5.101
      Directly or indirectly, I should not do anything
      Other than the welfare of sentient beings.
      Solely for the welfare of sentient beings
      I should dedicate all towards enlightenment.

Whether we are directly benefiting sentient beings through giving  teachings
or material gifts or we are engaging in our daily prayers while  we  are  in
retreat, whatever virtue that is accumulated, we have to dedicate it to  the
welfare of sentient beings.

We are striving to accomplish the  welfare  of  sentient  beings  only.  Our
efforts should be reflected in our dedication. When we  are  dedicating  our
roots of virtue, we pray and dedicate them to the  achievement  of  complete
enlightenment so that we can accomplish the welfare of sentient beings.

        B. One should never discard the spiritual master and the  trainings
           of the Mahayana
      Verse 5.102
      Never, even at the cost of my life,
      Should I forsake a spiritual friend
      Skilled in the meanings of the Mahayana
      [Who abides in] the supreme modes of conduct of a bodhisattva.

The lam-rim mentions clearly  the  qualifications  of  a  Mahayana  virtuous
friend. You should  know  well  what  the  qualifications  of  the  Mahayana
virtuous friend are as well as the necessary qualifications  of  a  suitable
disciple or student.

Many of you are familiar now with the topic of  correctly  devoting  to  the
virtuous friend. We now should know:
1. the qualifications that the Mahayana virtuous friend should possess
2. the qualifications that the suitable student must possess
3. the benefits of correct reliance on such a  teacher
4. the disadvantages you will  experience  when  you  make  the  mistake  of
   giving up this relationship
Then next we come to the actual way  of  relying  on  the  virtuous  friends
which has two points:
1. reliance in thought
2. reliance in action

Because there are so much benefit and profit when you rely correctly on  the
qualified Mahayana virtuous friend and because  so  many  disadvantages  and
problems will ensue when you rely  incorrectly  on  the  qualified  Mahayana
virtuous friend, therefore, it says here, “Never, even at  the  cost  of  my
life,/ Should I forsake a spiritual friend.”

      4.  The basis one hears and reflects upon
                    A.   Training in reliance upon the sutras
      Verse 5.103
      I should train in devoting myself to my spiritual master
      In the manner taught in The Biography of Shrisambhava.
      This and other trainings spoken by the Buddha,
      I should understand through reading the sutras.


      Verse 5.104
      I should read the sutras
      Because it is in them that the practices appear.
      To begin with, I should look at
      The Sutra of Akashagarba.

In the Sutra of the Array of Stalks there  is  an  account  of  Shrisambhava
asking the bodhisattva  Lobsang,  “How  one  should  rely  on  the  virtuous
friend?” In this sutra, it is mentioned that there  are  nine  attitudes  of
how a disciple should rely on the virtuous friend:
1. the attitude which is like a vajra
2. the attitude which is like a mountain
3. the attitude which is like a worldly servant
4. the attitude which is like a dog
5. the attitude which is like a dutiful child
6. the attitude which is like the earth
7. the attitude which is like a foundation
8. the attitude which is like a sweeper
9. the attitude which is like a boat

What attitude should you adopt in  relying  on  the  virtuous  friend?  Your
attitude should be as  unshakeable  as  a  vajra.  When  you  rely  on  your
virtuous friend, it does not matter what kind of  condition  you  meet,  you
never give up your virtuous friend.

In the  course  of  relying  on  the  virtuous  friend  you  may  meet  with
challenges and difficulties.  Regardless  of  whatever  conditions  you  may
encounter, at those times, your attitude and your reliance on  the  virtuous
friend should be as firm and as immovable as a mountain. You  do  not  waver
and you do not change.

Your attitude should also be like that of a worldly servant.  Whatever  work
you are given, you do it without further negotiation. You should follow  the
advice and whatever jobs or tasks given by the guru.

You should be like a dog. If you were to scold  your  dog,  it  doesn’t  get
angry or retaliate but it looks at you happily.  Likewise  when  relying  on
the virtuous friend, you should never get angry.

You should rely on a virtuous friend like an obedient or dutiful  child.  An
obedient child follows exactly what the parents tell and advise  him/her  to
do.

Verse 5.103 is indicating the  attitudes  that  you  should  train  in  when
relying on  the  virtuous  friend.  You  should  also  be  clear  about  the
essential points of the  training  that  you  are  going  to  engage  in  by
referring to the source, the sutras.

The commentary says here that those who  have  taken  the  bodhisattva  vows
must definitely look at the Sutra of Akashagarba. The reason is  that  after
you have taken the  bodhisattva  vows,  you  have  to  know  what  the  root
downfalls and the secondary transgressions are. The Sutra of Akashagarba  is
clear on that.

         B.   Training in reliance upon the treatises
      Verse 5.105
      I should definitely look at
      Compendium of Trainings again and again
      Because what is to be constantly practiced
      Is clearly and extensively shown there.

The Compendium of Trainings was composed by Shantideva himself.  He  advises
us  to  look  at  that  text.  As  this  text  is  quite  elaborate,  it  is
insufficient to look at it just once but it should be referred to again  and
again.

      Verse 5.106
      Alternatively I should sometimes look at
      The condensed Compendium of Sutras.
      Also, I should make an effort to look at
      The second composed by Arya Nagarjuna.

Shantideva advises that alternatively we can  also  look  at  his  condensed
Compendium of Sutras. We should also look at the text  with  the  same  name
composed by Arya Nagarjuna.

Shantideva and Nagarjuna  both  composed  a  text  of  the  same  name,  the
Compendium of Sutras but it  seems  that  Shantideva’s  text  has  not  been
translated into the Tibetan language.

   B.  Conclusion
      Verse 5.107
      I should do whatever
      Is not forbidden in those [works].
      I should impeccably practice whatever training I see
      In order to guard the minds of worldly people.

B.  THE CONCLUSION, AS IT IS NECESSARY TO  PUT  INTO  PRACTICE  THE  MEANING
   WITHOUT LEAVING IT ON THE LEVEL OF MERE WORDS[2]

     1. Mindfulness and  alertness  are  required  in  all  places  of  the
        training
      Verse 5.108
      The defining characteristic of introspection
      In brief is only this:
      To examine again and again
      The states of my body and mind.


     2. The actual meaning
      Verse 5.109
      Thus I shall put these into action with my body,
      For what can be achieved by merely expressing words?
      Will sick people be benefited
      Merely by reading the medical texts?

It is saying here that you should  investigate  with  introspection  to  see
whether the behaviour of your body, speech and  mind  are  contrary  to  the
training of the bodhisattvas. You should check whether you are coming  under
the control of your afflictions. The point is to  rely  on  mindfulness  and
introspection to practise in this way.

The last verse of this chapter is saying that you should put all the  advice
into practice with your body, speech and mind. When  you  do  not  do  this,
there is no benefit in just knowing the  teachings,  just  as  a  very  sick
person will not recover from his illness merely through  reading  a  medical
journal.

In short, we have to examine whatever we do with our body, speech  and  mind
with mindfulness and introspection and weigh the  benefit  of  our  actions,
i.e., whether they are more beneficial for others or not. Those  who  engage
in activities that are more beneficial for others are said to  be  the  wise
ones.

The Arya Nagarjuna says that despite extensive studies  and  learning,  when
we do not put the teachings into practice, we will be like  a  blind  person
holding a butter lamp that is lit. Knowing all the  Dharma  and  having  all
the opportunities and conditions to practice it but not  doing  so  is  like
someone sitting in a body of water, who remains very thirsty.

In Je Rinpoche’s Lam Rim Chen Mo, he says clearly that in order to  practise
the Dharma, you have to know the Dharma. In order to know  the  Dharma,  you
have to hear it and learn it.  The point of learning the  Dharma  is  to  be
able to practise it.

In order to practise the Dharma, you have to know the Dharma.  In  order  to
know the Dharma, you must educate yourself through learning  it.  The  point
of learning the Dharma is to educate yourself in knowing the Dharma but  the
point of knowing the Dharma is to be able to practice it. This  is  what  Je
Rinpoche said.

He also said that right from the beginning when you listen  to  the  Dharma,
you must understand clearly that the  whole  point  of  learning,  studying,
reflecting on and practising the Dharma is to  subdue  the  mind,  i.e.,  to
deal with your afflictions.

Je Rinpoche said clearly that when we do not subdue ourselves, there  is  no
way to and no basis for subduing others.

Therefore first subdue yourself.



Interpreted by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme; transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek,  Vivien  Ng
& Aki Yeo; edited by Cecilia Tsong.



-----------------------
[1] Kiasu is Singapore slang to describe someone who is afraid to  lose  out
on anything.
[2] The first main point of this chapter is covered under  A.  An  extensive
explanation of the way to practise. For clarification, refer to  page  7  of
Lesson 19.

