Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Engaging in the Deeds of a Bodhisattva/BP2 M5 L36 final.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:52:21.780752
================================================================================


Transcript of the teachings by Khen Rinpoche Geshe  Chonyi  on  Engaging  in
the Bodhisattva Deeds, 2014

Root text: Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds by  Shantideva,  translated  by
Toh Sze Gee. Copyright: Toh Sze Gee, 2006; Revised edition, 2014.

Lesson                                                                    36
 24 June 2014


Chapter Six: Verses 6.62 - 6.74.
       2.   Being patient with those who would belittle you and so forth
              D.  It is unreasonable to be furious because others lack
faith in you (V. 6.62 – V. 6.63)
B.   Arresting fury towards those who wrong those dear to oneself (V. 6.64
– V. 6. 75)[1]
       A.  Arresting it be means of the patience that is intent on Dharma
(V. 6.64 – V. 6.65)
       B.  Arresting it by means of the patience that pays no heed to those
    who cause harm (V.   6.66 – V. 6. 74)


Pertaining to the Sunday discussion question on how  the  bodhisattvas  have
the permission to engage in  the  three  bodily  non-virtues  and  the  four
verbal non-virtues but not the three  mental  non-virtues,  do  bodhisattvas
have permission to have covetousness or not?

Khen Rinpoche: This is the question. Explain why. Don’t  just  say  no.  You
must give the reason why. Saying no is not enough.

Student:  Because it is a non-virtue of the mind.

Khen Rinpoche: You mean killing  is  virtuous?  Then  people  will  ask  why
killing is allowed for bodhisattvas when killing is non-virtuous.  You  have
to have to think about  that.  You  already  accept  seven  non-virtues  are
allowed. Then how can you just say it is a non-virtue of the mind?  You  got
the question? Why is it not allowed or allowed?

It  is  entirely  possible  for  a  bodhisattva  to   steal   motivated   by
covetousness, isn’t it? You can imagine  that,  right?  So  do  bodhisattvas
have covetousness or not? Do bodhisattvas have attachment or not?

Student: Yes, they do.

Are there  situations  where  it  is  permitted  for  bodhisattvas  to  have
attachment? This is basically tied to  the  first  question  of  the  Sunday
discussion. Do bodhisattvas have the  permission  to  have  covetousness  or
not?
Student: No.

Khen Rinpoche: Explain why.

(Student’s response is inaudible).

Khen Rinpoche:  Yes, I know the ten non-virtues  and  that  covetousness  is
one of them. I know that. My question is why is it not  allowed?  Seven  are
allowed and three are not allowed. Why  are  the  three  not  allowed?   The
question is that. You still didn’t get the question.

(Student’s response is inaudible).

Attachment or desire is an affliction. There are  things  that  bodhisattvas
do out of attachment in order to accomplish great purposes for others.  That
is clear.

I think I mentioned this before. The bodhisattvas do not focus  specifically
on abandoning attachment. This is unlike what is practised on  the  Hinayana
path to liberation where attachment is an affliction that  must  necessarily
be abandoned.

In the Paramitayana or the general Mahayana vehicle, it is taught  that  the
bodhisattvas do use afflictions such as attachment as a method or branch  to
accomplish  great  purposes  for  sentient  beings.  There  are   historical
accounts of bodhisattvas in the past who fathered many children in order  to
benefit the teachings of the Buddha.

Khen Rinpoche: That is  the  question.  Think  about  it,  “Why  is  it  not
allowed?” Next time, you give me the  answer  as  to  why  covetousness  and
attachment are not allowed.

                                 ~~~~~~~~~~

The next section is on why it is inappropriate to be angry with  others  who
have no faith in us.

2.   BEING PATIENT WITH THOSE WHO WOULD BELITTLE YOU AND SO FORTH (cont’d)

       D.  It is unreasonable to be furious because  others  lack  faith  in
you
             1.  As speaking ill of oneself causes one to lose faith in  the
        speaker, it is reasonable to be furious with the act of speaking ill
        of others
             Verse 6.62
      Since sentient beings will be weakened,
      I shall be angry with those who say unpleasant things.
      Why are you not likewise angry
      With those who say unpleasant things to other people?

You may think that when others say unpleasant things to you, this may  cause
some people to lose faith in you. For example, you may  be  thinking,  “When
these people hear the criticism directed at me, they will lose faith in  me.
Since this is not what I want, as such, I have the right to  be  upset  with
the person who is criticising me. Therefore I need to do something  to  that
person since he is criticising  and  saying  bad  things  about  me.  He  is
exhausting his own merit and he is going to the lower  realms.  Therefore  I
must stop him.” You may feel that maybe you need a bit of aggressiveness  or
anger to stop him.

If you happen to think like this, the answer to such thoughts is  in  verses
6.62 c, d, “Why are you not likewise angry/ With those  who  say  unpleasant
things to other people?” If you hear others criticising someone  else,  say,
someone who has more qualities than you, in that situation, why are you  not
upset with these other people?

Earlier on, you think, “When somebody is upset with me  because  he  has  no
faith in me, disliking me and criticising me, he  will  degenerate  his  own
merit and he will go to the lower realms.” We  see  that  as  a  reason  for
acting, “Therefore I must do  something  about  it.  I  need  to  counteract
that.”

If that is what you really think, the same logic should also be  applied  to
the situation when somebody else is being criticised. When somebody else  is
being criticized, that critic is also experiencing non-faith in  the  person
he is criticising. His criticism of that person will lead to him  exhausting
his merit and going to the lower realms. Following the same logic,  even  if
you are not the one being criticised, you  should  also  be  upset  at  that
critic who is criticising somebody else.

When you hear someone criticising another person,  why  are  you  not  angry
since that same logic also applies  in  that  situation  as  well?  In  that
situation, it is also appropriate for you to  be  upset.  But  you  are  not
upset when it involves somebody  else  criticising  another  person;  though
logically, you should also be upset in that situation.

Khen Rinpoche: You get the logic?  You  must  get  the  logic  and  line  of
reasoning.

Of course, when this logic is thrown back at you, you will  oppose  it.  You
may then think, “There is no reason for me to get upset  in  this  situation
because if I were to get upset, then there is no end to getting upset.  When
somebody else is being criticised,  the  primary  responsibility  lies  with
that person who is criticised. It is up to her to do something about it.  It
is not my problem as it doesn’t involve me. So I don’t have to get upset.”

If this is what we think, the rebuttal to that comes in Verse 6.63.

             2.  If one can  bear  the  lack  of  faith  in  others,  it  is
        reasonable to bear the lack of faith others may not have in  oneself
        due to the afflictions
      Verse 6.63
      If you are patient with this lack of faith
      Because it is related to others’ non-faith,
      Then why are you not patient with unpleasant words
      Since they are related to the arisal of afflictions?

When you look at this situation—where someone is upset with and  criticising
another person primarily due to his lack of faith  in  that  person,  seeing
that person’s faults—you may think that there must be a reason  for  him  to
criticise the other person. The other person must be at fault in  some  way.
She may have done something wrong or said something wrong. Therefore she  is
being criticised now. Is this not what you think in this situation?

You may think, “The person who is being criticised definitely  must  have  a
role to play. She may have done or said something wrong. I don’t have to  be
upset in that situation. She is at fault since  she  created  the  situation
for herself to be criticised.

As such, I have no reason to be upset at the person who is criticising  her.
It is none of my business. That situation doesn’t  affect  me.  As  such,  I
shall remain relaxed and be patient.”

Now bringing the case back to yourself: The person out of non-faith  in  you
criticises you and says unpleasant words to you. But he is doing so  because
of his  own  afflictions.  As  we  saw  earlier  in  the  text,  he  has  no
independence whatsoever. He is under the control of his own afflictions.

In essence, the teachings in this section is actually telling us  that  when
we experience all  these  problems—criticisms,  people  talking  behind  our
backs, people disliking us or not having faith in us and so forth—we  should
put aside getting angry with them.

The teachings say that, in reality, we  should  be  very  happy  when  these
things happen. As mentioned earlier in the chapter, when we experience  such
problems and difficulties, we should regard these  difficult  situations  or
problems as a broom that sweeps away all our negativities. We should  regard
these situations as something that persuades us to engage in virtue.

So when we experience problems such as criticism directed at us, we have  to
remember and remind ourselves that ultimately it is our own  doing.  We  are
experiencing these situations now as the result of the ripening of the  non-
virtues that we ourselves had accumulated in the past.

We don’t like it when these things happen to us. This is what  we  call  the
eight  worldly  dharmas.  When  we  are  experiencing  these  eight  worldly
dharmas, we can think about some of the advice that  is  mentioned  in  this
chapter and put them into practice.

Up to this point in this chapter, we  have  seen  that  there  are  so  many
reasons thrown at us, proving to us that no matter  what  we  may  think  or
what we may say, at the end of the day, it can be shown  that  there  is  no
reason whatsoever to justify our anger. Anger  is  completely  inappropriate
and no exception is made at all with regard to anger.

The next section talks about stopping ourselves from getting angry when  our
loved ones, the people who matter to us and who we consider  to  be  in  our
circle, are harmed.

Earlier we saw the many reasons why it is inappropriate for us to  be  upset
when we are  harmed.  That  being  said,  even  if  we  accept  that  it  is
inappropriate to get upset when we ourselves are harmed, we may  think  that
it is a different matter if our loved ones, the people who matter to us  and
who we consider to be in our circle, such as our own teachers or people  who
have faith in us, are harmed. Then we have a reason to be upset.  We  think,
“I am not getting upset because of myself.”

But the next verse says that even if the  Three  Jewels  and  so  forth  are
harmed, it is still inappropriate to be upset.

Gyaltsab Je puts forth an  argument  that  we  ourselves  may  already  have
thought of, “Although it is inappropriate for me  to  be  upset  when  I  am
harmed, but if the Three Jewels are harmed, then even  if  I  get  upset,  I
won't incur any faults because I am upset for the Three Jewels. As  such,  I
am not at fault.”

If we have such thoughts, then the answer to that is in verse 6.64

B.  ARRESTING FURY TOWARDS THOSE WHO WRONG THOSE DEAR TO ONESELF

      1.   Arresting it by means of the patience that is intent on Dharma
             A.   The reasons why it is  unreasonable  to  be  furious  with
         those who cause harm to statues of the Buddha, etc.
      Verse 6.64
      Should others talk frivolously about or even destroy
      Holy images, reliquaries, and the sacred Dharma,
      My hatred is inappropriate,
      For the buddhas and so forth can never be harmed.

The objects to whom we go for refuge  are  the  Three  Jewels:  the  Buddha,
Dharma and Sangha.

Let’s say the Buddha is being harmed. But it is impossible  for  the  Buddha
to be unhappy. As such, the Buddha cannot be harmed.

The Sangha Jewel here is  referring  to  the  superiors  who  have  realised
emptiness  directly.  As  such,  they  have  abandoned  the   intellectually
acquired grasping at a  self.  When  they  are  harmed,  they  do  not  have
grasping, feeling, “I  am  being  harmed.”  As  such,  they  do  not  become
unhappy.

In that sense, the Buddha is not harmed and the Sangha is also  not  harmed.
What is left is the Dharma Jewel, true paths and true cessations.  The  true
paths and true cessations also cannot be harmed.

Since the Buddha, Dharma and Sangha do not experience unhappiness nor  could
they be harmed, therefore it is inappropriate to  get  angry  at  those  who
harm  the  Buddha,  Dharma  and  Sangha.  Likewise   we   talk   about   the
representations of the Buddha’s body, speech and mind. Whether it is a  holy
object like a statue, painting, scriptures or stupas, these  are  atomically
established. They are matter and  form.  Even  if  these  holy  objects  are
destroyed, the Buddha can never be harmed. So  in  those  situations,  there
are no reason to be upset for it is possible for people to  get  upset  when
they see others destroying holy objects.

There are also people who criticise or put down the Dharma. Even then  there
is no justification for being upset with them. It  is  inappropriate  to  be
upset with such people. When people  engage  in  destructive  acts  such  as
criticising or putting down the Dharma and  destroying  holy  objects,  they
accumulate so much negative  karma.  So  when  we  see  people  doing  these
things, setting aside not getting upset or  angry  with  them,  in  fact  we
should have even more compassion for them. It is completely  appropriate  to
develop even more care, concern and compassion for them.

Likewise the next section shows how we should be patient with harm  that  is
directed at the people who matter to us.

             B.  Likewise it is reasonable to  be  patient  with  those  who
        cause harm to those dear to oneself
      Verse 6.65
      I should counteract anger towards those
      Who harm my spiritual masters, relatives and so forth, and friends,
      By seeing, as in the manner shown before,
      That they arise from conditions.

The verse is saying that it is inappropriate for us to be upset or angry  at
those who criticise or harm our gurus, relatives such  as  our  parents  and
loved ones and friends. Why? Because there  are  reasons  for  these  things
happening such as the ripening of karma and  so  forth.  The  harm  that  is
directed at our gurus, relatives, loved ones, friends and so  forth  is  the
result of the coming together of various causes and conditions.

Next it is inappropriate to become angry only at sentient beings.

      2.   Arresting it by means of the patience that pays no heed to  those
who cause harm
              A.  It is unreasonable to be furious only with animate beings
      Verse 6.66
      If embodied creatures are harmed
      By both those with mind and those without mind,
      Why single out and begrudge only those with mind?
      Therefore I should be patient with harm.

We are harmed by a combination of the sources of harm that include  sentient
beings and non-sentient beings. If  somebody  is  wielding  a  weapon,  that
sentient being is the person with a mind to harm us.
But there are also other factors such as the four  elements:  earth,  water,
fire and wind. We are also harmed by these four elements.

Yet we only get upset at sentient beings, i.e., those with a mind. We  don’t
get upset with the elements.  Both  sentient  and  non-sentient  beings  are
sources of harm and are equally responsible for causing us  pain.  Why  then
are we only upset at one and not the other? This verse is asking us  why  do
we single out and get upset only with sentient beings. At the same time,  we
do not get upset with those non-sentient sources of harms.

              B.  The reasons fury is unreasonable
      Verse 6.67
      Should one person do harm out of confusion
      And another is confused and gets angry,
      Then who would be without fault?
      And who would be at fault?

People often engage in activities that harm  others  such  as  stealing  and
killing while being ignorant of the consequences of their actions that  they
have to experience in the future in the form of suffering. In the same  way,
there are people who get upset when they are harmed by  others  while  being
ignorant of the consequences of getting angry.

So there are people who are ignorant of the consequences  of  their  actions
of harming others and  there  are  also  people  who  are  ignorant  of  the
consequences of getting angry at the harm-doers. These two types  of  people
are acting out of their ignorance and under the influence  of  the  Mara  of
afflictions.

As such, you cannot attribute blame to one  and  not  the  other.  Both  are
equally at fault  —the  person  who  harms  others  while  ignorant  of  the
consequences of his actions and the person who gets angry when he is  harmed
while ignorant of the consequences of getting  angry.  So  if  you  want  to
attribute blame, both are at fault.

Essentially this  verse  is  saying  that  there  is  no  justification  for
retaliating against any harm directed at oneself.

              C.  Reflecting on one’s own faults
      Verse 6.68  
      Why did I previously commit those actions
      Because of which others now cause harm?
      If all are related to my actions
      Why should I begrudge them?


      Verse 6.69  
      Having seen thus, no matter what,
      I should strive in this way for what is meritorious,
      That all will have
      Loving thoughts towards each other.
Essentially when we see harm directed at our loved ones and the  people  who
matter to us, we have to remember and understand  that  it  is  due  to  the
power of karma, i.e., the ripening of  the  non-virtue  accumulated  in  the
past. As such, when the conditions come together, there is nothing  you  can
do as it is irreversible and it will just happen.  Since  these  experiences
are the results of karma, as such,  there  is  no  justification  for  being
upset with those who harm our loved ones.

This is something that you have to think about for yourself. When there  are
situations where you see your loved ones or the people  who  matter  to  you
being harmed for whatever reason, you have to  remember  that  there  is  no
real justification for you to be upset. Rather you can use  the  opportunity
to think, “How wonderful it would be if we  could  all  have  love  for  one
another. How wonderful it would be if I could  have  love  towards  both  my
loved ones and the people who are harming my loved ones.”

These are advice for a person to develop love,  compassion  and  bodhicitta.
In these situations when our loved ones  are  harmed,  instead  of  reacting
with anger, we should develop love for both our loved ones  and  the  people
who are harming them.

Next is striving not to let one’s virtue degenerate.

              D.  Reflecting on  the  benefits  of  this  specific  kind  of
patience
                     1.   Making  effort  so  that  one’s  virtue  does  not
deteriorate
      Verse 6.70
      For example, if a fire in one house
      Has moved into another house,
      It is right to remove and get rid of straw and such things
      That the fire will spread to.


      Verse 6.71
      Likewise when my mind is attached to something
      And the fire of hatred spreads,
      I should immediately get rid of it
      For fear of my merit being burned.

If your neighbour’s house catches fire and you  sense  that  the  fire  will
spread soon to your  house,  in  that  situation,  if  you  happen  to  have
flammable things in your house such as furniture and so forth that  you  are
emotionally attached to, you realise, “I better get rid of all these  things
before my house catches fire.” You will throw them away as you know that  if
you keep those things,  your  house  will  burn  down  completely.  In  that
situation, probably you will be happy to throw them away quickly.

Likewise when your loved ones and the people who matter to you  are  harmed,
probably they will get very upset. The fire of their anger will  be  blazing
in their mind, consuming the merit that they have accumulated.  But  if  you
also get upset when you see that they are harmed, then  the  fire  of  anger
will also burn in your mind and thereby consume  the  merit  that  you  have
accumulated.
The only reason why the fire of anger in the mind of  your  loved  ones  can
move from their mind into yours and  through  that  consume  your  merit  is
because of your attachment for them. If  you  do  not  have  attachment  for
them, then there is no way you will be angry when you see  your  loved  ones
suffer.

It is just like the example of your  neighbour’s  house  catching  fire.  If
there is nothing flammable in your  house,  the  fire  in  your  neighbour’s
house will not be able to do much damage to  your  house.  The  only  reason
your house can burn down is if your house is filled with flammable  objects.
If you throw those flammable objects away, your house will not burn.

Likewise if there is no attachment for your loved ones and  the  people  who
matter to you, you will not be affected by their anger.

These are the ways to stop anger from arising in our mind. In  this  context
here, the way to stop anger is to remove the attachment in our mind.

Next is purifying the causes for the hells by tolerating small sufferings.

                    2.  Accepting small sufferings will act to overcome  the
          cause for the suffering of the hells
                       A.  Example
      Verse 6.72
      Is it not excellent if a man condemned to death
      Is released after having his hand cut off?
      Is it not excellent if I am spared from hell
      By way of human suffering?


                       B.  Meaning
      Verse 6.73
      If I cannot endure
      Even just this suffering of the present,
      Then why do I not refrain from getting angry,
      The cause of suffering in hell?

What did we say earlier? We often get upset when our loved ones are  harmed.
We get upset because of our attachment. So  the  solution  is  not  to  have
attachment.

Of course this is unacceptable for people, “How is it possible not  to  have
attachment? You are asking me to give up  attachment?  That  means  you  are
asking me to give up my emotional bond and connection with these people.  In
that sense, it is separating me from  them,  making  the  clear  distinction
that we are not connected.

That is something I cannot do. I cannot bear to be separated from  my  loved
ones. I cannot bear to be disconnected from my loved  ones.  I  cannot  bear
not to have this emotional bond with them.

As such, in  order  to  be  emotionally  bonded  and  connected  with  them,
obviously there must be some kind of attachment to them.  Therefore  I  must
have attachment. It is necessary. So when they are harmed, I don’t  like  it
and it is justifiable for me to get upset because this is  what  I  need  to
do.”

This is what people think.

But the pain  of  separation  from  your  loved  ones  is  relatively  small
compared to the suffering that you have to experience if  you  were  to  get
upset for their sake. If you practise patience and voluntarily  accept  that
suffering—the  discomfort  that   comes   along   with   this   feeling   of
disconnectedness from your loved  ones  because  you  are  not  attached  to
them—that suffering is small. You should voluntarily put up with it  because
you are saving yourself from the suffering of more samsara  in  the  future.
In particular, you are saving yourself from the  great  suffering  of  being
born in the hell realms that is the result of getting upset and  acting  out
of anger.

We have to make a distinction between short-term pain  and  long-term  pain.
It is about choosing short-term pain and tolerating and putting up with  it.
Otherwise there will be great long-term pain.

Verse 6.73 is telling us that  if  we  cannot  tolerate  the  harm  that  we
experience or the harm that is directed at our loved ones, then how  are  we
able to tolerate the suffering of the lower realms such as the suffering  of
the hells in the future? How are we able to tolerate the great suffering  of
the hells if we claim,  “This  present  suffering  is  too  much.  I  cannot
tolerate the harm done to me and I cannot tolerate the fact  that  my  loved
ones are being harmed”?

If you retaliate with anger, the question is, “Will you be able to  tolerate
the consequences of that act of retaliation  that  is  primarily  driven  by
attachment?” It is because of being driven by attachment that you get  upset
and retaliate. Then the consequences will be rebirth in  the  lower  realms,
in particular, the hell realms. Will you be able to tolerate that result  of
following after your anger or not?

Therefore as such, you have to turn  away  from  the  causes  of  the  lower
realms. Essentially these are our afflictions such as anger.

                    3.  It is reasonable to enjoy hardships that  accomplish
          greater purposes
                          A.  Feeling regret for how  many  bodies  we  have
             wasted in the past and still not accomplished either  our  own
             or other’s welfares
      Verse 6.74
      For the sake of my desires
      I experienced thousands [of eons] in hell,
      But I enacted the purpose
      Of neither others nor myself.

Verse 6.73 is something that we can think about whenever we  think  that  we
cannot tolerate the harm-doer or the harm that is done to us.

                                 ~~~~~~~~~~~

Question: Are there bodhisattvas who get  angry  but  will  not  have  their
roots  of  virtue  destroyed  but  only  experience   a   delay   in   their
realisations?

Answer: The postponement of the realisations of the path is  the  result  of
the destruction of the roots of virtue.

(A student revives the discussion pertaining  to  whether  at  the  time  of
death, a person can accumulate the projecting  karma  that  can  become  the
actualising karma or not).

Student: During the time  of  death,  projecting  karma  cannot  be  created
because at the time of death, it is karma not accumulated due to  the  short
period of time. Can or not?

Khen Rinpoche: Cannot! You say, “short period of time.” What do you mean  by
“short period of time”?

Student: Because projecting karma has to be karma that  is  accumulated  and
karma that is accumulated has to be karma created  over  a  long  period  of
time.

Khen Rinpoche: My question back to you. If you were to think that  you  want
to kill someone for about ten seconds, is that long enough for karma  to  be
created or not?

(Further discussion between Khen Rinpoche and the student as to the  meaning
of “long period of time.”)

Student: My understanding of “long period of time”  is  that  it  should  be
more than one moment.

Khen Rinpoche: At the time of death, you have more than one moment!  It  may
be longer than ten seconds but you  can  have  two  minutes,  five  minutes,
isn’t it? What is your understanding of “long period  of  time”?  One  year,
one month, one day?

If you were to think strongly for say, ten  minutes,  five  minutes,  “I  am
going to kill this person,” do you create karma or not?

(Student ponders this).

Khen Rinpoche: Do you create karma in five minutes or not? OK. Five  minutes
is too short. I give you ten minutes, lah!

You think you can create karma in ten minutes?

Student: Yes.

Khen Rinpoche: Five minutes?

Student: Yes.

Khen Rinpoche: Three minutes?

Student: Die already. Yes.

Khen Rinpoche: Two minutes?

Student: Yes.

Khen Rinpoche: One minute?

Student: Yes. Every moment we are creating karma. (Uproar in class).

(Student still  insists  that  although  karma  is  created,  that  may  not
necessarily be karma accumulated).

Khen Rinpoche: Your reason that the time is too short does  not  answer  the
question.

Question: When karma is about to be ripened, can it be reversed  or  can  it
be nullified, i.e., can it be stopped?

Khen Rinpoche: It is possible. It can be reversed. It can be stopped.

Student 2: If that karma can be stopped, then it being nourished by  craving
and grasping can also be stopped. In other words, at the time of  nourishing
with craving and grasping, there is a projecting  karma  that  is  about  to
manifest. But this projecting karma can be stopped or reversed.

If this karma can be reversed during the time of craving  and  grasping,  at
that time, one generates a powerful positive mind  of  virtuous  faith,  for
example. That leaves a powerful imprint on the causal period  consciousness.
Because the earlier karma has been reversed, a second  set  of  craving  and
grasping can nourish this latter karma. Is that possible?

If that is the case, then this means at the time of death, the karma can  be
changed at the time of nourishing. That karma can be reversed.

Khen Rinpoche: Yes. I think so. Why not?

Student 2:  Then we have settled the issue.

Khen Rinpoche: We have settled the issue?

Student 2: During the time of craving and grasping, a  projecting  karma  is
being nourished. But it is possible for that karma to be reversed?

Khen Rinpoche: I think so.
Student 2: At that time there can be a virtuous mind that leaves a  powerful
imprint in the causal period consciousness. Immediately after that,  it  can
be nourished by a second set of craving and grasping.

The previous projecting karma was perhaps a non-virtuous  projecting  karma.
The second projecting karma was perhaps  a  virtuous  projecting  karma.  In
other words, at the time of dying, we were supposed  to  be  reborn  in  the
hells but because of this being reversed by the second projecting karma,  we
can be reborn in a higher realm.

Khen Rinpoche: Yes. So you are saying that, at the time of  death,  you  can
create projecting karma and actualising karma?

Student 2: When it is nourished by craving  and  grasping,  that  projecting
karma becomes actualising karma.

Khen Rinpoche: At the time of death, we can create both?

(Student 2 restates his position).

Khen Rinpoche: According to the  lower  Abhidharma,  the  Abidharmakosha  by
Vasubandhu, once you are in the intermediate state of  a  particular  realm,
that is irreversible. Once that intermediate state comes about  due  to  the
nourishing of a karma by craving  and  grasping,  once  a  certain  kind  of
intermediate state is established, it is irreversible. So once  you  are  in
the intermediate state of the hell  realms,  you  are  definitely  going  to
hell. There is no way out. You will go down.

But according to Asanga’s higher Abhidharma, the  Compendium  of  Knowledge,
it is said that even if the bardo is established and you  have  entered  the
intermediate  state  of  a  particular  realm,  if  very  strong  virtue  is
accumulated for  whatever  reason,  then  that  intermediate  state  can  be
changed.

I think we talked about this earlier some time ago.

If we follow the  position  of  the  Compendium  of  Knowledge,  the  higher
Abhidharma, i.e., that the intermediate  state  can  be  reversed,  it  goes
without saying that at the time of craving and grasping, the karma  that  is
being nourished can be reversed. It can be reversed as in it can  change  to
another karma that is being nourished.

Student 3: Previously I asked this question, “At the time  of  death,  if  a
projecting karma is non-virtuous but at  the  same  time,  one  has  single-
pointed faith in one’s guru. Could that non-virtuous karma  be  changed?”  I
remember the answer was that that single-pointed faith was a condition,  not
karma and that the non-virtuous projecting karma could not be changed.

How then does that karma become reversible if, say, a  single-pointed  faith
is only a condition and not karm?.

Khen Rinpoche: At the time of death, one would be going  to  a  lower  realm
but due to the condition of faith, another karma comes into play. It is  not
that the earlier non-virtuous karma has transformed into a  virtuous  karma.
No!

It is not possible for a non-virtuous karma to  transform  into  a  virtuous
karma. That is not the meaning when we say that karma has changed.

Student 3: In other words, at the time of death, one has  this  non-virtuous
projecting karma but due to the  condition  of  having  this  single-pointed
faith in one’s guru, this non-virtuous karma is somehow replaced by a  fresh
virtuous  karma.  Hence  the  rebirth  will  be  a  favourable  one.  Can  I
understand it to be like that?

Khen Rinpoche: Yes.


Interpreted by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme; transcribed by Phuah  Soon  Ek,  Patricia
Lee & Julia Koh; edited by Cecilia Tsong.




















-----------------------
[1] Arresting fury towards that which brings unwanted things (V. 6.12  –  V.
6.86)
 A.  Arresting fury towards those who wrong you (V. 6.12 – V. 6.63)
 B. Arresting fury towards those who wrong those dear to oneself (V. 6.64  –
    V. 6.75)
 C. Arresting fury towards those who do well by one’s enemies (V. 6.76 –  V.
    6. 86)

