Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Engaging in the Deeds of a Bodhisattva/BP2 M5 L21 final.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:52:13.440253
================================================================================


Transcript of the teachings by Khen Rinpoche Geshe  Chonyi  on  Engaging  in
the Bodhisattva Deeds, 2014

Root text: Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds by  Shantideva,  translated  by
Toh Sze Gee. Copyright: Toh Sze Gee, 2006; Revised edition, 2014.

Lesson                                                                    21
22 April 2014


Review. Chapter Five: Guarding Introspection.  Verses 5.124-5.171. A. An
extensive explanation of the way to practice. 1. The method for guarding
the trainings: guarding the mind. A. By guarding the mind, one comes to
guard all. B. The reasons for that (cont’d). 1. Wrongdoing depends upon the
mind. 2. Qualities depend upon the mind.


Question: What is the measure of having generated refuge in one’s mind?

Answer:  When the entity  of  the  refuge  is  discussed,  what  exactly  is
refuge? There are two causes of refuge:
1. the fear of the sufferings of cyclic existence and the fear of the
   sufferings of the lower realms
2. the conviction that the Three Jewels have the ability and power to
   protect one from these fears

When you take refuge in the Buddha, having real refuge means that  you  have
complete conviction and trust that the Buddha has the power to  protect  you
from these fears, the fear of the sufferings of  cyclic  existence  and  the
fear of the sufferings of the lower realms.

This conviction is similar to the conviction that a sick  person  has  in  a
doctor. When a sick person sees a doctor, this patient has so much trust  in
the doctor and is willing to carry out all the instructions of  the  doctor.
Having refuge in the Buddha is similar to that in that you completely  trust
that the Buddha can protect you from these fears.

But first you must have the fear of the  sufferings  of  the  lower  realms,
i.e., the fear of going to the lower realms and suffering there. On  top  of
that, you have the fear of the sufferings of cyclic existence. On the  basis
of having these fears, then you have the faith,  conviction,  and  trust  in
the ability of the Buddha to  protect  you  from  these  fears.  This  faith
arises from understanding and thinking,  “I  trust  the  Buddha  can  really
protect me from these fears.” This is taking refuge in the Buddha.

When you trust the enlightened one, the Buddha, based on that, you  will  be
able to take refuge in his teachings, the Dharma. Similarly,  you  would  be
able to take refuge and trust in the Sangha, those  who  are  following  his
teachings. When you say that you go for refuge to the Dharma, it means  that
you have the conviction, faith and trust in the words  of  the  Buddha,  the
teachings, because they were taught by the Buddha himself. So when you  have
faith in the Buddha, naturally you would have faith in his teachings.

Similarly, you would be able to take refuge and trust in the  Sangha,  those
who are following his teachings.

From this, you will know whether you have refuge or not,  whether  you  have
such faith and whether that faith is stable or not. In your  mind  you  know
that you have these fears but you have this absolute trust that  the  Buddha
can protect you from them. When you have such trust and faith, that  is  the
sign that you have refuge.

                                 ~~~~~~~~~~

THE REASONS FOR THAT (cont’d)

2.   Qualities depend upon the mind
       C.   Patience relies upon the mind
              1.   The meaning
      Verse 5.12
      Unruly sentient beings are like space;
      All of them cannot possibly be overcome.
      But if I overcome the mind of anger alone,
      This will be equivalent to vanquishing all those foes.

This verse is saying that patience depends on  and  arises  from  the  mind.
When we talk about unruly sentient beings,  they  are  everywhere.  Wherever
there is space, there are  sentient  beings.  As  long  as  sentient  beings
exist, there will necessarily be sentient beings who will do harm.

This verse points out that there is no  way  to  eliminate  or  destroy  all
those sentient beings who that harm others. Even if you were to  try  to  do
this, you will not succeed. But even though  there  are  suchthese  sentient
beings, if we will to overcome the mind of anger, it would be equivalent  to
having vanquished, conquered or destroyed all these external enemies.  There
is an analogy to explain this.

      2. The analogy
      Verse 5.13
      Where could I possibly find enough leather
      With which to cover the surface of the earth?
      Having leather on just the soles of my shoes
      Is equivalent to covering the earth with it.

      3. Applying the analogy to the meaning
      Verse 5.14
      Likewise it is not possible for me
      To counteract things externally;
      But should I counteract this mind of mine,
      What is the need for counteracting others?

The verse says that there is no way that you can eliminate all the  external
sources of harm even if you were to try.  But  when  you  can  eliminate  or
counteract the inner enemy of anger, there is  no  need  to  counteract  the
external sources of harm. It is mentioned in the sutras that when one  tames
one’s anger, the external enemy will be pacified. When anger is  not  tamed,
external enemies will increase in number.

Cultivating patience is for the sake of subduing and  pacifying  our  anger.
Essentially,T the practice of patience is a practice of the mind.

       D.  Joyous effort relies upon the mind
      Verse 5.15
      Although the result of generating a clear mind
      Is Brahma and so forth,
      The results along with body and speech will be
      Weak in conduct, therefore it is not like that.

According to Gyaltsab Je, the  explanation  for  this  verse  is  this:  the
result  of  generating  the  mind  of  clear  joy  from  meditating  on  the
absorption of the first form realm is rebirth in the place of Brahma and  so
forth.

When one does not have such a strong mind,  the  result  of  the  mind  that
comes with the body and speech belongs to the class of behaviour or  actions
with less joy and one cannot be reborn in the first form  realm.  T  and  t.
Therefore the completion of joyous perseverance effort depends on the  mind.
This is what Gyaltsab Je says.


The meaning is this: We  have  talked  about  the  four  concentrations  (or
meditative stabilisations) of the form and  the four concentrations  of  the
formless realms.

There are three  abodes or three lands of in the first concentration of  the
form realm.
 can be divided into three.

In order to be reborn as a god in the form realm in the first  concentration
of the form realm such as the land of Brahma  and  so  forth,  that  rebirth
must be preceded by a realisation of calm-abiding, which  is  a  quality  of
the mind. Based on that, one gains access to a level  of  concentration  and
based on that, one achieves an actual  concentration.  All  these  qualities
are dependent on the mind.

Without a clear mind such as a mind that has realised calm-abiding,  without
having gained access to a concentration and without  actualising  an  actual
concentration, it is not possible there is no way tto be reborn in the  form
and formless realms  such  as  the  land  of  Brahma.   Without  the  mental
qualities of such a clear states of mind, other  virtues  that  is  are  the
results of  the practices of  the body and speech  alone  cannot  result  in
such a that rebirth.

One can also explain  a  clear  mind  here  to  mean  cultivating  love  and
compassion. In short, they  are  the  four  immeasurables  thoughts.  It  is
through cultivating these minds that one  can  be  reborn  in  the  land  of
Brahma and so forth.

Without joyous effort and the mental qualities of  such  a  clear  state  of
mind, virtue that is the result of the practices  of  the  body  and  speech
cannot result in such a rebirth. Without the joyous effort exerted  by  such
a clear mind, Oone’s actions of body and speech  will  be  weak  and  .  aAs
such, one’s actions of body and speech alone cannot lead one  to  be  reborn
in the land of Brahma and so forth.

You accumulate virtue with your body,  speech  and  mind.  Enthusiasm  is  a
mental quality. When there is strong enthusiasm for virtue,  you  accumulate
strong virtuous karma. Due to the strong enthusiasm  for  the  activity  you
are engengaging e in, it leaves an imprint on the mind.

But in the absence of such strong  enthusiasm  for  virtue,  even  when  you
carry out those virtuous that actions with your body and  speech,  I  wonder
what is actually being accumulated? When you  accumulate  virtue  with  your
body and speech , since that is closely linked  with your strong  enthusiasm
for such activities, you it could be that you  are  accumulating  something.
But in the absence of such enthusiasm for  virtue,  what  exactly  is  being
accumulated when  you  are  just  physically  or  verbally  doing  those  at
actions?

This ere is an explanation of how all qualities are very much  dependent  on
the mind.

What exactly is en tthe entity of joyous effort, what exactly is it?  Joyous
effort is a mind that has a virtuous object as its  object  of  observation.
Focusing on this virtuous  object  of  observation,  the  aspect  of  joyous
effort It is a clear mind that has enthusiasm for the virtuous  object  that
the joyous effort is focussing on. virtue.
A clear mind that is enthusiastic about whatever virtuous objects  and  that
is what joyous perseverance is focusing on.

In essence, in the context of this verse, the discussion is this:  in  order
to be reborn in the form and formless realms, one must have  a  clear  mind.
As explained earlier, without this quality of a  clear  mind,  it  does  not
matter what virtue you create with your body and speech, there is no way  to
be reborn in these higher realms.

       E.  Concentration relies upon the mind
      Verse 5.16
      The Knower of Reality taught
      That even if recitation and hardships
      Are practiced for long periods of time,
      They will be meaningless if the mind is distracted elsewhere.

You all know that in the process of carrying out  whatever  job,  activities
or tasks that  you  undertake,  when  your  mind  is  not  concentrated  and
focused, your heart is not in it and your mind is not  there,  nothing  much
is gets accomplished. Even though you may complete the task, but it may  not
be a job that is well done. This is quite clear from your own experiences.

The verse is saying that when you are doing your daily recitation,  reciting
mantras, undergoing austerities and  putting  up  with  hardships  during  a
nyung-na, when  those practices are done with a distracted  mind,  you  will
not achieve anything that is greatly meaningful. Regardless of how long  you
engage in those activities—and you  may  be  doing  them  for  a  very  long
time—during theat entire  whole time when if  you  arewere  distracted,  you
will not achieve anything meaningful.

When you look at the words  of  this  verse  literally,  the  teachings  are
telling you that no matter what you  do,  as  long  as  you  do  it  with  a
distracted mind, all your those practices including your daily  prayers  are
meaningless.

Khen Rinpoche: I don’t know the expression in English for this. If  you  ask
a guy to do a job such as heavy lifting and the guy cannot do  it,  normally
people will say these negative words, “You are not a man.” You know  what  I
am saying? You have such an expression in English?

There are such expressions, “You are not a  human  being  as  you  can't  do
this. Are you human? You cannot even do that!” But of course the person  you
are referring to is obviously a human being.

Likewise here, the  verse  is  saying  that  when  you  practice  all  these
hardships and austerities for a long period of time with a distracted  mind,
they will be meaningless. Meaningless here  does  not  mean  that  there  is
absolutely no benefit or absolutely no meaning. What it  is  driving  at  is
that you will not achieve anything that is really meaningful.

In short, without a concentrated mind, without some level of  attention  and
focus, the teachings are telling you that you will not achieve your  purpose
and goals. But when you focus on what you are  doing  single-pointedly,  you
will achieve your goals. So achieving your goals and purposes are  dependent
on your mind.

Practices like our daily recitations and daily prayers are  methods  for  us
to stabilise and focus ththe mind and they should  become  the  methods  for
achieving  these  aims.  .  These  practices  must  then  become  method  to
stabilize and to focus the mind.


The Buddha said in one sutra, “Oh bhikshus, austerities,   and  prayers  and
so forth that distract the mind towards  the desire realms  do  not  have  a
result.”.  This  means  that  whatever  practices  and   whatever   virtuous
activities of the body and speech you are engaged in, they have to  be  done
without a distracted mind. Otherwise they will not  bring  about  any  great
result.

       F.  Wisdom relies upon the mind
      Verse 5.17
      Even those who wish to obtain happiness and overcome suffering
      Will wander with no aim
      If they do not comprehend the secret of the mind –
      The principal Dharma

What is “the secret  of  the  mind”  mentioned  in  this  verse?  There  are
different ways to explain this phrase, “the secret of the mind.” The  Dharma
to be known, the Dharma to be learnt and the Dharma to be  understood  areis
none other than “the secret of the mind.” In this context,  “the  secret  of
the mind” is the mind’s emptiness of inherent existence.

When you take “the secret of the mind”  to  mean  the  mind’s  emptiness  of
inherent existence or the mind’s emptiness of true existence, why  is  it  a
secret? Because  you  should  not  reveal  the  teachings  of  emptiness  to
unsuitable people whose minds are not ripe for that understanding. As  such,
it is a secret of the mind. This is one explanation.

The mind’s emptiness of inherent existence is a quality that every  sentient
being has. As long as one is a sentient being, that  sentient  being  has  a
consciousness  whose  ultimate  nature  is   its   emptiness   of   existing
inherently. Although this is the reality, most sentient beings do  not  know
or and do not realise the ultimate nature of the mind. As  such,  for  them,
it remains a secret.

The ultimate nature  of  all  phenomena,  including  one’s  mind,  is  their
emptiness of inherent existence. All  phenomena  arise  from  this  ultimate
nature, this emptiness of inherent  existence  and  as  such,  a,  that  all
phenomena arise from. So all phenomena are like the display of emptiness.

The mind is like a mirror and aAll the appearance of the phenomena  is  like
reflection. Phenomena are like the reflection  and  the  mind  is  like  the
mirror. All phenomena are appearances and reflections of the mind. They  All
phenomena are creations of the mind.

This e verse is talking about the principal or primary Dharma, i.e.,   which
is the ultimate nature of all phenomena.  Every  phenomenon   including  the
mind is empty of existing  inherently.  All  phenomena  are  a  displays  of
emptiness  and  all  external  objects  are  creations  of  the  mind.   The
Uunderstanding of this fact constitutes the principal Dharma.

Without realiszing how all phenomena arise from emptinessaand  a,   and  are
the displays of emptiness, how phenomena arise from emptiness  and  how  all
external phenomena are projections or /creations of the mind, one  will  not
be able to achieve nirvana and peace and one will not  be  able  to  achieve
full enlightenment.

When the highest school, the Consequence Middle  Way  School  (CMWS),  talks
about external objects, they it is not  that  theydo  not   refute  the  the
existence of external objects. They do assert external objects. It  is  just
that they assert external objects do not exist truly.  Many  a  times  Often
when people hear the words, “external objects,” and when  they  think  about
external objects, they think that what external  objects  are  is  something
that is separated from the mind, i.e., they out there  existing  from  their
its own side, but  .  this  That  is  not  what  an  external  object  means
according to the CMWS.

We talked about external objects From  from  tthe  viewpoint  of  the  CMWS'
point of view, t.  They  assert  external  objects   but  they  assert  that
external objects do not exist truly. They are not saying that  the  external
objects are the mind . Thbut that ey are just saying that  external  objects
are projections of the mind and as such are distinct . External objects  are
distinct entitiesy from the mind.

Without realiszing this “secret of  the  mind,”  there  is  no  nirvana,  no
liberation and there is not no omniscience. As such, One one would have  has
to continue circling over and over again in cyclic existence. So   over  and
over again. iIn order to achieve nirvana and omniscience, one  must  has  to
understand and realisze this “secret of the mind.”

Having  some  understanding  of  and  reflecting  on   how   phenomena   are
projections and creations  of the mind, and how phenomena are  the  creation
of the mind  is very helpful. One could relate  this  to  the  enemy,  i.e.,
reflecting on how ies.  How  the  enemy  is  ies  are  thea   creations  and
projections of our own mind.

As Like what wwe have seen before, the foundation of  all  the  problems  is
theis apprehension of true existence. This at is is the  self-ignorance.  In
the perspective of this mind of ignorancet mind, wwhatever  appears  appears
to be as truly existent or / inherently existent. And Furthermore we  assent
to this e appearance and believe it to be so. in it.  With  that  belief  as
the basis, then,  the  incorrect  mental  attention  arises,  comes  in  and
exaggerating or deprecating es  the  situation  or  the  object.   –  either
exaggerating or  deprecating  it.  Based  on  such  these  incorrect  mental
attention,  anger and attachment arises.
On the basis of ignorance, we have the incorrect mental attention. Based  on
that, then this that is how the object of attachment  arises,  and  that  is
how the object of hatred arises as well.

Because of our attachment and anger,  and attachment,  then  we  create  the
object of attachment and we create the enemy.   and  object  of  attachment.
This understanding is helpful for the . It helps  the  mind.  We  understand
how this object  of  attachment  and  this  enemy  and  external  object  of
attachment are the creations of the mind  -  the  creations  of  theour  own
incorrect mental  attention,  of  our  own  mind.  There  is  no  beautiful,
pleasant and attractive object from the side of the object. Rather it  is  a
projection of our attachment. Likewise tThere is no enemy from the  side  of
theat object or or , theat person. , or that situation.  There  is  no  real
beautiful, pleasant, and attractive object from  the  side  of  the  object.
Rather it is a projection of the attachment.
It is very important to understand how everything  is  the  display  of  the
mind. a nd how eEverything is projected by the mind.

As the projection of the mind. Like what we have discussed  earlier  in  the
context of anger, the external enemy is a projection,  a  creation   of  our
anger. , which is a creation of anger. When If there is no anger,  there  is
no enemy. The eEnemy comes into existence being because we are  upset  or  ,
or we do not like something. n’t like it. But when if  there  is  no  anger,
there is nothing appearsing as an enemy. As such, there is  no  enemy.  Even
when if thesomeone  person does something bad to us,  because  there  is  no
projection of an enemy, it is like as if there is  no  enemy  at  all.  From
this, you can see how the enemy is a projection/creation or creation of  our
own  of the mind. But when If there is anger,  there  isthe   enemy  arises.
When If there is no anger, there is no labelling,  “enemy.”  then  one  does
not consider that as enemy.

Similarly with Like attachment as  well,  the  object  of  attachment  is  a
projection of one’s attachment. Because  one  exaggerates  the  object,  the
object appears desirable nice in the view of thate attachment. .  Therefore,
Iin the view of one’sthe attachment, there is an object of  attachment  that
appears to be very attractive.  . Therefore, there  is  this  appearance  of
very nice and so real. In the absence of such of  the  view  of  attachment,
there will be no attachment even though the object is there.  Because  there
is no attachment, that pleasant object has nothing to appear to.

Even Even wisdom is a quality that is . It is  dependent  on  the  mind.  In
this context,  The  wisdom  here  in  this  context  refers  to  the  wisdom
realiszing  selflessness  and  this  wisdom  is  .  The   wisdom   realizing
selflessness is dependent on the mind. Without  this  wisdom,  there  is  no
nirvana, and there is no omniscience.

Explanation of hand gestures used in monastic dDebates Gestures
By now many of you may have seen  how  a  debate  session  is  traditionally
conducted traditionally in the monasteries such as Sera Je.

The debate is carried out with certain hand gestures including the  clapping
of hands.

Khen Rinpoche (in English): Many haven’t seen? Haven’t you  seen  this?  You
may ight think the monks y are doing some kung fu!

In debate, When people are debating, the challenger puts out his  left  hand
out with the palm facing upwards. He then raises his  right  hand  and  hits
his left hand with the  the rright.  hand onto his left hand.

Khen Rinpoche (in English): You must remember  that.  Tomorrow  we  need  to
debate!.

There is a symbolism behind that hand gestures by depending  on  what  thate
individual is being visualisedingzes or thinks about.
The theory is this:
 • One visualises that all the six types of migratory  beings  are  oOn  the
   palm of the your left hand.
 • hand, you visualize and think that all the six types of migratory  beings
   are there.
 • The Your raised right hand is the sword of wisdom.
 • When the As your right hand comes down on the left  hand  goes  down  and
   claps, this symboliszes  the  sword  of  wisdom  cutting,  destroying  s,
   destroys and then eliminating es the darkness of confusion  or  ignorance
   in the minds of the six types of migratory beings.
 • Once that is done, one’s you have done that  your  left  palm  hand  then
   faces downwards.
 • Then one you raises one’s your right hand  again  with  the  palm  facing
   towards oneself. you. What it This symboliszes is that having  after  you
   have eliminated the ignorance of the six types of migratory  beings,  one
   you leads and guides them to enlightenment.

At the beginning of every debate session, what you hear when the  hands  are
clapped, one  is thatwill hear the debaters   they  are  shouting  Dhih“DHI”
very loudly.
When one you is are debating for  the  very  first  time,  one  is  you  are
supposed to recite Om Ah Ra Pa Dza Na Dhih  “OM AH RA PA TSA  NA  DHI”  very
quickly but as one claps ones.’s  But as you  slam  your  hands  down,,  one
you recites Dhih “DHI”  loudly.

Meaning of the The meaning of the syllables of the mantra Ah,  Ra,  Pa,  Dza
H, RA, PA and TSA
 • Ah H rrefers  to  phenomena  are  not  being  established  by  their  own
   entities, i.e., it is referring to .
 • The syllable “AH” essentially is talking about emptiness. There  are  the
   extensive,  middling,  short  and  condensed  versions  of  the  In   the
   Perfection of Wisdom Sutras, there are the extensive, middling, short and
   the condensed versions. . The condensed  version  is  the  Heart  of  the
   Perfection of Wisdom Sutra. The most condensed version is the pPerfection
   of wWisdom expressed in a single in one letter, “Ah. H”.

Khen Rinpoche (in English): If you know the “AhH”, that’s it!

 • RaA means that to all phenomena are devoid of, or separated from  or   or
   free of from dust. Dust here refers is taken to be true  existence.  This
   means that all phenomena are free from true  existence,  i.e.,  .  Simply
   speaking, all phenomena are not truly existent.

 • PaA refers  to  the  ultimate,  i.e.,  which  is  the  emptiness  of  all
   phenomena.

 • Dza TSA refers to no birth and no death. When If we examine the  ultimate
   nature of all phenomena, ultimately there is no production and  there  is
   no disintegration. As such, when one if you relates this it  to  a  human
   being or sentient being, ultimately there  is  no  birth  and  ultimately
   there is no death.

 • Na is explained as free of name.
    •
    • NaA – here it is explained as to be free of name. I  wonder  what  the
      explanation is.



Khen Rinpoche (in English): I do not n’t know  exactly  what  “free  of   of
name” means. Does it mean free Free of a label?  Free  of  name?  What  does
that mean?
It is merely labelled so it is not free of a label? I’m  not  sure  what  is
the the explanation is.

 of that.
I wonder how you can explain the “NaA” to be free from of namename  or  free
from naming or free from labelling.

Yes, all phenomena are established in as mere name. but  But  phenomena  are
not the names.
Could that be the explanation  of  how  all  phenomena  are  “free  of  from
name”s? I don’t know.


Khen Rinpoche (in English): Could  weyou  say  that  all  phenomena  are  is
names? or Or not?

It is said in The CMWS asserts that all phenomena exist as mere names.  Does
that mean that all phenomena are names? If you can say  that  phenomena  are
not names, then you can could ssay that this is would then  be  the  meaning
of “free of names.”

Student: Khen Rinpoche, can we use the term non-conceptual?
How Lama Tsongkhapa phrased it as, is that it is “free from name.”  But  the
question is w: Whhat exactly does this mean? it mean to be free  from  name?
What is a name?

Khen Rinpoche (in English): What is a name?

Among the three divisions of functioning things, What is a name?  Iis  it  a
form, ? Is ita  consciousness or a ? Or is it  non-associated  compositional
factor?
Of the three divisions of the  functioning  thing,  is  name  consciousness,
form or non-associated compositional factor?

Khen Rinpoche (in English): Is name not form? I think the name is form. ,  I
don’t know.

(Student’s response is inaudible).

Khen Rinpoche (in English): So name is just a sound? Anyway it does not  n’t
matter. w Whatever it is!

Right in the beginning,  when one engages you enter into the debate, as  one
as you makes the first clap, one you recites “ OmM AhH RaA  PaA  DzaTSA  NaA
and end with DhihHI” quickly. This is the whole explanation of emptiness.

After DhiHIh comes , it  is  followed  by  the  prayer,   “May  we  come  to
realisze the meaning of emptiness exactly as it is intended.”.

Next one you observes the non-objectifying the  three  circles.  This  means
recognising that as one proceeds with the debate:, which mean:
-
 • One focuses on oneself, the debater, as not existing inherently.
You carry out the debate focusing on yourself the debater as non-existing
inherently,
 • - The opponent whom one is that you are debating with does not exist
   inherently. and

 • - The activity of debate itself, the activity,  does not exist
   inherently.  as well.

The  intention/mmotivation  behind   doing   this   kind   of   debate   and
analysis/debate is to eliminate the darkness of confusion  or  ignorance  in
one’s mind and in the mind of and other’s but primarily,  it  is  to   mind,
primarily to eliminate the ignorance and /cconfusion in one’s own  mind.  Of
course the gaol effort for that  is  to  realisze  the  ultimate  nature  of
reality.

Therefore from the , right from the beginning of  one’s  formal  entry  into
engaging in this whole exercise  of  dialectics/debate,  starting  from  the
very first clap that you make,  one  you  generates  the  motivation  to  be
intention to be able to arrive at and settle the view  of  selflessness  one
day that can only be achieved when one’s confusion or darkness of  ignorance
is . Because it is only with that one’s confusion/darkness of  ignorance  in
one’s mind can be removed. One engages in such dialectics/ debates with  the
intention  to  be  able  to  realisze  the  ultimate  nature   of   reality,
selflessness. Until this  realisation  is  achieved,  this  selflessness  is
realized, one will just  have  to  continue  to  circleing  in  samsara  and
suffer.

Anyway, that is the main intention behind engaging  in  debateit.  From  the
first  day,  one  you  sets  this  at  kind  of  motivation.  Ideally    and
theoretically this at should be one’s the mindset all the time when  one  is
you are engaging in such dialectics/ debates.

But often wWe are unable to continuously focus place the mind  to  focus  on
that intention, the mind becomes . As it always happens,  many  a  time  the
mind is distracted and then  there comes to  be  athe   distinction  between
oneself as the a challenger and the other as  defender,  i.e.,  I  vs.  you,
arises. there is “you and me.” Then Iin the  process,  we   one  gets  upset
with one another during in the debate.   and  sometimesThis   it  becomes  a
condition for one to become very arrogant or very proud.  This  happens  all
the time.

In the course of engaging in such dialectics/debates, it  helps  if  for  as
long as one can maintain mindfulness on the  fact  that  all  phenomena  how
everything does not exist inherently, such as  like oneself and  the  person
one is debating you are discussing with. Such , then that helps.
The concentration and the ffocus help the mind not to be distracted  and  to
end up in a state of anger or pride.

I guess Rthat right from the very beginning,  when one is formally  entering
into such dialectic/ debates, one is introduced to the purpose  behind  such
an exercise towgether with  a  brief  statement  of  kind  of  stating  tthe
meaning of emptiness.

In our the context here, it is becomes important to have the  same  kind  of
motivation at thought of doing it whenever we  engage  ing  in  discussions.
Thate exercise is also to help one another  to  eliminate  the  darkness  of
ignorance. /confusion. Otherwise, sometimes during in the  discussions,  one
may be unhappy people are  not  happy  with  someone  else’s  one  another’s
answers or questions. When If that it happens often, one’s many times,  then
your discussion partner will becomes an enemy.  Of  course  such  things  do
happen. At that time it  is  as  if  Then  it  is  like  medicine  has  been
transformeding into poison and it loses its power to cure  the  sickness  or
disease.

. As such the medicine which is transformed into poison will not be able  to
cure. It would be ideal  if  we  can  maintain  the  understanding  or  that
feeling of emptiness of inherent existence during  discussions.  If  not,  ,
then as much as possible, one should remember in the back of one’s  to  have
that in the back of the mind that  ,  the  whole  the  point  of  the  whole
exercise  is  to  help  one  another  to  eliminate  each  other’s  our  the
ignorance.

If you can memorise and think about vVerse 5.17, it  is quite  helpful.   if
you can memorize it and think about it. Up to this particular  verse,  i.e.,
from verses  [verse 5.6 to – 5.176, ] are the explanations of  how  all  the
faults and how all the positive qualities arise from the mind.
The conclusion then is that since all  the  faults  and  all  the  qualities
arise from the mind, therefore,  it is essential to guard the mind.
Next section is about striving and guarding the mind. We  will  continue  in
the next lesson.


Interpreted by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme; transcribed by Phuah  Soon  Ek,  Patricia
Lee & Julia Koh; edited by Cecilia Tsong.













