Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Engaging in the Deeds of a Bodhisattva/BP2 M5 L03 final2.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:52:14.683209
================================================================================


Transcript of the teachings by Khen Rinpoche Geshe  Chonyi  on  Engaging  in
the Bodhisattva Deeds, 2014

Root text: Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds by  Shantideva,  translated  by
Toh Sze Gee. Copyright: Toh Sze Gee, 2006; Revised edition, 2014.

Lesson    3                                                               13
February 2014


Precious  human  rebirth  and  the  six  perfections.  Chapter  One:  Verses
1.5–1.14. Explaining the benefits of bodhicitta.


In the last lesson we looked at verse 1.4.

      Verse 1.4
      The leisures and endowments are very hard to find.
      Since they accomplish the purposes of beings,
      If I do not accomplish benefit upon this,
      How will I acquire this in the future?

This is an exhortation to extract  the  essence  from  this  human  life  of
freedoms and endowments. When one reflects on the  difficulty  of  obtaining
this human life of freedoms and endowments:
• One can reflect in terms of the difficulty of actualising the  causes  for
  such a rebirth.
• One can reflect from the viewpoint of its nature.
• One can also reflect on the difficulty through the use of analogies.

The root text is saying that having found now this human  life  of  freedoms
and endowments that is very difficult to find, one has to  use  it.  In  the
context of this text, you are asked to extract the essence from  this  human
life of freedoms and endowments by practicing the meditation on  bodhicitta.
The text is saying that  if  one  wishes  to  meditate  on  bodhicitta,  one
actually has the basis, i.e., the body, for doing so.

As I mentioned before, whether one wishes to  practise  the  Dharma  or  one
wishes to cultivate the mind of enlightenment, it is much easier  to  do  so
on the basis of this human life of freedoms and  endowments  as  it  is  the
ideal basis for such practices.

In the previous lesson, we saw how in order to attain this ideal  basis  for
the  practice  of  the  Dharma,  i.e.,  this  human  life  of  freedoms  and
endowments with its 18 qualities, one  has  to  actualise  its  causes.  The
causes for such a perfect human rebirth is said to be:
• the practice of  pure morality
• complemented with the practices of generosity and so forth and
• completed with the making of pure stainless prayers.

In order to actualise such an ideal basis for the practice of the Dharma  in
the future, one must actualise  its  causes,  without  which  one  will  not
obtain such an opportunity again.

PRECIOUS HUMAN REBIRTH & THE SIX PRACTICES

Practice of generosity
In order to practise the Dharma, first we must have the  means  of  survival
such as food and other necessities  that  will  sustain  our  life.  Without
them, it  will  be  very  difficult  to  practise  the  Dharma.  Having  the
enjoyments and necessities of life  comes  about  through  the  practice  of
generosity.

Practice of ethics
In order to achieve a specific result, first one  must  create  the  correct
cause because there must be concordance between the cause  and  the  result.
Even if you have the necessities for survival such as food, shelter  and  so
forth, you will still need good health. When you do not  have  good  health,
it is very difficult to practise the Dharma. Good health is  the  result  of
having practised ethical discipline in the past. If you  wish  to  obtain  a
good body with good health in your future lives, then you have to  actualise
its cause, the practice of ethics.

Practice of patience
In addition to having a good body, good health and all the  necessities  and
enjoyments for sustaining life, in order to carry out  one’s  practice,  one
will need good companions and helpers. In Tibetan,  it  literally  means  to
have a good entourage.  This is also very important. The  cause  for  having
good helpers and good Dharma friends and not  non-virtuous  friends  is  the
practice of patience. If there is a need to have companions who are  helpful
to your practice in the future, then you have to actualise its cause,  i.e.,
the practice of patience.

Practice of joyous effort
Even when you have all these  three  conditions—the  means  of  survival,  a
suitable body with good health and a circle of companions  and  helpers—this
does not  necessarily guarantee that you will practise the Dharma. In  order
to practise the Dharma, first you must take delight in it,  i.e.,  you  must
want to do it. From your side, you must have  enthusiasm  and  delight.  The
cause for this is joyous effort (or joyous perseverance).

Dharma practice becomes challenging and difficult when we lack any of  these
four favourable conditions. When you do not  have  the  means  of  survival,
when you do not have food to eat, when you do not have  the  necessities  of
life, when you do not have good health, when you do not  have  good  helpers
and companions and when you do not take delight in virtue, when you  do  not
have any enthusiasm for practising the Dharma,  Dharma practice will  become
very difficult.

But if you do  see  the  purpose  of  and  want  to  experience  these  four
favourable conditions in your future lives, then  you  have  to  create  the
causes by practising generosity,  guarding  one’s  ethics  (or  engaging  in
ethical discipline), cultivate patience and strive in joyous effort.

Practice of concentration (or meditative stabilisation)
However even when you have these four conditions, if you are unable to  keep
your mind  focussed  on  virtue  and  you  lack  determination  and  single-
pointedness of mind, i.e.,  concentration, then  some  of  these  favourable
conditions  can  actually  become  the  conditions  for  you   to   generate
afflictions. Is that not the case for many  people?  For  example,  you  may
have all these favourable conditions but they often become  the  causes  for
the generation of  negative  emotions.  Here  when  we  talk  about  single-
pointedness, it is the single-pointedness that is focussed and  very  intent
on virtue. Without that single-pointedness, even  when  the  mind  wants  to
practise virtue, often the other conditions actually become the  causes  for
the generation of afflictions.

Practice of wisdom
Dharma  practice  can  also  be  difficult  without  wisdom.  We  need   the
intelligence that is able to discriminate and differentiate between what  we
need to cultivate and pursue and  what  we  need  to  discard  and  abandon.
Without this kind of wisdom, for example, one will not think of  the  future
and one will simply concentrate only on the here  and  now.  One  will  only
focus on the enjoyments and happiness of this life without thinking  of  the
future and  without  thinking  of  creating  the  causes  for  one’s  future
happiness. When we live our life  in  such  a  way,  not  only  are  we  not
creating the causes for our future happiness, we will actually be  depleting
whatever merit we have accumulated in the past. So discriminating wisdom  is
also indispensable. Without it, while one is depleting and using up all  the
enjoyments that were the result of the practices that one had  done  in  the
past, one will not do the  practices  for  creating  the  causes  for  one’s
future happiness. When all  of  one’s  virtue  is  depleted,  this  will  be
followed by the start of suffering.

Thinking along these lines, it becomes clear that one needs to engage  in  a
certain amount  of  practice  of  the  six  perfections—generosity,  ethics,
patience, joyous effort, some  form  of  concentration  and  some  level  of
wisdom—in order to be able to do some reasonable Dharma practice.

Even when one has all these conditions and one does all these practices,  at
the minimum the motivation has to be turning away  from  attachment  to  the
happiness of this life. This is the minimum and must be  the  driving  force
behind all these practices. Otherwise again it becomes difficult.

Everything I have said was already covered when we look at the lam-rim,  the
stages of the path to  enlightenment.  The  point  is  that  while  we  have
already obtained and still have this human life of freedoms and  endowments,
we need to extract its  essence and make use of it.

We can recite and reflect on verse 1.4, using it to  persuade  ourselves  to
practise the Dharma, reminding ourselves over and over again to extract  the
meaning of this human life. If you do not do this, I guess it  will  not  be
easy to transform your mind and to change yourself.

                                 ~~~~~~~~~~


CHAPTER ONE: EXPLANATION OF THE BENEFITS OF THE MIND OF ENLIGHTENMENT

Instructions on the reasoning behind abandoning negativities and  practising
virtue
      Verse 1.5
      Just as a flash of lightning brightly illuminates
      For an instant within the clouds on a dark night,
      Likewise in this world, through the might of the Buddha,
      Merit and intelligence occasionally occur for once.


      Verse 1.6a
      Hence virtue is perpetually feeble,


Although we have obtained a human life of freedoms and endowments that is  a
suitable basis for practising  the  Dharma,  the  desire  to  practise  pure
Dharma arises very infrequently. Even when it does arise, it only lasts  for
a very short time, just like “a flash of lightning” in the  dark.  Our  non-
virtuous states of mind are very strong and powerful and  they  last  for  a
long time, like the night sky that is completely covered  by  thick  clouds.
So first we have to work at generating the desire  to  practise  Dharma  and
then, using that as the basis, we should seek  to  extend  the  duration  of
those virtuous thoughts.

The text says that the virtuous thoughts that arise in our mind are  due  to
the enlightened influence of the buddhas and due to the power of our  merit.
So we need to cultivate faith and belief in the Dharma  and  aspiration  for
the Dharma. In particular, in this context, we need to  develop  the  belief
in the Mahayana Dharma that is the basis for developing bodhicitta.

It is said that for  those  who  have  vast  and  extensive  belief  in  the
Mahayana Dharma, they will receive the blessing of all  the  buddhas.  Those
who receive the blessing of all the buddhas are the  ones  who  receive  the
blessing to actualise bodhicitta. It is mentioned in one commentary that  it
is very important to strive in cultivating and  developing  this  belief  in
the Mahayana for it is the basis for  bodhicitta.  It  is  advised  that  we
should cultivate this belief in the Mahayana Dharma on the basis  of  having
found this human life of freedoms and endowments.

We know from our own experience how difficult it is  for  virtuous  thoughts
to arise. Even when they do arise, they do not last for  a  long  time.  The
commentary is saying that with regard to  whatever  virtuous  thoughts  that
may arise, we should try not to lose them. We  should  try  to  sustain  the
continuity of those thoughts and try to increase those thoughts.  Basically,
there is this advice to cultivate this belief in  the  Mahayana  Dharma.  By
doing  this,  we  will  be  establishing  the  foundation   for   developing
bodhicitta.

Explaining the benefits of bodhicitta
~ The potential to destroy all negativities and accomplish all virtues
 A   Destroying great negativities
 B   The potential to accomplish supreme bliss
 C   The potential to accomplish whatever one wishes

A   Destroying great negativities
Let us look at how bodhicitta has the power to destroy great negativities.

      Verse 1.6 b,c,d
      The great power of negativities, horrible.
      Except for a mind of complete enlightenment
      By what other virtue will it be overcome?


I briefly mentioned before that there are two types of bodhicitta.  The  two
types of bodhicitta are:
1. conventional bodhicitta
2. ultimate bodhicitta

The bodhicitta that we are  talking  about  now  is  primarily  conventional
bodhicitta,  i.e.,  we  are  talking  about  the  benefits  of  conventional
bodhicitta. One of these benefits is that it has the great power to  destroy
all negativities.

In the commentary, it is said that  even  when  one  accumulates  non-virtue
that causes one to be reborn in hell but one manages to develop  bodhicitta,
this bodhicitta will outshine or overwhelm those  heavy  negativities.  When
we compare the power of those negativities to the power of  bodhicitta,  the
power of those negativities become small.

Let us think about this. Why is it  that  when  bodhicitta  arises,  it  can
overwhelm and outshine even very heavy negative karma?  When  bodhicitta  is
generated and arises, one accumulates  a  vast  amount  of  merit  and  very
powerful  virtue.  You  could  say  that  this  merit  is  immeasurable  and
limitless. That is what makes even those very heavy  negative  karma  almost
powerless and small in comparison.

B  Potential to accomplish supreme bliss
      Verse 1.7
      All the Lords of Subduers who have contemplated for many eons
      Have seen it to be beneficial;
      For by it the immeasurable masses of beings
      Will easily attain the supreme happiness.

The buddhas thought about this for a very very long time and  saw  that  the
most beneficial thing for sentient beings is bodhicitta, that it is  like  a
seed with which the immeasurable  number  of  sentient  beings  can  achieve
supreme happiness.

C  The potential to accomplish whatever one wishes
      Verse 1.8
      Those who wish to destroy the multitudes of sufferings of existence,
      Those who wish to dispel the unhappiness of sentient beings,
      And those who wish to enjoy multitudes of happiness,
      Should never forsake the mind of enlightenment.


“Those who wish to destroy the multitudes of sufferings  of  existence”:  We
can relate this to the persons training in the path that is shared with  the
persons of small and medium capacities,  i.e.,  those  people  who  want  to
destroy the sufferings of samsara should meditate on bodhicitta.

“Those who wish to dispel  the  unhappiness  of  sentient  beings”:  We  can
relate this to the persons training in the path  of  the  persons  of  great
capacity.

“And those who wish to enjoy multitudes of happiness”:  The  happiness  here
refers to the happiness of being human beings or gods, i.e.,  the  happiness
of a good rebirth. You can relate this to the persons of small  capacity  or
those who are training their minds in the  path  that  is  shared  with  the
person  of  small  capacity.  Even  such  people  should  also  meditate  on
bodhicitta.

In simple terms, you can say that:
• Those who wish to destroy the multitudes of sufferings of  samsara  should
  meditate on bodhicitta.
• Those who wish to dispel the unhappiness and suffering of sentient  beings
  should also meditate on bodhicitta.
• Those who are looking for a good  rebirth  either  as  a  human  being  or
  worldly god should also meditate on bodhicitta and never forsake it.

In general, you do not need to develop bodhicitta to get out of  samsara  or
to achieve a good rebirth as a human being or god. But  the  point  here  is
that when one actualises bodhicitta, all those different goals will also  be
achieved easily. This is advice that is given from the  perspective  of  the
practice of the Mahayana.

~ Attaining the special name and purpose
The next benefit of bodhicitta is that one becomes special in  name  and  in
meaning.

Khen Rinpoche: Does anybody want a special name? If yes, then you know  what
to do.

      Verse 1.9
      When the mind of enlightenment is generated, in that moment,
      Those wretched ones fettered in the jail of cyclic existence
      Will be called “Child of the Sugatas,”
      And will become objects of reverence by the humans and gods of the
      world.

When bodhicitta is developed and it arises in one’s  mind,  one  acquires  a
special name. The name is a “Child of the Sugatas.” In addition to  becoming
special in name, one becomes special in meaning  in  that  one  becomes  the
object of reverence of  humans and gods.

We are still talking here about an ordinary person, the sentient  being  who
generates bodhicitta initially. He is still  an  ordinary  being  in  cyclic
existence but whoever  he or she  may  be—it  can  even  be  an  animal—once
bodhicitta arises in the mind,  that  being  becomes  a  special  object  of
reverence.

Here we are talking  about  an  ordinary  person  in  cyclic  existence  who
develops bodhicitta for the first time. When bodhicitta arises, that  person
is still an ordinary being without  any  special  or  exalted  qualities  of
abandonments or realisations. Nevertheless this person becomes  a  child  of
the Sugatas, a special object  of  reverence  because  of  having  developed
bodhicitta. So when one actualises bodhicitta, one becomes special  in  name
and in meaning.

~ Explaining the benefits by means of an analogy
     A   An analogy of the inferior becoming the supreme
  B   An analogy of the difficulty in obtaining it and its great value
  C   An analogy of an inexhaustible effect and an effect that is magnified
  D   An analogy of the potential for being protected from great fear
  E   An analogy of destroying negativities without difficulty
  F  The way benefits are taught in the sutras


A   An analogy of the inferior becoming the supreme
      Verse 1.10
      Like the supreme gold-making elixir,
      It takes the unclean body and transforms it
      Into the priceless jewel, a Victor’s body.
      Therefore, firmly seize this so-called “mind of enlightenment.”

Using the analogy of a small amount of gold-making elixir that  is  able  to
transform a lot of iron into gold, likewise  bodhicitta  can  transform  our
unclean body, i.e., unclean in terms of  its  cause  and  in  terms  of  its
nature, into the exalted body of a buddha.  We  are  not  saying  that  once
bodhicitta arises in the mind, the actual unclean physical  body  transforms
into the exalted body of a buddha. Of course that is not possible. But  what
it means is that when bodhicitta arises, from  then  on,  on  the  basis  of
having this unclean body, one can achieve enlightenment.

From the perspective of sutra:
• It is the factor of method that primarily refers to bodhicitta that is
  responsible for achieving the form body, the rupakaya.
• It is the factor of wisdom that primarily refers to the wisdom directly
  perceiving emptiness that is responsible for achieving the truth body, the
  dharmakaya.

When you look at  the  sutric  explanation  of  the  substantial  cause  for
achieving the form body of a buddha, upon deeper  analysis,  you  will  find
that  explanation  inadequate.  A  detailed  explanation   of   the   actual
substantial cause of form body of the buddha can only be found in tantra.

B   An analogy of the difficulty in obtaining it and its great value
      Verse 1.11
      Since the sole helmsmen of migrating beings, the limitless mind,
      Has upon thorough investigation seen its preciousness,
      All beings wishing to be free from the abodes of migration,
      Firmly seize this precious mind of enlightenment.

This is an analogy of its rarity and  preciousness.  The  analogy  is  of  a
captain of a boat who leads a group of  people  to  seek  treasures  in  the
middle of the ocean. You need a captain who can lead  them  to  the  correct
spot and enable them to retrieve the treasures from the ocean. Likewise  the
buddhas have seen that bodhicitta is the best thing  for  accomplishing  the
welfare of the sentient beings. Bodhicitta is  priceless  for  it  can  lead
sentient beings out of all suffering. Therefore one should  always  hold  on
to bodhicitta.

C   An analogy of an inexhaustible effect and an effect that is magnified
Next is an analogy of the unending and increasing result.

      Verse 1.12
      All other virtues are like the plantain tree,
      For after bearing fruit they will be exhausted.
      But the tree of the mind of enlightenment will constantly bear fruit,
      Whereby it is inexhaustible and flourishes more and more.

The text is saying that if we want to have unceasing virtues, i.e.,  virtues
that are constantly increasing, then we should meditate  on  bodhicitta.  It
is said that when we have bodhicitta, our virtues will always increase  like
some trees that  constantly  bear  fruit,  i.e.,  they  continually  produce
fruit. This is an analogy of how bodhicitta causes our virtues  to  increase
always.

Virtues that are not conjoined  with  bodhicitta  are  likened  to  plantain
tree. Such trees are said to only produce fruit  once.  After  they  produce
fruit, the tree dies and it does not produce any more fruit.

So this is said to  be  one  of  the  benefits  of  bodhicitta,  i.e.,  once
bodhicitta arises in our mind, our  virtues  would  be  unceasing  and  will
carry on increasing. Usually  at  the  end  of  a  particular  activity,  we
dedicate the  merit  that  is  accumulated.  When  we  dedicate  that  merit
conjoined with bodhicitta, it will be a cause  for  the  merit  to  increase
more and more.

Here we are just talking about the benefits of bodhicitta in general.  There
is so much more to be  said  about  the  virtues  that  are  conjoined  with
bodhicitta. Whether the virtues  that  are  conjoined  with  bodhicitta  are
necessarily unceasing or not, there is so much more to be said  about  them.
I think there was some discussion on this topic in the previous  module.  We
have covered this already. You can read up on this if you like  and  if  you
have questions pertaining to this, you can always bring it up in class.

D  An analogy of the potential for being protected from great fear
Next is the analogy for the ability of bodhicitta to rescue one from great
danger.


      Verse 1.13
      Like depending on a hero when greatly afraid,
      Even if I may have committed very terrible negativities,
      I shall be swiftly liberated in dependence upon it.
      Why then do those who have the imprints not depend on it?

It is said that the best method for purifying  heavy  negativities  such  as
the five actions of immediate retribution  (or  five  uninterrupted  karmas)
and so forth is by generating bodhicitta. It  is  like  travelling  along  a
very dangerous road. When  one  has  someone  who  is  confident  and  brave
walking ahead of oneself,  one  will  be  less  afraid.  Likewise  when  one
develops bodhicitta, there is no need  to  be  fearful  of  these  extremely
heavy negativities such as the five actions of  immediate  retribution  that
one has accumulated for it is said that even they can be purified.

E  An analogy of destroying negativities without difficulty
Next is an analogy for how bodhicitta destroys negativities effortlessly.

      Verse 1.14 a,b
      Just like the fire at the end of time,
      In an instant it certainly burns up the great negativities.


In the teachings of the Buddha, there is a presentation  of  how  the  world
system comes into being and  how  it  will  go  out  of  existence.  When  a
particular world  system  undergoes  disintegration  and  destruction,  that
destruction will be caused by fire. During that time, all  the  abodes  from
the level of the first concentration and below that  will  be  destroyed  by
this fire at the end of the eon.  The  power  of  bodhicitta  in  destroying
negativities is likened to this fire that destroys the world at the  end  of
its existence.

What is the difference  then  between  the  earlier  benefit  where  it  was
mentioned  that   bodhicitta   can   completely   overwhelm   and   outshine
negativities created (Verse 1.6 b,c,d) and this  particular  benefit  (Verse
1.14 a,b) where it says that bodhicitta can destroy the negativities “in  an
instant”?

You can think about this. It was said that when bodhicitta arises  in  one’s
mind, that bodhicitta will outshine or  overwhelm  all  one’s  negativities.
This is an explanation of bodhicitta in general but does it apply  to  every
instance of bodhicitta or all kinds of bodhicitta?

If  you  remember  the  discussion  on  the  paths  and  grounds,  when  the
bodhisattva achieves the forbearance level of the path  of  preparation,  he
achieves the confidence that he will never fall back into the  lower  realms
again. Could we relate this benefit to this achievement as it was  explained
earlier that the negativities mentioned refer  to  those  negativities  that
will throw us into  the  lower  realms?  Could  we  apply  that  benefit  to
specifically mean gaining that confidence of  not  falling  into  the  lower
realms when one achieves the forbearance level of the path of preparation?

F  The way benefits are taught in the sutras
      Verse 1.14 c,d
      Its unfathomable benefits were explained
      To Sudhana by the wise Protector Maitreya.


In  the  Arrays  of  Stalks  Sutra,  Maitreya  explained  to  Sudhana   that
bodhicitta is like:
• the seed of all the teachings of the Buddha
• fuel because bodhicitta increases  the  white  dharmas  of  all  migrating
  beings
• the noble vase because it perfectly  accomplishes  all  thoughts  and  all
  wishes.[1]

These are the benefits  of  bodhicitta.  As  said  in  the  teachings,  when
bodhicitta arises in the mind:
• One is able to finish the accumulation of merit easily.
• One is able to purify negativities easily.
• One is able to accomplish effortlessly the aims of oneself  and  the  aims
  and welfare of others.
• One becomes impervious as one will not be easily affected by problems  and
  obstacles.


In essence, Shantideva says that:
• If you want to be free from samsara, meditate on bodhicitta.
• If you want to free others from their suffering and unhappiness,  meditate
  on bodhicitta
• If you want to get a good rebirth as a human being  or  god,  meditate  on
  bodhicitta.

Basically, when one has bodhicitta, one accomplishes all one’s goals. It  is
with bodhicitta that one will be able to finish the  accumulation  of  merit
and purify one’s negativities easily. When bodhicitta arises, one  will  not
face obstacles, because when bodhicitta  arises,  there  is  no  more  self-
cherishing. Since self-cherishing is the source of all  one’s  problems  and
obstacles, in  the  absence  of  self-cherishing,  there  will  not  be  any
obstacles at all. It  is  because  of  self-cherishing  that  one  does  not
accomplish one’s own goals and one cannot accomplish the welfare of  others.
So when self-cherishing is destroyed, one will be able to  accomplish  one’s
own purposes and the welfare of others effortlessly.

I do not really know how to give a good explanation but you should read  the
text and think about it. The point is that you have to  generate  belief  in
bodhicitta. When you have belief in  bodhicitta,  then  you  will  have  the
aspiration  for  and  faith  in  bodhicitta.  It  is  that  aspiration   for
bodhicitta that will kickstart your practice to cultivate  and  meditate  on
bodhicitta.

                                 ~~~~~~~~~~~

Question: I want to  clarify  the  way  conventional  bodhicitta  overwhelms
negativities. Does it mean that it reduces or does it  actually  remove  the
conditions for that  negative karma to ripen? It is not that it  causes  the
negative karma to become like a burnt seed.

Answer: It is mentioned that one of the benefits is  that  negativities  are
outshined or overwhelmed by bodhicitta (Verse 1.6  b,c,d).  When  bodhicitta
arises, it outshines the negativities, i.e.,  it  renders  the  negativities
powerless.

But whether the seeds  of  those  negativities  are  removed  or  not  is  a
different question. Think of this example. On a  bright  day,  although  the
moon is always up there in the sky, because the sun is shining so  brightly,
you cannot see the moon. The  sun  completely  outshines  the  moon.  It  is
similar  here.  Whether  the  seed  of  the  negative  karma   is   rendered
ineffective or powerless is something that we need to think about.

The seed of the non-virtue that  causes  rebirth  in  the  lower  realms  is
probably only rendered powerless upon achieving  the  forbearance  level  of
the Mahayana path of preparation. So when we  think  about  this  particular
benefit of bodhicitta, i.e.   outshining  the  negativities,  does  it  mean
outshining  them  in  terms  of  rendering  the  seeds  of  the  non-virtues
powerless or does it mean simply preventing and not allowing the  result  to
arise?


Interpreted by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme; transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek,  Vivien  Ng
and Aki Yeo; edited by Cecilia Tsong.



-----------------------
[1] “O Noble Son, the awakening mind is like the seed of  all  the  buddhas’
qualities. Since it increases the wholesome qualities of all  beings  it  is
like a field; since it supports each and every  creature,  it  is  like  the
earth; since it perfectly severs all poverty, it is like the god of  wealth;
since it affords complete protection to  all  bodhisattvas,  it  is  like  a
father; since it perfectly accomplishes all aims, it is  like  the  king  of
wish-fulfilling gems; since it completely  fulfils  all  intentions,  it  is
like an auspicious vase...O Noble Son, the awakening mind  is  endowed  with
such excellent virtues as these as well as  limitless  other  benefits.”  (A
Guide to the Bodhisattva’s Way of Life,  translated  by  Stephen  Batchelor,
Copyright: Library of Tibetan Works and  Archives,  Dharamsala,  1979,  page
169).


