Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Engaging in the Deeds of a Bodhisattva/BP2 M5 L43 final.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:52:17.084644
================================================================================


Transcript of the teachings by Khen Rinpoche Geshe  Chonyi  on  Engaging  in
the Bodhisattva Deeds, 2014

Root text: Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds by  Shantideva,  translated  by
Toh Sze Gee. Copyright: Toh Sze Gee, 2006; Revised edition, 2014.

Lesson  43                                                                12
August 2014


Chapter seven: Verses 7. 16 – 7. 30
 • Classifying joyous effort
 • Abandoning the laziness that is disheartened about virtue (V. 7.16 – V.
   7. 30)


Recently we looked at the laziness that clings  to  unwholesome  activities,
i.e., the laziness that is attached to doing  things  that  are  essentially
not beneficial. In that section, we were told that  if  we  live  our  whole
life under the control of our ignorance, anger and attachment distracted  by
many things, that will be entirely inappropriate.  Rather  than  living  our
life in such a way, we should practise the Dharma.

The advice to abandon this kind of laziness is  essentially  the  advice  to
practise the Dharma because the Dharma is the real cause of  happiness.  The
antidote to the laziness that  is  attached  to  ignoble  activities  is  to
develop an enthusiasm for the Dharma. It is  through  such  enthusiasm  that
one abandons and counteracts this kind of laziness.

We have to practise the Buddhadharma for it  is  the  cause  of  everlasting
happiness. The subject matter of the entire  Buddhadharma  is  contained  in
the three scriptural collections. The heart or  the  meaning  of  the  three
scriptural collections is essentially the three higher trainings.

One of the  things  that  stops  us  from  actualising  these  three  higher
trainings is distraction. We are distracted solely by the  affairs  of  this
life. If we live our life working only for the affairs and the happiness  of
this  life,  then  we  will  not  be  able  to  actualise  the  Dharma.  The
Buddhadharma is the cause of everlasting infinite happiness.

One of the things that stop us from actualising the Dharma is  the  laziness
that clings  to  unwholesome  activities  such  as  the  attachment  to  the
happiness of this life. One of the ways to counteract this kind of  laziness
is to develop real enthusiasm from the heart for the  Buddhadharma.  It  has
to be a heartfelt enthusiasm for the Buddhadharma, which comes  from  seeing
that the Buddhadharma is the cause of everlasting infinite happiness.

Having said  that,  even  if  one  has  such  enthusiasm  for  virtue,  such
enthusiasm for actualising the Dharma, but  if  one  feels  discouraged—that
is, one has the laziness that is disheartened about virtue or  the  laziness
of discouragement—that will also be a big obstacle. As such,  the  following
sections of the text deal with this kind of laziness.

Right from the beginning, it is very important to have the  confidence  that
we can definitely engage in the practice  and  actualise  it.  So  from  the
outset, it is important to uplift one’s  mind  and  mood  and  to  have  the
confidence that one can do the practice.

CLASSIFYING JOYOUS EFFORT

Of the different ways of classifying  joyous  effort,  one  type  of  joyous
effort is known as armour-like joyous effort.

When warriors go to war, they put on armour to  protect  themselves  against
all kinds of weapons. Similarly right from the beginning  of  the  practice,
one must put on this armour-like joyous effort, an attitude that thinks,  “I
can definitely do this.” It is a heartfelt enthusiasm  for  Dharma  and  for
virtue. Before you engage in the practice, you need  to  uplift  one’s  mind
and one’s mood. The armour-like joyous effort is  the  preparation  for  the
practice.

Then when one engages in the actual practice, i.e., when one starts  on  the
process of the  actual  practice,  then  one  needs  the  joyous  effort  of
application, which is enthusiasm for whatever one  is  doing  while  one  is
doing it. During the time of the actual practice, one takes up the  practice
sincerely with enthusiasm and one carries out the practice with  mindfulness
and introspection.

During the actual practice, it is extremely important  to  do  the  practice
and  carry  out  whatever  one  has  decided  on  without   any   sense   of
discouragement, thinking, “Really, I can’t do this.” One needs to have  that
kind  of  joyous  effort  of  non-inferiority  (or  joyous  effort  of  non-
discouragement).

Then there is also the joyous  effort  of  non-complacency  (or  the  joyous
effort of non-contentment). If one has already started on  engaging  in  the
practice of the Buddhadharma or  in  the  practice  of  some  virtue,  after
having accomplished a little bit, one shouldn’t have the idea, “I have  done
enough.” Instead, one should think, “I am going to continue to practise  and
work even harder.” One should not feel satisfied or  content  with  whatever
one is able to do but rather one should strive to be able to do more.

ABANDONING THE LAZINESS THAT IS DISHEARTENED ABOUT VIRTUE


      Verse 7.16
      Without despondency, I should gather the masses of army
      And diligently take control of myself.
      Through equalizing self with others and
      Exchanging self for others,


I guess this verse is talking about the four types of joyous effort:
 • Before one starts on any virtuous endeavour or Dharma practice, one must
   have a sense of enthusiasm, i.e., one’s mood and spirits must  be  high.
   So one must uplift the mind. That is armour-like joyous perseverance.
 • As one starts to engage in the practice, that engagement  must  be  done
   happily and with enthusiasm. That is the joyous effort of application.
 • In the process of doing the practice, one must do so with enthusiasm and
   without any discouragement, i.e., applying the  joyous  effort  of  non-
   inferiority, and one does the practice mindfully and with introspection.


 • Then comes a point in  time  when  one  achieves  calm-abiding  and  the
   pliancy of the body and mind. That is when one gains control over  one’s
   body and mind and one is able to employ them in any virtue  one  wishes.
   When one has that kind of ability, from then on, one  has  mastery  over
   one’s body and mind. That comes from  achieving  calm-abiding.  I  guess
   that is when the last type of joyous effort—the joyous  effort  of  non-
   complacency—can really set in, because from that time onwards,  one  can
   really strive in the practice.
I guess this is the meaning of the first two lines of Verse 7.16.

After having gained some mastery over one’s body and mind as the  result  of
achieving calm- abiding, one then meditates on  bodhicitta  through  methods
such as exchanging self and others. This will be covered in  greater  detail
in the next chapter, Chapter Eight on concentration.

If you think about the presentation of the progression  of  these  different
practices, it is said clearly that the cultivation of  the  actual  practice
or the real practice of bodhicitta comes after one has gained  mastery  over
one’s body and mind, which is the effect of having actualised  calm-abiding.


Having said that, perhaps this is why according to some views such as  those
presented in the textbooks of Sera Je, one  needs  calm-abiding  before  one
can actualise bodhicitta. If  you  look  at  how  things  are  presented  in
Shantideva’s text, perhaps one could argue that there is some  truth  behind
that assertion, i.e., that one could only  actualise  bodhicitta  after  one
has calm-abiding.

When I looked at Verses 7.17 to 7.19, they are essentially the antidotes  or
remedies  to  counteract  despondency  or  discouragement.  Their  essential
meaning is that if one puts in the right effort  and  cultivates  bodhicitta
without giving up the bodhisattva trainings, then there  is  no  reason  why
one cannot achieve enlightenment. The text says that  even  so-called  lowly
creatures  such  as  flies,  mosquitoes,  bees  and  insects   can   achieve
enlightenment if the conditions are right. What reason then is there for  us
not to achieve enlightenment?

In Verse 7.18, it says, “Even those who  are  flies,  mosquitoes,  bees  and
likewise worms/ Will win the unsurpassable enlightenment,” if  they  put  in
the effort!

Primarily the argument that is being made by this line is that all  sentient
beings  including  the  flies,  mosquitoes  and   so   forth   can   achieve
enlightenment because all sentient beings possess  the  buddha  lineage  (or
buddha nature). This is because the nature of  the  minds  of  all  sentient
beings  is  clear  light  and  their  obscurations   and   defilements   are
adventitious in that it is not in the nature of the mind to  be  defiled  or
obscured. These defilements and  obscurations  are  there  but  fortunately,
they are temporary and can be removed through the application of  antidotes.
As such, this is one of the main reasons that show why all  sentient  beings
indeed have the potential to achieve full enlightenment.

More details on this subject can be found in the next module next year  when
we look  at  Chapter  One  of  the  Uttaratantra  or  the  Mahayana  Sublime
Continuum. By  understanding  how  we  ourselves  and  all  sentient  beings
possess the buddha lineage and the potential to achieve  full  enlightenment
or omniscience if  we  work  at  it,  we  can  counteract  the  laziness  of
discouragement.

Perhaps it would be beneficial if you could  memorise  Verse  7.19  so  that
whenever you feel hopeless or discouraged, then you  can  think  about  this
verse.

      Verse 7.19
      Since I have been born human by race
      And recognize what is beneficial and what is harmful,
      If I do not forsake the deeds of enlightenment,
      Why will I not attain enlightenment?

If you think about it, it is really very  difficult,  in  general,  to  feel
discouraged about practising Dharma.

Khen Rinpoche: True? Not true? Interesting! That means you are working  very
hard. You are practising Dharma. If that is not true,  that  means  you  are
working day and night practising Dharma. You get what I am saying?

I think the practice never discourages us. We  think,  “I  want  to  achieve
enlightenment. That is my motivation.” With that, we  recite  some  mantras,
do some daily practice, some studies and then  we  feel  content.  “That  is
great. I am doing great!” So for us, there is no room to be discouraged.

We are not at that level of practice  where  we  ever  get  discouraged.  So
discouragement sets in for  which  kind  of  practitioner?  This  person  is
somebody who understands what enlightenment is, what a buddha really is.  In
short, this person understands that a buddha is somebody who has  eliminated
every single fault and have accomplished every single quality.

This person understands that such a state doesn’t happen without  any  cause
or condition. Rather this person fully understands that any  individual  who
wants to actualise this state needs to  accomplish  limitless  varieties  of
tasks and know the overall picture, understanding what practice  has  to  be
done at what stage, without mixing things up or missing out  anything.  This
person understands that that  individual  must  carry  out  these  limitless
tasks over a very long period of time, i.e.,  countless  eons.  This  person
has the complete understanding of all these points and has real  conviction.
But when he is about to start on the practice, he  feels,  “This  is  really
tough. It is not easy.” That is what you call discouragement.

Khen Rinpoche: So we don’t have  that.  We  don’t  have  the  last  type  of
laziness.

We have only the first two (types of laziness) but it looks  like  we  don’t
have the last one.  We also don’t need  the  antidote  (for  it).  Since  we
don’t have it (the last type of laziness), so we don’t need the antidote.

There are some practitioners who understand these various things. The  cause
of them getting discouraged is their understanding that in order to  achieve
omniscience, they have to engage in the extensive bodhisattva deeds such  as
the practice of the perfection of generosity. This is said  to  involve  the
giving up of one’s body or one’s life when  it  is  appropriate  to  do  so.
Faced by such a prospect, then there are some who will think, “I  understand
I need to do this but I don’t think I can  do  it.  No  way!”  That  is  how
discouragement sets in.

Such worry or fear is stated in Verse 7. 20.

      Verse 7.20
      OPINION: Having to give away my legs, arms,
      And so forth frightens me.
      RESPONSE: Without analyzing what is heavy and what is light,
      I am reduced to fear through confusion


      Verse 7.21
      Over countless billions of eons
      I have been cut, stabbed, burned,
      And chopped up many times
      But I will not attain enlightenment. [1]


The essential response to this fear is that this kind of fear is  unfounded.
In the first place, you are not afraid of what you need to fear but you  are
frightened by what you do not need to fear.

The answer continues by saying, “It is a different  thing  if  you  have  to
lose your head, your arm and so forth after having generated bodhicitta  but
what if  you  hadn’t  generate  bodhicitta?  Does  that  mean  that  without
bodhicitta you don’t lose your arms, legs and so forth?”

Khen Rinpoche: Are you getting the point?

In the first place, do you understand what the fear  is  about?   What  some
people are afraid of is engaging in  the  bodhisattva  deeds  of  giving  up
their bodies or having to sacrifice parts of their bodies.

If you don’t develop bodhicitta,  if  you  don’t  practise  the  bodhisattva
deeds and at the same time, if you don’t end  up  losing  your  body,  legs,
arms and so forth for whatever reason, then maybe there is a reason for  you
to be afraid of the bodhisattva deeds of having to give up your body.

But obviously that isn’t the case because  we  don’t  have  any  bodhicitta.
Neither have we engaged in any bodhisattva deeds.  But  since  beginningless
lifetimes up to now, how  many  lifetimes  have  we  been  cut,  beaten  and
chopped up for nothing? Although we have been cut,  beaten  and  chopped  up
many times in the past, none of those  experiences  benefited  us.  None  of
those experiences brought us any closer to enlightenment.

      Verse 7.22
      Yet this suffering
      For my accomplishing enlightenment will have a limit;
      It is like the suffering of having an incision made
      In order to eliminate the harm of pain destroying it inside.

Even if we have to put up with suffering, engage  in  austerities  and  bear
hardships  in  the  process  of  working  for  omniscience,  still  whatever
hardships that may be  involved  are  still  relatively  small.  Furthermore
there is also a limit to them in terms of the time span of  three  countless
great eons. It may sound very long but still we can put a number  to  it  so
there is a limit and there will be an end to those  hardships.  It  is  like
putting up with a small problem in order to overcome a big problem.

      Verse 7.23
      Even all doctors eliminate illness
      With unpleasant medical treatments,
      So in order to overcome manifold sufferings
      I should put up with little discomfort.

Do you think that the last two lines of Verses 7.22 and 7.23 are an  analogy
of bearing hardships in  order  to  achieve  the  greater  purpose  of  full
enlightenment? If so, how does the analogy works?

I don’t know whether the last  two  lines  of  Verses  7.22  and  V7.23  are
driving at the same thing or not?

      Verse 7.24
      But the Supreme Physician does not employ
      Such ordinary remedies;
      With a very gentle procedure
      He remedies the boundless great ailments.

Verse 7.24 says that the  Buddha  shows  us  the  method  to  cure  the  big
diseases without having to experience the slightest suffering. The point  is
that when the Buddha shows us the path  of  freedom  to  enlightenment,  his
path is not like ordinary solutions. He is not like the ordinary doctor  who
prescribes all kinds of unpleasant tasting medicines  and  make  us  undergo
medical procedures that involve cutting  up  the  body  and  so  forth.  But
rather, the Buddha helps us to overcome all the problems  by  showing  us  a
solution that leads from bliss and happiness to bliss and happiness.  It  is
a path that brings only joy.

The Buddha prescribes a happy, blissful and joyful path that leads on  to  a
happy, blissful and joyful result. If  you  look  at  the  instructions  for
carrying out the practice of meditation or  changing  the  mind,  it  always
involves the advice to find a suitable seat. The  Buddha  doesn’t  recommend
unnecessary discomforts or austerities. We are always advised to  sit  on  a
comfortable seat. While seated  in  a  comfortable  posture,  then  we  look
within as the practice is done inside with  the  mind.  It  doesn’t  involve
much externally as it focuses on the inside. What the Buddha has  prescribed
is the medicine and the method to eradicate karma and afflictions, which  is
the root and the source of all our problems,  including  sicknesses  and  so
forth.

The method that the Buddha has prescribed is soft and gentle  and  does  not
involve harming or hurting ourselves. Having said that, how do we  reconcile
this with having to give up your head, your legs and your arms? There  seems
to be a contradiction here.

Khen Rinpoche:  In order to get enlightened, do you have  to  give  up  your
limbs and head? If you say  no,  the  next  question  is  how  do  you  then
complete the perfection of generosity?

(Student’s response is inaudible).

Khen Rinpoche:  Do you have to give up your body to get enlightened?

(Student’s response is inaudible).

Khen Rinpoche:  That means you haven’t read the text. Whether  you  have  to
give or don’t have to give? If you don’t give your limbs and so  forth,  can
you achieve the perfection of generosity?

The answer is in the next verse.


      Verse 7.25
      At the beginning, the Guide applies
      The giving of such things as vegetables.
      Later, having become accustomed to that,
      One may progressively give away even one’s flesh.

“One may progressively give away even one’s  flesh.”  What  does  this  line
mean?

Verse 7.25 is the answer to that potential qualm. As stated earlier,  people
found that they cannot reconcile the fact that, on the one  hand,  the  path
that the Buddha has prescribed is said to be a  gentle  one  that  does  not
involve any harm to  oneself.  On  the  other  hand  however,  there  is  an
instruction  of  giving  up  one’s  life   and   one’s   body   to   achieve
enlightenment.

The answer is  in  Verse  7.25.  At  the  beginning  of  one’s  practice  of
generosity, one gives away what one finds easy to part with such as a  plate
of vegetables. There are  also  instructions  to  accustom  oneself  to  the
practice of generosity, i.e.,  to  generate  and  increase  the  thought  of
giving. In the lam-rim, it is explained how one could practise  giving  from
one’s right hand to one’s left and from one’s left hand to one’s right.  One
could also verbalise one’s intent, “I want to give this and I want  to  give
that.”
So  it  is  getting  oneself  used  to  that  attitude  of  giving.  Through
familiarising oneself to the idea of  giving,  then  one’s  willingness  and
ability to give  will  gradually  increase.  It  is  said  that  because  of
thorough habituation or familiarity  with  the  practice  of  perfection  of
giving, there will come a point in time when one can give  away  one’s  body
without any sense of loss.

It is also said that the bodhisattvas reach a point in their practice  where
they are even able to give away their body without any sense  of  loss.  For
such bodhisattvas, giving away their body is  like  someone  giving  away  a
plate of vegetables. They don’t feel any sense  of  loss  and  there  is  no
attachment holding them back at all.

      Verse 7.26
      At such a time when I have generated a mind
      That regards my body as being like vegetables,
      Then what hardship will there be
      When it comes to giving away my flesh?


It is said that those who are not expert or skilful in the correct order  of
the practice of training their mind in the path  and  do  not  know  how  to
progress stage by stage, these are the people who  experience  physical  and
mental difficulties. It is said that for those who  know  how  to  go  about
doing their practice correctly and in the correct order and so  forth,  they
don’t experience any hardship.

      Verse 7.27
      Due to having abandoned negativities there is no suffering
      And due to skill there is no unhappiness.
      Thus mind and body are harmed
      By wrong conceptions and negativities.

Earlier on, we had looked at  the  divisions  of  mind  generation.  If  you
divide mind generation into four, then there is the mind generation that  is
associated with the path of seeing. This is  the  mind  generation  of  pure
resolve  and  is  basically  the  mind  generation  in  the   continuum   of
bodhisattvas. Because of having that mind generation,  they  have  abandoned
the non-virtues of body, speech and mind, which  are  essentially  the  main
causes of experiencing  physical  pain.  Because  they  have  abandoned  the
causes of physical pain, so even when these bodhisattvas cut and  give  away
their body, they don’t experience any physical pain.

The  bodhisattvas  on  the  first  ground  have  perceived  the  meaning  of
selflessness directly. Therefore they are expert and skilled in  seeing  the
truth or reality directly. As such, even when they  give  away  their  body,
they don’t experience any mental suffering.

For the rest of us, we are not superior bodhisattvas. If we  give  away  any
part of our body, we will feel both physical and mental pain and  suffering.

 • We experience physical suffering because we have not  yet  abandoned  the
   negativities such as killing, stealing and so forth. So when we  cut  and
   give away our body, we will experience physical pain.
 •  Because  we  have  not  yet  abandoned   the   intellectually   acquired
   afflictions,  therefore  we  experience  mental  suffering.  People  like
   ourselves hold on very strongly to and  grasp  at  the  ‘I’  and  ‘mine’.
   Therefore we have the bases for experiencing mental pain and suffering if
   we were to give away our body.

In the Supplement to the Middle Way, Chandrakirti said  that  when  superior
bodhisattvas hear someone requesting them to  give  away  their  body,  they
feel so happy and experience immeasurable joy.

It is said that the joy that such bodhisattvas experience  just  by  hearing
such a request far exceeds the joy that is experienced  by  the  hearer  and
solitary realizer foe-destroyers  (or  arhats)  while  in  their  meditative
equipoise on the ultimate nature of reality. During that time, those  arhats
are in a very peaceful state. But the joy that the  bodhisattvas  experience
when they hear the request for their body to be  given  is  said  to  exceed
even the joy that is experienced by the arhats at that time.

It is said that if those bodhisattvas get to actually  offer  their  bodies,
they experience even more happiness.  The  joy  that  they  experience  then
greatly exceeds the joy that they experience from hearing  the  request  for
their bodies to be given.

In the discussion in the stages of the path to enlightenment, when it  comes
to  the  practice  of  giving,  there  are  an  appropriate  time   and   an
inappropriate time. One has to be skilful  and  know  when  the  appropriate
time and inappropriate time for giving are.

It is an inappropriate time to give when one  has  not  reached  that  level
yet.  Although  it  is  true  the  body  is  by  nature  dirty  and  filthy,
nevertheless one should not look down on the body and not take care  of  it.
In fact, as a practitioner, it is said  that  one  has  to  guard  the  body
because one needs it as the basis to practise the  Dharma  but  one  has  to
guard it without any attachment to the body.  One guards it for the  purpose
of practising the Dharma.

Then when the time is appropriate and one is  at  that  level  of  practice,
then it is alright to give away the body. To give away  the  body  when  the
time is inappropriate will not  bring  about  any  benefit  for  oneself  or
others.

Khen Rinpoche: So if someone asks you (for your  body),  please  don’t  give
it. If somebody comes and asks for your hand, you can  shake  his  hand  but
…(Laughter).

      Verse 7.28
      If their bodies are happy due to their merits
      And their minds are happy due to their skill,
      Then, even if they remain in cyclic existence for the sake of others,
      Why would the Compassionate Ones be disheartened?

      Verse 7.29
      Due to the strength of the mind of enlightenment,
      He exhausts his previous negativities
      And gathers oceans of merit.
      Hence he is said to excel the hearers
Remember in Chapter One of this text when  the  mind  of  enlightenment  was
discussed, one of the many benefits of generating the mind of  enlightenment
is that once that mind is generated, even  the  most  powerful  negativities
can be purified.

Another benefit of having generated the mind of enlightenment is  that  once
that mind is generated, henceforth even when one  is  distracted  and  lying
down, one’s merit continuously increases.

There is also a verse  that  says  whatever  kind  of  happiness  you  want,
whether it is samsara or enlightenment, those kinds of happiness  come  from
meditating on bodhicitta.

Khen Rinpoche: There is one verse (that says this).  Can  you  remember?   I
cannot find that verse.

      Verse 1.8
      Those who wish to destroy the multitudes of sufferings of existence,
      Those who wish to dispel the unhappiness of sentient beings,
      And those who wish to enjoy multitudes of happiness,
      Should never forsake the mind of enlightenment.

“Those who wish to destroy  the  multitudes  of  sufferings  of  existence”:
Whatever samsaric problems or sufferings can be vanquished by bodhicitta.

“Those who wish to dispel  the  unhappiness  of  sentient  beings”:  If  one
wishes to dispel whatever problems and sufferings sentient beings have,  the
method is to generate the mind of enlightenment.

“And those who wish to enjoy multitudes of  happiness”:  Whatever  happiness
one wants to enjoy and whatever happiness one wants  others  to  enjoy,  the
method to achieve such happiness is again to generate bodhicitta.

The  “multitudes  of  happiness”  here  is  primarily   the   happiness   of
omniscience or full enlightenment which is achieved through  the  meditation
on bodhicitta.

Those who wish for all these  things  “should  never  forsake  the  mind  of
enlightenment.” This means that one should always meditate on bodhicitta.

I think I did mention to you that you should memorise this verse.

Through the generation of the mind of enlightenment, one is able  to  easily
exhaust  the  hosts  of  negativities  and  one  is  able  to   finish   the
accumulation of the collection of merit. As  such,  the  practice  of  one’s
path greatly excels that of the hearers’ path.

      Verse 7.30
      So, having mounted the horse of the mind of enlightenment
      That dispels all disheartenment and weariness,
      And proceeds from happiness to happiness,
      Which ones who know of this mind would lapse into despondency?
It is said that those who really understand the extensive benefit of  having
generated  bodhicitta  will  never  get  discouraged  from   meditating   on
bodhicitta  and  will   never   get   discouraged   from   cultivating   the
bodhisattvas’ deeds. The teachings say this is  how  it  is  impossible  for
them to feel discouraged.

Up to here is the advice of the methods on how to deal with the laziness  of
being disheartened about virtue.
With that we have covered the three types of laziness:
1. the laziness that relishes the taste of idleness
2. the laziness that clings to unwholesome activities
3. the laziness that is disheartened about virtue

Now we have finished  looking  at  the  three  types  of  laziness  and  the
recommended  antidotes  and  remedies.  What  remains  to  be  done  is  for
everybody individually to go back and look at the antidotes,  try  them  out
and see whether they actually work or not.  So that is what  remains  to  be
done.

                                 ~~~~~~~~~~

Question: I refer to the bodhisattvas on the path of seeing who  is  cutting
his flesh to give away to someone who requested for it. How  does  one  link
someone, who has abandoned negativities such as  killing,  not  experiencing
physical pain and someone,who  has  abandoned  the  intellectually  acquired
afflictions, not experiencing mental suffering. What is the  precise  reason
to explain the two links?

Answer: You are aware of the accumulation of the two  collections,  are  you
not?

The bodhisattva accumulates the collection of merit and  the  collection  of
wisdom:
 • The collection of merit results in the form body.
 • The collection of wisdom results in the truth body.

The perfections of generosity, ethics and patience are classified under  the
collection of merit. Through the accumulation of merit through the  practice
of these perfections, it is said  that  one  enjoys  physical  bliss  as  in
stated in Verse 7.28, “If their bodies are happy due to their merits.”

It is said that  depending  primarily  on  the  perfection  of  wisdom,  one
accumulates the collection of wisdom, which is the cause of the  dharmakaya,
the truth body. “And  their  minds  are  happy  due  to  their  skill”:  The
superior bodhisattva experiences  mental  bliss  primarily  because  of  his
perception of the truth, i.e., the direct perception of selflessness.

If you compare non-virtue and  the  apprehensions  of  self,  non-virtue  is
coarser and by committing  non-virtue,  one  experiences  bodily  suffering.
When we talk about non-virtue, essentially this  refers  to  a  non-virtuous
mind.

So, “If their bodies are happy due  to  their  merits,”  i.e.,  that  bodily
bliss is the result of their collection of merit, then the opposite to  that
must be that the accumulation of non-virtue results in bodily pain.
If you compare physical and  mental  suffering,  mental  suffering  is  more
acute than physical suffering because mental suffering is difficult  to  get
rid of. Because of the apprehension of the  self,  then  non-virtue  arises.
The root of all our problems, especially mental unhappiness, is due to  what
we call the ego or the apprehension of  the  self.  Until  we  overcome  the
apprehension of the self, then there  is  no  way  to  overcome  the  mental
unhappiness and mental suffering. As such, there is a need to  generate  the
antidote to such self-grasping.

Khen Rinpoche:  Am I answering your question or  not?  (The  answer  is)  As
simple as that!

The essence of the answer is that in dependence on the collection of  merit,
one achieves  the  rupakaya,  the  form  body,  and  in  dependence  on  the
collection of wisdom, one achieves the dharmakaya, the truth body. Then  you
think about it.

Khen Rinpoche:   From  there,  you  elaborate  for  yourself,  the  relation
between non-virtue, the wisdom realize emptiness, …  I  don’t  know  how  to
combine them together. I think (the answer)  something  like  that.  If  you
think more, maybe you can find answer somewhere in there.


Interpreted by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme; transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek,  Julia  Koh
& Rachel Tan; edited by Cecilia Tsong.


-----------------------
[1] Ven. Gyurme interpreted the last line of this verse  as,  “But  I  still
have not attained enlightenment.”

