Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Engaging in the Deeds of a Bodhisattva/BP2 M5 L26 final.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:52:18.163187
================================================================================


Transcript of the teachings by Khen Rinpoche Geshe  Chonyi  on  Engaging  in
the Bodhisattva Deeds, 2014

Root text: Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds by  Shantideva,  translated  by
Toh Sze Gee. Copyright: Toh Sze Gee, 2006; Revised edition, 2014.

Lesson                                                                    26
  20 May 2014


Chapter Five: Verses 5.55 - 5.76. 3. The way to  train  in  the  conduct  of
guarding the mind by means of mindfulness  and  introspection  (cont’d).  A.
The way to train in the ethics  of  refraining  from  negative  actions.  2.
Guarding against all deterioration.  B. The way to train in  the  ethics  of
gathering virtuous dharmas. 1. Abandoning attachment to the body: the  cause
for  not  training  in  ethics.  2.  One  should  be   knowledgeable   about
accomplishing virtue


We have been talking  about  guarding  ourselves  from  deterioration.  This
involves:
1. guarding against deterioration in the training of the body
2. guarding against deterioration in the training of the mind
We have completed the section  on  guarding  against  deterioration  in  the
training of the body.

Guarding against deterioration in the training of the mind has three parts:
1. Guarding by means of the individual antidote
2. The common antidotes
3. The way to apply oneself to cultivating the antidote

3.   THE WAY TO TRAIN IN THE CONDUCT  OF  GUARDING  THE  MIND  BY  MEANS  OF
   MINDFULNESS AND INTROSPECTION (cont’d)

   A.  The way to train in the ethics of refraining from negative actions
      2.   Guarding against all deterioration
                     B.  Guarding against deterioration in the  training  of
the mind
                             1.   Guarding  by  means  of   the   individual
antidote
Verse 5.55
Being very resolute and faithful,
Steady, respectful, polite,
With a sense of shame, fear, and pacification,
I should strive to make others happy.

Verse 5.56
I should not be disheartened by the whims
Of the childish who are in discord with one another;
I should be merciful, thinking, “This mind of theirs
Is due to the generation of afflictions.”

With respect to whatever practice one is going to  undertake,  three  things
have to be done: (1) the preliminaries, (2) the actual practice and (3)  the
conclusion of the practice. It is said to be very important not to have  any
doubts about the practice that one  is  undertaking  with  regard  to  these
three stages—the beginning, the middle and the end.

One should eliminate any doubts, wrong concepts or  wrong  understanding  of
one’s practice. At the very least, one  should  have  a  correctly  assuming
consciousness,  i.e.,  a  correct  valid  belief,  with  respect  to   one’s
practice. If one  has  a  valid  cognition  of  the  practice  that  one  is
undertaking, that would be wonderful. The point is that one has to  be  very
resolute in one’s practice, i.e., there must  not  be  any  doubt  or  wrong
understanding of the practice.

Verse 5.55 starts with, “Being very resolute ….” This is what it  means.  We
must have a strong ascertainment of the topic or practice that we are  going
to do and having eliminated all doubts and wrong  understanding,  we  should
think, “It is as it is. It is like this, not something else.”

Based on such ascertainment, we generate the faith  of  conviction  that  is
indicated by the  remainder  of  the  first  line  of  Verse  5.55,  “…  and
faithful.”

Based on such faith, we then have to engage  in  our  practice  with  proper
thought and action. We must have a  stable  intention,  stable  thought  and
stable action when carrying out the  practice.  Having  a  stable  intention
means being resolute and determined with regard to doing  our  practice.  We
generate the determination to persevere with our practice and not  be  side-
tracked by unfavourable conditions such as  sicknesses  or  other  problems.
They should not become the reasons for us to discontinue our practice.

It becomes very important that whatever practice we are doing, we must  want
to do it from the bottom of our heart and do it with great enthusiasm.

It is also mentioned here that,  with  respect  to  our  conversations  with
others, such as our  teachers  or  those  who  are  senior  in  training  to
ourselves, they should be conducted  respectfully  and  the  nature  of  the
conversation should be soft and gentle. We should then  extend  this  manner
of conducting gentle conversations to everyone else.

“With a sense of shame” means that we should have a sense  of  shame,  i.e.,
restraining  ourselves  from  negativities  on  account  of  ourselves,   by
remembering the fruitional effects  we  would  have  to  experience  in  the
future if we were to engage in such negativities.  By  reflecting  on  these
negative consequences in the future if we were to  engage  in  negativities,
we subdue our senses.

When we restrain our eye sense power and ear sense power, we  also  have  to
restrain our mind. We have to be  vigilant  by  restraining  our  eye  sense
power. Otherwise, depending on what we see, it is possible to  generate  all
kinds of negative thoughts and afflictions. It  is  the  same  with  hearing
things. When we hear certain things, they may act as the conditions for  our
afflictions to arise. Likewise, we work on subduing or taming our mind.

By subduing our body and mind, as the text says, the behaviour of  our  body
and mind, “should  strive  to  make  others  happy.”  Here  we  are  talking
specifically about the training of and advice for  bodhisattvas.  They  have
to assume a very subdued manner  in  striving  to  make  others  happy.  One
reason for them doing so is to stop others  from  creating  negativities  in
relation to  themselves,  i.e.,  the  bodhisattvas.  Otherwise,  others  may
create negativities in relation  to  the  bodhisattvas.  People  who  create
negativities  in   relation   to   bodhisattvas   accumulate   very   strong
negativities.

Here it is said  that  the  bodhisattvas  have  to  live  harmoniously  with
others. But nevertheless,  conflicts  may  still  arise.  When  bodhisattvas
relate to others, there may be people who may be upset with them  and  cause
them problems. In those instances, the bodhisattvas are reminded  that  they
must not get disheartened.

In a bodhisattva’s dealings with others, in spite of showing  her  love  for
them, some sentient beings may respond in a very negative way and  be  upset
with  the  bodhisattva.  If  the  bodhisattva  were  to   feel   upset   and
disheartened, there is a danger that the bodhisattva may degenerate her  own
bodhicitta. Therefore the bodhisattva  has  to  be  careful.  In  situations
where a  bodhisattva  faces  such  hostility  from  a  sentient  being,  the
bodhisattva  has  to  remind  herself  that  there  is  a  wide  variety  of
disposition and inclinations among sentient beings and  that  this  sentient
being is acting under the control of his own afflictions. Then this  becomes
a reason for the bodhisattva to show even more love  and  affection  towards
that sentient being.

According to the Ornament for the Mahayana Sutra, it says

By thinking how they  are  without  power  due  to  their  constant  faults,
possessing that mind, do not hold it against beings.

Aryadeva’s Four Hundred Stanzas say,

Just as a doctor does not fight but helps
Patients who are possessed by spirits, though they get angry,
So the Sage sees that the afflictions are at fault,
Not the persons who have the afflictions.[1]

This is the advice for bodhisattvas not to get disheartened when  they  meet
with negative or difficult  people.  They  have  to  remind  themselves  and
understand that all sentient beings are afflicted and  are  acting  in  this
way due to their afflictions. As such, the bodhisattvas should cherish  them
even more and show them even more love and affection.

                            2.  The common antidotes
Verse 5.57
      Having control over that which is actually not misdeeds
      In myself and other sentient beings,
      I should always hold my mind
      Like an emanation without an I.

This verse is saying that with regard to whatever activity we  are  engaging
in— whether it is for ourselves, such as when we are eating or  engaging  in
virtue, or for the benefit of others such as giving teachings—we  should  do
them without a sense of self-importance, i.e., that what we are doing is  so
important and wonderful.

The advice is to carry out those activities without holding on  to  the  “I”
or self by reflecting on how phenomena are like illusions and are  empty  in
nature.

                            3.  The way to apply oneself to cultivating  the
antidote
      Verse 5.58
      By thinking again and again that
      After a long time I have obtained the supreme leisures,
      Thus I should hold my mind
      As utterly unshakeable as Mount Meru.

This is something that we have to remember  constantly—this  human  life  of
freedoms and endowments that we possess now is obtained  only  once  and  is
the result of having worked very  hard  for  a  very  long  time  over  many
lifetimes in the past.

On the basis of having found this human life of freedoms and endowments,  it
is said that we can achieve so many meaningful objectives and goals. Yet  it
will end and we will have to part with it. It is only a matter of  time.  By
reflecting on these points, we should persuade ourselves to  move  our  mind
towards practising the Dharma. We  must  protect  the  mind  that  wants  to
practise the Dharma and engage in virtue and make sure that it is as  stable
as a mountain.

Khen Rinpoche: That mind should be as stable  as  a  mountain,  not  like  a
water bubble!

Of the three  types  of  ethics,  we  have  finished  the  first  ethics  of
refraining from negative actions. Next is the way to train in the ethics  of
gathering virtuous dharmas.

One of the reasons why we are unable to  guard  our  ethics  and  engage  in
virtuous practices is  our  attachment  to  our  body.  Therefore  from  the
outset, we have to overcome and abandon that attachment. We also have to  be
skilful when it comes to practising virtue.

In abandoning the attachment to the body, an example is given  to  show  why
it is unreasonable to be attached to the body.

   B.   The way to train in the ethics of gathering virtuous dharmas
      1.  Abandoning attachment to the body: the cause for not  training  in
      ethics
                 A.  An example of how it is unreasonable to be attached  to
the body
Verse 5.59
If, mind, you are not made unhappy
When this body is dragged here and there and
Taken away by vultures attached to flesh,
Then why do you advise so now?
Everyone is very concerned about his or her body. We do  everything  we  can
to take care of it. When we are hungry, we look for food. When we are  cold,
we put on more clothes. We get very worried when something  happens  to  our
body.  If  someone  points  out  some  fault  in  our  body,  some  physical
shortcoming, we get very upset.  All this happens because  we  are  attached
to our body.

But at the time of death, we have to leave our body behind.  At  that  time,
whether our body is fed to the vultures, eaten by maggots or burnt by  fire,
we are not upset. Then why are we upset now when something  happens  to  our
body? It is inappropriate to conceive this body as belonging to us,  holding
on to it so strongly for if we were to do so,  all  kinds  of  problems  and
unhappiness arise.

      Verse 5.60 a, b
      Holding this body as “mine”,
      Why, mind, do you guard it so?

If we were to counter that by saying, “Of course I have to  hold  this  body
as mine because I need it. It is a necessity.” The answer to that will be:


      Verse 5.60 c, d
      Since you and it are separate,
      What use can it be to you?

We and our bodies are not the same. They  are  different  and  separate.  No
matter how much we may think that our body  is  an  absolute  necessity  and
that it belongs to us, at the time of  death,  we  have  no  choice  but  to
discard it. There is nothing we can do to  stop  ourselves  from  discarding
our body.

This is the same as the outline in the lam-rim on the section on  death  and
impermanence where it says that, at the time of death, the  body  is  of  no
use to us.

Next is the meditation on the filthiness of the body.

                 B.  Cultivating a sense of the body’s lack  of  cleanliness

      Verse 5.61
      Why, confused mind,
      Do you not hold onto a clean, wooden form?
      Just what is the point of guarding
      This rotting machine that is a collection of filth?

This verse is asking us why we are so hung up on this body of ours. Why  are
we holding on to this body that is by nature filthy and dirty? It is just  a
filth and dirt- making machine. This point is  something  that  we  have  to
think about over a period of time. It may not be apparent when  we  look  at
it superficially.

                 C.  Reflecting on how the body is without essence
                       1.  If one were to divide the  body  into  parts  and
            examine them, one would         find nothing  that  is  in  the
            slightest a reliable essence

      Verse 5.62
      First of all, mentally separate
      The layers of skin,
      And then with the scalpel of wisdom
      Also separate the flesh from the skeletal frame.


      Verse 5.63
      And, having split open even the bones,
      Look right down into the marrow.
      While examining this ask yourself,
      “Where is its essence?”

It was said earlier that there  is  no  purpose  to  holding  on  and  being
attached to this body since it is filthy by nature. It is a  filth-producing
machine. Nevertheless, it is still  possible  to  think,  “Whatever  it  is,
there is still something to hold on to.”

These two verses, 5.62 and 5.63, are telling us that  there  is  no  essence
and no real meaning to be found in the body.

We have to use our wisdom to investigate whether, in reality, the  body  has
any essence and whether there is something worthwhile for us to hold on  to.
With the mind of wisdom, first we look beneath the layer of  skin.  Then  we
go down to the layer of flesh, down to the bones and  then  right  into  the
bone marrow. Now we ask ourselves objectively, “What exactly is the  essence
that we are holding on to and grasping at?”

What we see are the constituents that make up the  body.  This  is  reality.
But we do not see this reality precisely because  we  do  not  perceive  our
body in this way.  We do not think about it. If we do think about  it,  this
is in fact what the body is. When we go beneath the skin,  what  we  see  is
just flesh, muscle, bone, blood  and  so  forth.  We  would  not  find  them
attractive.

Therefore it is inappropriate to  be  attached  to  the  body  that  has  no
essence.

                       2. It is unreasonable to  be  attached  to  something
            that has no essence
      Verse 5.64
      If, even when searching with such effort
      You see no essence,
      Then why with so much attachment
      Are you still guarding this body now?

These are all exercises that we have to do ourselves. What  exactly  are  we
so attached to? Its nature  is  dirty,  unclean  and  filthy.  There  is  no
essence in the body. After seeing this, if we are still so attached  to  and
grasping at the body, we  have  to  ask  ourselves,  “Exactly  what  are  we
attached to?”

                 D. The reasons it is unreasonable to  be  attached  to  the
body
      Verse 5.65
      What use is this body to you
      If its filth is unfit for you to eat,
      If its blood is not fit to drink
      And if its intestines are not fit to be sucked?


      Verse 5.66 a,b
      At second best it is only fit to be guarded
      In order to feed the foxes and vultures.

Here the text asks, “What use is this body to you? Can we eat our own  flesh
or drink our own blood? Can they  sustain  us?  Are  we  going  to  eat  our
intestines?”

If this is not the case and we are  not  going  to  do  these  things,  what
exactly are we so attached to? Why do we cherish and hold on so  tightly  to
this body? Perhaps if we are taking care of our body because  we  are  going
to feed it to wild animals, maybe there is something to be said about  that.
But this is not the point. The point is to ask ourselves  the  exact  reason
for our attachment to and grasping of our body.

Many points are mentioned here for us to deal with  our  attachment  to  our
body. There is a need to deal with and abandon our attachment to  our  body.
Without abandoning our attachment to our  body,  it  is  very  difficult  to
guard our ethics. It is very difficult to engage in virtue.

Also, due to our attachment for the body, we suffer so much. Because of  our
attachment to our body, the stronger the attachment,  the  more  worries  we
have. We suffer so much mentally and physically, working  so  hard  to  take
care of our body. The level of mental disturbance  and  physical  discomfort
that  we  experience  due  to  cherishing  and  caring  for  our   body   is
commensurate with the strength of our attachment to it.

Here we are talking  about  abandoning  attachment  to  the  body;  as  such
attachment is one of the unfavourable conditions that stops and prevents  us
from engaging in virtue.

We have to understand however that these points  here  are  not  telling  us
that we should not take care of our body. This is not the point.  What  they
are saying is that it is inappropriate for us  to  take  care  of  our  body
solely due to our attachment to it since so many problems  arise  from  such
attachment. Because of this attachment to the  body,  we  cannot  engage  in
much virtue. If that is the case, how then should  we  use  our  body?  What
should we use our body for? We should use it to engage in virtue.

        E. As it quickly perishes, it is reasonable to utilise it for virtue


                      1.  It is reasonable to utilise  the  perishable  body
            for virtue as death will soon be upon us
      Verse 5.66 c,d
      This body of a human being
      Should only be put to work.


      Verse 5.67
      Even though you guard it thus,
      Then what will you do
      When it is stolen by the merciless Lord of Death
      And given to the birds and dogs?

We critically examine the inside and outside of the body and discover  that,
by nature, the body is filthy and dirty. We then look for its  core  essence
by trying to find out whether there is some meaning there. We again look  at
the inside and outside of the body. We find that there  is  nothing  we  can
point to that is really meaningful. If the inside and outside  of  the  body
are just dirty and filthy and hold no meaning, then how can we make  use  of
this body to extract its essence?

Our mind must take full control of our body and speech and through that,  we
should employ our body and speech in virtue.

Among the six types of migratory beings in samsara, the human  body  is  the
best basis for practising and actualising the Dharma. Having  obtained  such
an opportunity to do so now, we should employ our body  and  speech  as  our
servants and use them to engage in virtue. This is the only  way  of  making
use of this body of ours.

If we were to behave as we normally  do,  acting  only  out  of  attachment,
taking care of our body by giving it food and drink  and  adorning  it  with
jewellery and make-up, there will still come a day  when  we  have  to  die.
There is nothing we can do then. We still have to discard this body.

                      2.  An example of how it is unreasonable to  carry  on
           with craving while not   doing a single thing
      Verse 5.68
      If servants are not given clothing and so forth
      When they are unable to be put to work,
      Then why do you nourish it in health
      When, even though caring for the body, it goes elsewhere?

If you happen to have domestic helpers or subordinates working for you,  you
are not going to pay them their salary if they do not do their  jobs.  Isn’t
this  how  the  world  works?  You  are  not  going  to  give   them   food,
accommodation and salary. In fact, you will punish them and subject them  to
disciplinary actions. Likewise, when you feed, care  for,  adorn  this  body
and so forth out of attachment despite it not doing  anything  virtuous,  at
the time of death, this body will still leave us. All our efforts in  caring
for it would come to nought and we get nothing in return.

                      3. Causing one to accomplish one’s  aims  and  desires
           by providing it with incentives
      Verse 5.69
      Now having paid my body its wages,
      I shall make it enact my welfare.
      I shall not give it anything
      If it is not beneficial.

Khen Rinpoche: Don’t give your body anything!
We will feed our body, take care of it and pay it wages. If it  is  able  to
do something beneficial for us, then this is all worth it. Otherwise, it  is
not worth doing those things for it. Now having paid our body its  wages  by
giving it food,  sustaining  it  and  so  forth,  we  should  employ  it  in
accumulating virtue through learning and reflecting on the Dharma.

                      4. It is reasonable to accomplish the welfare  of  all
           sentient beings by considering the body as a boat
      Verse 5.70
      I should conceive of my body as a boat,
      A mere support for coming and going,
      And in order to accomplish the welfare of sentient beings
      Transform it into a wish-fulfilling body.

We should regard our body as a boat on which  we  can  cross  the  ocean  of
samsara, reach the shore of liberation and omniscience and  thereby  achieve
the exalted body of the Conqueror that is like a wish-fulfilling jewel.  Any
sentient being who comes into contact with  this  wish-fulfilling  jewel  of
the body of the Conqueror through hearing, seeing, thinking about it and  so
forth would have their wishes fulfilled.

These are the verses pertaining to abandoning attachment to our  body.  Next
is the section  on  being  skilful  when  accomplishing  virtue,  i.e.,  the
importance of beautifying our normal daily actions and behaviour.

      2. One should be knowledgeable about accomplishing virtue
                 A.  Performing ordinary activities beautifully
                      1.  How to act when encountering others
      Verse 5.71
      Now, while I have freedom,
      I should always present a smiling face
      And cease to frown and look black-faced;
      I should be a friend of migrating beings and be straightforward.

First, our body and speech have to come under the control of  our  mind  and
our mind has to come under the control of  the  antidotes.  On  that  basis,
when we come into contact with others, “I should always  present  a  smiling
face,” without putting on an unhappy facial expression.

We  should  be  a  friend  to  sentient  beings.  Here  it  says   to,   “be
straightforward,”  in  dealings  with  others.  This  means  that   in   our
interactions  with  others,  there  should  not  be  any  deceit  or  guile,
pretension  and  so  forth.  We  should  not  put  on  an   act   but     be
straightforward and honest. This is how we should act when meeting others.

In short, we should relate to others with  a  pleasant  demeanour  and  when
talking to them, to be honest and truthful without  any  pretension,  deceit
or guile.

Next is how to we should handle our possessions.

                         2.  How  to  act  with  regard  to  discarding  and
adopting basic necessities
Verse 5.72 a, b
      I should desist from inconsiderately and noisily
      Moving chairs around and so forth,

This is advice  for  the  bodhisattvas.  The  point  is  that  whatever  the
bodhisattvas do, they do it without harming or causing  any  disturbance  to
others. Therefore, when they are moving  chairs,  beds  or  dragging  things
about, they should not do so with a lot of noise. When they sit  down  on  a
seat or cushion, they do not throw themselves to the ground,  making  a  lot
of noise in the process but do so  gently.  The  point  is  not  to  disturb
others and also not to cause others to lose faith in them.

While these are advices for the bodhisattvas, they are  also  applicable  to
us. These are the ways in which we can beautify our  own  ordinary  actions.
We should make sure that our actions do not disturb or harm others. In  that
sense it is also relevant for us.

            3. Acting at all times with noble demeanour
      Verse 5.72 c,d
      As well as from violently opening doors;
      I should always delight in humility.


      Verse 5.73
      The stork, the cat, and the thief,
      By ambushing and moving silently,
      Are able to accomplish what they desire to do;
      I should always behave in this way.

Whether it is opening or closing doors, when  this  is  done  in  a  violent
manner such as slamming the door on people, such actions  disturb  and  make
people unhappy.

With the recognition of our own mistakes and faults, we  should  also  abide
in humility.

This is how we should go  about  conducting  ourselves  and  practising  the
Dharma. It is best to live a life of simplicity and contentment.  This  text
talked about going into isolation where we do not need to  meet  people.  In
that situation, we are better able to subdue our own mind and  complete  our
practice.

With conscientiousness, we have to  conduct  ourselves  in  a  pacified  and
subdued manner. This also applies to our practice of the Dharma.

When predators hunt for their prey, they do so  in  a  very  subdued  manner
with a lot of planning and patience. They will plan,  take  their  time  and
sneak up on their prey. Then they attack and they are  able  to  kill  their
prey. They do all this in a very hidden and quiet way in order to get  their
prey.

Likewise, when we are engaging in our practice, we should not advertise,  “I
did this number of this practice. I’m doing this and I did that.”
“Are able” refer to the able ones who can, “accomplish what they  desire  to
do,” and who always  behave  in  this  way.  The  able  ones  refer  to  the
bodhisattvas. At all times when bodhisattvas are working for the benefit  of
sentient beings, they do  so  with  conscientiousness  and  in  a  peaceful,
subdued manner.

Next is how to behave in relation to well-meant advice.

                 B. Being knowledgeable in the  way  of  befriending  others
          without incurring   misdeeds
                     1.  How  to  act  when  someone  speaks  to  you  in  a
beneficial way
      Verse 5.74
      With respect I should gratefully accept
      Unsought for words that are of benefit
      And that wisely advise and admonish me.
      At all times I should be the pupil of everyone.

When we receive advice, including advice that we did not seek but  which  is
nevertheless useful and beneficial for us, we are advised to listen to it.

Whatever beneficial  advice  we  receive,  it  says  here  that  we  should,
metaphorically speaking, place the advice on the crown  of  our  head.  This
involves the ability to listen to beneficial advice  without  pride  and  to
consider ourselves  to  be  the  students  of  all  who  give  us  good  and
beneficial advice.

                      2.  How to act when someone speaks truthfully to you
      Verse 5.75 a, b
      I should say, “Virtuously said,”
      To all those who speak well,

In response to well-spoken beneficial advice, we should say, “Well said.  It
is good.”

                      3.  How to act when you see someone doing virtue
      Verse 5.75 c, d
      And, if I see someone creating merit,
      I should praise him and be well pleased.

We should rejoice when we see or hear of someone creating merit.  We  should
feel happy and  directly  praise  that  person  in  order  to  increase  his
enthusiasm for virtue.

                      4.  How to act when remarking on another’s qualities
      Verse 5.76
      I should discreetly talk about the good qualities
      And repeat those recounted.
      If my own good qualities are spoken about
      I should just know and be aware that I have them.

When there is a possibility that the person you wish  to  praise  may  think
that you are just flattering her rather than praising her directly, you  can
do so indirectly by praising her to somebody else.

When somebody mentions to you the good  qualities  of  a  third  party,  you
should respond and agree by saying, “Yes, it is like that!”

When it comes to our own qualities or  when  someone  directly  praises  us,
without any conceit, arrogance  or  pride,  we  should  first  check  if  we
actually possess those qualities or not. Even when we  do  actually  possess
the qualities, we  should  simply  acknowledge  that  fact  without  feeling
arrogant or proud.

I seem to remember that  it  was  mentioned  in  one  commentary  that  when
someone praises you and says  that  you  have  certain  qualities  that  you
actually do not have, you could reply by  saying,  “How  wonderful  you  say
this. It shows that you have a very pure mind.” You can think of the  person
who is praising you for your non-existent qualities as someone special.

When someone is praised for qualities that he  does  have,  that  praise  is
simply an acknowledgement of those qualities. It is just a verbal  statement
that this person has such and such qualities. That is it. There  is  nothing
beyond that.

When we see others accumulating merit such as making offerings to the  Three
Jewels, the text says here that we should encourage them  by  praising  them
to enhance their enthusiasm for virtue and to  make  them  feel  good  about
what they are doing.

DISCUSSION QUESTIONS FOR SUNDAY, 25TH MAY 2014

1.  What  is  the  difference  between  mindfulness  and  introspection  (or
   vigilance)?
2. (a) What are the reasons for guarding the mind?
3. (b) What are the benefits of guarding the mind?
4. What are the faults and what problems  will  there  be  when  we  do  not
   protect the mind?
5. It is said that when we do not  possess  introspection,  our  ethics  (or
   ethical discipline) will not be pure. Why is this so?
6. How is introspection generated in dependence upon mindfulness?
7. Explain the exceptions mentioned in Verse 5.42.


Interpreted by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme; transcribed by Phuah  Soon  Ek,  Patricia
Lee & Julia Koh; edited by Cecilia Tsong.

-----------------------
[1] Page 161, Volume 2, The Great Treatise on the  Stages  of  the  Path  to
Enlightenment, Lam Rim Chen Mo  by  Tsong-kha-pa,  Snow  Lion  Publications,
2004.

