Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Engaging in the Deeds of a Bodhisattva/BP2 M5 L19 final .doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:52:21.793180
================================================================================


Transcript of the teachings by Khen Rinpoche Geshe  Chonyi  on  Engaging  in
the Bodhisattva Deeds, 2014

Root text: Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds by  Shantideva,  translated  by
Toh Sze Gee. Copyright: Toh Sze Gee, 2006; Revised edition, 2014.

Lesson                                                                    19
10 April 2014


Review. Chapter Four: Verses 4.4725–-4. 4836. Being conscientious about
cultivating virtue (cont’d). Being conscientious about abandoning
afflictions (cont’d). C. : A. Cultivating joy that it is possible to
abandon the afflictions, if effort is made.  Reflecting on the
disadvantages of the afflictions. Chapter Five: Guarding Introspection.
Verses 5.1-5.5. A. An extensive explanation of the way to practice. 1. The
method for guarding the trainings: guarding the mind. A. By guarding the
mind, one comes to guard all.



REVIEW

As we have seen,  that it is mentioned in the text  that  afflictions  arise
from the  erroneous  minds.  As  such,  it  is  possible  to  eradicate  the
afflictions. We  and we hhave the capacity to destroy them by   afflictions.
The way to destroy the afflictions is to ddeveloping  the wisdom  realiszing
selflessness in our own minds. The afflictions are not going to go  away  or
disappear on their own accord  but  it  is  through  developing  the  wisdom
realiszing selflessness, we will be able to  that will enable us to  destroy
the afflictions in the same way that .  The  wisdom  realizing  selflessness
destroys the afflictions  and  it  is  quite  similar  to  how  illumination
overcomes darkness. When the  wisdom  realiszing  selflessness  arises,  the
afflictions are pacified so . So when the wisdom realiszing selflessness  is
developed,  the  afflictions  ceased  there  and  then.  They  do   not   go
anywhereelsewhere,  but rather they dissolve into the clear light.

Because of our lack of wisdom and very weak state of mind, we are unable  to
overcome or destroy ourthe afflictions. It  is  said  that  the  afflictions
will be destroyed  easily  when  If  we  are  able  to  develop  the  wisdom
realiszing  selflessness.  ,  it  is  said  that  the  afflictions  will  be
destroyed easily. When there is wisdom realizing selflessness,  it  will  be
easy to overcome or to destroy the inner enemy of the afflictions. With  the
wisdom  realiszing   selflessness,   destroying   the   inner   enemy,   the
afflictions,  will be a much easier task than overcoming the outer enemy.

As said in the last line of verse 4.46, “Although this is  so,  weak-minded,
I have been reduced to making no effort”.
 to making no effort.” Because we do not  n’t  have  the  wisdom  realiszing
selflessness  or  because  this  wisdom  realiszing  selflessness  is  weak,
therefore we are not able to vanquish or to destroy the afflictions.
The next verse basically explains  that  the  afflictions  can  be  overcome
because the afflictions do not truly exist truly.

BEING CONSCIENTIOUS ABOUT ABANDONING AFFLICTIONS (cont’d)

C. Cultivating joy that it  is  possible  to  abandon  the  afflictions,  if
effort is made
  3. If they are completely uprooted, there is  absolutely  no  place  that
   supports their existence and [thus] it is reasonable [to say] that  they
   [can be] abandoned
|3 If they are completely uprooted, there is absolutely no place that |
|supports their existence and [thus] it is reasonable [to say] that   |
|they [can be] abandoned                                              |

In Gyaltsab Je’s commentary, he states that there may be some people  others
who may raise this a qualm. “S: “There may be people who think  “sSince  the
afflictions are generated in one’s own continuum,  therefore  they  have  to
exist inherently. If so, how can the afflictions can be abandoned?””.

There maybe people who think in such a way. Next verse  is  in  response  to
this qualm.
This is what we think. When we look at our own afflictions, the  afflictions
look  so real . It looks as if they have always have been there,  they  look
so real right there and something very and solid,  existing from  their  its
own side. Therefore , we really wonder whether  it  is  really  possible  to
overcome themit.

The next verse is in response to this qualm.

      Verse 4.47  a,b
      If these afflictions do not abide within objects,
      Not in the collection of sense powers, between the two nor elsewhere,
      Then where do they abide and how do they harm all migrating beings?

This verse is  ttalksing  about  how  the  afflictions  are  not  inherently
existent and explains .
Here is an explanation of  how  we  can  reflect  on  thise  fact  that  the
afflictions are not being inherently existent when  the  afflictions,   such
as anger or attachment,  arise in our minds.

When an affliction such as an affliction such as attachment or anger  arises
strongly, we can check whether the afflictions exists right  from  the  side
of the object of anger or attachment or the object of anger   or  not.  Does
the affliction  exist  inherently  right  there  on  either  the  object  of
attachment or the enemy or the object of attachment?

Our afflictions do not exist inherently from the side of the  loved  one  on
the enemy nor . Neither does it  exist  inherently  from  the  side  of  the
enemyon the loved ones. For example, when weif you  talk  about  attachment,
attachment and desire does not exist inherently on the form that  weone  are
is attached to. The form that we are attracted to or the enemy that  we  are
upset with do not exist from their own side,  i.e.,  right from the side  of
the object.

If the afflictions were to  exist inherently on the object of attachment  or
object of anger, then whoever comes into contact with  thate   object  would
necessarily have  to  generate  attachment  or  anger.  But  when  the  foe-
destroyers, when they come into contact with  form,  they  do  not  generate
attachment towards from the form that they perceive.

This is something that you can to think about.  When  weIf  you  talk  about
attachment, attachment does not  exist  inherently  from  the  side  of  the
object that weyou are attached to, let’s say, y our loved ones. Nor does  Or
anger does not exist inherently from the side of on the enemy. It  does  not
exist from the side of the enemy.



But when If you just examine yon our own experience, when you  we  are  very
upset with a situation or with someone, f somebody,  the  anger  appears  to
exist withinin the object,  i.e.,  from the side of  the  object.  We  never
ever think the anger it is coming from our own side and is made  up  by  our
own mind.

Similarly, when we are attached to an object or to a person, again there  is
this attachment, this energy that seems to be coming from the  side  of  the
object person or person. the object. We never ever  think,  ;  “This  It  is
coming from me. This is coming from , my mind.”.”

This  is  what  how  we  believe  and  this  is  how  things  appear  to  us
experientially.

It is said in the teachings that afflictions such as  attachment  and  anger
arise from incorrect mental attention.
 mental attention. Afflictions such  as  anger  and  attachment  arise  from
incorrect mental attention. When If you investigate  at  the  very  root  of
this  incorrect  mental  attention,  it  is  this  innate  belief  in    and
apprehension of inherent existence  or  true  existence,  that  there  appis
rehension of true existence, something real right there.

How does attachment operate? From In the view of this attachment,  there  is
an appearance of an inherently  existent object of attachment  as  ,  it  is
like a very nice object or a very nice person.  Then  the  incorrect  mental
attention comes in and basically exaggerates the  qualities  of  the  object
beyond what they ait actually are. is. From that arises , there  is  a  very
strong emotional involvement and very strong grasping.

Likewise from in the view of anger, when an unpleasant situation  occurs  or
an unpleasant object appears, first  there  is  an  appearance  of  a  truly
existent or /inherently existent enemy or the unpleasant  object.  Then  the
incorrect mental attention exaggerates the situation  or  qualities  of  the
objectperson beyond what they it aactually areis  and  that  leads  to  very
strong aversion. dislike.

This is how afflictions arise and this is hhow they it works. The  basis  is
always  an  apprehension  of  inherent  existence,  apprehension   of   true
existence. With tThat acting as the  a  basis   then  weyou  have  incorrect
mental attention that superimposes the features and the  characteristics  on
to that object of attachment or anger beyond what they  it  actually  areis.
Thatat mind reacts and then there is then very strong  attachment  anger  or
strong anger.attachment.  From sStrong attachment  anger  and  strong  anger
ttachment, it leads us to accumulateing karma that in turn leads us  .  Then
we have to experience all the various  ety  of  problems  and  suffering  of
samsara.

Your experience of For every  single  problem,  your  experience  is  the  a
ripening  result  of  the  karma  that  you  have  accumulated.   Karma   is
accumulated, motivated and driven by the afflictions.  All  the  afflictions
are based on  the  apprehension  of  true  existence,  the  apprehension  of
inherent existence.

All the problems and sufferings come from karma and the afflictions. Of  the
two, the afflictions are the principal le cause. for  For it  is  said  that
whenif there areis no afflictions, even if there is the karma remaining,  it
will not be  able  to  give  rise  to  its  effects.  So  of  the  two,  the
afflictions are much more powerful.

The very thing that can directly oppose this ignorance, the apprehension  of
inherent existence, is the wisdom  directly  perceiving  selflessness.  When
the  wisdom  directly  perceiving  selflessness  is  generated,  it  renders
ignorance powerless in that,  henceforth,  one  will  not  accumulate  fresh
projecting karma.

In the Nagarjuna’s “Fundamental Root Treatise on  Wisdom”,  states  it  says
that the problems and sufferings  arise from karma and the afflictions.  The
Aafflictions come from the incorrect mental attention. The root of  all  the
afflictions is ignorance,  the  apprehension  of  inherent  existence.  This
ignorance is  overcome  by  the  wisdom  directly  realising  is  ceased  by
emptiness.
So when weif  you  look  at  the  process  of  how  the  afflictions  arise,
essentially  afflictionsthey  arise  through  our   own   incorrect   mental
attention,  through  the  root  of  our  ignorance,  i.e.,  being  ignorant.
Basically, they it is comeing from our own mind. This at is the reality  but
we never don’t ever think that the afflictioons  are   is  made  up  by  our
mind. We believe that they it comes from the side of the object, whether  it
is an object of attachment or an unpleasant object.

When we are very attached to an object, we do so because our  attachment  is
due to the fact that we feel that there is something right  there  from  the
object or coming from the side of  the  object.  We  never  ever  think  our
attachment it is a projection of our mind. To us, it is coming  right  there
from the side of the very pleasant object or the person.

It is the  same  thing  with  anger.  When  we  get  upset,  we  think  that
everything is coming completely from the  side  of  the  object;  completely
right there from the side of the  object.  We  never  ever  think  it  is  a
projection of our mind. Never!

In short, the afflictions do not abide within objects despite , unlike  what
we may innately believe innately. When we are attached or we  get  upset  or
very attached, we feel that there is this  energy,  this  feeling  and  this
affliction,s that is coming from  the  side  of  the  object,   -  from  the
pleasant object or unpleasant object.  right there.

But if If the afflictions are coming from the side of  the  object  as  like
what we we believe innately to be the case, believe, then  it  follows  then
that whoever comes into contact with  thate  same  object  will  necessarily
develop afflictions, whether it beis attachment or anger.  But  this  at  is
not the case.

When we are  very  attached  to  a  person  or  an  object,  there  is  this
appearance and belief that everything that is pleasant about that object  is
coming completely  from the side of the object.  completely. Or when we  are
upset with athe situation,  or an  object  or  a  person,  again  all  these
unpleasant characteristics,  or whatever we dislike  don’t  like  about  the
object or the person, in our experience,  what we believe they are  is  that
it is completely coming from the side of the object.  They  have  absolutely
nNothing to do with our mind!

Although this at is what we believe to be true but the reality is  that  the
afflictions do not exist inherently within the objects. If  the  afflictions
exist inherently within the objects, then it absurdly follows  that  whoever
comes  into  contact  with   those   objects   will   necessarily   generate
afflictions.

 • The afflictions do not exist inherently within the objects.
 • The afflictions do not exist Neither do they  exist  ininherently  within
   the sense powers.
 • The afflictions They do not  exist  inherently  within  also  within  the
   mental sense powers, the consciousness.
The afflictions do not  exist  inherently.  The  afflictions  do  not  abide
inherently within the sense powers. They do not abide inherently within  the
consciousness (the mind).
Why is this so?
-
 If the afflictions are existingt inherently within the sense  powers,  then
it absurdly follows that whenever the sense powers are  in  operation,  then
one will necessarily be in an afflicted state, i.e.,  and there will  always
be afflictions.  If  the  afflictions  exist  inherently  within  the  sense
powers, it necessarily follows that whenever we see or hear  things  and  so
forth, all those experiences will be pervaded  necessarily  by  afflictions.
But this is not the case. It does not mean that whenever we are  looking  at
something or hearing something, afflictions will necessarily arise.


-If the afflictions are abiding inherently within  the  consciousness,  then
it would absurdly follows that as long as there is a consciousness or  mind,
afflictions will always manifest. (the mind),  then  there  will  always  be
afflictions manifest.


-If the affliction  exists  inherently  within  the  sense  powers  then  it
necessarily follows that whenever we see things, whenever  we  hear  things,
those experiences are necessarily pervaded by afflictions. That will be  the
entailment but that is not the case. It doesn’t mean that  whenever  we  are
hearing something or whenever we are looking at something, it  doesn’t  mean
that there is necessarily an affliction.
If the afflictions exist inherently in the various sense powers and  if  the
afflictions inherently exist within the consciousness, this at  would  means
that  whenever these sense powers  came  into  existence  and  whenever  the
consciousness arosisees, the afflictions were  already  there  already  from
day one. If the afflictions exist inherently, they have to exist in  such  a
way. If they exist inherently within the sense powers  or  exist  inherently
within the consciousness, Tthey would have to be one with the  sense  powers
or one with the consciousness. It will Then that will absurdly follows  that
arhats will have afflictions because they have sense powers  and  they  also
have a mind.

The point is that it is wrong to believe or to think  that  the  afflictions
are inherently one with the sense  powers  or  one  with  the  consciousness
because there will be many logical fallacies.

Although the afflictions do not exist inherently in these ways, but when  we
look at, conceive or think about  our  afflictions,  when  we  conceive  and
think of our afflictions, , how do they appear to us? They appear  so  real,
they appear to be  inherently existent. But  just  because  they  appear  to
exist inherently, it does not n’t mean that they are inherently existent.

The The afflictions do not exist inherently within  the  objects  nor  do  .
Neither do they exist within the  sense  powers.  What  about  somewhere  in
between these two?  But tThe text is says ing the afflictions  also  do  not
exist, “between the two.” the afflictions  also  do  not  exist  in  between
those two”.

If the afflictions do are not inherently existent within  the  objects,   or
if the afflictions do not are  not  inherently  existent  within  the  sense
powers and it cannot be found somewhere in between theose two, does it  mean
that it is somewhere else other than in between theose two?  Of  course  the
answer is also  no.  At  the  end  of  the  day,  Tthe  point  is  that  the
afflictions do not exist inherently.

These afflictions that have been harming us since beginningless time  up  to
now are not inherently existent. If they are not inherently existent,  again
how are we then harmed by themit?

If afflictions do not exist inherently within  the  objects,  do  not  exist
inherently within the sense powers, do not exist inherently  between  theose
two, then how can inherently existent afflictions harm us?  The  Iinherently
existent afflictions  cannot  harm  us  because  afflictions  do  not  exist
inherently. As such, inherently existent afflictions cannot harm.

We deal  with  the  afflictions  when  they  arise  by  reflecting  in  this
wayThrough such a reflection then we deal with  the  afflictions  when  they
arise. First you suppress them,  then you to eliminate them from the root.

Next is how to deal with the afflictions by understanding  that  they  exist
conventionally.



      Verse 4.47 c,d
      They are like an illusion. Thus I should dispel  the  fear  within  my
      heart and strive for the sake of wisdom.
      For no meaning, why am I harmed in hell and so forth?

We have to understand that the afflictions are like illusions. There are  no
such isn’t  such  a  thing  as  inherently  existent  afflictions.  Although
aAfflictions do not exist inherently,  nevertheless they  appear  to  be  as
inherently existentexistent. They  appear  to  exist  inherently.  Therefore
they are like an illusions.

By Uunderstanding all this,  these, we overcome  abandon  the  fear  of  not
being able to abandon the afflictions due to because of thinking  that  they
are inherently existent. Therefore, it is correct to  strive  in  abandoning
the afflictions through developing wisdom.  If this is  the  case  then  why
should we I allow ourselves myself to go to the  hells  realms   and  suffer
there, now that weI know that the afflictions can be destroyed?

In short, we deal with the afflictions by reflecting on  how  they  are  not
inherently existent and that reflecting on how  they  are  liked  illusions.
The teachings are saying that when afflictions arise, we should  not  follow
them after the afflictions but rather that we  should  investigate,  “  wWhy
and how is this affliction arising? What is its cause, i.e., ?  wHow  is  it
arising? What is it arising from?”  Then we look for the  very  source,  the
origin, and the root of  the  afflictions.  It  is  through  generating  the
wisdom realiszing selflessness that we are able to cut at the root  of  tthe
afflictions. The teachings tell us that once we are  able  to  develop  this
wisdom realiszing selflessness,   we  will  ould  be  able  to  destroy  the
afflictions.

Synopsis
|Synopsis |


      Verse 4.48
      Therefore, having thought about this,
      I should make effort for  the  sake  of  accomplishing  the  trainings
      explained.
      If the doctor’s instructions are ignored,
      How will a patient in need of treatment be cured by the medicines?

In all the earlier verses in this chapter, we were told to be  conscientious
in guarding the bodhicitta that has been generated, . We have been  told  to
be conscientious in guarding the training. , isn’t it? In the  first  place,
we were told to be conscientious in to guarding ourselves  and  to  not  let
ourselves be stained by the bodhisattva downfalls and the faults.  But  even
when if we are stained by the downfalls and faults, we  should  confess  and
purify  them.  Then  there  was  this  extensive  big   section   on   being
conscientious in guarding ourselves against the afflictions. So, Aall  these
of these were explained earlier.

We have to cultivate conscientiousness by  reflecting  on  all  the  advices
given earlier in the chapter.
This verse is saying that just like a patient who is very sick  would  needs
to follow the doctor’s advice, to  take  e  the  medicine  and  undergo  the
appropriate treatment. Likewise,  here  we  have  to  follow  basically  the
advices given by the Buddha with  regards  to  being  conscientious  in  our
trainings.

In Gyaltsab Je’s commentary, he concluded the commentary  for  this  chapter
by saying, : “Tthe freedom from memory  of  faults  and   increasing  virtue
without degeneration, these is depend with certainty on  the  meditation  on
conscientiousness. Therefore should those proficient should  always  depends
on conscientiousness.”
|The chapter’s|
|name         |

The chapter’s name is Teaching Conscientiousness
The Fifth Chapter Five: Guarding IntrospectionAlertness

The nNext chapter is the chapter on  guarding  introspection  or  vigilance.
Chapter on guarding vigilance. According  to  Gyaltsab  Je’s  outline,  this
chapter relates to, “The way to train  in  ethics:  A  specific  explanation
given with regard to  mindit  says:  Explaining  the  way  of  trainings  in
morality by explaining mindfulness  and  introspection—  (vigilance)  -  the
methods for purely guarding all keeping the vvirtuous dharmas pure.”


Essentially, tThis chapter essentially is an explanation of keeping  ethical
discipline. It is an explanation of how to protect one’s ethics (or  ethical
discipline)  and how to keep themit  pure.  One  has  to  keep  the  ethical
discipline pure with mindfulness and introspection.

In order to achieve full enlightenment, it is necessary to enter and  engage
in a path that is unmistaken and complete. When If  the  path  is  mistaken,
one will not achieve the result. Similarly, when if there  are  elements  of
the path that are missing, i.e., which means the  path  is  incomplete,  the
result will would not be achieved eitheras well.

The teachings tell us that it is innot sufficient to  generate  aspirational
bodhicitta. R, rather on the basis of having  after  generated  aspirational
bodhicitta,  one must take the bodhisattva  vows  and  then  engage  in  the
trainings. Otherwise, one will not achieve the result.

All the trainings of the bodhisattvas’ trainings  can be condensed into  the
six perfections. When we say that the bodhisattvas  need  to  train  in  the
path that is unmistaken and  complete,  complete  and  unmistaken,  this  at
means the bodhisattvas have to practisce the  bodhisattva  deeds,  i.e.,   -
the trainings,  - and in particular, of these six perfections.  Of  the  six
perfections, here in this chapter, the perfection of ethicsal discipline  is
the topic of discussion.

|Explaining the chapter’s material                                    |
|A An extensive explanation of the way to practice                    |
|B The conclusion, as it is necessary to put into practice the meaning|
|without [leaving it on the level of] mere words                      |

|A An extensive explanation of the way to practice                    |
|1 The method for guarding the trainings: guarding the mind           |
|2 The method for guarding the mind: guarding mindfulness and         |
|alertness                                                            |
|3 The way to train in the conduct of guarding the mind by means of   |
|mindfulness and alertness                                            |
|4 The branch or method of excellent trainings                        |

|1 The method for guarding the trainings: guarding the mind           |
|A By guarding the mind, one comes to guard all                       |
|B The reasons for that                                               |
|C Making effort in guarding the mind                                 |

|A By guarding the mind, one comes to guard all                       |
|1 A brief presentation on the necessity of guarding the mind         |
|2 The shortcomings of allowing the mind to degenerate                |
|3 The benefits of guarding the mind                                  |


Following Gyaltsab Je’s outline, the  explanation of the ining the  text  or
the body of this chapter is covered in two main points:
A. AAn extensive explanation of the way to practise  Explaining extensively
   how to practice
B. B The conclusion, as it is necessary to put into practice the meaning
   without leaving it on the level of mere words  by summary as one need to
   actually practice and just not talking from the mouth.

A.   An extensive explanation of the way to practice Explaining  extensively
how to practice itself is covered in four points:
    1. The method for guarding the trainings: guarding the mind Guarding the
       mind as method for guarding the trainings
    2.
    3.  The  method  for  guarding  the  mind:  gGuarding  mindfulness   and
       introspection as method for guarding the mind
   4. The way to train in the conduct of action  of  guarding  the  mind  by
      means of with mindfulness and introspection
    5. The branch or method of excellent limb of perfecting the trainings


1.    The method for guarding the trainings:  gGuarding the mind  as  method
for guarding the trainings consists of three points:
  A.  By guarding the mind, one comes to guard all
  B.  The reasons for that
   i. C.  Making effort in guarding the mindProtecting all by protecting the
      mind
  ii. The reason for that
 iii. Striving then in protecting the mind
  i.

A.  By guarding the mind, one comes to guard all consists of Protecting  all
by protecting the mind, there are three points:
  1.  Brief presentation on the necessity of guarding the mind
  2.  The shortcomings of allowing the mind to degenerate
   a) 3.  The benefits of guarding the mindShowing in brief that  one  needs
      to protect the mind
   b) The fault of the mind degenerating or degenerating the mind
   c) The benefits of protecting the mind



The point is that in order to guard the trainings,  one  has  to  guard  the
mind. Therefore, it is very important to guard and protect the mind.

THE METHOD FOR GUARDING THE TRAININGS: GUARDING THE MIND

A. By guarding the mind, one comes to guard all
|1 A brief presentation on the necessity of guarding the mind         |


  1.  Brief presentation on the necessity of guarding the mind
      Verse 5.1
      Those who wish to guard their trainings
      Should very tightly guard their minds.
      Those who do not guard their minds
      Are unable to guard their trainings.

The  bodhisattvas  have  to  undertake  There  are  many   trainings.    the
bodhisattvas have to undertake. In order to protect  their  trainings,  they
have to focus on guarding their minds.

We have to protect the minds from engaging with in the  eerroneous  objects.
When If the mind is not protected against erroneous objects, and when if  we
do not stop the mind from following and engaging with in erroneous  objects,
 then it  will  be  very  difficult  to  protect  the  trainings.  As  such,
Ttherefore it is very important to protect and to guard the mind.

Our minds is are likened to an untamed elephant. How do you tame an  untamed
elephant? You tie the untamed elephant with a very strong  rope  to  a  very
stable pillar. Then yYou check  every  now  and  then  to  see  whether  the
elephant is still tied to theat strong pillar. Likewise, we guard our  minds
with the rope of mindfulness and the guard  of  introspection.  We  have  to
protect our  minds  from  wandering  off  and  engaging  with  in  erroneous
objects. The way to guard our  minds  in  such  a  way   is  by  relying  on
mindfulness and introspection.

The thoughts in our minds are likened to waves in the an  ocean.  They  just
come in waves after waves without any stopping. The thoughts that arise  are
not stable and they do not n’t last very long time. They only  exist  for  a
very short time and are then rreplaced by another one.
We have to guard our minds with mindfulness and introspection.

Mindfulness is the mental factor that does not allow the mind to forget  the
virtuous object of observation.
We have to tie our mind with the rope of mindfulness to  a  virtuous  object
of observation. It is mindfulness that stops the mind from  forgetting  this
chosen virtuous object of observation and it.  is
mMindfulness is that which that does not allow the mind to  forget  what  to
cultivate engage and what to abandondiscard. Mindfulness causes the mind  to
stay on that virtuous object of observation without forgetting. This is  how
mindfulness protects the mind.

Introspection (or vigilance) is like the person who checks what  we  are  we
up to, what is our body, speech and mind are up to and what they are ,  what
is it doing.? It is like someonebody  checking  up  on  us.  It  is  through
introspection  (vigilance)  that  we  continue  to  engage  in   and   apply
mindfulness. , and continue to apply mindfulness.

This at is the a brief explanation of  how  to  guard  one’s  trainings.  In
short, one guards one’s the trainings by guarding the mind with  mindfulness
and introspection.
What happens when the  If the mind degenerates, what happens??

  2.  The shortcomings of allowing the mind to degenerate
      Verse 5.2
      In this [world,] unsubdued and crazed elephants
      Do not cause such harms
      As the harms of Relentless Torment[1]
      Caused by the unleashed elephant of my mind.
Note: Relentless Torment - Avici Hells

When If we let theis unsubdued mind wander off and do whatever it likes,  we
will end up accumulating negativities that which  then  throw  us  into  the
hells. An untamed mind leads to the accumulation ng of so many  negativities
that which will then lead us into the lower  realms.  The  is  is  something
that an external untamed elephant cannot do this to us. For this at  reason,
therefore we have to strive in guarding or protecting the mind.

What are the benefits then when if we protect or guard our mind?

  3.  The benefits of guarding the mind
    A.  Brief presentation

|3 The benefits of guarding the mind |
|A A brief presentation              |
|B An extensive explanation          |

|A A brief presentation              |


      Verse 5.3
      But if the elephant of my mind is tightly bound
      Through all by the rope of mindfulness,
      All fears will cease to exist
      And all virtues will come into my hand.

Here the verse says that when if we bind our mind s tightly onto a  virtuous
object of observation, we will protect our minds and we . It  is  said  that
if we are able  to  bind  our  minds  tightly  onto  a  virtuous  object  of
observation then we will achieve easily a good rebirth as  a  human  or  and
god and . We will easily achieve the happiness of liberation.

The teachings are saying that we need to guard our  minds  with  mindfulness
and introspection. When If we can place our minds strongly on athe  virtuous
object of observation,  we will be able to acquire every all  virtues.  When
If we are able to acquire all the virtues,  we will be able to  acquire  all
the different kinds of happiness and we will be able to overcome  non-virtue
and suffering for it . For it is said in the sutras that the best  thing  is
to subdue one’s  minds.  When  If  we  subdue  our  minds,  we  achieve  all
happiness.

Lama Atisha said,  “When weIf  we  subdue  our  minds,  the  external  enemy
cannot harm us. But  but when one’s if one’s mind is not  non-subdued,  when
 and if one’s mind  moves  and  wanders  off  towards   the  this  erroneous
object,  then we are harmed.”. This is how external  enemy  as  a  condition
can harm us. When If we let  our  mind  wander  off  to  an  onto  erroneous
objects, this e external enemy acts as a  condition  for  the  inner  enemy,
the afflictions, to arise. When  the  inner  enemy  of  afflictions  arises,
this at burns our mind and this  .  This  iiss  how  this  inner  our  enemy
destroys us. Therefore we have to vanquish or subdue the inner  enemy.  This
is the advice of Lama Atisha.

We may think,  “So what if I subdue my mind? Even when if I subdue my  mind,
 but there are so many difficult  external  difficult  conditions  that  and
there is  no  way  that  I  can  protect  myself  against  all  of  themse..
Therefore there is no way I can completely be free of fear even  if  I  were
to  subdue my mind.”.

The answer to this qualm that in is in the next verse.

B. Extensive explanation
[BP1 L25] When we bind our three doors of body, speech  and  mind  with  the
rope of mindfulness and tie them to a virtuous  object  of  observation,  we
will be freed of the fears of this  life  and  all  future  lives.  All  the
qualities of the path and the qualities of the realisations of a  person  of
small,  medium and great capacity - in short, all virtues and excellences  -
will come to us.  What  do  we  mean  by  tying  up  our  three  doors  with
mindfulness and introspection? What are we  tying  them  to?  It  means  the
capability of the mind to keep focused on virtue.  We  can  understand  this
with the simple analogy of the crazy and unsubdued elephant. If we are  able
to tie the elephant with an iron chain to a very strong pillar, there is  no
way the elephant can harm us and we need not be afraid since  we  know  that
it can no longer hurt us. In the same way, we need to tie up our  minds  and
keep them focussed very strongly and in a very  stable  way  on  a  virtuous
object.
|B An extensive       |
|explanation          |


      Verse 5.4
      Tigers, lions, elephants, bears,
      Snakes, and all my enemies,
      The guardians who are hell beings,
      Evil spirits and likewise cannibals,


      Verse 5.5
      Will all be bound
      By binding this mind alone,
      And will all be subdued
      By subduing this mind alone.


 Khen Rinpoche (In English): Okay that is the answer. You will find out.  We
                                 stop here.
                                 ~~~~~~~~~~~
Q&A

Question: My question rStudent 1:  Relatesd to  the  explanation  of  Vverse
4.47  regarding  the  relationship   that  were   explained,   it   is   the
relationship between the afflictions and the objects. It is  soundsed   like
there are two versions:  .  oneOne  is  when  we  see  the  our  object,  we
exaggerate its qualities and attachment or aversion arises  because  we  see
the  object  as   is  inherently  desirable  or  the  object  is  inherently
horrible.
It also seems to say that the affliction is somehow embedded in  the  object
itself.

I I can’t get my mind around the  notion  that  the  affliction  is  somehow
inherently existentce within the object. Maybe I didn’t  understanding  this
it correctly.

Answer: In that verse, it is stated very clearly that these  afflictions  do
not abide within the object. Essentially the meaning  of  the  statement  is
that the afflictions do not inherently abide within the objects.

Student 1:  But  the  incorrect  mental  attention  is  thinksing  that  the
affliction exists in the object. Is that what we are saying  here?  I  am  a
bit confused about this.

Khen Rinpoche (In English): Whatich one are  you are confused aboutin?

Student 1: The relationship between the afflictions and the objects.

Answer: This is an exercise to establish discover that  the  afflictions  do
not inherently exist.
In order to establish discover that they do not inherently  exist,  we  have
to establish discover that:
 • - the afflictions do not exist inherently exist within the objects,
 • - the afflictions do not exist inherently exist in the sense powers or
 • - the afflictions do not exist inherently exist somewhere in between

That verse is saying that:
 • - the afflictions do not exist inherently within the objects,
 • - the afflictions do not exist inherently within the sense powers,
 • - the afflictions do not exist inherently somewhere in between,

-T therefore the afflictions do not exist inherently at all.

This at is the meaning of the verse 4.47 ( a, b), “I : If these  afflictions
do not abide within objects,/   Not  in  the  collection  of  sense  powers,
between the two nor elsewhere.”

Khen Rinpoche (in English): This at  is  the  meaning  of  the  verse.  What
isThen  your question is what?

Student 1: The commentary sounded as if that we exaggerate the qualities  of
the objects that is the afflictions, that is what causes the afflictions  to
arise.
Answer: That was an explanation on how the afflictions arise  in  our  mind,
isn’t it?
Student 1: The commentary seems to be saying that there Yes. There  is  this
conception from our side  that  thinks  the  attachment  exists  within  the
object.

Khen Rinpoche (in English):  Don’t we we think like that or not?

Student 1:  No. One doesn’t think the attachment is embedded in the object.

Khen Rinpoche (in English): Don’t you feel that your aAttachment  is  coming
100% coming from the object itself, you don’t feel that? You  feel  that  it
is coming from your mind? You see that  the  attachment  is  totally  coming
from the side of the  object, isn’t that soit? Giving this  attachment  from
the object, isn’t it?

Student 1: I see the qualities of the object.

Khen Rinpoche (in English): So, this gives rise  to  the  attachment  right?
Whato gives rise to  the attachment?

Student 1: The attachment is arising in my our mind.

Khen Rinpoche (in English): But whato produces  that  attachment?  Isn’t  it
100% produced from the object, isn’t it?

Student 1: OK. kay. It is just that I never  thought  about  it  think  like
that before.

Khen Rinpoche (in English): When The  strong  attachment  arises,  you  feel
that it is 100% attachment is given by ing from the object.

When you are angry at athe person, it is also it is exactly like that.  What
you feel is,  “I am all right okay but this person is giving 100%  anger  to
me.”, from the object”.  It is totally from the  side  of  the  object.  You
don’t feel, “It is my  that “my mind” that is making me  made this,  unhappy
and  & angry.”, isn’t it?

The point is that  the  object  100%  makes  your  attachment  arise.  100%.
YouYour  minds  doesn’t  not   don’t  think,  “I  made  this   “I  make  the
attachment.”. What you feel is that the  object  gives  you  the  attachment
100%. It is coming from the side of the object.  your attachment,  from  the
object side.


Interpreted by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme; transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek,  Vivien  Ng
& Aki Yeo; edited by Cecilia Tsong.

-----------------------
[1] Relentless Torment refers to the Avici hells.

