Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Engaging in the Deeds of a Bodhisattva/BP2 M5 L20 final .doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:52:14.591238
================================================================================


Transcript of the teachings by Khen Rinpoche Geshe  Chonyi  on  Engaging  in
the Bodhisattva Deeds, 2014

Root text: Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds by  Shantideva,  translated  by
Toh Sze Gee. Copyright: Toh Sze Gee, 2006; Revised edition, 2014.

Lesson                                                                    20
15 April 2014


Review. Chapter Five: Guarding Introspection. Verses 5.41-5.115. A. An
extensive explanation of the way to practice. 1. The method for guarding
the trainings: guarding the mind. A. By guarding the mind, one comes to
guard all. B. The reasons for that. 1. Wrongdoing depends upon the mind. 2.
Qualities depend upon the mind.



REVIEW

We saw earlier how in order to protect one’s ethics one has to  guard  one’s
mind. Without guarding one’s mind, there is no way to  guard  one’s  ethics.
Therefore, guarding one’s mind is very important. The  text  tells  us  that
when if we guard or protect our mind well, then we cannot be harmed  by  the
external enemy.

When our minds  are  stirred  by  thethe   waves  of  the  incorrect  mental
attention, the appearance of an the external enemy then arises which that  ,
which acts as a condition for the inner enemy, of the  afflictions  such  as
anger  and  attachment,   to  arise.  When  this  inner   enemy,    of   the
afflictions,  arises, what does it do to us? It kills us.

The essential point here is that the main enemy is the  inner  enemy,  i.e.,
which is the afflictions. We have to subdue the  mind.  When  we  discipline
and subdue our own mmind, then there  is  no  external  enemy,  as  nd  tthe
external enemy cannot harm us. On the basis of recogniszing the problems  or
 faults of the afflictions, we have to strive to in destroying them.

The text tells us that when if wwe let our minds being stirred  up   by  the
waves of incorrect mental attention, and when the  afflictions  arises,  the
harms they will bring  to  us  is  very,  very  great  as  they  ,  for  the
afflictions can throw us even into the  lowest  of  the  lower  realms,  the
Avici hHells. This Such  Such harms that is inflicted by done to us  by  the
inner enemy is something that the external enemy cannot do to us.  to us.

Here we are discussing the application of mindfulness and introspection  (or
vigilance). In this context, what should we be mindful of  and  what  should
we apply introspection tobe vigilant about? We should have  mindfulness  and
introspection with regards to the things we need to cultivate adopt and  the
things we need to abandon. discard. When If we are able to apply  constantly
 mindfulness and introspection  with  regards  to  the  things  we  need  to
cultivateadopt, then it is said that the cultivation of virtues willould  be
easy.

Let us ’s take the ethicsal discipline of abandoning the ten non-virtues  as
an example. Before we can apply mindfulness and introspection  vigilance  in
cultivating theis  ethics al discipline of abandoning the  ten  non-virtues,
we need:
 • - first,  wwe first have to know what the ten non-virtues are;,
 • second, - we need to recognisze their individual entities;,
 • third, - we need to understand how  these  ten  non-virtues  are  created
   and;, and
 • finally, - we need to know exactly how to abandon the ten non-virtues..
Without knowing these few couple of points, there is no  way  we  can  apply
mindfulness as because mindfulness  is  not  forgetting  something  that  we
already know.
My point is using the ten-non-virtues as an example. IfIf  we  do  not  know
exactly what the ten non-virtues are, their entities, how  to  engage  them,
how to turn away from them and so forth, we cannot apply mindfulness  so  as
. wWe cannot say that we cannot be are mindful in abandoning  the  ten  non-
virtues. Therefore, we have to know these points.

Similarly,, in order to keep whatever pratimoksha vows we  you  have  taken,
first we you have to know the trainings involved first before weyou  can  be
mindful of theamt.

Similarly, , in order to protect our your bodhisattva vows, we you  have  to
know what the your bodhisattva vows are,,  and,  in order to  keep  our  the
tantric vows, weyou have to know what the tantric vows consist of.

Here we  are  discussing  the  practice  of  mindfulness  and  introspection
vigilance in relation to the practice of ethics. al  discipline.  There  are
different kinds of ethicsal discipline:
 • -  the ethicsal discipline of the pratimoksha vows,
 • -  the ethicsal discipline  of the bodhisattva vows and
 • -  the ethics al discipline of the tantric vows.
Whatever vows we may be referring to, it is, bbefore weyou can  protect  and
guard  these  vows  well   with   mindfulness   and   introspection,   first
wevigilance, you first have to know what the vows are.

The ethics al discipline we are discussing here is primarily the  ethics  al
discipline oof the bodhisattvas,s, which can be classified into three  types
of ethical discipline:
1. the ethics of restraintE
thical discipline of restraint
2. the eEthics al discipline of gathering virtuous dharma
3. the eEthicsa l discipline of benefiting sentient beings

The teachings  states  that  these  three  types  of  ethics  constitute  al
discipline form tthe ethicsal discipline of the bodhisattvas.  In  order  to
keep and protect these is ethicsal discipline, first we first have  to  know
what they are and, on that basis, we have to strive to protect them.

Acharya Shantarakshita said that b, ys; “Because of apprehending  things  to
be truly existent, this that aacts as the a condition for  afflictions  such
as anger and attachment to arise. Through apprehending things  to  be  truly
existent (or inherently existent), , then  the  inner  enemy  of  anger  and
attachment arises. When If this grasping at things to be as  truly  existent
ceases, and when if it no longer exists, is non-existent, then there  is  no
way  for  anger  and  attachment  to  arise.  Therefore,  the  great  master
Shantarakshita said, ys; “The root or source of  all  the  problems  is  the
belief in  things  to  be  truly  existent.”  This  apprehension  of  truely
existencet, the ignorance that grasps at a self, is the root of  all  ourthe
problems. When that ignorance If that is destroyed, then  there  is  no  way
for the inner enemy of anger and attachment  to  arise.  When  there  is  no
inner enemy, there will not be any external enemy either.

The appearance of the external enemy  is  very  much  dependsent  on  having
anger. From In the view of anger, there is  a  projection  of  the  external
enemy, ; ““This person harmeds me.” Without hatred or anger, there will  not
be an external enemy. The external enemy does not exist from its  own  side,
i.e.,  it does not existing  right there inherently. , but Rrather it  is  a
product or creation or projection of one’s inner  enemy.  It  is  said  that
when if the inner enemy does not exist, there will  be  no  external  enemy.
Therefore, the teachings emphasisze the need to subdue our own mind.

When If one thinks,  “No matter how much I can subdue my mind, there  is  no
way to stop these external problems and conditions. There  are  so  many  of
them. So it doesn’t really matter whether whether I can subdue  my  mind  or
not , it doesn’t really matter bbecause the  problems  areis  still  there.”
One will not be able to protect oneself when if one thinks in this way.  The
answer to that is in verses 5.4 and verse 5.5.

THE METHOD FOR GUARDING THE TRAININGS: GUARDING THE MIND (cont’d)

A. By guarding the mind, one comes to guard all
     3.  The benefits of guarding the mind
        B.  Extensive explanation

|B An extensive       |
|explanation          |


      Verse 5.4
      Tigers, lions, elephants, bears,
      Snakes, and all my enemies,
      The guardians who are hell beings,
      Evil spirits and likewise cannibals,


      Verse 5.5
      Will all be bound
      By binding this mind alone,
      And will all be subdued
      By subduing this mind alone.

All the Hharms that may comes from all the different  kinds  of  animals—  -
tigers, lions, elephants, bears, snakes and so forth—-,  all  of  our  human
enemies, all the hell guardians, all the different kinds of  people  who  do
black  magic  to  and  harms  us,  all  the  different   kinds   of   blood-
drinkingsucking  drinking spirits and so forth. When  If we are able to  tie
fasten oour minds  with  mindfulness  and  introspection  vigilance  onto  a
virtuous object of observation, such as compassion and bodhicitta, then  all
these harms from animals, humans and non-humans will not be able  to  affect
us.

We are afraid of these things. When we see animals, we are afraid  of  being
harmed by them animals. We are afraid of being harmed by humans,  non-humans
and so forth. When If we analysze this further, thise  fear comes  from  our
self-cherishing. The greater is our self-cherishing,  is, the  greater  will
be our worriesy and fears.

In place  of  self-cherishing,  when  if  we  have  the  strong  thought  of
cherishing  others—   in  particular  when  if  there  is   compassion   and
bodhicitta,— although that will not make the animal go away,   and  even  if
though the animal is still there, from our side,   we  will  not  experience
fear.
Even when we if one meets with frightening animals such as poisonous  snakes
cks and so forth, and when if there is the a strong  thought  of  benefiting
others, they will not frighten us. Why is this so? Because when If there  is
the a strong thought of benefiting others, the mind  is  very  stable,  calm
and relaxeds.

Khen Rinpoche (said in English): If you just sit there, maybe the lion  will
eat you. T, then how? What will you do? You have to stay calm, generate  the
bodhicitta mind, and you remain stay there. When If the lion comes in  front
of you, will it  and eeat you, how?? Maybe it  They wowon't eat you. ? I  am
not sure. Maybe they won't eat you.  Maybe the  lion can  must  have  smell,
“Oh this not the right person to eat because she doesn’t  don’t  have  self-
cherishing.  I  only  like  only  to  eat  people  those  who  haves   self-
cherishing!”.

In such a situation,  whether one will is gets eaten or not,  putting  aside
that, when if there is a really strong thought of benefiting others and  one
is accustomed to that, then definitely from one’s own side, one has no  fear
and no worry.

There are many historical accounts of real bodhisattvas who  have  generated
real the actual bodhicitta. When they come  coming into  contact  with  wild
animals, and because of their actual real  bodhicitta,  these  wild  animals
are naturally just get pacified and subdued and stay by  their  side.  Those
who have real bodhicitta are able to subdue the minds  of  others’  mind.  I
guess thisat is one explanation of is one of the symbolisms  behind  certain
buddhas and bodhisattvas depicted as sitting on lions or , and some of  them
having snakes as a their hood covering their holy bodies.

This That is why the teachings say that when s “If our  minds  are  subdued,
then  we  are  able  to  subdue  everything.”  Wherever  these  Those   real
bodhisattvas, wherever they go,  when  people  comes  into  their  presence,
somehow  they  are  just  naturally  pacified.  Because  of  their  powerful
bodhicitta,  ,  everything  around  them  isare  gets  pacified,   and   and
everything becomes very calm.

|The reasons for that     |
|1 Wrongdoing depends upon|
|the mind                 |
|2 Qualities depend upon  |
|the mind                 |

|1 Wrongdoing depends upon|
|the mind                 |
|A Scripture              |
|B Reasoning              |
|C Synopsis               |


What follows Next is the explanation ining the reasons  for  what  has  been
mentioned so far, the reasons for that, and this has two parts:
1. W1. rongdoing depends upon There is an  explanation  of  how  the  faults
   depend on the mind..
2. Q2. ualities depend  upon  There  is  also  an  explanation  of  how  the
   qualities also depend on the mind.

Wrongdoing depends on the mind On how the  faults  depend  on  the  mind  is
discussed under three points.
A. Scripture
   1. Reasoning Scriptural citation
B. The reason for that
C. Synopsis Summary
|A         |
|Scripture |

B.  The reasons for that
  1.  Wrongdoing depends upon the mind
    A.  Scripture
    Verse 5.6
    The perfect speech itself indicated,
    “Thus all fears
    As well as all boundless suffering
    Originate from the mind.”

It is said that, “All fears/  As  well  as   all  fears  and  all  boundless
sufferings/  Ooriginate from the mind.”. The fears  of  this  life  and  the
future lives arise from the negative mind.

Where is this stated? What is the source? In the  Sutra  of  the  Clouds  of
Jewels, the Buddha said, ys: “If one controls one’s mind, one  controls  all
phenomena.”.

Next is establishing this through reasoning.
|B         |
|Reasoning |


    B.  Reasoning
    Verse 5.7
    Who intentionally created
    The weapons of hell beings?
    Who created the burning iron ground?
    From what did all those hosts of women ensue?


    Verse 5.8 a,  b
    The  Muni taught that all such things
    Are the negative mind.

It is explained that in the  hells,  there  are  hell  guardians  who  wield
heeled different kinds of weapons such as swords and  spears.  Who  or  what
created these weapons?  these weapons? These wereare not created by  an  the
all- mighty creator god.


Who created the burning iron groundss in the hell  realms?  The  creator  is
again not someone body else.

Similarly, who created the surrounding hells? There is  a  surrounding  hell
that has a tree called the sShalmmali tree that is as big , which is a  very
big and is as big as athe mountain. From the  vicinity  of  that  tree,  one
hears the cries of women. Who created thatis?

The beings who are born in that particular hell  hear  the  cries  of  their
objects of attachment. , and Iin this case,  here the objects of  attachment
are is being women. These beings hear the cries of those   wthe  women  that
they were one is attached to. They hear the women calling out to  them  from
the top of these trees. Due to their attachment,  they  one  climbs  up  the
trees looking for their women. As they one climbs up  the  trees,  they  are
one is pierced by all kinds of swords. Then when they one  reached  the  top
of the trees, they one hears  the women calling for them from  the  foot  of
the trees. the sound is coming from the bottom of the tree. Again  they  one
climbs down the trees looking for the source of the  cries  of  those  women
that they were one is attached to.

Who or what is the creator of all thisese sufferings? It is not  created  by
someone body else, nor is are it they ,  neither  it  is  generated  without
cause. All thisese sufferings is   are the results  of  one’s  own  negative
mind.

There are people who are not well-trained in logic and reasoning  and  there
are people who deny the  workings  of  karma,  the  law  of  cause  and  its
effects. We may tell them
You may tell someone  that when humans  see  the  liquid,  they  see  it  as
water, but hungry ghosts see  the  same  liquid  as  pus  and  blood.  YOour
explanation to them is that this is due to  karma.  The  hungry  ghosts  are
unable not able to partake of the pus and blood because this  is  what  they
see.

But these those people who are not skilled trained in  logic  and  reasoning
and who deny ied the workings of cause and effect will say, : ““If  you  say
that there is really pus and blood  because  that  is  what  the  e  hhungry
ghosts are seeing it, then the same it must also appear to  me  as  a  human
being.”.

 Our reply is this, : “There is no contradiction.  in that. ”.
If Yyou think,  s  “‘This  appearance  of  pus  and  blood  and  pus  is  an
appearance to the mind of the hungry ghosts but,  in.  I’s  mind,  but,   in
actuality,  there is no pus and blood b. Because if If thate pus  and  blood
and pus that appears to the hungry ghosts really exist, they  then it  would
have to appear to a human being too.’,”  then You  you  have  to  understand
that you are it is actually wrong.

Our reply: “You are wrong because when  This  is  very  wrong,  for  if  you
assert that, you would also have to deny the existence  of  the  hell  fires
since the hell fires areis  an  experienced  by   only  to  certain  beings.
Therefore since they do it does not  exist  for  you,  in  .  In  actuality,
there is no hell and there are is no hell fires.” When If you think in  this
such a way, basically at the end of the day, basically you are  denying  the
workings of karma.

“WIf we argue: “Whhat we see asis water is seen by the  gods  as  to  be  as
nectar by the gods, but we do nnot ’t see nectar”. If we were to  argue  and
say that that nectar does not n’t exist just because we do not n’t  see  the
nectar, then we would also have to say that the water  that  appears  to  us
does not exist.”

Khen Rinpoche (said in English): Are yYou getting the line of  reasoning  or
notor not getting?

The point is this. When you say, If you say “Pus and bBlood  and  pus  areis
just an appearance to the negative minds of  the  pretas.  They  do  not  It
doesn’t really exist..”,, when  If you phrase it in such  a  way,  then  you
are actually deprecating the workings of karma and its effects.

Why is that line of thinking is wrong? Because this The line of thinking  is
basically coming from our human prejudice— that if it  exists,  then  humans
must see it. It must appear to  a hhuman for it  to  exist.  Thisat  s,  and
that is the prejudice. At the end of the day, basically it all goes back  to
oneself,  “Because I don’t see it, therefore it doesn’t exist.”  TBasically,
the whole line of reasoning goes back to that point.

Khen Rinpoche (in English): Yes or no? No?

WWhat we humans see a bowl of liquid that which is wet and moist  as  water.
Due to Ourour very strong karma, it causes us to  have  this  appearance  of
water and for . For us, that bowl of liquid , and  for  us  that  exists  as
water. But for the hungry ghosts, that same bowl of liquid  appears  as  pus
and blood and pus.  Due  to  their  very  strong  karma,  for  them,  it  is
established as pus and blood and pus.  for the hungry ghosts.

From the side of the liquid, the liquid is neither not established as  water
nor pus and . Neither is it established as blood and pus.  from the side  of
the liquid. For the gods, because of their pure karma, the  bowl  of  liquid
appears as nectar. This appearance of nectar to the gods  is  due  to  their
own karma and their merit. Due to their own merit,  they  see  the  bowl  of
liquid as nectar.  If that bowl of liquid is established as  nectar  by  its
own nature, from its own side and by its own nature, then whoever sees  that
bowl of liquid would have to see nectar.

Everything  that  exists  in  the  hells—,  all  the  different  frightening
appearances such as the weapons wielded heeled by the  hell  guardians,  the
burning iron grounds and so forth— are not created by  somebody  else.  They
are all created by one’s negative mind. I guess the saying  that  all  these
frightening appearances in the hells  –  the  weapons,  the  fire,  and  the
burning iron grounds - all these are created by  one’s  negative  mind.   If
one created the karma,  which is basically is  the  creation  of  one’s  own
mind, then there  are  is  theseis  appearances  of  all  these  frightening
images. There  that doesn’t have to be real fires existing  from  their  its
own side. But due to the one’s negative karma created by  one’s  mind,  then
there is a projection of the appearance of all  these  fires,  burning  iron
grounds and so forth.

Even though they do not exist from their own side as a  real  fires  and  so
forth, nevertheless,  these appearances torment the mind. One  goes  through
the experiences of being burnt, being harmed,  and pierced and so forth.  It
does not n’t mean that just because they it isare   a  mere  appearances  to
one’s negative mind,  therefore they it  cannot  function.  Although  theyse
are mere appearances to one’s negative mind, the a creations  of  one’s  own
negative mind, nevertheless,  they function  to  cause  problems,  suffering
and pain.

We may fall asleep and then dream of being trapped in a building that is  on
fire. ablaze. We may even dream that we are  burnt  by  the  fire.   in  the
dream. Although it is just a dream, there are all these appearances  to  the
dream consciousness. Nevertheless, in the dream,  you  experience  fear  and
you experience pain. You may even wake up sweating all over. You  could  say
that it wasis just a  mere  appearance  to  the  mind,  but,   nevertheless,
thate mere appearance to the mind does cause suffering.

A Mmere appearances can function to generate fear. This analogy of  a  dream
fire should only be  used  to  illustrate  that  the  mere  appearances  can
function to cause fear and suffering. But that analogy  cannot  be  used  to
arrive at come to the a conclusion that both the dream fire is the  same  as
the and hell fires because they are not the same.  are the  same.  No,  they
are not the same. One exists and one doesn’t exist. The dream fire does  not
exist, but the hell fires  does  exist.  This  is  something  that  requires
deeper analysis.

When If you think more deeply er about this, what is the difference  between
the dream fire and the hell fires? Of course when , if you  do  think  about
it, you will get a headache!. What is the difference then?

When If you think about it, this is what you would probably end  up  saying,
: “Just  as  like  the  dream  fire  is  a  mere  appearance  to  the  dream
consciousness, all tthese  hell fires, hell guardians, weapons and so  forth
are just a mere appearances to the negative  mind.”  Therefore  tThese  hell
fires, hells and so forth are not as real as they are as being described  in
the texts that is so real, but. T  hey  are  it  is  actually  just  a  mere
appearances to the negative mind. This is what you  probably  would  end  up
saying.


Is there any problem if you were to for you to say this? If you were to  say
that there is no n’t a problem, and you say that this is the  a  conclusion,
then,  it follows that there are is no hell fires and  so  forth.  If  there
are is no hell fires, then it follows that there areis  also  no  hells.  If
there areis no hells, then of course,  there cannot be any hungry ghosts.

It is not easy to posit the existence of something. What  is  the  criterion
for determining whether something exists or not? How do you  define  or  how
do you posit whether something exists or not?

For all the tenet systems s below the  Prasangika,  the  Consequence  Middle
Way School (CMWS)—, basically from the Autonomy  Middle  Way  School  (AMWS)
and below,— whether something exists or not, it  is basically determined  by
whether there is a valid cogniszer realiszing that object or not.

However, fFor the CMWS, an existence is posited as a mere appearance.

If you were to ask someonebody, or anybody  who has the world  view  of  the
AMWS and the tenets below that below this question, :
“Why is it that a human being doesn’t have horns? Why is it  that  the  cows
have horns?”,
tThe answer they will give you is this, “b “Bbecause you can  see  that  one
does not have has horns and the other has one doesn’t have  horns.”  ”  This
at answer is basically saying that the  presence  or  absence  of  horns  or
absence of horns is determined by whether there is a valid  mind  cogniszing
the horns or not.  This at is how it is determined you  determine  that  the
cows have horns and the humans does not have  horns.  This  is  the  answer,
isn’t it?


If you were to ask most people include those who hold onto  the  AMWS  view,
the Mind Only School (MOS) and below, they will tell you; “Because  you  can
see one has horns and one doesn’t have horns.”
How do you validate the existence of  horns?  Through  there  being  Because
there is a mind that realises zing horns. But when  if  you  consider  their
answer, what are they driving at? is it that they are driving at end of  the
day?  To them, tThere is a horns exist   right  there  from  their  its  own
side. At the end of the day,T this at is the very crux  and  the  bbasis  of
all their views:. tThere is something right there from its  own  side.  This
very ‘existence from its own side’  is the number one target that which  iis
negated by the CMWS. Whatever is asserted by everybody else,  this   asserts
becomes the object of negation  that which  is refuted by the CMWS.

According to the Prasangikas,[1], what is a horn? A horn is none other  than
that which is posited by convention. The Prasangikas say  the  fact  that  a
human  does  not  have  horns  and  athe  cow  has  horns  is  are   posited
conventionally, i.e., ; tthrough convention. That’s it. But  a  Whether  the
human not having doesn’t have horns, and a the cows having  e  horns  are  ,
both are the same in that they do not exist from their own side.

The CMWS states that while phenomena are posited  conventionally,  they  are
mere  appearances.  Even  though  phenomena  are  mere  appearances  posited
through mere names and labels, nevertheless,  they  function.  According  to
the CMWS, although all phenomena are  mere  appearances,  nevertheless  they
function, e.g., , just like how a dream fire can cause fear and worry.  ies.
Likewise, all these appearances—, the weapons,  the  burning  iron  grounds,
the hell  and fires and so forth in the hell realms—, are  mere  appearances
to to  the  negative  mind.  Nevertheless,  they  function  to  cause  pain,
worriesy ies, and fears.

There is a difference between a dream fire and a  hell  fire.  You  have  to
posit that there is a difference. The dream fire is posited  not  toto   not
exist and the hell fire  is  posited  to  exist  but  b.  Both  are  posited
conventionally.

WWe have to think, : “What is the difference between? ? Why is it  that  the
dream fire does not exist? Why is it that the the hell fires exists?

Khen Rinpoche (in English): What do you think? Do the hell fires  It  exists
or notdoesn’t exist? Hell fire, what do you think? Why?

Anyway, Tthe point is this: Although the hell fires areis  mere  appearances
to the negative mind, nevertheless, hell  fires  exists.  They  cause  pain,
fears and sufferings. Therefore, it is important to protect the mind.

C.  Synopsis
|C Synopsis|


      Verse 5.8 c, d
      Hence, within the three worlds
      There is nothing to fear other than my own mind.

All the fears contained in the three  worlds—  –  the  desire  realms,  form
realms and the formless realms— –arise from the negative mind.

So this is the section explaining how all faults arise from the mind.

Next is an explanation of how all qualities depend on the  mind.  There  are
six points:
|Qualities depend upon the |
|mind                      |
|A Giving relies upon the  |
|mind                      |
|B Ethics relies upon the  |
|mind                      |
|C Patience relies upon the|
|mind                      |
|D Joyous effort relies    |
|upon the mind             |
|E Concentration relies    |
|upon the mind             |
|F Wisdom relies upon the  |
|mind                      |


A. All qualities depend on the mind. There are six points:
B. Giving relies upon the mind Generosity
C. Ethics relies upon the mindEthical discipline
D. Patience relies upon the mind
E. Joyous effort relies upon the mind perseverance
F. Concentration relies upon the mindMeditative stabilization
G. WWisdom relies upon the mind

2.   Qualities depend upon the mind
       A.  Giving relies upon the mind
              1.   Completing the perfection of giving does not depend  upon
         eliminating  all                               types   of   poverty
         amongst all migrators

|A Giving relies upon the mind                                        |
|1 Completing the perfection of giving does not depend upon           |
|eliminating [all types of] poverty amongst all migrators             |
|2 It is brought to completion by familiarizing oneself with the      |
|attitude of generosity                                               |

|1 Completing the perfection of giving does not depend upon           |
|eliminating [all types of] poverty amongst all migrators             |


      Verse 5.9
      If the perfection of generosity
      Were the alleviation of migrating beings’ poverty,
      Then since there are still starving migrating beings,
      In what manner did the previous Protectors perfect it?
[Ven Gyurme translated Protectors as Saviours]

Why is there such a fallacy? Because if  the  perfection  of  generosity  is
contingent on removing all  poverty,  and  since  poverty  still  exists  in
abundance, then it follows that  all  the  buddhas  of  the  past  have  not
perfected the perfection of generosity.

The perfection of generosity is the cultivation of the mind of  giving  that
is brought to its fulfilment.

       2.   It is brought to completion by familiarising  oneself  with  the
          attitude of generosity
|2 It is brought to completion by familiarizing oneself |
|with the attitude of generosity                        |


      Verse 5.10
      The perfection of generosity is taught to be
      The mind intending to give all things,
      As well as its result, to all beings;
      Hence it is simply the mind.

The completion of the perfection of generosity is said to  be  the  complete
habituation of the mind of giving that gives away one’s body, resources  and
roots of virtues together with their results,  i.e.,  the  merit  from  such
giving.

One trains in this e generous attitude, the mind that is  willing  and  able
to give up  everything—  –  one’s  body,  resources  and  roots  of  virtue,
resources and body -— and including the effects of such giving,  the  merit.
One You ggives  all  this  it  away  to  all  sentient  beings  without  any
miserliness and attachment.

When one is thoroughly habituated with this attitude, then this at  is  said
to be the a completion of  the  perfection  of  generosity.  Therefore,  the
completion of the perfection of generosity is contingent on the mind  itself
and not on  the  external  factors  situation  or  the  external  situation.
factors. You bring to fulfilment this habituation of giving,  and  bring  it
to completion by bringing it to  to  iits  highest  level.  You  bring  this
generous  attitude  to  its  highest  level  through   becoming   thoroughly
habituated with it.  thoroughly.  This at is said to be  the  perfection  of
generosity.

When we think of generosity, Ggenerosity has to be understood  to  be  as  a
mind. It is a state of mind and it is . Generosity is defined as a  generous
attitude. The completion of the perfection of generosity  is  bringing  that
generous attitude to completion through habituation.

Next is the  perfection  of  ethics  (or  ethical  discipline)  that  is  al
discipline. The perfection of ethical discipline is also a quality  that  is
dependent on  the  mind.  The  completion  of  the  perfection  of  ethicsal
discipline does not depend on the absence of any  sentient  being  that  one
could kill.

       B.  Ethics relies upon the mind
             1.   It is invalid to say that  completing  the  perfection  of
         ethics depends upon the exhaustion of all sentient beings to kill


  |B Ethics depends upon the mind                                       |
|1 It is invalid [to say] that completing the perfection of ethics    |
|depends upon the exhaustion of all sentient beings who kill          |
|2 It is brought to completion by familiarizing oneself with the      |
|intention to abandon [killing]                                       |

|1 It is invalid [to say] that completing the perfection of ethics    |
|depends upon the exhaustion of all sentient beings who kill          |


      Verse 5.11 a,b
      Where will the fish and so forth be driven
      So that they will not be killed?

If the perfection of ethicsal  discipline is posited as removing or  putting
all the sentient beings that you can kill and putting  them  to  in  a  safe
place where such that they cannot be touched by anyone, then  the  thing  is
that you will never be able to do that or find a place for to  put  everyone
where in such that they will not be killed.

If  the   mind   of   abandonment   is   brought   to   completion   through
familiariszation,  thisat  is  posited  as  the   perfection   of   ethicsal
discipline.
IIf Yyou do not n’t want to kill aand you think, “No  matter  what  happens,
I will not kill. I will not physically harm others even at the costs  of  my
life.” This ”, t That is ethics. Is this not a al discipline. It is  a  mind
of abandonment, isn’t it?

Similarly when if yyou think, ;““It dDoes not n’t matter  what  happens.   I
will not take what is not given. I will not steal.” T,.  this  is  There  is
thisa mind of abandonment and this is that is ethicsal  discipline.  Such  a
mind  of   abandonment   is   brought   to   completion   through   constant
familiariszation that is . Then that is positedposited   as  the  perfection
of ethicsal discipline.

You may encounter a situation whereby you have a choice whether to  kill  or
not. You but you restrain yourself,  thinking,  “I will not  kill.  This  is
not good, and I will not do it.kill” You restrain yourself, and Tthis at  is
ethicsal discipline. Just  doing  nothing  sitting  there  and  not  killing
anything  is  not  posited  to  be  ethics,  i.e.,  al  discipline.  Ethical
discipline is a mind that hasis the this attitude of abandonment.  You  have
this mind of abandoning. When this mind of abandonment  ing  is  brought  to
completion  through  constant  familiarisazation,  then  this  at   is   the
completion of the perfection of ethics. al discipline.

                                 ~~~~~~~~~~

DISCUSSION QUESTIONS FOR SUNDAY, 27TH APRIL 2014
1.   (a)      What is the manner of rejoicing?
      (b)         How does  one  accumulate  merit  when  rejoicing  in  the
virtue of others?

2.    The Buddha has conquered the four maras including the mara  of  death.
   The Buddha is also omniscient and knows the wishes and  dispositions  of
   all sentient beings. What then is the purpose of requesting  the  Buddha
   not to pass into parinirvana and to turn the wheel of Dharma?

3.       It  is  said  that  conventional  bodhicitta  destroys   both   the
   afflictive obscurations and the  knowledge  obscurations.  How  is  this
   done?

4.   (a)       After generating bodhicitta, why is it inappropriate to  give
up bodhicitta?
      (b)    What happens when one gives up the  bodhicitta  that  has  been
generated?

5.  (a)      What are the faults of the afflictions?
      (b)   When they arise, how are we harmed by them?


Interpreted by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme; transcribed by Phuah  Soon  Ek,  Patricia
Lee & Julia Koh; edited by Cecilia Tsong.


-----------------------
[1] The proponents of the Consequence Middle Way School.

