Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Engaging in the Deeds of a Bodhisattva/BP2 M05 L07 final.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:52:18.132628
================================================================================


Transcript of the teachings by Khen Rinpoche Geshe Chonyi on Engaging in
the Bodhisattva Deeds, 2014

Root text: Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds by Shantideva, translated by
Toh Sze Gee. Copyright: Toh Sze Gee, 2006; Revised edition, 2014.

Lesson 7                                                           27
February 2014


Four erroneous conceptions & the four close placements of mindfulness.
Chapter Two: Confessing Negativities. Verses 2.1-2.9: Offerings: The need
to make offerings and the practice of offering unowned substances and
offering one’s body.


FOUR ERRONEOUS CONCEPTIONS & THE FOUR CLOSE PLACEMENTS OF MINDFULNESS

Much of the suffering that we experience arises as  a  result  of  following
after the four erroneous conceptions. The four erroneous conceptions are:
1. conceiving that which is unclean to be clean
2. conceiving that which is in the nature of suffering to be happiness
3. conceiving that which is impermanent to be permanent
4. conceiving that which is selfless to have a self

Many of  our  problems  and  much  of  our  unhappiness,  especially  mental
disturbances, arise from following  these  four  erroneous  conceptions.  In
order to stop these four erroneous conceptions, the Buddha taught  the  four
close placements of mindfulness:
1. the close placement of mindfulness of the body
2. the close placement of mindfulness of the feelings
3. the close placement of mindfulness of the mind
4. the close placement of mindfulness of phenomena

Conception of the unclean to be clean & the close placement  of  mindfulness
of the body
When we look at the conception of that which is  unclean  to  be  clean,  we
should relate this conception to how we view our  own  bodies.  In  reality,
our bodies are unclean and dirty by nature. The mind that sees  the  reality
of the body can reverse any erroneous conception of it as  being  clean  and
pure.

The purpose of seeing the reality of the body is to overcome our  attachment
to it. It is taught in the teachings that we should look at how unclean  and
dirty our bodies are in terms of the three  times,  the  past,  present  and
future. We should bring to mind the source of this body,  i.e.,  where  this
body comes from and how it comes about. Looking at the body in the  present,
we see how unclean and dirty it is by nature. In the future, this body  will
become a corpse.

We have to reflect and think in order to be able to see the  nature  of  the
body as being unclean and dirty. Seeing how  it  is  unclean  and  dirty  by
nature, we will be able to set aside any attachment  we  may  have  for  our
bodies. We often  accumulate  all  kinds  of  negativities  because  of  our
attachment to our bodies. This attachment often arises from  this  erroneous
conception of the body as being pure and clean.
While the body is indeed unclean and dirty by nature,  the  teachings  never
suggest that one should neglect or discard one’s body  or  that  one  should
not take good care of it.

Although the body is unclean and dirty by nature, it  can  be  put  to  good
use. On the basis of this  body,  one  can  practice  the  Dharma,  one  can
cultivate the good heart and one can be of benefit to others.  Therefore  it
is wrong to think that, just because the  body  is  impure  or  unclean  and
dirty by nature, one should neglect it and not take care of it. It does  not
mean that one should  not  take  care  of  one’s  personal  hygiene  by  not
cleaning or washing it.

Khen Rinpoche: Don’t do that!

This body can be useful when we use our  body  for  virtuous  activities  to
benefit others. For that reason, we need to take  care  of  the  body.  This
advice and instruction of looking at the unclean and impure  nature  of  the
body is a method for us to work with  and  deal  with  our  attachment.  The
close placement of mindfulness on the body is one of the methods  to  reduce
such attachment.

One’s body may by nature be dirty and impure but one  should  take  care  of
one’s body in the same way some farmers  collect  and  store  the  waste  of
their farm animals. Animal waste is dirty but because it can be put to  good
use, farmers keep and use it.  At the same time, they are  not  attached  to
the animal waste.

Khen Rinpoche: They still take care of it. For example,  when  I  was  young
and became a monk in Kopan, during Lama Yeshe’s time  in  Kopan,  we  didn’t
have many houses so there was a lot of empty land.

We had to plant vegetables such as cauliflower and cabbage. At that time  we
had to go to the farm to look after these vegetables. Lama Yeshe  taught  us
how to go to the septic tank of the toilet and put a bucket  in  to  collect
the waste—all the pee pee, poo poo and liquid inside the tank.

We would then go to the farm where the cabbage and cauliflower were  growing
with our buckets. Lama Yeshe told us not to put the  waste  on  top  of  the
vegetables. (Laughter).

He told us, “Dig the soil a little bit, then  put  one  scoop  in  and  then
cover it with soil again.” After that,  the  cauliflowers  would  grow  very
big.  When you put cow dung, the cauliflower  grows  this  much  (gestures).
But when you put the human waste, it grows much bigger. When I  was  a  kid,
that was what we did. Then after that, we would eat those vegetables.

Sometimes people misunderstand that because the body is  in  the  nature  of
suffering and unclean, they should  neglect  it.  Of  course,  this  is  not
correct. We have to take care of our body. The point is to work on  reducing
our attachment to our body.

Conception  of  suffering  to  be  happiness  &  the  close   placement   of
mindfulness of feelings
The close placement of mindfulness  of  feelings  is  a  method  for  us  to
overcome the erroneous conception that conceives suffering to be  happiness.

Whenever we experience pleasant feelings, even  though  they  start  off  as
very small, we immediately get emotionally attached  to  and  involved  with
those feelings. We want to hold on to and grasp at them.

This is what most people work for their entire lives. In  order  to  achieve
and have such pleasant and pleasurable feelings arise, people would  do  all
kinds of things. When one’s pleasurable feeling subsides or ends, one  turns
one’s attention to another pleasurable feeling and then  run  after  it.  We
have to do so much to achieve that same pleasurable feeling.

When we analyse the nature of those pleasurable  feelings,  first,  they  do
not increase forever. Second, they always end up resulting in suffering.  By
seeing how our feelings are in the nature of suffering,  we  can  reduce  or
work  with  this  erroneous  conception  that  conceives  suffering  to   be
happiness.

Most of us are attached to and emotionally  involved  with  our  pleasurable
feelings. In the process, we accumulate non-virtue in  order  to  experience
them.

Conception  of  impermanent  to  be  permanent  &  the  close  placement  of
mindfulness of the mind
The close placement of mindfulness of the mind is practised to overcome  the
erroneous conception of permanence.

Conception of the  selfless  to  have  a  self  &  the  close  placement  of
mindfulness of phenomena
The close placement of mindfulness on phenomena is done by  seeing  how  all
phenomena lack a self. Such  a  reflection  is  to  overcome  the  erroneous
conception of conceiving that which is selfless to have a self.

The four close placements of mindfulness of the  body,  feelings,  mind  and
phenomena are the methods for reducing  the  attachment  and  grasping  that
frequently arise due to the four erroneous conceptions.

|Close placement of mindfulness  |Overcomes  the erroneous conception |
|                                |of:                                 |
|Close placement of mindfulness  |Conceiving that which is unclean to |
|of the body                     |be clean                            |
|Close placement of mindfulness  |Conceiving that which is in the     |
|of feelings                     |nature of suffering to be happiness |
|Close placement of mindfulness  |Conceiving that which is impermanent|
|of the mind                     |to be permanent                     |
|Close placement of mindfulness  |Conceiving that which is selfless to|
|of phenomena                    |have a self                         |

                                 ~~~~~~~~~~

We  have  finished  with  the  benefits  of  the  mind   of   enlightenment,
bodhicitta. This mind of enlightenment is very precious. It  arises  due  to
the existence of suffering and that sentient beings are  tormented  by  such
suffering.

In the last  lesson,  we  saw  how  there  are  these  instructions  in  the
teachings to regard sentient  beings  as  the  Teacher,  i.e.,  the  Buddha.
Bodhicitta arises due to sentient beings and sentient beings from their  own
side have  the  buddha  lineage  or  buddha  nature,  i.e.,  they  have  the
potential to develop this mind of enlightenment. For that reason, we  should
try to respect sentient beings and take care of them.

This will come later in the text. There is a  verse  that  states  that  one
should cherish sentient beings as much as one  cherishes  the  Buddha.  Thus
there is an internal contradiction when we  cherish  the  buddhas  and  make
offerings to them but we do not cherish sentient beings.

When we reflect  on  the  benefits  of  bodhicitta,  we  find  how  precious
bodhicitta is. When we find bodhicitta to be precious, the  advice  is  that
we should also find sentient beings  from  where  bodhicitta  arises  to  be
precious. For that reason, we have to take care and cherish sentient  beings
as much as possible and not harm them.

In order to adopt the mind of enlightenment:
• We must  accumulate  the  merit  that  is  the  favourable  condition  for
  generating bodhicitta.
• We need to purify our minds of the negativities that is  the  unfavourable
  condition that obstructs the generation of such a mind.

It is said in the Great Treatise on the Stages of the Path to  Enlightenment
that accumulating merit,  i.e.,  the  favourable  condition,  and  purifying
negativities,  i.e.,  the  unfavourable  condition,  are   the   cooperative
conditions for the production of the path in one’s mind.
• The cooperative conditions for generating the  realisations  in  the  mind
  are accumulating merit and purifying the mind of negativities.
•  The  substantial  cause  for  producing  realisations  in  the  mind   is
  sustaining the meditations on the respective topics of the lam-rim.
This means that if you only sustain the meditations on  those  various  lam-
rim topics without accumulating merit and  without  purifying  the  mind  of
obscurations, i.e., the cooperative conditions, then the  realisations  will
not arise in the mind.  As such, one  cannot  neglect  the  accumulation  of
merit and the purification of negativities. These two are indispensable.

Lama Tsongkhapa said in his Great Treatise on the  Stages  of  the  Path  to
Enlightenment:
      When you hear the teachings, you do not remember them.
      When you reflect on the teachings, you do not understand them.
      When you meditate, you do not produce any experience or realisations.
      At such times when the mind is very weak, then one has to rely on  the
      power of the field of merit.
      This is a personal instruction.

This is what Lama Tsongkhapa said.  There is a need to accumulate merit  and
to purify the  mind  of  negativities  in  order  to  be  able  to  generate
bodhicitta.

Nagarjuna also stated the need to accumulate  a  vast  amount  of  merit  in
order to generate bodhicitta. Likewise Arya Asanga said that one  needed  to
accumulate merit in order to make the mind clear. It is only when  the  mind
is clear that bodhicitta can arise.  So  the  point  of  accumulating  merit
through making offerings is to make the mind clear and lucid.

Chapter two: Confessing Negativities

OFFERINGS

The need to make offerings
      Verse 2.1
      In order to uphold that precious mind
      I make excellent offerings to the Tathagatas,
      To the sacred Dharma, the stainless jewel, and
      To the children of the buddhas, the oceans of excellent qualities.

“In order to uphold that precious mind”: This states the attitude  that  one
should have when making offerings. In the context here, one should have  the
thought, “I’m going to make offerings so that I can generate bodhicitta.”

Often the reason that someone makes offerings is to put  on  a  display  and
show off or it is done with arrogance or pride. There are  also  times  when
the person making offerings does so with a miserly  mind,  clinging  to  and
unwilling to part with the offerings. One should  not  make  offerings  with
such attitudes.

One should have the correct and pure motivation for  making  offerings.  The
motivation here is to be able to develop  bodhicitta  in  order  to  benefit
others. With that as the motivation, the rest of  the  verses  indicate  the
objects to which one is making the offerings.

The objects here are the supreme objects, the supreme field  of  merit.  One
makes  offerings  to  the  buddhas,  the  sacred   Dharma   and   also   the
bodhisattvas.

“I make excellent offerings to the Tathagatas”: “Tathagatas”  refer  to  the
Ones Thus Gone, i.e.,  the  buddhas.  If  you  remember  from  our  previous
discussion, when we talk about the Buddhas, there is the truth body and  the
form body.

Then we make offerings to the Dharma as well. The Dharma here refers to  the
true paths and true cessations.

The children of the buddhas refer to  the  bodhisattvas;  primarily  we  are
talking about the bodhisattvas who abide on the  first  ground  and  beyond,
i.e., the Sangha Jewel.

I did not get a chance to mention this before.

The Buddha Jewel can be divided into:
1. ultimate Buddha Jewel—the two truth bodies
2. conventional Buddha Jewel—the two form bodies

The Dharma Jewel can be divided into:
1. ultimate Dharma Jewel —true paths and true cessations
2. conventional Dharma Jewel—twelve  branches  of  scriptures  that  can  be
   condensed into the three scriptural collections.

The Sangha Jewel can also be divided into:
1. ultimate Sangha Jewel—true paths and true cessations
2. conventional Sangha Jewel—superior beings

When we talk about refuge, we can talk about:
1. ultimate refuge
2. conventional refuge
In this context, when we talk  about  refuge,  refuge  here  refers  to  the
objects of refuge.
So we can have the:
1. ultimate objects  of  refuge—the  final  objects  of  refuge,  i.e.,  the
   ultimate objects of refuge exist only on the buddha ground.
2. conventional objects of refuge—the temporal objects of  refuge  refer  to
   the true paths and true cessations in the continuum of a sentient being.

With a pure attitude, one offers well to  all  these  different  objects  of
refuge. Offering   done well means offering with respect.

|            |ULTIMATE                        |CONVENTIONAL         |
|Buddha Jewel|1. Nature truth body (emptiness |1. Complete enjoyment|
|            |of the enlightened mind)        |body                 |
|            |2. Wisdom truth body            |2. Supreme emanation |
|            |(omniscience of the Buddha’s    |body                 |
|            |mind)                           |                     |
|Dharma Jewel|True paths  and true cessations |12 branches of       |
|            |                                |scriptural teachings.|
|            |                                |When condensed, the  |
|            |                                |three scriptural     |
|            |                                |collections          |
|Sangha Jewel|True paths  and true cessations |Superior being       |
|Object of   |Final objects of refuge that    |True paths  and true |
|Refuge      |exist only on the buddha ground |cessations in the    |
|            |                                |continuum of a       |
|            |                                |sentient being       |

Offering unowned substances
As  for  the  offering  substances,  there  are  many   different   offering
substances.


      Verse 2.2
      Whatever flowers and fruits there are
      And whatever kinds of medicine,
      Whatever jewels exist in this world,
      And whatever clean refreshing waters;


      Verse 2.3
      Jewel mountains, and likewise,
      Forest groves, quiet and joyful places,
      Heavenly trees ornamented by and bedecked with flowers,
      And trees with branches laden with good fruit;






      Verse 2.4
      Fragrances and incense of the realms of gods,
      Wish-fulfilling trees and jewel trees,
      Uncultivated harvests, and all ornaments
      That are worthy to be offered;


      Verse 2.5 a,b
      Lakes and pools adorned with lotuses
      And the beautiful cry of wild geese,

• We offer all the flowers that exist in the pure lands, in  the  realms  of
  the celestial beings, the human world and in the world of the  nagas;  all
  the different species of flowers.
• We offer  whatever  kinds  of  medicines  that  are  effective  in  curing
  different illnesses and diseases.
• We offer whatever jewels there are such as wish-granting jewels  that  are
  said to be able to fulfil all one’s desires and needs  and  all  kinds  of
  precious stones.

We also offer all the clean and refreshing waters there are  in  the  world.
This is said in the teachings to be one of the things to be  offered.  There
are certain types of water that when  drunk  will  harm  one’s  stomach  and
throat. There are also certain types of water that when  drunk  are  helpful
and are good for one’s body and  health.  For  example,  there  are  certain
kinds of water that possess the eight properties.[1] One should offer  these
kinds of water.

There is  a  widespread  tradition  of  making  water-bowls  offering.  This
practice  originated  from  Tibet  because  of  the  abundant   pure   water
possessing the eight properties that  can  be  found  almost  everywhere  in
Tibet. Since the water was so readily available and so clean and  pure  with
all these eight properties, it became  very  easy  to  accumulate  merit  by
offering it. Offering water is something that can be done without  any  kind
of clinging.

• We offer jewel mountains, i.e., mountains made of precious substances.  In
  the Abidharmakosha, there is an explanation of Mount Meru and  how  it  is
  surrounded by chains  of  golden  mountains  that  are  made  of  precious
  substances.
• We offer all the forest groves that exist in the world.  In  our  context,
  probably this can refer to parks that are beautifully adorned with flowers
  and so forth.
• We offer trees that are laden with fruits, i.e., fruit trees.
• We offer various kinds of fragrances and incenses such as  sandalwood  and
  agaru.
• We offer wish-granting  trees,  trees  made  of  jewels  and  uncultivated
  crops.
• We offer lakes and pools that are filled with lotuses, swans and geese.

These are the various unowned offering substances that exist  in  the  human
world, in the celestial realms and pure lands.  Wherever  they  may  be,  we
bring to mind all these various substances and offer them.
      Verse 2.5 c, d
      Everything unowned
      Within the limitless spheres of space;


      Verse 2.6
      Taking these with my mind, I offer them
      To the supreme beings, the Munis, as well as their Sons;
      O holy objects of offering, Compassionate Ones,
      Think mercifully of me and accept these offerings of mine.

There are these lists of  unowned  offering  substances.  Whatever  offering
substances you bring to mind, you should multiply them, thinking  that  they
are numberless and filling all of space, and then  you  offer  them  to  the
objects of refuges that are mentioned  earlier  with  the  thought,  “Please
accept my offerings”. Then you can think that your offerings are accepted.

      Verse 2.7
      Not having merit I am destitute
      And I have no other gifts to offer.
      Thus, O Protectors, you who think of others’ welfare,
      Through your power accept these for my sake.

I guess Shantideva is referring to himself here as not having  enough  merit
and therefore is very poor in terms of having external resources,  i.e.,  he
does not actually have all these various substances. As such,  he  says,  “I
offer these things that are unowned. Please accept them. ”

Offering one’s own body
      Verse 2.8
      Eternally I shall offer all my bodies
      To the Conquerors and their children.
      Please accept me, you Supreme Heroes.
      Respectfully shall I be your subject.


      Verse 2.9
      Through being completely under your care,
      I shall not fear conditioned  existence  and  shall  benefit  sentient
      beings;
      I shall perfectly transcend my previous negativities
      And henceforth shall commit no more.

Shantideva is saying here, “What I have is only  my  body.  I  do  not  have
other things to offer. As such I  offer  myself.   Please  accept  it.”  The
offering of one’s  body  is  done  willingly  and  happily  with  faith  and
respect. The point of offering one’s body to the  buddhas  and  bodhisattvas
is to be able to accomplish their wishes. It is said that by offering  one’s
body to the buddhas and bodhisattvas  and  thinking  that  they  accept  it,
henceforth one uses one’s  body  to  work  fearlessly  for  the  welfare  of
others. After having  offered  one’s  body,  one  applies  the  attitude  of
restraint, pledging that one will not use the body that one has  offered  to
accumulate negativities.


Offering one’s body to the buddhas and bodhisattvas is said  to  be  one  of
the best protections for oneself. Having offered one’s body,  basically  one
places  oneself  under  the  command  and  orders   of   the   buddhas   and
bodhisattvas, i.e., one literally becomes their servant,  allowing  them  to
use one’s body in whatever way they deem fit  to  benefit  sentient  beings.
When  one  allows  oneself  to  be  used  in  that  way,  the  buddhas   and
bodhisattvas will  always  protect  one.  As  such  that  becomes  the  best
protection for oneself.

When you truly dedicate yourself to  the  buddhas  and  bodhisattvas,  i.e.,
completely dedicating your body, speech and mind,  you  will  be  under  the
influence and control of the buddhas and bodhisattvas.  Naturally  you  will
accumulate a lot of merit and you will purify  your negativities.
                                 ~~~~~~~~~~

Question: Verse 2.5 says, “Everything unowned/ Within limitless  spheres  of
space.” Let’s says I want to offer all  the  offering  substances  that  are
unowned in the ten billon world systems but I do not specifically  think  of
what these offering substances may be. I do not visualise  them.  Does  that
offering count?

Answer: In general, when you think that you  are  offering  everything  that
exists in the world without bringing to mind any specific object, it is  not
that you do not  accumulate merit. You definitely accumulate merit.

But when you do bring to mind some specific offering  substances,  while  it
is not yours, there is this feeling of closeness or proximity  to  them.  By
bringing them to mind and visualising them as clearly as  possible  in  your
mind, it feels as if they are yours and belong to you. When you offer  that,
then there is some kind of emotional involvement and feeling  that  you  get
from making the offering.

There is an account of two people making aspirational prayers. One  of  them
really knew how to pray and he was able to think  extensively,  making  very
extensive wishes and aspirations. But the other person, he didn’t have  this
ability and didn’t really know how to think. He just thought,  “Whatever  he
is aspiring towards, whatever he is praying for, I also pray like that.  May
my prayers bear fruit as well.” It is said that this  person  also  achieved
the same results of those prayers.

Khen Rinpoche: It could also be like that.

Khen Rinpoche: Perhaps by thinking, “I  offer  whatever  there  is  in  this
world,” there is the likelihood that you may actually accumulate  the  merit
of actually having offered everything.

Question: When we  think,  “everything  unowned,”  does  that  also  include
things that are not so good?

Khen Rinpoche: But doesn’t the text mention only the good things?

Student: It is not mentioned here but that does not mean they do not  exist.
Is there such a danger?

Khen Rinpoche: We only offer the good things.

Student: If I forget to think, then maybe I offer the bad things.

Khen Rinpoche: So you cannot think, “Everything in the world.” You  have  to
think, “Everything that is good in the world.” Then that is OK.

Question: (1) Since there is no such thing as  substantial  existence,  what
is the thing that is attached to the ego?
(2) Through the practice of uncovering the buddha nature within all  of  us,
is there the risk that the practice becomes a form of  attachment?  If  yes,
how do we avoid it?

Answer: The nature of all phenomena is  that  they  are  empty  of  existing
inherently, empty of existing truly and so forth.  All  phenomena  have  the
nature of emptiness. But because we do  not  realise  this,  there  is  this
apprehension grasping at the person, at a  real self, there is  the  arising
of afflictions such as pride and so forth. In  the  first  place,  when  one
understands the ultimate nature of phenomena, there is no basis for such  an
apprehension of a self to arise.

Attachment is not to be fostered but rather attachment is  to  be  abandoned
and gotten rid of. The best method for overcoming attachment is to  meditate
on the emptiness of inherent existence.

Whatever practice one is doing, including studying  the  Dharma,  everything
that the Buddha taught is to overcome the afflictions. If  it  is  a  Dharma
practice, then it must contribute to the  destruction  of  the  afflictions.
When you are practising Dharma, whether the practice becomes Dharma  or  not
depends on whether the afflictions are harmed or not, even if it is  only  a
little bit. This is the criterion you can use to judge whether what you  are
doing actually becomes  Dharma  or  not.  Your  practice  has  to  hurt  the
afflictions.

While one thinks that one is practising the Dharma but  when  that  practice
does not contribute to the weakening or lessening of  the  afflictions,  but
rather it contributes to an increase in the afflictions, then that  practice
does not become Dharma. It only looks like practice but  it  is  counterfeit
practice. This is incorrect.

As I mentioned earlier, one may make offerings. When one does not  know  how
to give, then the act of giving may actually become a display or  a  way  to
show off and one becomes proud in the process.

It is the same with studying the Dharma. The whole  point  of  studying  the
Dharma is that it must contribute to the lessening of afflictions.  It  must
hurt the afflictions. If in the process of learning the Dharma,  instead  of
that becoming an antidote to the  afflictions,  it  becomes  the  cause  for
competing with others, the cause for becoming arrogant,  then  that  is  the
sign of not knowing what is Dharma and how to practise the Dharma.

This is why it is clearly explained right at the beginning of The Stages  of
the Path to Enlightenment how one should learn the Dharma.  In  the  context
of hearing the Dharma, one should do so by abandoning the  three  faults  of
the vessel and cultivating the six ideas. Among  the  six  ideas,  there  is
this idea that one is a chronically  ill  patient  and  the  Dharma  is  the
medicine for the sickness of the afflictions.

You should try to read the remaining verses of this chapter  quickly.  There
is nothing really  important  or  critical  in  that  sense  that  it  needs
detailed explanation.

                                 ~~~~~~~~~~~

One Year Meditation Program

I think some of you have already started but  for  those  of  you  who  have
signed up for the one year meditation program  but  have  not  yet  started,
please take note that the start date is this Sunday,  2nd  March  2014,  the
first day of the Tibetan New Year. If you haven’t  started,  make  sure  you
start this Sunday.

The commitment is that you have to meditate for a minimum of  15-20  minutes
daily for a year. We are doing  this  exercise  as  a  group  or  collective
effort. So it will be easier if everybody reflects on  the  same  topic.  As
such you should start with the topic of correctly relying  on  the  virtuous
friend. We will set aside three months for this topic.

Meditating for 15 or 20 minutes goes by  very  quickly.  For  the  first  10
minutes, what you should do is go for refuge, generate  bodhicitta  and  the
four immeasurables. After that, you do  the  seven-limb  practice.  This  is
what you should do for the first 10 minutes.

Khen Rinpoche: Don’t tell me that 10  minutes  is  not  enough  time  and  I
cannot finish these four meditations! You know  what  I  am  saying?  People
say, “I don’t know what to meditate on,” but there  is  plenty  to  meditate
on.

My point is this: For 10 minutes you can do  refuge,  bodhicitta,  the  four
immeasurables and the seven-limb practice. If you meditate on  them  for  10
minutes, 10 minutes is not enough. Some people say, “What do I  think  about
for 10 minutes?” Many people say, “I don’t know what to  think  about,”  but
there is plenty to think about and 10 minutes may  not be enough. For  those
people who think, “10 minutes is too long. I don’t  know  what  to  meditate
on,” there is plenty of things. Those who think there is  not  enough  time,
then you set aside more time. Maybe 20 minutes. That is up to you.

Then you bring to mind your own guru, viewing him as inseparable  from  Lama
Tsongkhapa. You reflect on the topic of correctly relying  on  the  virtuous
friend or guru devotion. You can think of the whole topic of  guru  devotion
in terms of five main points. What you have to think about is:
1. The advantages of correctly relying on the virtuous friend
2. The disadvantages of relying incorrectly on the virtuous friend
3. The root training in faith
4. Developing respect for him by remembering the kindness of the guru
5. Devoting correctly in action
The whole topic of guru devotion can be looked at in  terms  of  these  five
main points.

You should ask yourself:
• What are the qualities that I have gained after  I  have  relied  on  this
  particular person as my guru?
• What would happen if I did not rely on this person?

On the first and second points, if you have time,  you  should  consult  the
lam-rim literature where there is  an  extensive  explanation  of  the  many
benefits. There is a list of benefits or advantages of correctly relying  on
the  virtuous  friend.  There  is  also  a  list  of  all  the  faults   and
disadvantages of not relying correctly on the virtuous friend.

Although there are these lists of advantages and disadvantages,  you  should
take those that are effective for your mind and that help  you  to  see  for
yourself the benefits of  correct  reliance  and  the  faults  of  incorrect
reliance on the guru.  The whole point is to bring  about  a  transformation
in the mind that you can actually feel and experience.

As for the third point, the root training  in  faith,  this  means  training
your mind to look at your guru as a buddha.  For this particular  point,  it
is good to refer to the lam-rim text, Liberation in the Palm  of  Your  Hand
by Pabongka Rinpoche where there is an extensive discussion on the topic  of
guru devotion.
• Why you should look at the guru as a buddha
• How to be able to do that
• The actual way of looking at the guru as a Buddha  and  transforming  your
  mind to be able to do so.

On the fourth point, remembering the kindness of the guru, again there is  a
very good explanation of the different sub-points in Liberation in the  Palm
of Your Hand.

Whatever you are reflecting on or analysing, you need to have a  good  grasp
of the subject matter. It is also good to situate the entire subject  matter
in terms of its main areas or what we called the outlines.

As I mentioned earlier, you can look at the whole topic  of  guru  devotions
in terms of  the  five  main  areas.  It  is  not  possible  to  reflect  on
everything in one session, so you should start with the benefits of  relying
correctly on the virtuous friend and thinks about this for a few days.  Then
you move on to the next point and reflect for a few days  or  weeks  on  the
faults of relying incorrectly on the virtuous friend. Then you  move  on  to
the next point, the actual training as mentioned in Liberation in  the  Palm
of Your Hand, using those reasons to train the mind to see  the  guru  as  a
buddha and so forth. You can divide the time up on your own.

Medicine Buddha Retreat in Kopan

Actual retreat will be from October 16 to 23. Leaving Singapore  on  15  Oct
and returning on 24 Oct. Registration starts now.  Closing  date:  April  1.
Estimated cost: $1300 to $1400.

Interpreted by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme; transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek, Vivien  Ng,
Aki Yeo; edited by Cecilia Tsong.
-----------------------
[1] “Cool, delicious, light, and soft,/Clear, odourless, easy on the
throat,/ and kind to the stomach is the water/ With the eight properties.”
(Quotation from Chim Jampaelyang’s commentary to Vasubandu’s Treasury of
Metaphysics, Liberation in the Palm of Your Hand, Copyright: Wisdom
Publications, revised Edition 1993, page 146).

