Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Engaging in the Deeds of a Bodhisattva/BP2 M5 L06 final .doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:52:14.661989
================================================================================


Transcript of the teachings by Khen Rinpoche Geshe  Chonyi  on  Engaging  in
the Bodhisattva Deeds, 2014

Root text: Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds by  Shantideva,  translated  by
Toh Sze Gee. Copyright: Toh Sze Gee, 2006; Revised edition, 2014.

Lesson    6                                                               25
February 2014


Establishing selflessness. Chapter One: Verses 1.26–1.36.  The  reasons  for
such benefits (contd). Praising the person who cultivates bodhicitta.


      Because it is suffering, it is selfless.

I mentioned that there were two ways to reflect on this statement. You  have
to analyse the two points that I explained to you in the  last  lesson.  You
have to think about them over and over  again  to  understand  what  I  have
explained.

You have to think and come to an understanding as to why:

      Because it is impermanent, it is suffering.
      Because it is suffering, it is selfless.

“Because it is impermanent, it is suffering.”  Why is it in  the  nature  of
suffering? This is because it arises from karma and afflictions. Because  it
arises from karma and afflictions, it is in the nature of suffering.

ESTABLISHING SELFLESSNESS

You have to think about where that suffering comes from. Based on that,  you
then go on to see how, “Because it is suffering, it is selfless.”  When  you
think deeply and analyse  where  the  source  of  suffering  is,  you  would
understand and discover that the very root of suffering is ignorance,  i.e.,
an apprehension of a self. This goes back to  the  view  of  the  transitory
collection.[1] This is the root of all suffering, the mind  that  apprehends
a self. Although a self is apprehended by this  mind,  i.e.,  ignorance,  in
reality such a self does not exist at all. However,  its  non-existence  has
to be proved.

Reasoning of one and different
We had talked  about  this  in  the  past.  There  are  different  lines  of
reasoning that one can  employ  to  establish  selflessness.  There  is  the
reasoning of dependant-arising and the reasoning of one and different.

Let us look at  the  reasoning  of  one  and  different.  In  this  line  of
reasoning, there are four essential points that must be grasped.
1. The first essential point is finding the object of negation. This is
   extremely important.
2. Based on that, the second essential point is establishing the pervasion.


3. The third essential point is establishing that it is not inherently one
   with the aggregates.
4. The fourth essential point is establishing that it is not inherently
   different from the aggregates.

The first essential point of finding the object  of  negation  is  extremely
important. However, it is also very challenging to identify correctly,  from
your own experience, the object of negation. What exactly  is  your  target?
Although it is difficult, you have to try.

~ Analogy of mistaking a coil of rope to be a snake
Let us use an analogy to help you  find  the  object  of  negation.  Do  you
remember the analogy of mistaking a coil of rope to  be  a  snake?   In  the
view of the mind that is mistaking the coil of rope to be a snake, there  is
a snake appearing from the side of rope, i.e., the snake is somewhere  there
on the rope.

Likewise how does the ‘I’ appear to oneself? The ‘I’ appears to  exist  from
the side of our body and mind. It is somewhere there within that  collection
of body and mind.

How does that coil of rope appear from the  perspective  of  the  mind  that
mistakes the coil of rope to be a snake? In the view of that mind, there  is
a snake appearing from the side of the coil  of  rope.  To  this  mind,  the
concept of the snake does not appear to be  something  that  is  imputed  or
projected by the mind.

Likewise, in terms of our grasping of a self, when we think of  the  ‘I’  or
self, the ‘I’ appears to exist from the side of the body  and  mind,  coming
from the side of body and mind. The ‘I’ does not appear to us  as  something
that is projected or merely imputed by thought. This is  the  way  in  which
the inherently existent ‘I’, appears to  us.  In  terms  of  the  inherently
existent ‘I’, there is this appearance of the  ‘I’  existing  from  its  own
side, i.e., from the side of the body and mind without it being  imputed  by
the mind. This appearance is the object of negation, i.e., the  object  that
needs to be negated.

When we talk about the object of negation, we  are  not  negating  the  mere
appearance of a self. This is not what is to  be  negated.  What  is  to  be
negated is the appearance of the ‘I’ existing from its own side,  i.e.,  the
appearance of the ‘I’ existing right there from the side  of  the  body  and
mind without being merely imputed by the mind. This appearance is what  that
needs to be negated.

Our greatest difficulty is distinguishing  between  these  two  in  our  own
experience, although their manner of  appearance  is  completely  different.
When we talk  about  the  inherently  existent  ‘I’  that  does  not  exist,
nevertheless it appears to exist from its own side, i.e., from the  side  of
the body and mind, without being merely imputed by  the  mind.  It  is  this
appearance that we need to negate. Such an ‘I’ does not exist and  needs  to
be negated. We are not negating the mere appearance of the ‘I’.  But in  our
experience, these two appear to be mixed and our greatest  challenge  is  to
see the difference between them. We are not able to distinguish between  the
two. Our problem lies in this. Until we  are  able  to  distinguish  between
these two appearances in our  own  experience,  there  is  no  way  to  move
forward in the process of realising selflessness.

~  Explanation of fourfold emptiness from the Heart Sutra
In the Heart of the Perfection of Wisdom Sutra, there was an explanation  of
the fourfold emptiness (or the  four  empties).  Form  is  mentioned  first,
“Form is empty. Emptiness is form.” By changing the subject to the  self  or
‘I’, we can analyse this statement, “‘I’ is empty. Emptiness is ‘I’.”

‘I’ is empty means that the ‘I’ that appears to exist from the side  of  the
body and mind without being merely  imputed  by  the  mind  does  not  exist
whatsoever. Although there is the appearance of such an inherently  existent
‘I’, in reality, it does not exist. The  self,  the  actual  ‘I’,  does  not
exist in the way it appears; therefore such an ‘I’ is empty, i.e.,  it  does
not exist.

The object of negation, the inherently existent ‘I’ that appears  to  us  as
the real ‘I’   existing from the side of the body and mind without it  being
merely imputed by the mind, does not exist. For if  it  exists,  it  can  be
found. But when you look for such an ‘I’ among the body and mind,  you  will
not be able to find it. Although it appears, it does not exist  in  the  way
it appears. Therefore such an ‘I’  is empty,  i.e.,  empty  of  existing  in
such a way.

Its nature, whether it be form  or  the  ‘I’,  is  emptiness.  Here  we  are
talking about the ‘I’. The ‘I’ is  in  the  nature  of  emptiness.  However,
although the ‘I’ is in the nature of emptiness, this is not to say that  the
‘I’ does not exist. The ‘I’ exists. How does the ‘I’ exist? The  ‘I’  exists
as mere appearance. Therefore, “Emptiness is ‘I’.”

By thinking how, ‘“I’ is empty. Emptiness is ‘I’,” one comes  to  understand
how the ‘I’ does not exist in the way it appears to us:
• The ‘I’ is empty of existing inherently.
• The ‘I’ is empty of existing in the way it appears to us.
• The nature of the ‘I’ is emptiness.

We are not saying that the ‘I’ does not exist. The ‘I’ exists. How does  the
‘I’ exist?
• The ‘I’ exists as something that is merely imputed by thought.
• The ‘I’ exists as mere appearance.
This is how the ‘I’ exists.

It is said that one should not have any partiality. When one is  partial  or
biased, one is supporting only emptiness but neglecting  appearance  or  one
could be in favour of appearance but neglecting  emptiness.  When  one  goes
down such a path, one will never realise emptiness. So one  should  not,  in
the name of appearance, deprecate emptiness and one should not, in the  name
of emptiness, deprecate appearance.

The correct understanding of mere appearance should help one  to  elicit  an
understanding of  emptiness  and  the  correct  understanding  of  emptiness
should help one to elicit the correct understanding of appearance. They  are
mutually complementary.

Due  to  the  reason,  “Because  it  is  suffering,  it  is  selfless,”   by
understanding selflessness, i.e., by understanding  how  the  ‘I’  does  not
exist in the way it appears, then one  is  able  to  uproot  ignorance,  the
apprehension of a self that is the very root of all suffering. By  uprooting
the root of suffering, one will be able  to  achieve  the  nirvana  that  is
peace.
                                 ~~~~~~~~~~

THE REASONS FOR SUCH BENEFITS (CONTD.)
The validity of obtaining benefits from engaging bodhicitta
      Verse 1.26
      How can I fathom
      The merits of this jewel mind,
      The cause of joy of all migrating beings
      And the panacea for the suffering of sentient beings?

If the aspirational mind generation had  all  the  benefits  that  had  been
mentioned earlier, it goes without saying that the engaged  mind  generation
would have even greater benefits.

There is a citation from the Sutra Requested by Viradatta  that  establishes
the benefits of the engaged mind generation. It says, “If the merit  of  the
mind of enlightenment was to take form, all the sphere  of  space  would  be
filled; it is even more than that.”

      Verse 1.27
      If merely a benevolent intention
      Excels venerating the buddhas,
      Then what need to mention striving to make
      All beings without exception happy?

The King of Concentration Sutra says,  “The  benefit  of  the  mere  thought
wanting to achieve enlightenment for the welfare of sentient beings is  more
powerful than the merit one accumulates from making numberless offerings  to
billions of buddhas.”

If the merit of the aspirational mind generation is more powerful  than  the
merit  one  accumulates  from  making  offerings  to  billions  of  buddhas,
obviously the benefits one accumulates  from  the  engaged  mind  generation
would be even more powerful.

Here when we talk about the engaged mind generation, we  are  talking  about
the mind of enlightenment that is directly conjoined with the  practices  of
the bodhisattvas such as the practice of the perfection  of  generosity  and
so forth.

A qualm is raised here. Sentient beings wish for happiness and do  not  want
suffering. By striving in this way, they are able to achieve  happiness  and
abandon  suffering.  Therefore  are  they  not  proficient  or  skilled   in
achieving happiness and abandoning suffering? Why should others  strive  for
their purpose?

Khen Rinpoche: This was  the question  that  Hup  Cheng  (name  of  student)
asked before. He asked, “Why do I need  to  get  enlightened?”   This  is  a
similar question. The answer is in the next verse.

      Verse 1.28
      Although wishing to be rid of misery,
      They run towards misery itself.
      Although wishing to have happiness,
      Like an enemy they ignorantly destroy it.

Everyone is the same in not wanting to have a short life. No  one  wants  to
be poor and no one wants to be sick. Everyone does whatever  she/he  can  to
avoid these things. Although no one wants to have a  short  life,  yet  they
are killing. Although no one wants to be poor, they are stealing.  They  are
engaging in actions that are contrary to what they are looking for.

The teachings are telling us  that,  although  no  one  wants  problems  and
suffering, although that is everyone’s goal, yet in actualising  that  goal,
many are creating the causes for suffering.

We don’t see this often in Singapore but, in many places, when you  light  a
candle in the dark, you will see moths attracted to the candle  flame.  They
fly towards the flame and are burnt. There is  something  about  the  candle
flame that attracts them so they fly towards the  candle  flame.  The  moths
are not thinking of committing suicide by flying towards the  candle  flame.
They are looking for something else but they are burnt by the  candle  flame
in the process. Likewise,  sentient  beings  want  happiness  but  they  run
towards the causes of suffering and, in so doing, they suffer.

The teachings say that all of us are the same in  wanting  to  be  rich,  to
have long lives and good health. But in practice,  sentient  beings  do  not
guard the practice of ethical discipline by avoiding  the  ten  non-virtues.
Instead they create immeasurable negative karma. In so  doing,  they  behave
as if virtue was their enemy and end up destroying it.

      Verse 1.29
      For those who are deprived of happiness
      And burdened with many sorrows,
      It satisfies them with all joys,
      Dispels all suffering,


      Verse 1.30
      And clears away confusion.
      Where is there a comparable virtue?
      Where is there even such a friend?
      Where is there merit similar to this?

Verse 1.29 is saying that bodhicitta, the  mind  of  enlightenment,  is  the
very thing that can dispel  all  misery,  sorrow  and  poverty  of  sentient
beings. It is bodhicitta that can bestow on them  every  kind  of  happiness
and clear away all confusion with regard to what  is  to  be  abandoned  and
what is to be adopted. There is nothing else like  bodhicitta  in  terms  of
performing these functions.

One will not be able  to  find  a  friend  who  is  able  to  eliminate  all
suffering, bestow all joy and clear away confusion with regard  to  what  is
to be abandoned and what to  be  cultivated.  With  regard  to  accumulating
merit, there is no other kind of merit  that  is  comparable  to  generating
bodhicitta.

This ends the section on the benefits of bodhicitta.

I guess the reply to the qualm would  be  that,  when  one  develops  actual
bodhicitta, one would be in a position to clear away the  confusion  in  the
mind of others with regard to what they need to adopt and what they need  to
abandon. One can clear away the confusion in the  minds  of  those  sentient
beings who are running after the causes  of  suffering  although  they  want
only happiness.

By thinking about the benefits of bodhicitta, one strives  to  generate  the
bodhicitta that has not yet been generated and one prevents that  which  has
been generated from degenerating. The point  of  reflecting  over  and  over
again on the benefits of bodhicitta is to develop a deep  aspiration  to  be
able to generate bodhicitta. By  continually  reflecting  on  the  benefits,
there will come a time when one is  truly  convinced  that  bodhicitta  does
indeed have those benefits, “I stand to gain  all  these  benefits.  I  must
seek to develop this bodhicitta.” Only then  will  one  have  a  strong  and
stable aspiration or desire to achieve bodhicitta. This desire is  like  the
desire of a very thirsty person for water.  Someone who is very  thirsty  is
always thinking about finding water. When such an aspiration for  bodhicitta
arises, this fulfils the purpose of hearing  about  and  reflecting  on  the
benefits of bodhicitta.

As we do not yet have bodhicitta, we do not feel anything for  the  benefits
of bodhicitta. Instead we wonder, “Can  this  really  be  true?  How  is  it
possible?” At the initial  stage  of  development,  apart  from  relying  on
speech of the Buddha,  it  is   difficult  to  infer  that  there  are  such
benefits. Bodhicitta is out of our reach.

I mentioned the other  day  about  developing  equanimity.  Based  on  that,
developing some love and compassion—thinking of  how  we  need  to  rely  on
others and for that reason, how others are so kind—is  possible  and  within
reach. One can develop some kind of equanimity, overcoming  strong  aversion
or anger for some and very strong attachment for others. It is  possible  to
do that. On that basis, develop some sincere feeling of wanting everyone  to
be happy and to be free of suffering.

When we are able to bring  about  such  thoughts  of  equanimity,  love  and
compassion, the mind definitely becomes more relaxed and  less  uptight.  In
addition to that, when we can develop bodhicitta,  we  can  infer  that  the
benefits must be even greater.

I mentioned the practice of the four immeasurables in the  previous  lesson.
You have to try that out for yourself to see whether it  works  or  not.  In
terms of practice, that is the first step you have to take.
PRAISING THE PERSON WHO CULTIVATES BODHICITTA

Next is explaining how those individuals who have real bodhicitta  in  their
minds are worthy of homage.

      Verse 1.31
      If whoever reciprocates benefit
      Is worthy of some praise,
      Then what need to mention the bodhisattva
      Who does good without its being asked of him?


In the worldly sense, when someone receives help from  another  person,  the
beneficiary would praise his benefactor, “That person was really very  kind.
He helped me and did this for me.” This being  the  case,  it  goes  without
saying that bodhisattvas are worthy of homage and worthy  of  being  objects
to whom we make offerings because they help sentient  beings  without  being
asked. Furthermore, the help that bodhisattvas render to sentient beings  is
not some small little  thing.  They  work  for  the  happiness  of  sentient
beings, the happiness of this life and the happiness  of  all  their  future
lives. Therefore bodhisattvas are worthy  of  homage  and  worthy  of  being
objects of offering.

      Verse 1.32
      The world honors as virtuous
      A man who procures mediocre food and for an instant gives it
      Disrespectfully to a small number of beings,
      That satisfies them for only half a day.


      Verse 1.33
      What need be said then of one
      Who constantly bestows the unsurpassed bliss of the Sugatas for a long
      time
      Upon countless sentient beings,
      Fulfilling all their hopes?

Here is an example of a man who gives food to some people for a  very  short
while. He  is not giving food to many people, just a  few  sentient  beings.
It is not as if he was giving a lot  of  food  either.  He  is  giving  just
enough food for them not to be hungry for half a day. His manner  of  giving
is disrespectful, i.e., without respect. Even so,  in  this  world,  such  a
person would be regarded as quite a good  person.  He  would  be  considered
very generous in helping the poor.

If such a person who gave this small amount of food to  a  small  number  of
sentient beings for a short duration in a disrespectful manner is worthy  of
praise, then what need is there to mention those individuals  who,  with  an
attitude of love and compassion, work for all sentient beings until the  end
of samsara and who gives sentient beings the  highest  uncontaminated  bliss
of full enlightenment. Such an individual is definitely praiseworthy.

      Verse 1.34
      The Buddha has said that someone who generates an evil thought
      Against such a benefactor as a Child of the Victors
      Will remain in hell for as many eons
      As there were evil thoughts.

It is said that the Buddha taught that anyone who generates anger  and  evil
thoughts towards bodhisattvas will have to be reborn in  the  hells  for  as
many eons as there were moments of anger.

If moments of anger towards  the  bodhisattvas  can  have  such  destructive
consequences, what is the merit that can be accumulated when one  has  faith
in them? Here it says:

      Verse 1.35 a,b
      But if one acts out of an attitude of faith,
      Its fruits will multiply far more than that.

It is said that those who act out of faith in relation to  the  bodhisattvas
will experience  results,  “far  more  than  that.”  “That”  refers  to  how
sentient beings have to be reborn in hells for as many eons  as  there  were
moments of anger.

A bodhisattva is a special and very  powerful  karmic  object,  so  whatever
evil thoughts or anger directed at them will  have  grave  consequences  and
whatever virtuous thoughts directed at them will lead to very  powerful  and
positive results.

      Verse 1.35 c,d
      Even in adversity the Children of the Victors generate no negativity,
      Instead their virtues naturally increase.

It is said that whatever adverse conditions  bodhisattvas  may  meet,  e.g.,
danger to their lives, their health, possessions and so forth, they are  not
affected and those conditions do not cause them  to  generate  negativities.
Instead such conditions encourage them to further increase  their  qualities
and virtue.

      Verse 1.36
      I prostrate to the body of he
      In whom the sacred precious mind is born.
      I seek refuge in that source of happiness
      Who brings to happiness even those who harm him.


Verse 1.36 is saying, “I prostrate  to  the  person  who  possesses  in  his
continuum the mind of enlightenment that eliminates  both  the  problems  of
samsara and nirvana.” One  is  prostrating  to  the  bodhisattvas  who  only
benefit sentient beings, even those who harm them.

In short, the person who develops bodhicitta, a bodhisattva,  is  an  object
of homage and offering for all humans and gods. It is a great negativity  to
harm bodhisattvas. On the other hand, one accumulates very  powerful  virtue
by making offerings and paying homage to the bodhisattvas.  One  accumulates
very  powerful  merit  by  simply  showing  a  pleasant   demeanour   to   a
bodhisattva.

When one adopts through a ritual  the  aspirational  bodhicitta  that  comes
with a  commitment,  one  needs  to  abandon  the  four  black  dharmas  and
cultivate the four white dharmas. One of the things to be cultivated  is  to
generate the recognition that all sentient beings are  like  one’s  Teacher,
like the Founder, the Buddha. The point is to train in  pure  appearance  in
relation to all sentient beings precisely because one does not know  who  is
and who is not a bodhisattva. As we saw earlier, when we get upset or  angry
with a bodhisattva,  we  destroy  so  much  merit  and  accumulate  so  much
negativity.

In our context, I think many people here have  taken  the  bodhisattva  vows
and tantric vows already through the various empowerments.  In  that  sense,
everyone can be said to be a kind of special  object.  Therefore  we  should
regard one another  without  anger  or  without  showing  an  unpleasant  or
disrespectful demeanour. It will be beneficial when  we  think  along  these
lines.

Even when we notice some faults in others, we  should  not  grasp  at  those
faults and hold on to them so strongly. In this way, the chances of  getting
angry are lessened. We can reflect on  the  faults  that  we  see  as  being
impermanent. It is not as if those faults will  always  remain.  Also  those
faults are not established from their own side. It is not as if  the  faults
have always been there. In that sense, the faults are adventitious.

The buddhas in whom we have such faith now were  not  always  buddhas.  They
were sentient beings once who were also full of faults. When we  talk  about
training in regarding others as the Buddha, seeing others  as  the  Teacher,
there is a basis for doing so.

Although sentient beings are not buddhas  now,  are  they  not  amenable  to
becoming a  buddha in the future? They can be buddhas in the future  because
they all have  buddha lineage. They have the seed  of  enlightenment  within
them so they can become buddhas and they can  develop  bodhicitta.  When  we
recognise this fact, we can  treat  and  look  at  sentient  beings  as  our
Teacher, as like the Buddha. It is paying respect to and holding  in  regard
the cause, i.e., one day, they can become a buddha.  Just  as  we  hold  the
result in such high regard, likewise we should hold the cause with the  same
level of respect and regard.

The point is that we should try not to get upset or angry and,  as  much  as
possible, focus on the qualities of others instead  of  focussing  on  their
faults  and  grasping  at  them.   Furthermore,  sentient  beings  are   not
something that exists far away from  us.  Sentient  beings  are  the  people
around us. In our context here, they are the people in  the  same  class  as
us.

As I mentioned earlier, many of you here have bodhisattva vows  and  tantric
vows and, in that sense, are also special objects. When  we  get  upset  and
angry with one another, we will  accumulate  negativities  so,  as  much  as
possible, we should respect one another. This is very important.

This is the end of Chapter One: Explanation of the Benefits of the  Mind  of
Enlightenment.

                                 ~~~~~~~~~~~

Question: In the  last  lesson  you  talked  about  the  difference  between
bodhicitta as well as  the  Mahayana  mind  generation  in  terms  of  their
boundaries:
• Bodhicitta exists from the Mahayana path of accumulation up to  the  tenth
  ground in the continuum of a bodhisattva.
•  The  Mahayana  mind  generation  exists  from  the   Mahayana   path   of
  accumulation up to enlightenment
This seems to imply  that  the  definitions  for  the  bodhicitta  and  mind
generation are different. I am wondering what is the difference?

Khen Rinpoche: Your question is about the definition of bodhicitta?

Answer: In general, bodhicitta is mind  generation.  You  will  not  find  a
definition for bodhicitta that is separate  from  the  definition  for  mind
generation. Bodhicitta or the mind of enlightenment is so-called because  it
is a mind generation existing in the continuum of  a  bodhisattva.   Because
it is the mind generation existing in the continuum of a bodhisattva, it  is
called bodhicitta.

The Buddha is not a bodhisattva. For that reason the Buddha  does  not  have
bodhicitta.

Khen Rinpoche: This is for the sake of debate.

In general,  most  of  the  time  we  could  say  that  bodhicitta  is  mind
generation

Khen Rinpoche: Mind generation is bodhicitta. They are  the  same.  Normally
we can say that.

Initially it may  sound  weird  when  you  hear  that  a  buddha  is  not  a
bodhisattva.

Khen Rinpoche: No? It does not sound weird? It sounds correct? A  buddha  is
not a bodhisattva?

(Students’ responses are inaudible).

Khen Rinpoche: I thought the Buddha  was  a  bodhisattva.  Anyway,  you  can
think about it.

Question: Last week you mentioned that love is the antidote for  malice.  If
love is the antidote for malice, would that not  apply  to  belligerence  as
well because belligerence  is  also  the  mind  of  malice.  In  that  case,
compassion should not be the antidote for belligerence.

I remember during  the  lam-rim  module,  someone  asked  you  whether  non-
harmfulness and compassion is the same thing. Because the definition of non-
harmfulness is a mind of compassion, I think that compassion should  be  the
antidote for harmfulness.

Answer: In general, when you  talk  about  love  and  compassion,  sometimes
people mix them up, thinking they are the same but:
• Love is the wish for others to be happy.
• Compassion is the wish for others to be free of suffering.

When one has love, the thought of wanting others to be  happy,  the  thought
of harming others would not be there.

When one is focussing on a sentient being tormented  by  suffering  and  one
has the wish to free that sentient being  from  suffering,  the  thought  of
harming that sentient being will not exist. The  mind  of  harmfulness  will
not exist.

Is there a difference then between harmfulness and malice or ill will?

Khen Rinpoche:  You have completed the study of the  51  mental  factors.  I
have also forgotten!

Question: Back to the four immeasurables. All of them seem to  be  antidotes
to the afflictions. Joy is an antidote to dislike. I’m not  too  sure  which
affliction is dislike. Also, dislike can be dislike for many things.  Is  it
resentment, dislike for samsara and so forth?

Answer: Immeasurable joy is the thought not wanting others to  be  separated
from happiness. In that sense, it is stronger than merely wanting others  to
have happiness.

Dislike would be the opposite of that. Instead of wanting others not  to  be
separated from happiness, dislike  is  the  thought  wanting  others  to  be
separated from happiness.

Interpreted by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme; transcribed by Phuah  Soon  Ek,  Patricia
Lee and Julia Koh; edited by Cecilia Tsong.




-----------------------
[1] The ‘I’ is apprehended to be separate, different and independent of  the
body and mind. This mind  that  conceives  the  ‘I’  to  be  self-sufficient
substantially  existent,  i.e.,  conceiving  it  to  be  something  that  is
independent of the body and mind, is  called  the  view  of  the  transitory
collection. (Second Basic Program, Module 2, Lesson 27, page 1).


