Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Engaging in the Deeds of a Bodhisattva/BP2 M5 L33 final.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:52:14.628193
================================================================================


Transcript of the teachings by Khen Rinpoche Geshe  Chonyi  on  Engaging  in
the Bodhisattva Deeds, 2014

Root text: Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds by  Shantideva,  translated  by
Toh Sze Gee. Copyright: Toh Sze Gee, 2006; Revised edition, 2014.

Lesson                                                                    33
 12 June 2014



Chapter Six: Verses 6.22 - 6.31.
B.  Cultivating the patience that is intent on Dharma
       1.  Extensive explanation
             A.    As both fury and the one who is furious, etc. rely upon
        causes, they are not independent (V. 6.22 – V. 6.26)
              B.   Refuting the existence of independent causes (V. 6.27 –
                6.31)


The teachings tell us it is a quality of our mind that it  follows  whatever
it is habituated with, i.e.,  whatever  the  mind  is  familiar  with,  that
particular object or activity is more easily  comprehended  and  understood.
Basically we find it easier to do things that we are familiar with.

In the last lesson, we saw how the teachings tell us  that  we  have  to  be
patient  with  and  tolerate  small  problems  and  suffering.  By   getting
accustomed to putting up and being tolerant  with  them,  gradually  we  are
able to put up with and tolerate bigger problems and difficulties.

The discussion here is in the context of practising the Dharma. Why  are  we
practising the Dharma? The purpose of practising the Dharma is to enable  us
to subdue the afflictions in our own continuum.  So  practising  the  Dharma
means going to war against the afflictions  with  the  goal  of  vanquishing
them. We have to understand that in the  process  of  doing  this,  we  will
experience many challenges and difficulties. It is at those  times  that  we
have to put up with and be tolerant of challenges and difficulties.

We have to cultivate the patience that  voluntarily  accepts  suffering  and
the problems we meet. Having said this, we must know how to  do  this.  When
we say that we have to put up with problems and difficulties, that  we  have
to tolerate unpleasant situations, it does not mean that we do nothing  when
there is a problem. This is not what it means. We  must  know  how  to  deal
with the situation and we must know how to  be  patient.  So  this  involves
thinking.

For example,  when  we  meet  with  difficulties,  suffering,  problems  and
challenges, we should remind ourselves that whatever problems  or  suffering
we are experiencing are the results  of  our  own  non-virtue  (or  negative
karma) that we had accumulated in the past.  The experience of the  problems
and suffering we are going through is like a broom that sweeps away all  the
negativities and obscurations.  This is how we can think. Thinking  of  such
a reason, we accept the situation voluntarily.
We should also remind ourselves of the benefit of  that  experience  of  the
problems because without any problems or suffering, we will not look  for  a
solution to such suffering.  We  will  not  remember  virtue.  We  will  not
practise virtue. When there are problems and when there  is  suffering,  the
problems and suffering persuade us to look for a  solution,  that  is,  they
persuade us to engage in virtue and they also persuade us to  think  of  the
future, our next life.

Yes we have to be tolerant.  We  have  to  put  up  with  the  difficulties,
problems and suffering that we meet but we must know how  to  do  so.  Being
tolerant in this context does not mean just accepting  the  situation,  “Oh,
it doesn’t matter.”

There are people who are like that. They misunderstand and think, “I  should
just accept it.” But actually they are not really  accepting  the  situation
because deep down inside, more and more unhappiness  is  being  accumulated.
Then there comes the time when it all boils over and they explode. They  get
even more upset.  There  are  people  like  that.  That  is  not  practising
patience. Many people have such a wrong  understanding  of  the  meaning  of
patience. They think that practicing patience means to just keep  quiet  and
accept things. But actually they  are  not  accepting  things  because  deep
down, their minds are still disturbed.

Practising patience does not lead to a disturbed mind.  Practising  patience
means you look at the situation and deal with it,  without  disturbing  your
mind. When you deal with a  situation,  you  think  about  it  from  various
angles. The whole point of the exercise  is  to  be  able  to  deal  with  a
situation and yet at the same time inside, you do not  get  disturbed.  This
is patience.

      Verse 6.19 a,b
    . Even when those who are skilled are suffering,
    . Their minds remain very lucid and undefiled.

This is what patience is. When there is a problem, deep down, the  minds  of
such practitioners are still clear and  undisturbed.  In  fact,  the  really
capable and “skilled” ones are those who feel happy and joyful even  in  the
midst of a crisis or difficulties.

Next is cultivating the patience that is intent on the  Dharma.  Essentially
this section discusses how those people who are angry at us  do  so  without
any control or without any independence.

B.  CULTIVATING THE PATIENCE THAT IS INTENT ON DHARMA

  1.  Extensive explanation
     A.  As both fury and the one who is furious, etc.  rely  upon  causes,
        they are not independent
        1.  Neither fury nor the furious person is independent
           A.  The reasons why it is unreasonable  to  be  furious  with  an
              afflicted person


First there is an explanation of why it is inappropriate for us to be  upset
with the person who is harming us.

When one falls sick, most people can accept this including ourselves. We  do
not blame anyone else when we fall sick and feel discomfort. We put up  with
it. But if there is somebody causing us problems,  then  we  cannot  put  up
with it. In fact, we do not want to put up with it.

When we look at our sickness, we understand that we have no control over  it
as the sickness just happens. But with respect to the person who is  harming
us, we think, “He  is  doing  it  on  purpose.  The  reason  for  his  whole
existence is to destroy me! He exists to cause  me  problems.  Since  he  is
doing this on purpose, I have every reason to be  upset  with  him.  I  have
every reason to fight with him.”

      Verse 6.22
      As I do not become angry
      At great sources of suffering such as bile disease,
      Then why be angry at those with mind?
      They too are provoked by conditions.


      Verse 6.23
      For example, although they are not wished for,
      These sicknesses arise;
      Likewise, although they are not wished for,
      These afflictions forcibly arise.

Shantideva is asking us why we  do  not  get  upset  when  we  have  medical
conditions or sicknesses  that  are  due  to  imbalances  of  our  elements.
Although we feel uncomfortable when these sicknesses occur,  somehow  we  do
not get upset. We do not get angry at the sickness.

Why is it then that we are angry with those  who  cause  us  problems?  Here
“those” refers to sentient beings who have a mind.

We get sick for a variety of reasons. Sometimes we fall sick due to  changes
in the weather, interferences from non-human  entities,  a  wrong  diet  and
inappropriate lifestyle. There are a variety of conditions that cause us  to
fall sick. As such, we do not really have much control over them.  When  the
causes and conditions—some of which we have no control  over—are  there,  we
fall sick. Sicknesses do not arise without a reason but whatever it may  be,
when we fall sick, we do not blame the sickness. We do not get angry at  our
sickness because we know that sickness occurs due to many reasons.  In  that
sense, the sickness itself does not have  any  choice.  Because  of  various
causes and conditions, we experience discomfort or sickness.

But when we think of a person who  is  harming  us,  we  feel  that  we  are
justified  in  getting  angry  with  this  person.  We  are   justified   in
retaliating and fighting with this person. This is  because  we  think  that
this person is harming us intentionally, “She is out there to  get  me.  She
is doing this on purpose.” Therefore we think, “I am right to be upset  with
her.” This is what we think.
But actually in reality, these  two  situations  are  similar  in  that  the
sickness we experience and the harm we receive  from  another  person,  both
arise without any choice and without  any  independence  because  they  both
arise due to their own causes and conditions.

Due  to  certain  causes  and  conditions  that  I  mentioned  earlier,   we
experience sickness.

In the case of the person however, we feel he is  harming  us  intentionally
and that he has full control over himself. But  actually  he  too  does  not
have any control or independence as he is under the  influence  and  control
of his afflictions. The person harming us is an afflicted person,  i.e.,  he
is someone who has afflictions and who is under their  control.   When  this
person harms us, the act of harming us does not arise without cause.  He  is
harming us precisely because of his afflictions such as  the  anger  in  his
mind. Since he is harming us because he is under the influence  and  control
of his afflictions, he is doing so without any choice on his part.

As such, the harm that  we  experience  is  a  dependent-arising,  i.e.,  it
occurred in dependence on some  other  factor.  Because  the  harm  that  we
experienced is a dependent-arising, that harm is by nature empty,  i.e.,  it
is empty of existing inherently.  When we think about  dependent-arising  in
this context, we can focus on the emptiness of:
 • ourselves being the experiencers of the harm
 • the person who is causing us harm
 • the harm itself, i.e., the harmful action

The main point here is to understand that the people  harming  us  or  those
who are upset with us are not doing so out of choice because they are  under
the influence and control of their own afflictions such as anger. It is  due
to their afflictions that they cause us harm so in that sense, they  do  not
have any control or independence.

When we think about this, then it is not appropriate to be  upset  with  the
perpetrator who is harming us. If we really want to  be  upset  or  point  a
finger at something, we should be upset with the afflictions of  that  harm-
doer. We should be angry at their afflictions and not at the person.

Khen Rinpoche: Are you getting the logic  here?  Whether  you  can  practise
this or not is another matter. But first, you must get  the  logic  of  what
Shantideva is saying.

This is the  logic.  Of  course  we  also  have  our  own  logic.  We  would
definitely think, “Yes, our sicknesses  do  not  have  any  choice.  Due  to
causes and conditions, they arise so I don’t blame the sicknesses.

Yes, you can also tell me that the person does not have any  choice  because
he is under the control of his afflictions. But why should I  get  angry  at
his afflictions? His afflictions don’t have any intention to harm me but  he
has the intention to harm me. He is the one who is upset with  me,  not  his
afflictions.”


           B.  Fury is not willingly developed
      Verse 6.24
      Without thinking, “I shall be angry,”
      People become angry with no resistance,
      And without thinking, “I shall produce,”
      Likewise anger itself is produced.


Before we get upset, prior to our anger arising, when the mind is OK, we  do
not sit there, thinking, “I’m going to harm this  person.  I  want  to  hurt
this person.” Nobody will sit around,  wishing  to  be  upset  and  to  harm
others.

But sometimes when  we  meet  with  certain  conditions,  then  the  thought
arises, “I want to hurt this person.” There must be some  conditions  coming
together, then we get upset. Without these conditions  coming  together,  we
will not get upset.

If we look at the conditions that made us upset and  want  to  harm  others,
the conditions themselves from their own side do not have any  intention  to
harm others. But even though these conditions do not  have  any  thought  of
harming  another  person,  when  these  conditions  come  together,  without
choice, anger and the thought to harm others arise.

You have to follow the line of reasoning:
 • By using the earlier example  of  sicknesses,  we  have  established  how
   sicknesses arise due to various causes and conditions. As such,  they  do
   not arise independently.
 • We also looked at how people do not get upset without  any  reason.  They
   get upset and harm us primarily because of their own afflictions.
So whether we are falling sick or someone is harming  us,  these  situations
arise because of causes and conditions coming together.

When we look at the  person,  no  one  has  the  intention  right  from  the
beginning wanting  to  harm  someone  else.  But  when  certain  causes  and
conditions come together, when these causes  and  conditions  are  complete,
somehow without any choice, anger arises and  the  thought  to  harm  others
arises.

Why is that person harming us? We can say that the person has a  choice.  Or
the person has the intention to harm us even if his afflictions do not  have
the intention to harm us. Or we can say that the person  may  not  have  the
intention to harm us but the person nonetheless still  ends  up  wanting  to
harm us. Why? Because once the causes and  conditions  for  him  wanting  to
harm us come together, that thought of harming us will  arise  in  his  mind
naturally.

           C. As all wrongdoing arises from causes and conditions, it is not
             independent
      Verse 6.25
      All misdeeds there are
      And all the various kinds of negativities
      Arise through the force of conditions;
      They do not have self-power[1].

Due to afflictions such as anger and attachment, non-virtuous karma—such  as
taking the lives of others, taking what is not  given,  engaging  in  sexual
misconduct, lying, divisive speech,  offensive  speech,  meaningless  speech
and so forth—is accumulated. All these non-virtues arise due  to  the  force
of  conditions.  These   non-virtues   do   not   arise   intentionally   or
independently of some other factors.

We cannot  do  something  intentionally  without  depending  on  some  other
factors. The reason why people engage in non-virtue such as acts of  harming
others is because of various causes and conditions coming together. As  such
it  is  not  as  if  these  actions  arise  without  cause,  that  they  are
independent or carried out due to a mere wish.

If we understand this and we really think about it, then  when  we  look  at
people who are engaging in a lot of non-virtue such  as  those  engaging  in
all kinds of acts of harming others,  never  mind  not  getting  upset  with
these people. In fact we would even generate compassion for  them.  This  is
because we understand they are under the control of some other  factors  and
they are not doing such actions intentionally. This is the reality.

But when people engage  in  non-virtue,  when  they  harm  others  including
harming us, we feel they are doing it intentionally, that they have  control
and a say over their actions. This is what we think. This is what  makes  us
even more upset because we  think  that  they  are  doing  so  purposely  or
intentionally.  But  they  do  not  have  any  control  as  they  are  being
controlled by their afflictions.

In the first place, there are many causes and conditions  for  a  person  to
get upset with us. When these causes  and  conditions  come  together,  that
person powerlessly and without choice gets angry. Motivated  by  her  anger,
she harms us.

If we are able to understand this line of reasoning,  rather  than  feeling,
“That person is doing this on purpose,” we should see that  the  person  has
no choice, that  she  is  completely  powerless  and  completely  under  the
control of various causes and conditions as well as her own afflictions.

When this person is upset with us or harms us, it is possible to think,  “It
is like that. What to do? Nothing can be done.” It is even possible then  to
have some thought of concern, affection, love and compassion for  the  harm-
doer.

What about the afflictions of the harm-doer, such as  her  anger?  Even  the
afflictions themselves are not independent.

        2. Their causes and conditions are also not independent
      Verse 6.26
      These conditions that assemble together
      Have no intention, “I shall produce,”
      And neither does that produced by them
      Have the intention, “I will produce.”

Without an external object, a visual form, there  is  nothing  to  be  seen.
Without a form, you cannot say,  “I  saw  something.  My  eye  consciousness
perceived a visual form.” Without seeing something, you cannot say,  “it  is
beautiful,” or, “it is ugly.”

Without the object, sound, you cannot say,  “I  heard  something.”  The  ear
consciousness apprehending sound would not arise. You cannot talk about  the
sound being pleasant or unpleasant.

Without an external object to touch, i.e., for tactility to arise, there  is
no way you can say, “I felt that object.” If there isn’t a  tactile  object,
you will not be able to know the feeling of that  object.  You  cannot  say,
“this is rough,” or, “this is smooth.”

In order for a pleasant or unpleasant feeling to arise,  let’s  say  we  are
talking about bodily feeling,  there  must  be  a  coming  together  of  the
object, the sense power and the consciousness. The coming together of  these
three factors, which we then call the mental factor  of  contact,  leads  to
feeling. Depending on how we perceive  or  distinguish  the  object,  it  is
either pleasant or unpleasant. But in order for there to be such  a  feeling
in the first place, there must be all these other factors.

Likewise in order for anger to arise, there  must  the  coming  together  of
these  three  factors:  (1)  an  external  situation  or  object,  (2)   the
consciousness and (3) the mental sense power.  Although these three  factors
must come together in  order  for  anger  to  arise,  these  three  factors,
whether individually or collectively, from their own side, do not  have  the
intention to produce anger.

Anger is a product of the coming together of these three factors  but  anger
itself also does not have the thought, “I am now produced  and  have  arisen
in dependence on these three things.”

The point behind this line of  reasoning  is  to  show  that  anger  is  not
generated intentionally. It is not due to a person thinking, “I want to  get
angry,” and then anger arises. The point is that anger itself is  a  product
of causes and conditions so that  when  these  causes  and  conditions  come
together, anger will arise.

     B.   Refuting the existence of independent causes
           1.  Refuting the independent self and principal of the Samkhyas
                 A.    Refuting   the   principal   generates   independent
     expressions


The next few verses refute the positions of some non-Buddhist  schools.  The
Buddhists’ understanding of causality is very different  from  some  of  the
non-Buddhists schools.

For example, there are proponents of  a  non-Buddhist  Indian  philosophical
system called the Samkhyas who assert causality but they assert that  causes
are independent. To them, there is such a thing as an independent cause.

A cause that exists independently is completely opposite to  what  Buddhists
assert. We also assert causality but we assert that  causes  themselves  are
under the control of some others factors so causes are other-powered.

First we refute the concept of the principal and generality asserted by  the
Samkhyas, who are Indian non-Buddhists. They assert that this principal  and
generality exist independently.

      Verse 6.27
      That which is asserted as the “Principal”
      And that which is imputed as the “Self,”
      Do not arise after having purposefully thought,
      “I shall arise.”


      Verse 6.28
      If they are not produced and non-existent,
      What is asserted to be produced at that time?

In the non-Buddhist Indian philosophical system propounded by the  Samkhyas,
they assert that everything that exists is included  within  25  categories.
They divide existents or objects of knowledge into 25 categories, which  are
exhaustive,  i.e.,  whatever  exists  necessarily  falls   into   these   25
categories.

The Samkhyas also talk about there being a principal and an  aspect  (or  an
expression) of the principal with the principal being like a creator of  all
the different aspects while the aspects are creations or expressions of  the
principal.

So of the 25 categories of the objects of knowledge, one is  the  principal,
one is the  self  and  the  remaining  23  categories  are  the  aspects  or
expressions of the principal.

The Samkhyas assert that the self is consciousness or awareness  and  it  is
permanent, unitary and independent.

The Samkhyas talk about how all existents or objects of knowledge  can  also
be subsumed under six terminological divisions such  as  quality,  substance
and so forth.

There are nine items under the terminological division  of  substance—we  do
not have to worry about what they all are—one of which  is  the  self.  This
self that belongs  to  the  terminological  division  of  substance  is  not
consciousness. Although this self is a form nevertheless  it  is  permanent,
unitary and independent. But because this self is a division  of  substance,
this  self  is  said  to  be  substantially  established.  Because   it   is
substantially established, it is not dependent on some other factor.  Rather
this self acts as the basis for other qualities.

These are the assertions of the Samkhyas.

Among the six terminological divisions, besides the division  of  substance,
there is the division  of  quality.  In  general,  within  the  division  of
quality,  there  are  24  qualities.  Nine  of  those  qualities  arise   in
dependence on the self and these include  happiness,  suffering,  anger  and
attachment. Anger being one of the qualities that  arise  in  dependence  on
the self is said to be produced independently by that self.

How does this fit into our discussions here? The point here  is  that  there
is  this  self  that  is  substantially  established.  This  self   is   not
consciousness but nevertheless it is  permanent,  unitary  and  independent.
But in dependence on this self, certain qualities come about.

|One classification:                                                  |
|25 categories of objects of knowledge: (1) the principal (2) the self|
|and 23 aspects or expressions of the principal                       |
|Under this classification, the Samkhyas assert that the self is      |
|consciousness or awareness and it is permanent, unitary and          |
|independent                                                          |
|                                                                     |
|Another classification:                                              |
|All objects of knowledge is subsumed under the six terminological    |
|divisions that include quality, substance and so forth.              |
|In the category of substance, there are nine things, one of which is |
|the self. Here the self is not consciousness but a form that is      |
|nevertheless permanent, unitary and independent. Also this self is   |
|substantially established, i.e., it is not dependent on some other   |
|factor.                                                              |
|In the category of quality, there are 24 qualities among which the   |
|Samkhyas assert that there are nine qualities—such as happiness,     |
|suffering, anger, attachment and so forth—that arise in dependence on|
|the self, i.e., the self acts as the basis for other qualities.      |

The main point is that there  are  some  non-Buddhist  Indian  philosophical
systems that assert causality but the problem for  us  is  that  while  they
assert causality, at the same time, they assert that these  are  independent
causes. These causes,  being  independent,  do  not  depend  on  some  other
factors; yet they can produce effects. That is the problem. For us, this  is
not tenable logically and is not possible. So  these  six  lines  of  verses
6.27 and 6.28 are saying that the philosophy of the Samkhyas is incorrect.

Khen Rinpoche: Do you know why it is not right?

The point is that the self—in dependence upon which qualities such as  anger
and attachment are produced—is in the first place independent. Since  it  is
not produced itself, how can it produce something else?

Since  you  (i.e.,  referring  to  the  Samkhyas)  posit  a  cause  that  is
independent, that means it is:
 • not dependent on some other factors, i.e., it exists from  its  own  side
   without depending on something else
 • not produced
If it is not produced and  it  is  independent,  how  then  can  it  produce
something else?

For  the  sake  of  analysis,  even  if  you  were  to  allow  for  such  an
impossibility to be possible—by asserting that an independent cause  can  be
produced by another cause  that  is  also  independent—since  it  itself  is
produced, how can it be permanent? It has to be  impermanent!  But  Samkhyas
assert that it is permanent.

If you assert that there is an independent cause and that independent  cause
is itself produced from something else, then it cannot  be  independent  and
it is not autonomous.

The point here is that although the Samkhyas said that there are causes  and
conditions that  produce  things,  they  also  assert  these  causes  to  be
independent.
 • If the cause itself is independent, it is permanent.
 • It is not subject to momentary change  because  it  is  not  produced  by
   something else.
 •  Since it is not produced by something else, it itself is permanent.
 •  If it is permanent, it cannot produce an effect.
Therefore the Samkhyas’ assertion that anger and so forth  can  be  produced
from an independent cause, the self, is untenable.

Khen Rinpoche You understand? OK. I make it simple in two sentences.

First you have to understand what our system, the Buddhist view, is:
 • If it is a functioning thing (or a product), its existence is necessarily
   dependent on some other factors.
 •  As it comes into being in dependence on some other factors, therefore it
   is not independent.
 •  As it is a result of  some  other  factors,  it  is  necessarily  other-
   powered. It cannot be self-powered.
 That is the reality.

But some non-Buddhist schools say that there can be  an  independent  cause.
There are  causes  that  produce  effects  but  the  causes  themselves  are
independent. For example, the Samkhyas said that the principal and the  self
are causes that produce  results  but  they  themselves  are  permanent  and
independent. That is not tenable and won’t work at all.

The main line of reasoning is that there isn’t  such  a  thing  as  a  self-
powered cause. If it is a cause, it  is  necessarily  other-powered.  Other-
powered means it is  not  independent  and  that  it  comes  into  being  by
depending on some other thing other than itself.

The reality is that if something is a cause:
 • it is necessarily impermanent
 • it is necessarily other-powered, i.e., it  is  dependent  on  some  other
   factors other than itself
 • it is not self-powered.
Therefore there isn’t such a thing as an independent  cause.   That  is  the
reality.

But when you look at the Samkhyas’ position, they  talk  of  there  being  a
principal and a self and they assert that these  two  are  causes  that  can
produce effects. Then we analyse this by looking at the principal and  self.

 • Do the principal and the self asserted by the Samkhyas arise from a cause
   or without a cause?
 • If the Samkhyas were to say that they arise from  causes,  the  principal
   and the self, which are also asserted by them  to  be  permanent,  cannot
   exist.
 • Because if the principal and the self are themselves  products  of  other
   causes, they cannot be independent. They cannot be self-powered. But  the
   Samkhyas assert that they are self-powered.
 • If they are self-powered and independent, they cannot produce things. But
   the Samkhyas say that the  principal  and  the  self  can  produce  whole
   varieties of effects.
 • If they are self-powered, they are permanent, i.e.,  they  don’t  undergo
   momentary change. How can they produce something else? It is impossible!

           B.   Refuting  that  an  aware  being  autonomously  experiences
           objects
      Verse 6.28 c, d
      Since it would always be distracted to its objects,
      It follows that it will never cease.

This is refuting the self that is a consciousness asserted by the  Samkhyas.


To keep it simple, the  Samkhyas  assert  that  the  self  engages  with  or
utilises its objects independently from its own side  without  depending  on
some other factors. This is what the text is refuting here.

This assertion by the Samkhyas leads to this  logical  fallacy:  it  follows
that because it is engaging independently with its  object,  once  the  self
engages with its object, it will continue to engage with it forever  without
stopping.

You have to remember the assertions by the Samkhyas:
 • They assert that the self is independent and permanent.  Being  permanent
   means it is never-changing.
 •  They  assert  that  the  self  engages  with  or  utilises  its  objects
   independently.
These are the assertions.

Then what would be the problem and the fallacy?

If you assert that there is such  a  permanent  and  independent  self  that
engages its object independently,  it  follows  that  once  it  engages  its
object, it will continuously  do  so  because  it  is  permanent  and  never
changing. You will never be able to posit  a  time  when  the  self  is  not
engaging its object since it is permanent and independent.

But that can never be the case because we  know  that  form,  sound  and  so
forth change. When there is a change in the object, there  must  also  be  a
change in the experience of the object. For example, when a form  ceases  to
exist, you cannot talk of a self utilising a form that is non-existent.
So the verse 6.28 c, d refutes the Samkhyas’s assertion that this  self  can
engage in its objects independently.

Next  is  refuting   the   assertions   of   another   non-Buddhist   Indian
philosophical system  whose  proponents  are  known  as  the  Nyayas.  There
assertions are similar to the Samkhayas.

        2.  Refuting the independent self of the Nyaya’s
      Verse 6.29
      If the Self were permanent
      It would obviously be devoid of activity, just like space.
      So even if it were to meet with other conditions
      What could the unchanging do?


      Verse 6.30
      Even if, when acted upon, it remains as before,
      Then what did activity do to it?
      If it is said, “This is the activity of that,”
      How could the two ever be related?

We just assume that we understood these verses![2]


The next outline  says  it  is  actually  inappropriate  to  be  angry  upon
understanding that all beings are like emanations.

        3.  Once one understands all migrators to be like emanations,  they
           see that it is unreasonable to be furious with them
      Verse 6.31
      Hence all are governed by others,
      And through the power of that, they have no power.
      Having understood in this way, I shall not become angry
      At all things that are like emanations.

All the examples given earlier, such as anger,  sicknesses,  the  harm-doers
and so forth, are all dependent-arisings in that they all arise through  the
force of some other factors. They do not arise from their own side.

The harm that we receive is the  result  of  the  coming  together  of  many
causes and conditions. The causes and  conditions  that  brought  about  the
harm that we experience are themselves the  products  of  other  causes  and
conditions. Those causes and conditions are also products  of  other  causes
and conditions and so forth.
When there is a harm-doer in our  life,  i.e.,  the  person  who  causes  us
problems and harms, he is doing so because of his own affliction, anger.

Why is he angry? He is angry because of his own mental unhappiness.

Why is a person unhappy? Because there is the  coming  together  of  various
causes and conditions such as the object or situation, the sense  power  and
the  consciousness.  When  these  three  come  together,  it   produces   an
experience that makes the person unhappy. Because his unhappiness builds  up
over time, he gets angry. Then because of his anger, this person  harms  us.
Usually this is the process. It all starts with the  coming  together  of  a
situation or an object, the sense power and the consciousness.

But why are there these three things in the first place? If you think  about
it, they must also come from causes. There is where  karma  and  afflictions
come into play. You can see that there is this whole causal mechanism.

Something arises because of a cause and that cause itself is the product  of
other causes and so on and so forth. As such, the various causes that  bring
about an experience are in themselves products of other causes. Therefore:
 • Causes are not independent.
 • Causes themselves are dependent-arisings.
 • Causes are other-powered.
 • Causes are not self-powered.

So there is no beginning to this whole causal mechanism. In short, if it  is
a functioning thing, if it  is  a  product  and  if  it  is  an  impermanent
phenomenon, it has no beginning. If you were to look  for  an  independently
existing cause, the very first moment of the real cause,  you  will  not  be
able to find it because there is no beginning.

A cause is the result of some other  causes.  These  other  causes  are  the
results of other causes that precede them and so forth. Going by  this  line
of reasoning, in general, there is no beginning to causes and  there  is  no
independently existent cause.
 • As such, things are dependently originated. Therefore you  can  say  that
   things are dependently arisen.
 •  As such,  there  isn’t  a  single  phenomenon  whose  existence  is  not
   dependent on some other factors.
 •  As such,  there  isn’t  any  truly  existent  phenomenon.  There  is  no
   phenomenon that  exists  by  its  own  entity,  from  its  own  side  and
   independent of other factors. That is impossible.
 •  Whatever exists is necessarily dependently arisen.
 •  As such, phenomena are like illusions.

As such, the harm-doer also does not exist independently. He  is  not  truly
existent and he does not exist  from  his  own  side.  He  came  into  being
because of the inter-play of many causes and conditions.  We  can  use  this
reflection to counteract any anger that we may have towards that person.

When there is anger in our mind, when we are  upset  with  a  situation,  an
object or a person, from  the  perspective  of  this  anger,  our  anger  is
directed at an independently existent person, a real harm-doer from his  own
side and a truly existent harm-doer. A harm-doer exists from  his  own  side
right there to do bad things to  us.  There  is  no  other  reason  for  his
actions or his behaviour. He is just there. This is what we believe. We  get
upset because of that. So we are getting upset at something  that  does  not
exist.

We have to realize that the situation or object that we are upset with  does
not exist by reflection on dependent arising. We have to  realise  how  that
person does not exist  independently  because  there  are  many  causes  and
conditions that cause the person to act in that way. Because there are  many
causes and conditions, therefore that harm-doer is not independent.

In order to help us understand subtle dependent arising, first  we  have  to
understand coarse dependent arising, i.e., dependent arising  at  the  level
of causality.

There are many causes and conditions that make  the  harm-doer  angry,  that
makes him harm you. If you understand that there is a whole list  of  causes
and conditions that make him do whatever he did to  you,  then  you  realise
that that person is not independent.

By depending on our understanding of  dependent  arising  at  the  level  of
causality, we come to understand dependent  arising  at  its  subtle  level.
Since his action is a product of various causes  and  conditions,  therefore
he is not independent. He does not exist from his own side. Therefore he  is
empty of existing truly. He is empty of existing inherently.

This is how we can counteract our anger with these reflections on  dependent
arising. First at the coarser level, at the level of causality and based  on
that, we come to understand how  things  are  dependently  arisen  at  their
subtle level.

Interpreted by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme; transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek,  Vivien  Ng
& Aki Yeo; edited by Cecilia Tsong.
-----------------------
[1] This line was interpreted as, “They do not have any independence.”
[2] While both the Samkhyas and the Nyayas assert an independent,  permanent
self, they are differentiated with regard to the nature of  that  self.  The
Samkhyas assert that the self is the consciousness while the  Nyayas  assert
that the self is matter. The Nyayas assert that the independent  thought  of
harming is produced by this independent, permanent  self.  Buddhists  refute
that such a self has the ability to function at all. It cannot  produce  any
effect since it is permanent. Such a self is like uncompounded space,  which
do not produce anything at all. (Page 4, Lesson 7,  Module  7,  First  Basic
Program).


