Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Engaging in the Deeds of a Bodhisattva/BP2 M5 L10 final.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:52:21.432850
================================================================================


Transcript of the teachings by Khen Rinpoche Geshe  Chonyi  on  Engaging  in
the Bodhisattva Deeds, 2014

Root text: Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds by  Shantideva,  translated  by
Toh Sze Gee. Copyright: Toh Sze Gee, 2006; Revised edition, 2014.

Lesson 10                                                                 11
March 2014


What is refuge? Chapter Two: Verses 2.34–2.55. Confessing negativities with
the four powers (cont’d).


WHAT IS REFUGE?

I mentioned before that the  practice  of  going  for  refuge  is  extremely
important. Among the three objects of refuge, the  Buddha  is  the  one  who
shows refuge. When one goes for refuge to the  Buddha,  it  means  that  one
recognises the Buddha to be one’s guide and  one  pledges  to  practise  his
instructions exactly as he had taught. The purpose of going  for  refuge  to
the Buddha is generating the pledge, “I will practise his teachings  exactly
as he intended.”

In order to be able to make this kind of pledge or promise, first  one  must
understand how the Buddha is an unparalleled teacher and that  there  is  no
other guide like him. In order to develop the conviction that the Buddha  is
an unparalleled teacher, one must listen to his  teachings  and  reflect  on
them. When such faith and conviction in the Buddha  arises,  one  will  then
naturally be able to pledge, “I am going to practise his  teachings  exactly
as he taught them.”

The unparalleled or unsurpassed refuge is  the  Dharma,  which  protects  us
from all  undesirable things,  samsara  and  the  lower  realms.  When  such
conviction arises in one’s heart, this is going for refuge  to  the  Dharma.
By going for refuge, one makes the pledge  or  commitment  to  practise  the
Dharma purely.

The unsurpassed guide, the Sangha, refers to those who guide us and help  us
in our practice. They are our role models  and  are  the  superior  or  arya
Sangha. Going for refuge to the Sangha is making the commitment to  practise
like them.

Going for refuge to the Buddha, Dharma  and  Sangha  is  essentially  making
these  pledges after which one’s practice begins. It  is  on  the  basis  of
knowing well what exactly the Buddha, Dharma and Sangha  are  that  one  can
make such a strong pledge.

                                 ~~~~~~~~~~

CONFESSING NEGATIVITIES WITH THE FOUR POWERS (cont’d)

We have started the section on the practice  of  confession.  The  teachings
tell us that we should engage in this practice by applying the four  powers.

The power of regret (or eradication)
The text talks about generating regret for  all  the  negativities  one  has
accumulated since beginningless lifetimes. These include:
• the negativities that are accumulated by oneself
•  the  negativities  accumulated  when  one  caused  others  to  engage  in
  negativities
• the negativities accumulated when one rejoiced in  the  negativities  that
  were performed by others
• the negativities  accumulated  in  relation  to  the  Buddha,  Dharma  and
  Sangha, in relation to one’s parents and so forth.

Contemplating the results that one  will  experience  in  the  future,  when
these negativities that one has accumulated ripen, one generates regret.

If one was to die without having purified  the  negativities  that  one  has
accumulated, it will also be a  cause  for  regret.  The  text  talks  about
bringing to mind how we will regret  dying  without  having  purified  these
negativities, especially since death is certain but the  time  of  death  is
uncertain.

~ Regretting negativities we have done for the sake of close friends and  so
forth.
In the following verse, the text says that we often accumulate  negativities
for  the  sake  of  our  loved  ones,  our  resources  and  possessions  and
ourselves, not knowing that at the end of the day,  we  have  to  leave  all
these behind. We generate regret by bringing to mind how all these will  not
last.

The text is also telling us that we often  accumulate  negativities  out  of
attachment for loved ones and dislike for and anger towards our  enemies  in
our quest to defeat or destroy them. It is also inappropriate to  accumulate
negativities for the sake of loved ones and our enemies.

      Verse 2.34
      Leaving all behind, I must depart alone.
      Through not having understood this
      I committed various kinds of negativities
      For the sake of my friends and foes.


      Verse 2.35
      Even my foes will become nothing.
      My friends will also become nothing.
      I too will become nothing.
      Likewise all will become nothing.

~ Friends and enemies alike become only objects of memory  at  the  time  of
death
One tries very hard to destroy one’s enemies but even  if  one  did  not  do
anything at all, sooner or later, they will die. Likewise  for  one’s  loved
ones, one tries so hard to sustain them. But over time they  will  gradually
decline and will also die. We ourselves will one day also  cease  to  exist.
We will die. There will come a day  when  this  world  will  also  cease  to
exist.


For that reason, it is meaningless to accumulate negativities for  the  sake
of loved ones and enemies. By thinking in this way—how it  is  inappropriate
to accumulate negativities for their sake—one generates regret.

Why is it meaningless? Because you can try ways and means to  sustain  these
relationships. But, at the end  of  the  day,  they  will  all  become  just
objects of memory,  nothing more.

      Verse 2.36
      Just like an experience in a dream,
      Whatever things I enjoy
      Will become a memory.
      Whatever has passed will not be seen.

At the time of death, the  last  day  of  your  life,  no  matter  how  much
enjoyment you had in this life, no matter how many friends,  loved  ones  or
possessions you have, they are all just objects of memory. They cannot  help
you beyond that. This is evident when you think about it. Imagine  the  very
last day of your life. All those past experiences  are  over,  are  finished
and are  just  memories.  So  it  is  evident  that  all  these  things  are
unreliable. You can see this directly with your own eyes.

      Verse 2.37
      Even within this brief life
      Many friends and foes have passed away,
      But whatever terrible negativities I committed for them
      Remains before me.

At the end of the day, friends that have been nice to us,  enemies  who  had
harmed us and those we would like to harm,  everyone  will  die.  When  they
die, they are gone, but the negativities that we accumulated in relation  to
our friends and enemies remain. The  teachings  are  telling  us  that  such
negativities that we have  accumulated  for  the  sake  of  loved  ones  and
enemies remain with us even after they have died, accompanying us  like  our
shadow. We will have to experience the  suffering  that  these  negativities
will bring about.

It is evident that whatever benefit we may  have  received  from  our  loved
ones and whatever harm we have received from our enemies only  last  for  as
long  as  they  exist,  i.e.,  they  only  last  for  this  life.  But   the
negativities that we accumulated in order  to  defeat  our  enemies  and  to
sustain our friends and loved ones remain with us from life to life.

~ Regretting negativities we perform due to not realising that the  time  of
 our death is uncertain
Although the time of death  is  uncertain,  because  of  our  predisposition
believing that everything is unchanging and permanent, we create  a  lot  of
negativities. The teachings are telling us to  generate  regret  for  having
lived in such a way by remembering the uncertainty of the time of death.




      Verse 2.38
      Thereby, through not having realized
      That I will suddenly vanish,
      I committed many negativities
      Through ignorance, attachment, and hatred.

~ Death is certain  and  to  die  while  still  possessing  negativities  is
fearful
      Verse 2.39
      Remaining neither day nor night,
      This life is always slipping by
      And never lengthening.
      Why will death not come to one like me?

“Remaining neither day nor night” means time is slipping by. Time  does  not
stop and nothing is being added to our lifespan.  It  is  definite  that  we
will die yet we still have  with  us  all  the  negativities  that  we  have
accumulated. Bringing this to mind, we generate regret.

Because the time of death is uncertain, therefore we must strive  to  purify
our  negativities. The teachings give an analogy of a  pond.  Imagine  there
is a pond that does not have any of water from other sources.  With  certain
conditions such as hot weather and so forth, the pond will start to  dry  up
and there will come a time when that body of  water  will  cease  to  exist.
This is like our lifespan.

~ Not purifying our negativities will bring suffering even in this life
When we do not purify our negativities, then we  would  have  to  experience
their  suffering results even in this  life.  When  we  do  not  purify  our
negativities, even our friends, loved ones and relatives would not  be  able
to do anything to help us.

      Verse 2.40
      While I am lying in bed,
      Although surrounded by my friends and relatives,
      The feeling of life being severed
      Will be experienced by me alone.


      Verse 2.41ab
      When seized by Yama’s messengers,
      What benefit will friends and relatives afford?

When we are lying on our deathbed, we may be surrounded by our  loved  ones,
friends and relatives. They may do many things to keep us alive,  but  there
is nothing they can do to prevent us  from  experiencing  the  suffering  of
death. We have to go through the experience of dying alone.  The  terrifying
fear and suffering at the time of death can only be experienced by  oneself,
not by anyone else.

At the time of  death,  we  undergo  the  death  process  where  the  subtle
elements in the body undergo dissolution.  When  we  have  accumulated  many
negativities, we will experience  all  kinds  of  fearful,  frightening  and
terrifying visions and we experience these on our own. No  one  can  protect
us from them, not the doctor nor our loved ones.  What  can  protect  us  is
only our merit.


~ The fear that comes from not performing meritorious acts
      Verse 2.41cd
      My merit alone shall protect me then,
      But upon that I have never relied.

The  unsurpassed  protection  is  virtuous  karma  but  since  we  have  not
accumulated such virtuous karma, thinking about this, we develop regret.

~ The anguish of regret
      Verse 2.42
      O Protectors! I, so unconscientious,
      Unaware of such terror as this,
      Performed many negativities
      For the sake of this impermanent life.

This verse is an expression of regret.

~ The reason great fear arises
      Verse 2.43
      One who is being led today  to  the  spot  where  his  limbs  will  be
      mutilated
      Will be petrified.
      With dry mouth, sunken eyes, and so forth
      His entire appearance is transfigured.


      Verse 2.44
      What need to mention the tremendous despair
      When stricken with the disease of terror,
      Being clasped by the frightful physical forms
      Of the messengers of Yama?

If a person is led to the execution  ground  or  place  where  he  would  be
killed, that person would  be  very  frightened.  Looking  at  the  physical
appearance of that person, you can see all these signs of great  terror  and
fear. If that is the case, then it goes without saying that, at the time  of
death, when we have visions of the messengers of the Lord  of  Death  coming
to take us away, that would also be very  frightening.  This  is  what  will
happen at the time of death. Then what will happen in the next life?

~ The way negativities cause one to be  tormented  by  suffering  in  future
lives
      Verse 2.45
      “Who can afford me good protection
      From this terror?”
      With terrified, bulging eyes agape
      I shall search the four directions for refuge.


      Verse 2.46
      Then seeing no refuge in the four directions
      I shall become enveloped in gloom.
      If there should be no refuge there,
      At that time what shall I do?

It is said that there  are  people  who  die  experiencing  this.  They  are
terrified, looking around for help but not finding any protection  anywhere.
Their minds become completely enveloped by darkness and gloom.

In the next life, if you are reborn in the hells, when you look around,  you
would not find any help. It is terrifying. At this  time,  the  Buddha  will
not be able to protect you  because  you  were  reborn  there  due  to  very
powerful negative karma. When  that  karma  ripens,  there  is  nothing  the
Buddha can do.

Up to this point here, verses V2.27 to 2.46 come under the power of  regret.


The very essence of generating regret for  having  accumulated  negativities
is through remembering that:
• death is certain
• the time of death is uncertain
• at the time of death, nothing help us except the Dharma

By thinking about these points, one develops regret for  having  accumulated
negativities.

As we saw earlier, in order to defeat  those  we  do  not  like,  i.e.,  our
enemies, we have to put in so much effort. Likewise, we also put  in  a  lot
of effort to support and sustain those who are in agreement with us. In  the
course of doing all this, we accumulate a lot of negativities.  But  at  the
time of death, none of them is of any benefit.

In the first place, we should remember and keep this in mind  and,  as  much
as possible, abstain or refrain from accumulating negativities. In  case  we
do accumulate negativities, as much  as  possible,  we  should  purify  them
without delay by remembering that the time of death is uncertain.

We have to remember this: that we can sustain and  support  our  loved  ones
due to our attachment to them and we can defeat our enemies, but there  will
come a time when they will cease  to  exist.  However  the  negativities  we
accumulated in relation to doing things for or to them will remain  with  us
and we will have to experience the results. By remembering this,  we  should
refrain from accumulating negativities.

The power of support
Next is the power of support, starting with going for refuge  to  the  Three
Jewels from this very moment.

~ Relying on refuge of the Three Jewels
      Verse 2.47
      Therefore from today onwards I go for refuge
      To the Victors, the protectors of migrating beings,
      Who strove for the purpose of protecting migrating beings
      And with great power eradicate all fear.


      Verse 2.48
      Likewise, I perfectly go for refuge
      To the Dharma they have realized,
      That clears away the fears of cyclic existence,
      And also to the assembly of bodhisattvas.

These two verses talk about going for  refuge  to  the  Buddha,  Dharma  and
Sangha.

~ Relying on the children of the Conquerors
      Verse 2.49
      I, terrified
      Offer myself to Samantabhadra;
      To Manjughosha also
      I offer my body.


      Verse 2.50
      To the Protector Avalokiteshvara
      Who unmistakenly acts with compassion,
      I utter a mournful cry,
      “Please protect this wrong-doer!”


      Verse 2.51
       In my search for refuge
      I cry from my heart
      To Akashagarba, Ksitigarbha,
      And all the Compassionate Protectors.


      Verse 2.52
       And I go for refuge to Vajrapani,
      Upon the sight of whom all hateful beings,
      Such as the messengers of Yama,
      Flee in terror to the four directions.

There are eight close sons or the  eight  great  bodhisattvas—Samantabhadra,
Manjushri, Avalokiteshvara, Vajrapani, Ksitigarbha,  Akashagarbha,  Maitreya
and Sarvanivaranaviskambini. Bring  to  mind  these  bodhisattvas  and  take
refuge in them.

~ Having gone for refuge, practise in accord with their instructions
One brings to mind all the negativities. After having gone for  refuge,  one
should practice according to the advice of the Three Jewels  and  the  eight
great bodhisattvas.

      Verse 2.53
      Previously I transgressed your words,
      But now upon seeing this great fear
      I go to you for refuge.
      By doing so, please swiftly clear away this fear.

“Previously I transgressed your word”: “I” here refers to the  one  who  has
accumulated all the non-virtuous negative karma. “I,  this  person  who  has
accumulated so much negative karma because of not following your  teachings,
have gone against your advice and have engaged in activities that should  be
discarded and not cultivated the qualities that need to be  cultivated.”  As
a result, one would have to experience all the suffering  and  problems.  By
remembering this, one is making a plea before going for refuge to them.

This is the power of the support, which in this case is going for refuge  to
the Three Jewels and relying on the eight close sons of the buddhas.

The power of applying the antidote (or the remedy)
      Verse 2.54
      If I need to comply with a doctor’s advice
      When frightened by an ordinary illness,
      Then what need to mention that it is so when perpetually diseased
      By the hundreds of faults of attachment and so forth?

When people fall sick, out of fear for their health and  their  lives,  they
would consult a doctor  to  seek  a  diagnosis.  They  will  usually  follow
exactly the advice of the doctor even though it may  involve  some  hardship
or inconvenience. If that is the case for  an  ordinary  sickness,  it  goes
without saying that someone who is   afflicted  by  hundreds  of  faults  of
attachment, anger, ignorance, pride and so forth,   needs  to  rely  on  and
follow exactly the advice given by  the  Omniscient  One,  the  Buddha.  The
mental sickness of the afflictions is far  more  severe  than  any  physical
sickness while the medicine to cure it is very rare.

      Verse 2.55
      If all the people dwelling in Jambudvipa
      Can be crushed by just one of these,
      And if no other medicine to cure them
      Is to be found in all the directions

In Gyaltsab Je’s commentary, it is said that if everyone  were  to  generate
just one moment of anger towards a  bodhisattva,  it  can  destroy  all  the
human beings in this world and cause them to be reborn  in  the  hells.  The
medicine for this sickness, which is the  meditation  on  the  path  and  so
forth, is so rare that one cannot find  it  anywhere  else  apart  from  the
teachings. Other than the teachings, one will  not  be  able  to  find  such
medicine anywhere else. You will not find it even in the celestial realm  of
Brahma.

Even just one affliction can harm so many sentient beings. The  medicine  to
cure the afflictions is only the Dharma. The disease of the  afflictions  is
so powerful and the only cure for it is the Dharma.


Interpreted by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme; transcribed by Phuah  Soon  Ek,  Patricia
Lee, Julia Koh; edited by Cecilia Tsong.
