Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Engaging in the Deeds of a Bodhisattva/BP2 M5 L39 final.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:52:17.105886
================================================================================


Transcript of the teachings by Khen Rinpoche Geshe  Chonyi  on  Engaging  in
the Bodhisattva Deeds, 2014

Root text: Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds by  Shantideva,  translated  by
Toh Sze Gee. Copyright: Toh Sze Gee, 2006; Revised edition, 2014.

Lesson                                                                    39
 22 July   2014


Chapter Six: Verses 6.96 - 6.111.
3.   Arresting fury towards that which hinders one’s desires
       B.  It is unreasonable to be impatient with that which hinders the
      benefit directed towards oneself and one’s interests
              1.  It is unreasonable to be furious with that which hinders
         mundane interests (V. 6. 96 – V. 101)
               2.  It is unreasonable to be furious with that which hinders
         merit (V. 6.102 –    V. 6.111)


LAM-RIM MEDITATION PROGRAMME

For those of you who are in the lam-rim meditation programme,  although  you
are now  meditating  on  the  topic  of  the  human  life  of  freedoms  and
endowments and death and impermanence,  nevertheless  you  must  not  forget
what you have meditated on earlier, the topic on correctly devoting  to  the
virtuous friend.

On a daily basis, at least you must remind yourself in an  abbreviated  way,
either through reflecting on  it  or  through  reading  the  topic  of  guru
devotion.

When you signed up for the program, it was a rule from  the  beginning  that
you have to meditate on the relevant topics every day without fail. That  is
important. You have to work at that and you have to make sure  that  you  do
it. I think there are some people who have broken that commitment  but  that
should not be the reason to discontinue the practice.

Although you may miss one or two days, nevertheless you should generate  the
determination to continue. What else is there to do other than to  continue?
If you do not continue because you did not do it for a day or  two  and  you
allow yourself to carry on like that, then the day or two will become  weeks
and months.

It is the same with coming to classes to continue with your education  here.
 Doesn’t the same thing apply here? After you stopped  coming  for  a  short
while, then it is very easy to stop coming to  class  altogether.  Therefore
from your side, try to make sure that you continue your learning.

Here we are studying this text, Engaging in  the  Bodhisattva  Deeds.  In  a
way, it is not a difficult text. It is quite easy to  understand  and  quite
straightforward. It is not really intellectually challenging. However  there
are many useful advice in this text. Even if you can’t  manage  to  practise
all of them, at least you can find something that is applicable, useful  and
helpful for you. You then focus on those sections. On the basis of  what  is
written in this text,  you  can  reflect  on  those  verses  that  you  find
relevant to you and then integrate them into your life.

From my side, I also find it quite difficult to teach this text. If  I  were
to give you just some short explanations, we would be  able  to  finish  the
text quite quickly. For example, the next chapter  on  joyous  perseverance,
if we were to just go through the verses in class and highlight some  points
here and there, we could finish that chapter in two or three lessons. But  I
don’t see much benefit in doing that because you probably will not  be  able
to understand much at the end of it.

On the other hand, if I were to explain in  detail  each  and  every  single
verse, then we will never ever finish. I also  see  that  some  of  you  are
probably getting tired of studying this text. It appears to me that some  of
you are getting sick of it.

It is like having to practise patience in studying this chapter on  patience
because the chapter on patience never ever seems to end. But  if  you  think
about it, actually in reality, this text is an indispensable text  for  real
practice. Ideally it is meant for integration into your life.  Every  single
line that makes up these verses is advice that you  can  practise  and  work
on. Ideally you need to have that kind of enthusiasm to be  able  to  really
read and analyse each verse, think about it and try to  utilise  the  advice
in those verses. Ideally it should be like that because this text  is  meant
for practice.

From your side, when you listen to the  explanations,  you  really  have  to
focus and pay attention. From my side, I am trying to explain  the  text  in
accordance with what Shantideva intended on the basis of  some  commentaries
to this text. I’m not making this up. So along the way, if perhaps you  find
some of my explanations incorrect, you should bring them up in class  so  we
can have some discussion about them.

                                 ~~~~~~~~~~~

In terms of the things that we like and the things that we  don’t  like,  if
we expand on them, we can talk about the twelve situations or  objects  that
we desire and the twelve situations or objects that we don’t desire.

With respect to the situations or  objects  that  we  desire,  if  there  is
anything that interferes with these things that we want to happen to  us  or
want to acquire, then we get upset.  Of the many things that we desire,  one
of them is praise. We like to be praised.

Now we are at that particular section about why it is  inappropriate  to  be
attached to praise. Having  said  that,  perhaps  one  may  justify  oneself
wanting praise by saying, “If I’m praised, it causes happiness in others.”

1.   IT IS UNREASONABLE TO  BE  FURIOUS  WITH  THAT  WHICH  HINDERS  MUNDANE
   INTERESTS (cont’d)

         A.   It is unreasonable to  be  furious  with  that  which  hinders
one’s own praise and renown
                4.   The reasons why it is erroneous
                       B.   If, because  of  the  joy  one  associates  with
           them, praise and renown were something to strive  for,  then  it
           would be reasonable for all beings who have that to enjoy them
                               1.   The actual
      Verse 6.96
      If I am happy due to his happiness,
      Then I must act similarly towards all.
      And if this were so then why am I unhappy
      When others are happy due to joy?

We may justify our attachment to praise by saying,  “When  somebody  praises
me, the person who is praising me is happy doing so. I am happy that  he  is
happy.” If that is what  you  think,  then  your  argument  should  also  be
applied to the situation when your enemy is  praised.  When  your  enemy  is
praised, you would have to accept that  the  person  who  is  praising  your
enemy is also happy doing so. But when your  enemy  is  praised,  you  don’t
like it and you also don’t like the person who is praising your enemy.

Going by your argument, if you really feel  happy  for  the  person  who  is
praising you because she is happy doing so, likewise you should extend  your
happiness to the person who is praising your enemy or the  people  that  you
don’t like.

The next verse talks about how childish we are when  we  are  praised.  When
somebody praises us, we get so excited and  happy.  That  is  actually  very
childish behaviour.

                               2.  Dismissing the joy of praise for  oneself
as child’s play
      Verse 6.97
      Therefore the happiness that arises
      From thinking, “I am being praised,”
      Is thus incorrect;
      It is only the behavior of the childish.

If we analyse what exactly is the very nature or entity of this praise  that
we are so attached to, in fact, there  is  no  essence  and  nothing  really
meaningful to it. Because the praise that we are so attached to do not  have
the slightest meaning or essence, therefore being attached to being  praised
is the behaviour of a childish person.

What we like is praise and good reputation. We  are  attached  to  them.  As
such, if anybody comes along and interferes with us being praised or  having
a good reputation, then we get very upset at those people.

The next section tells us that  in  fact,  praise  and  reputation  are  not
desirable and beneficial but rather they are harmful.

We like to be praised and we like to have  a  good  reputation.  If  anybody
comes along and interferes with that, we get very upset  with  that  person.
In fact, this section is telling us that it is  inappropriate  to  be  upset
with the person who interferes with  us  being  praised  or  having  a  good
reputation.

         B.  Reflecting on the benefits
               1.   As that which acts to  hinder  praise  and  renown  also
         arrests the lower realms, it is unreasonable to be furious with it
                      A.  Grasping after praise  and  renown  leads  to  the
             development of all wrongdoing
      Verse 6.98
      Praise and the like distract me
      And also destroy my disillusionment.
      I start to envy those who have excellent qualities
      And success is destroyed.

This verse is talking about the faults of being attached to praise  and  the
faults of being attached to good reputation. Praise and good reputation  are
not necessarily helpful for a real practitioner. From the perspective  of  a
real practitioner, perhaps it is better not to be  attached  to  praise  and
good reputation. Why? Because when  one  is  attached  to  praise  and  good
reputation, one starts to get distracted. They would also lead to  arrogance
and the developing of pride.

We are very attached to material gain, praise, reputation and so forth.  The
level of distraction in our lives is commensurate with the intensity of  the
attachment we have for these things. The more attached we are to  them,  the
more time and effort we would put into looking for and running  after  them.
That is how distractions happen.  The  more  attachment  we  have  to  fame,
praise, good reputation, material gain and so forth, the more distracted  we
become because we have to focus our time and  effort  into  achieving  these
things.

We physically come under the control and the influence of the eight  worldly
dharmas. As the eight worldly dharmas fill up our lives, there is  no  space
and time left for real Dharma practice. The more attached we are to  objects
of  desire  or  objects  of  enjoyment,   the   less   disillusionment   and
disenchantment we will be able to generate with regard to  cyclic  existence
or samsara.

Even if we do manage to  generate  some  disenchantment  or  disillusionment
with cyclic existence—we are able to see the truth  of  samsara—but  because
of our attachment  to  objects  of  desire,  that  small  disenchantment  or
disillusionment  will  dissipate.  The   weaker   our   disenchantment   and
disenchantment, the more difficulty we will experience in subduing our  mind
through meditation. We will find ourselves unable to meditate. In  the  end,
even engaging in some virtue with our  body  and  speech  will  also  become
difficult.

Here the verse  is  also  saying  that  being  praised  and  having  a  good
reputation are the conditions that could  cause  us  to  start  entertaining
negative  thoughts  of  competitiveness  with  those  who  have  some   good
qualities. Attachment to praise and good reputation will lead us into  being
jealous of others who have some good qualities. When jealousy creeps in,  we
are unable to bear the fact that there are others who have  good  qualities.
We want to compete with them. We are unable to bear that  there  are  others
who may be better than us. When there is  jealousy,  anger  comes  into  the
picture as well. Then we get upset.

As mentioned earlier  in  the  text,  when  anger  arises,  we  destroy  the
happiness of this life  and  our  future  lives.  Therefore  verse  6.98  is
telling us the faults of being attached to praise and good reputation.

The next verse talks about  how  the  people  who  obstruct  us  from  being
praised and having a good reputation are actually those who are stopping  us
from going to the lower realms.

                      B.  That which acts to arrest that [also] arrests  the
lower realms
      Verse 6.99
      Therefore, are not those who are closely involved
      In destroying my praise and the like
      Also engaged in protecting me
      From falling into the unfortunate realms?

In verse 6.98, we saw the many  faults  and  disadvantages  that  come  from
attachment to praise and reputation.  As  such,  isn’t  the  person  who  is
obstructing us from being praised and  having  a  good  reputation  actually
protecting us  from  falling  into  the  lower  realms?  Isn’t  that  person
stopping us from falling into the hells? Isn’t that person very kind?

Attachment to praise and good reputation brings about so many problems  that
will lead us to the lower realms. The effect of  being  attached  to  praise
and good reputation is the suffering that includes suffering  in  the  lower
realms. So isn’t the  person  who  is  stopping  us  from  experiencing  the
effects of being attached to praise and good  reputation  stopping  us  from
going to the lower realms?

If you analyse and really think about this, that is really  the  case.  That
is the conclusion. In fact the person who is obstructing and causing us  not
to be praised and having a good reputation is not  a  harm-doer  but  rather
someone who is  very  kind  and  beneficial  to  us.  So  it  is  completely
inappropriate to be upset and angry  with  this  person.  Rather  we  should
repay the kindness of this person.

Likewise it is also inappropriate to be upset and angry with the person  who
harms us in the sense of obstructing us from  being  praised  and  having  a
good reputation because that person is liberating us from samsara.

               2.  As it  is  something  that  acts  to  liberate  one  from
        conditioned existence, it is unreasonable to be furious with it
                     A.  As that which hinders praise and for forth acts  to
          liberate one from conditioned existence, it is unreasonable to  be
          furious with it
      Verse 6.100
      I who seek freedom
      Do not need to be bound by material gain and honor.
      So why should I be angry
      With those who free me from this bondage?

If you are really someone who from the heart aspires to be free  from  every
suffering, then you don’t need additional chains that  will  only  bind  you
further to cyclic existence. In that sense, you don’t need more  praise  and
good reputation for they will only bind you further to samsara.

For someone who is really intent on achieving  freedom  from  all  suffering
and liberation from cyclic existence, the person  who  interferes  with  his
achievement of fame, reputation and praise is in fact his liberator  who  is
freeing him from the chains that bind him to samsara. As such, there  is  no
justification to be upset with the person who is causing you harm. In  fact,
it is appropriate and suitable to like that person.

The essence of what we have covered here so far is that we  have  to  change
our view of the harm-doer. Instead of seeing the person as a  harm-doer,  we
need to realise that the person who obstructs  and  causes  problems  to  us
achieving fame, reputation and praise is someone who is very helpful  to  us
as he is someone who is closing the door of suffering for us.

                     B.   As it  is  something  that  cuts  the  avenues  of
          suffering, it is unreasonable to be furious with it
      Verse 6.101
      Why should I by angry
      At the very doors that do not let me in,
      Which are like buddhas bestowing blessings
      To those who wish to enter the chamber of suffering?

When we talk  about  being  patient  or  trying  to  develop  patience,  the
cultivation of patience can only happen in a  situation  that  involves  so-
called harm-doers. It is only because they exist  that  the  cultivation  of
patience is possible.

What I have just said is actually meant for a later  section  that  will  be
coming soon. So pay attention.

Being emotionally involved and attached to praise and good reputation  opens
the door for us to enter the lower realms so our attachment  to  praise  and
good reputation is the same as being attached to wanting to go to the  lower
realms and suffering. As such,  the  person  who  harms  our  attachment  to
praise and good reputation is in some ways like the Buddha in person  coming
right in front of us and stopping us from entering the door that  will  lead
us to the lower realms.

So the person who hurts our attachment to material  gain,  praise  and  good
reputation is the one who closes the door to the lower  realms  for  us.  As
such, that person who we usually  view  to  be  the  harm-doer  is  in  fact
someone who is kind and helpful. Therefore it is inappropriate to  be  angry
with that person.

Up to this section here in this chapter, the text  deals  with  how  we  can
work with the eight worldly dharmas; in particular, our  attachment  to  the
twelve  desirable  objects.  Because  of  our  attachment  to  these  twelve
desirable situations or objects, we get upset  when  something  comes  along
that stops us from achieving  those  things.  We  have  now  completed  this
section.

So far we have dealt with the reasons why it is inappropriate for us  to  be
upset with those situations or people who interfere with  us  achieving  the
things that we are attached to. Having said that, we may  still  think  that
there are situations where we are justified to be upset and angry. One  such
situation is being upset with  those  who  interfere  with  us  accumulating
merit.

2.  IT IS UNREASONABLE TO BE FURIOUS WITH THAT WHICH HINDERS MERIT

  A.  It is unreasonable to be furious because merit has been hindered
     1.  One should abide by the supreme austerity
     Verse 6.102
     Saying, “This hinders my merit,”
     With him too it is incorrect to be angry.
     If there is no fortitude similar to patience
     Should I not abide in that?

People may think that if their livelihood or the source of material gain  is
harmed, somehow their standard of living  will  also  be  harmed.  They  are
prevented from getting more material resources and so they will not be  able
to practise as much generosity as they would like.

If somebody comes along and obstructs  their  business,  they  think,  “With
less material resources, now I have less  money  to  be  generous,  to  make
offerings and also to save up to prepare for my retreat in the future.  This
person is actually harming me and stopping me from doing  my  practice.  I’m
not unreasonable in being upset with him.”  So there is  some  justification
for you to be upset. If this is what you think, then the  response  to  that
is as follows.

In the beginning of this chapter, we have already discussed  the  faults  of
anger. We have also already covered the many benefits  of  patience.  It  is
patience that overcomes anger.  As one of the earlier verses said, there  is
no fortitude like patience (V. 6.2) and  the  practice  of  patience  brings
about so many benefits. Of course the virtue that  is  associated  with  the
practice of patience is also very strong.

Since there is no fortitude like patience, no virtue that is  comparable  to
patience and it is truly the antidote to  anger,  then  if  you  are  really
aspiring to achieve merit, would it not be better to abide in patience  when
somebody comes and interferes with your practice of virtue?

Do you get the point? The point is that people always  justify  being  upset
in  certain  situations  because  their  practice   of   virtue   is   being
interrupted.  Since we want merit and  we  like  virtue  so  much,  then  we
should abide in patience because that will give us the greatest merit.

     2. If that acts as a hindrance, you yourself will become an obstacle to
        merit
     Verse 6.103
     If by my own fault
     I am not patient with this,
     Then it is only I myself hindering
     Involvement in the cause of merit.

If you are greatly upset and  end  up  not  practising  patience  while  the
object is there  for  you  to  do  so,  then  it  is  you  yourself  who  is
obstructing yourself from achieving the very strong virtue  and  merit  that
comes from practising patience. The person who you usually think of  as  the
enemy obstructing you from practising virtue is in fact not  an  obstruction
at all.

  B. It is not a hindrance to merit.
     1.  A general presentation
     Verse 6.104
     If without it something does not occur
     And if with it, it does come to be,
     Then since this would be the cause of it,
     How can I call it “a hindrance”?

The existence of the enemy or the harm-doer is an  indispensable  cause  and
condition for the practice of patience  for  without  their  existence,  one
would not be able to practise patience. As such, one will  not  be  able  to
reap the benefits that come from practising patience.

Therefore this verse is saying that the enemy or the  harm-doer  is  not  an
obstruction to virtue. Rather this person is very helpful for  the  practice
of virtue for without the enemy or the harm-doer, there is no cause for  the
practice of patience.

     2. Establishing that by an analogy
     Verse 6.105
     A beggar who came at the time
     Was not a hindrance to generosity,
     And I cannot say that those who give ordination
     Are hindrances to becoming ordained.

Let’s say you really have something to give  and  from  your  own  side  you
really want to practise generosity. You are enthusiastic  about  giving.  In
that situation, if a beggar come along and asks you for something, you  will
not think that the beggar is an obstacle or hindrance to  your  practice  of
generosity.

Likewise for those who wish to be ordained, there is  the  requirement  that
the abbot presiding over the ordination, the acharya, needs  to  be  present
in order for the ordination to take place and to be valid.  So  for  someone
who wants to be  ordained,  the  acharya  is  not  an  obstacle  to  getting
ordained.

So the point is that for someone  who  wants  to  gather  virtue  and  merit
through the practice of patience, the enemy  or  the  harm-doer  is  not  an
obstacle. The essence of this section is that the  enemy  or  the  harm-doer
who obstructs us from accumulating merit is in fact not  an  obstruction  at
all. The teachings state that we should put aside viewing the enemy or harm-
doer as an obstruction for us to accumulate merit. In fact, we  should  look
upon him with respect. Here the teachings state that the enemy or the  harm-
doer is in fact special objects who are indeed very rare.

  C. Reflecting on it as an object one ought to have respect for
     1.  As it is something that  acts  to  develop  qualities,  one  should
        respect it
        A. Its benefits for oneself are great
          1.  The rarity of the special field
      Verse 6.106
      There are indeed beggars in this world,
      But rare are those who inflict harm;
      If I have not harmed others
      Few beings will cause me harm.

What do you think? Are there more beggars or more enemies?

Khen Rinpoche: If somebody were to ask you, do you meet more beggars  or  do
you have more enemies, what is your answer?

Student: More beggars.

Khen Rinpoche: Why?

Student: I seldom harm people.

Khen Rinpoche: Good.

For those who are real practitioners of bodhicitta, I  guess  they  find  it
rare to encounter enemies. In this context here, we are  talking  about  the
real  bodhisattvas.  Because  the  real  bodhisattvas  don’t  harm   others,
generally speaking, they are unlikely to have enemies  or  people  who  give
them trouble. As such,  the  enemy  becomes  a  very  rare  object  for  the
bodhisattvas. They find it rare to have objects that enable them to  further
enhance their practice of patience. Generally  speaking,  anything  that  is
hard to come by in this world is usually  considered  more  precious.  Since
the enemies are rare, then it is appropriate to like them.

          2. It is reasonable to take joy in that
      Verse 6.107
      Therefore, just like a treasure appearing in my house
      Idly without me accomplishing it,
      I should be happy at the enemy
      For he assists me in my deeds of enlightenment.

Imagine a situation whereby a rare treasure that one has  been  looking  for
all along suddenly appears on its own accord without  any  effort  on  one’s
part. One would only feel happy in  these  circumstances.  In  general,  the
bodhisattvas have great  difficulty  finding  people  to  practise  patience
with.  For these bodhisattvas, because the enemy appears to them,  they  are
able to really practise the perfection of patience  and  are  then  able  to
bring their practice of the perfection of patience to completion. For  these
bodhisattvas then, the enemy is really like a rare treasure.

Next it is appropriate to have the thought of benefiting the enemy.

          3. It is reasonable to adopt the attitude that it is beneficial
      Verse 6.108
      Because I am able to practice this,
      He is worthy of being the very first to be given
      The fruit of my patience,
      For in this way he is the cause of it.

I guess this verse is like a dedication of the merit. The existence  of  the
enemy is an indispensable condition for the practice  of  patience.  If  one
practices patience, then one is able  to  accumulate  the  merit  of  having
practised patience. Then one will  experience  the  benefits  of  practising
patience. Due to the practice of patience, one dedicates the fruit  of  that
practice of patience—whatever one achieves  including  enlightenment—to  the
enemy or harm-doer who  is  the  condition  that  enables  one  to  practise
patience in the first place.

There is a story of two persons by the names  of  Lama  Serkengpa  and  Lama
Ngai Thubten. Lama Ngai Thubten was the guru of Lama  Serkengpa.  Lama  Ngai
Thubten,  who  was  a  bandit  chief,  took  all  the  material  possessions
belonging to Lama Serkengpa. As  a  result,  Lama  Serkengpa  lost  all  his
power, prestige and wealth.

I guess prior to being deprived and robbed  of  all  his  possessions,  Lama
Serkengpa was someone who was very powerful with  great  prestige  and  high
position in society. Because he was deprived of all his  power,  wealth  and
status in society, he decided to go  into  isolation  and  live  a  life  of
austerity. It was because of going into isolation retreat that he  was  able
to really engage in pure Dharma practice.  As  a  result,  he  was  able  to
develop experiences of the path. Thus Lama Serkengpa was  very  appreciative
of Lama Ngai Thubten, regarding him to be very kind.

The point is that our usual view of the enemy or the harm-doer  as  bad  and
unhelpful is not really correct if we think about it.  Rather  than  viewing
the enemy or the harm-doer as an obstruction to our practice of  virtue,  in
actual fact if we know how to think, that person is  actually  very  helpful
to us and  is  an  essential  condition  for  our  practice  of  virtue.  In
particular, if we want to practise patience, then the  enemy  or  the  harm-
doer is really very helpful. As such, for people who have  accomplished  the
practice of patience, they dedicate all the benefit that they  received  and
the merit that they have gained to that enemy.

Of course we will still object to this by saying, “Why should I respect  the
enemy? He is not deserving of my respect. He is  not  worthy  of  me  paying
homage and making offerings to him just because he is the condition  for  me
to practise patience. This is because  he  doesn’t  have  the  intention  to
benefit  me  and  to  help  me  practise  patience.  He  has  no  motivation
whatsoever to benefit me in any way. So why should I  venerate  and  respect
him?”
The response to that is stated in Verse 6.109.

        B. It is not reliant upon having reflected upon the qualities
          1. It does not cease to be an object  worthy  of  offerings  just
             because one does  not  have  the  attitude  that  it  benefits
             oneself
      Verse 6.109
      OBJECTION: Why should this enemy be venerated,
      Since he has no intention for me to practice patience?
      RESPONSE: Then why venerate the sacred Dharma
      That is a fit cause for practice?

We  usually  think,  “Yes,  I  need  the  enemy  to  practise  patience  but
nevertheless I don’t have to venerate him. I don’t have to  respect  him.  I
don’t have to see him in that way. I don’t have to  make  offerings  to  him
because from his side, he doesn’t have any intention  to  help  me  practise
patience nor does he have any intention to  benefit  me.  Since  he  has  no
intention to benefit me, there is no reason for me to venerate him and  make
offerings to him.” This is what we think.

If that is what we think, then if we were asked,  “Should  you  respect  the
Dharma? Should you make offerings to the  Dharma?”  We  would  probably  say
yes.

But does the Dharma have any intention to  benefit  us?  The  Dharma  Jewel,
true paths and true cessations, benefit us when we achieve  them.  But  from
the side of true paths and true cessations, they do not have the  motivation
to benefit or to help us. If that is the case, then why do we  venerate  the
Dharma? So that is the argument.

Of course we want to have the last say. We agree  but  we  respond  in  this
way, “Fine, but there is still a big difference. Yes,  the  Dharma  may  not
have the intention  to  benefit  me  but  at  least,  it  doesn’t  have  the
intention to harm me. The enemy not only does  not  have  any  intention  to
benefit me, he has every intention of harming me.” Our objection  is  stated
in Verse 6.110.

          2. It does not cease to be an object  worthy  of  offerings  just
             because one has the attitude that it is harmful to oneself
      Verse 6.110
      OBJECTION: Since he intends to cause me harm,
      He is not to be venerated.
      RESPONSE: If, like a doctor, someone strives to benefit me
      Then how can I practice patience?

The enemy is an object suitable to be venerated because he is an  object  of
observation for the cultivation of patience.

          3. Thus, as it acts as a focal  condition  for  patience,  it  is
             worthy as an object of offerings
      Verse 6.111
      Thus since patience is produced
      In dependence upon a very hateful mind,
      He is a cause of patience,
      Whereby he is worthy of veneration just like the sacred Dharma.

We cannot practise  patience  and  bring  that  practice  to  completion  in
dependence on somebody who has loving concern for us. One can only  practise
patience and bring the practice to completion  in  dependence  upon  someone
who is harming us, i.e., someone who has harmful intentions towards us,  who
is angry at us. Although the enemy does not have any  intention  to  benefit
us, nevertheless, without the enemy as the cause and condition, there is  no
way we can practise patience and  bring  that  practice  to  completion.  As
such, the enemy is worthy of veneration.

Khen Rinpoche: This patience chapter never  seem  to  finish.  I  commit  to
finishing the patience chapter  by  Thursday.  I  have  to  commit  to  this
otherwise I  will  never  finish  this  chapter.  Chapter  seven  on  joyous
perseverance, maybe I will go as fast as possible, just reading the  verses.


We like to be in various desirable situations and we like to  have  material
gain, fame, reputation and praise. In  short,  we  are  really  attached  to
these eight worldly dharmas. When we get what we don’t  want  and  we  don’t
get what we want, then we get mighty upset. For most of us,  our  minds  are
usually disturbed on a daily basis because of our attachment to  the  things
that we want. We are also attached to disliking the  things  that  we  don’t
want. Because of that, every day there is a lot of  mental  disturbance  and
upheaval that cause us to be very unhappy and which in turn  lead  to  anger
and so forth.

The many verses in this chapter tell us  the  reasons  why  it  is  actually
inappropriate and incorrect to be upset over such things. What  we  need  to
do is to look through these verses slowly, think about them on our  own  and
to reflect on them in order to reap the benefit.

As I said earlier, the material we have covered  so  far  is  intellectually
not challenging at all. It is so straightforward. There is nothing  that  we
don’t understand. There aren’t any new  words  or  terms  that  we  are  not
familiar with. The verses are easy to understand.

The only difficult thing is putting them into  practice.  We  only  have  to
practise them. We just have to look  at  them  on  a  regular  basis,  going
through the verses slowly, thinking about them and reflecting  on  them.  We
need to get familiar with the ideas that are mentioned in this text  and  to
familiarise ourselves with these logical and correct ways of thinking.

There may be some people who are  looking  for  intellectual  challenge.  If
this is so, they have got it wrong. Some people  think,  “This  is  an  easy
text. There is nothing intellectually challenging about it.” Because  it  is
easy, as such, their interest in the text and their determination  to  study
it are lessened. That is incorrect.

The challenge here is not in understanding the  meaning  of  the  text.  The
point here is not about studying it. The point here is about practising  it.
The  challenge  here  is  to  internalise  what  we  have   learnt   through
reflection. That is the challenge.
What is this particular section that we have just covered driving at? It  is
trying to make one consistent point—that the enemy or the harm-doer  is  not
an obstruction for us. In fact, he is our benefactor, somebody who  is  very
kind and very useful for us. That is the thesis that we  need  to  prove  to
our own mind. It is only through constant reflection and thinking over  time
that we can move our mind slowly in that direction, to change our  own  view
of those people in our lives who we dislike or who give  us  problems.  That
is what we need to do for ourselves.

Khen Rinpoche: Are you now challenged by that?

So many reasons are put forth to challenge our  old  and  familiar  idea  of
seeing the enemy as completely bad, as an obstruction to us  in  every  way.
We just have to follow the reasoning given and  familiarise  ourselves  with
them so as to move our mind away from the old way of looking at  the  enemy.
Instead we should move towards seeing that person as somebody  who  is  very
kind, beneficial, helpful and useful to us.

The great bodhisattva, Shantideva, has put up  many  reasons  to  prove  his
point that the enemy is not an obstruction but rather,  the  enemy  is  very
kind. We have to look at the  arguments  that  he  has  put  forth.  If  you
disagree and object to any of his arguments, you can always bring it up.


Interpreted by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme; transcribed by Phuah  Soon  Ek,  Patricia
Lee & Julia Koh; edited by Cecilia Tsong.






