Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Engaging in the Deeds of a Bodhisattva/BP2 M5 L44 final.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:52:14.578160
================================================================================


Transcript of the teachings by Khen Rinpoche Geshe  Chonyi  on  Engaging  in
the Bodhisattva Deeds, 2014

Root text: Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds by  Shantideva,  translated  by
Toh Sze Gee. Copyright: Toh Sze Gee, 2006; Revised edition, 2014.

Lesson  44                                                                14
August 2014


Chapter seven: Verses 7. 31–7. 39
Increasing the strength of joyous effort—the antidote (V. 7.16 – V. 7. 30)
A. Increasing the strength of the conditions conducive to joyous effort
   1. Brief presentation (V. 7.31 – 7.32)
   2. Extensive explanation (V. 7.33 – 7.39)


We have identified what exactly joyous effort (or joyous  perseverance)  is.
We have also looked at the discordant classes of joyous  effort,  which  are
essentially the three types of lazinesses and some of  their  antidotes.  We
have finished with that.

Next is increasing the power of  joyous  effort  that  is  the  antidote  to
laziness.

INCREASING THE STRENGTH OF JOYOUS EFFORT —THE ANTIDOTE

A.  Increasing the strength of the conditions conducive to joyous effort
      1.  Brief presentation by means of identifying the four powers
First there is a brief presentation  on  the  four  powers,  which  are  the
favourable conditions for increasing joyous effort.

      Verse 7.31
      The army for the sake of accomplishing the welfare of sentient beings
      Are interest[1], steadfastness, joy, and relinquishment.
      Interest is developed through fear of suffering
      And contemplating its benefits.


      Verse 7.32
      Thus I shall abandon its discordant classes
      And make effort in order to increase joyous effort
      Through the powers of interest, pride, joy, and relinquishment,
      Diligence and mastery.

The favourable conditions for generating joyous effort are said  to  be  the
four powers:
1. The power of aspiration (or the power of esteem)
2. The power of steadfastness (or the power of stability)
3. The power of joy
4. The power of relinquishment (or the power of suspension)
The power of aspiration literally  is  the  power  of  belief  but  in  this
context it is referring to aspiration. In this  context,  aspiration  refers
to the yearning for practice, the yearning for  the  Dharma.  Such  yearning
for the practice and yearning for the Dharma is produced through  developing
the faith of conviction in karma and its effects.

The  power  of  steadfastness:  The  teachings  advise  us  that  prior   to
undertaking any practice, we should carry out a  thorough  investigation  as
to see why we are doing it, whether we can actually do  it  and  whether  we
can bring it to completion. The point is to develop a stable aspiration  for
the practice. We need to be steadfast.

The power of joy literally refers to the joy and  the  liking  for  whatever
practice you have decided to carry out. So when  you  are  engaging  in  the
practice, you do it with very strong yearning and without any wish  to  stop
doing it. The example is given of children playing games. When children  are
playing games, they never want to stop. They just want to  continue  on  and
on. Likewise when it comes  to  applying  joyous  effort,  whatever  we  are
practising, we should do it with a sense of joy  and  without  any  wish  to
stop the practice.

The power of relinquishment:  As I have  said  before,  in  the  process  of
applying joyous effort  in  engaging  in  practice  or  virtue,  we  do  get
exhausted and tired at times. So it is important to take  a  rest  with  the
view of carrying on after we have rested. After we have rested, we  continue
with whatever we had set out to do.

“Thus I shall abandon its discordant classes”:  The  discordant  classes  of
joyous effort are lazinesses of which there are three types.
1. There are people who can and  know  that  they  can  actually  engage  in
   virtue but nevertheless they do not  do  so.  That  is  the  laziness  of
   procrastination (or the laziness that relishes the taste of idleness).
2. There are some who want to engage in virtue but they feel that  they  are
   unable to do so. They feel hopeless and discouraged for whatever  reason.
   So that is a form of laziness that is the laziness of discouragement  (or
   the laziness that is disheartened about virtue).
3. The last laziness is the  laziness  of  being  attached  to  inferior  or
   ignoble  activities  (or  the  laziness  that   clings   to   unwholesome
   activities).

In order to develop joyous effort,  we  need  to  abandon  these  discordant
classes and we need to rely on the  four  powers  that  are  the  favourable
conditions for the generation and the increase of joyous effort.

In the process of engaging in whatever practice  or  virtue,  that  practice
must be done with mindfulness and introspection. There comes the  time  when
one achieves the concentration that makes one’s body  and  mind  serviceable
for virtue—that is, one achieves meditative  serenity  or  calm-abiding  and
the pliancy of the body and mind—one will be able to engage effortlessly  in
the practice of virtue or Dharma day and night. This is because  one’s  body
and mind have already been made serviceable.

Right from the very beginning of any practice or cultivation of any  virtue,
you need to be thoroughly convinced of the benefits of  that  practice  that
you are going to engage  in.  This  is  faith,  i.e.,  a  conviction  or  an
ascertainment  with  the  understanding  that  the  practice  or  virtue  is
beneficial.

For example, if someone hopes to actualise  concentration,  right  from  the
beginning before engaging in the practices that will  help  him  to  achieve
that concentration, he must first understand thoroughly  what  concentration
is. He must have confidence and belief in  the  benefits  of  concentration,
that when he achieves it one day, these are  the  benefits  that  he  really
wants.  He  needs  that  conviction  and  the  confidence  right  from   the
beginning.

With regard to whatever virtue that  you  want  to  cultivate  and  whatever
practice that you want to do, if you have that  faith  of  conviction  right
from the beginning—you are able to see what  is  in  it  for  you  when  you
actualise that practice—that will form the basis  for  your  yearning.  That
faith, understanding and confidence in the  benefit  of  the  practice  will
drive your aspiration and yearning for that practice.

With the strong heartfelt yearning to achieve whatever  goal  you  have  set
for yourself, only then do you start with the  practice.  It  is  only  then
that you will apply joyous effort in the practice  that  will  lead  you  to
your goal. With the faith of  conviction  that  leads  to  strong  yearning,
this, in turn, leads to the start of actually applying joyous effort.

With the continuous application of such joyous effort directed to  achieving
the single-pointedness of mind whereby the practitioner aims to achieve  the
concentration that makes his body and mind serviceable, he will be  able  to
achieve that single-pointed concentration. From then onwards,  because  that
practitioner’s body and mind are made serviceable,  he  is  never  tired  of
engaging in virtue and practice. Then his progress  will  sky  rocket.  Such
practitioners will never find it difficult  to  engage  in  virtue  day  and
night. They do not experience tiredness.

Within that single-pointed concentration, the practitioner then goes  on  to
cultivate wisdom, in particular  the  wisdom  that  perceives  the  ultimate
nature of reality, the wisdom realizing selflessness, which is the  antidote
that will enable him to cut the very root  of  all  problems,  the  root  of
samsara. These are the essential points.

Let us look at the discussion of aspiration in the context of the  mind  and
awareness, as covered in one of the earlier modules where we looked  at  the
workings of the consciousness. Within  the  study  of  the  mental  factors,
there are  51  mental  factors,  which  are  then  divided  into  groups  of
different mental factors. There is a group of mental factors that is  called
the five object-ascertaining mental factors.

The first of the five  object-ascertaining  mental  factors  is  the  mental
factor of aspiration, essentially a mind  that  is  yearning  for  a  chosen
object, whatever the object  may  be.  If  we  are  differentiating  between
aspiration and belief, then we do not take aspiration and belief to  be  the
same mental factor.

In the context of studying the mental factors, in the group of  the  object-
ascertaining mental factors, the mental factor after aspiration  is  belief.
What is belief? Belief is essentially an  ascertainment  of  the  object  in
question, a valid cognition. That means it is  a  valid  establishment  from
one’s own side, i.e., one’s mind has gained certainty with  regard  to  that
object, “It is really like this and is not like that.” That  is  why  it  is
called belief.

With respect to the chosen object, you have understood it correctly.  It  is
not just a superficial understanding but a  thorough  understanding  of  the
chosen object that you have thoroughly ascertained  through  a  valid  mind.
That is belief.

What comes after belief? After you have aspiration and  belief,  then  there
is the mental factor of mindfulness. What  is  mindfulness?  Mindfulness  is
not forgetting the things that you have belief in and  not  forgetting  what
you have ascertained through valid cognition.

After you have ascertained the chosen object through  belief,  you  are  not
supposed to forget it. You have to keep it in mind. That is the  purpose  of
mindfulness. Its function is not forgetting. Based on  not  forgetting  what
you have ascertained earlier through a valid  mind,  when  that  mindfulness
becomes strong, you will be able to  focus  your  mind  single-pointedly  on
that  object.  Therefore  after  mindfulness  comes  the  mental  factor  of
concentration.

Now out of the five object-ascertaining mental  factors,  you  already  have
four—aspiration, belief, mindfulness and concentration.  The  fifth  object-
ascertaining mental factor is wisdom that is  essentially  a  mind  that  is
able to distinguish or differentiate phenomena.  There  are  many  types  of
wisdom but the wisdom that is very important is  the  wisdom  that  directly
perceives  the  ultimate  nature  of  reality—  the  wisdom  that   directly
perceives selflessness.

So these  are  the  five  object-ascertaining  mental  factors.  It  is  not
sufficient just to be able to list them out. You have to understand them  as
they are the workings of your own mind.  You  have  to  understand  how  one
leads to the other, starting  with  aspiration,  then  belief,  mindfulness,
concentration and wisdom.

Verses 7.31 and 7.32 are the brief presentation of the four powers.

      2. Extensive explanation
          A. The power of aspiration (or the power of esteem)
Next is the extended  explanation  of  these  powers.  First  there  is  the
explanation on the power of aspiration.

Essentially Verses  7.33  and  7.34  are  telling  us  how  it  is  actually
incorrect for us not to have any aspiration to overcome our faults.

          A. The power of aspiration (or the power of esteem)
                1.  The esteemed object
                      A.   Discarding wrongdoing
      Verse 7.33
      I shall destroy
      The boundless misdeeds of others and myself.
      At that time each of these misdeeds
      Will be exhausted in an ocean of eons.


      Verse 7.34
      But if within myself I do not perceive
      Even a fraction of the endeavor for exhausting these misdeeds,
      Then I have become an abode for boundless suffering;
      Why does my heart not burst?

The context here is of someone who has  taken  the  pledge  to  achieve  the
state of full enlightenment in  order  to  accomplish  the  benefit  of  all
sentient beings. One has taken the bodhisattva vows and one has  pledged  to
eliminate the flaws and misdeeds  of  all  sentient  beings.  That  includes
eliminating one’s own faults and misdeeds.

The task of eliminating the afflictions  of  others  and  ourselves—starting
with our own afflictions—is a long term task for there are  many  afflictive
emotions. There is a saying that there are 84,000 afflictions.  It  is  said
that even eliminating one affliction will require many eons of effort.

While that is the case, the reality  is  that  we  do  not  even  possess  a
fraction of the joyous effort that is needed  to  overcome  the  affliction.
Putting aside the thought of having to  eliminate  our  afflictions  over  a
very long period of time—we  are  talking  about  eons  here—we  don’t  even
possess a fraction of the joyous effort that is needed to do that. As  such,
because of our inability to overcome our afflictive  emotions,  then  it  is
certain that we are in for boundless problems and suffering in  the  future.
That is the reality. That is our situation. If  we  think  about  this,  the
verse asks us, “Why does my heart not burst?”  It is said that if we  really
think about this and if we really understand that reality, it  is  mentioned
in the teachings that we will probably find it even difficult to breathe.

We have to understand that these two verses  here  are  meant  for  our  own
consumption in that we should use them to look at our own mind, as a way  to
evaluate ourselves. It is about  disciplining  ourselves  and  putting  down
ourselves in an appropriate way. Essentially it is  to  persuade  ourselves,
to move our heart enough to start to do something about this situation.

But not only do we not have aspiration to  overcome  our  faults,  we  don’t
even have any aspiration to acquire good qualities.

The next two verses talk about  that.  Again  it  is  a  way  of  evaluating
ourselves, a way of moving and persuading ourselves to develop the  interest
and aspiration to acquire the good qualities.

                      B.  Adopting qualities
      Verse 7.35[2]
      I shall accomplish many
      Excellent qualities for others and myself.
      And I will acquaint myself
      With each of these qualities through an ocean of eons


      Verse 7.36
      But I have never developed acquaintance
      With even a fraction of these excellences,
      How strange it is to make without purpose
      This birth I have somehow found

The context here is someone who has taken the pledge to  achieve  the  state
of full enlightenment in order to accomplish the  welfare  of  all  sentient
beings. This means that this person has taken  a  pledge  to  achieve  every
single quality of enlightenment.

The enlightenment or omniscience that we are talking about here is  a  state
of existence that possesses limitless qualities. Just to  achieve  one  good
quality requires the  collection  of  merit  for  many  eons,  without  even
talking about the rest of the limitless qualities. Putting aside  having  to
achieve  the  collection  of  merit  required  for  actualising  all   these
numberless qualities, we have not even cultivated a fraction of  the  joyous
effort needed to accumulate the collection of merit needed to  achieve  even
just one good quality of enlightenment. We  have  not  even  accomplished  a
fraction of the cause of even one good quality of enlightenment.

“How strange” or how appalling it is to have wasted so far  the  human  life
of freedoms and endowments that we have obtained. Instead of  using  it,  we
have only procrastinated accumulating those causes  for  enlightenment.  The
verse is saying “how strange” or how appalling this is.

In Nagarjuna’s Precious Garland, there is a description of  the  merit  that
is needed to achieve enlightenment.

For example, how much merit do you need to accumulate in  order  to  achieve
even just one hair-pore of the Buddha? With  regard  to  the  pores  of  the
exalted body of the Buddha, how much merit is needed to achieve one pore  of
the Buddha’s exalted body? The merit required is all the immeasurable  merit
of all sentient beings up to the level of the hearers and solitary  realiser
arhats combined and then multiplied by 10.

Khen Rinpoche: It says here how precious one pore of the Buddha is.

So that is the merit that is required to actualise one pore of the  Buddha’s
exalted body.

The Buddha’s exalted body has numberless pores. The merit that  is  required
to actualise all  the  immeasurable  pores  of  the  Buddha’s  exalted  body
multiplied by 100 times is the merit that is required to  actualise  one  of
the 80 exemplifications (or minor signs) of the Buddha’s exalted  body.  The
major  marks  and  the  minor  signs   technically   are   the   signs   and
exemplifications.

There are 80 exemplifications (or minor signs) such as the Buddha’s  copper-
coloured nails, red lips, black hair and so forth. These are  just  some  of
the exemplifications of the Buddha’s exalted body. So now you know how  much
merit is needed to actualise each of those exemplifications.

Then there are the major signs such as the image of a  dharmachakra  on  the
palms and soles of the feet of the Buddha. These are  the  illustrations  of
some of the major  signs  of  the  Buddha’s  exalted  body.  What  merit  is
required to actualise one of those major signs? The merit that  is  required
to actualise one of those major signs is all the merit that is  required  to
actualise all the exemplifications multiplied by 100 times.

The Buddha also has this particular feature called the treasure hair,  i.e.,
the hair curl that is slightly above the bridge of the nose. How much  merit
is required  to  actualise  this  particular  feature?  The  merit  that  is
acquired to actualise the treasure hair is the merit  that  is  required  to
actualise all the 32 major signs multiplied by 1000 times.

Then there is the Buddha’s crown protrusion. The merit that is  required  to
actualise the Buddha’s crown protrusion is the merit  that  is  required  to
actualise the treasure hair multiplied by 100,000 times.

Khen Rinpoche: We still haven’t finished.

The merit that is required to actualise the crown protrusion of  the  Buddha
multiplied  by  100  times  is  the  merit  that  would  bring   about   the
actualisation of the Buddha’s exalted speech.

The explanation stops there. It does  not  continue  to  mention  the  merit
required to actualise the exalted mind of the Buddha.

Let’s say—I can’t say for sure—that the  merit  required  to  actualise  the
Buddha’s exalted mind is  the  merit  that  is  required  to  actualise  the
Buddha’s speech multiplied by 100 times. That is actually  still  a  lot  of
merit.

Khen Rinpoche: What do you think? You are discouraged? Mui  Cheng  (name  of
student) said she is discouraged.

(Student’s response is not audible).

Khen Rinpoche: You are at the level of laziness.

The next two verses are kind of putting us down by highlighting to  us  that
we do not generate the aspiration  to  practise  the  Dharma  correctly  and
because of that, we do not  persuade  ourselves  to  practise  it  with  the
application of joyous effort.

                      C.  Examining the list of things to do and not to do
      Verse 7.37
      I have not made offerings to the Bhagavan,
      I have not given the pleasure of great festivals,
      I have not performed actions for the teachings,
      I have not fulfilled the wishes of the poor,


      Verse 7.38
      I have not granted fearlessness to the frightened
      And I have not given happiness to the wretched.
      All I have given rise to are
      The agonies in the mother’s womb and suffering.

Sometimes it is possible that people may feel that they  have  done  a  fair
bit, thinking: “I am not the person who has been mentioned so  far.  I  have
done a fair bit of practice.” While that is true, that kind of thinking  can
sometimes stop the person from increasing  her  joyous  effort.  At  such  a
time, one needs to remember these two verses.

Verse 7.37 is  meant  for  personal  reflection.  It  starts  off  with  the
example, saying, “I have not make offerings to the Bhagavan.”  We  have  not
actually sat down and made a proper mental offering to the Buddha.  Have  we
ever made proper offerings through mental visualisation? Have we  even  done
this properly once? When it comes  to  actually  performing  the  offerings,
have  we  procured  and  set  up  good  offerings?  Have  we  made  generous
offerings? Do we honour the sangha community with extensive offerings?

With  regard  to  the  scriptural  Dharma,  which  consists  of  the   three
scriptural collections, have we ever  listened  well  to  the  teachings  on
them? Even if you are someone who thinks that you know a  fair  bit  of  the
Buddha’s teachings, do you actually know them very  well  or  not?  Have  we
ever actually learnt the  scriptural  Dharma  properly?  Even  if  you  have
learnt it, do you actually know it well?  Then  when  it  comes  to  putting
those teachings into practice, do we even have the  practice  of  the  three
higher trainings? Do we have a good practice or do we have  any  experience?
Again these are points for personal reflection. Probably the answer is:  No!
We have not done any of these things well if at all.

Have we fulfilled the wishes of the poor? There are so many people  who  are
in need of help. Have we  done  anything  for  them?  Putting  aside  having
helped all of them, we have not even offered anything to these people.

Have we ever granted help or fearlessness to those who  are  frightened  and
to those whose lives are in danger? Have we saved the lives of  others?  For
example, when we walk down the road and see some sentient beings or  insects
in danger—people often ignore such situations—it is almost as if  we  didn’t
even see anything at all although we did see it. We continue to walk on  and
continue to do whatever we were doing.

This is meant for personal reflection. It may  appear  that  you  are  doing
some practice and you may think that you are doing quite well. But when  you
actually sit down and examine your practice honestly,  there  is  almost  no
practice that you can point to as having been done well. As such, your  life
has been wasted. It would seem that your coming into  existence  is  nothing
more than for the purpose of causing pain and suffering to your mother.

You must understand that you should use all  the  advice  given  so  far  to
generate enthusiasm and the strong aspiration to do better. You  should  not
take the advice as a means to feel discouraged  or  to  put  yourself  down.
That is not the point.

Khen  Rinpoche:  Is  the  advice  beneficial  or  harmful?  You  feel   more
discouraged?

                2. The effect
                      A.   It is unreasonable  to  abandon  esteem  for  the
Dharma
It is not appropriate to give up one’s aspiration for the dharma.


      Verse 7.39
      If in the past and even now
      Such deprivation are arising
      Because of my lack of interest in the Dharma,[3]
      Who would reject this interest in the Dharma?

Verse 7.39 is talking about how it is wrong to give up  our  aspiration  for
the Dharma. In all our past lives, because  of  this  lack  of  yearning  or
aspiration for the Dharma, we hadn’t actualised it. Similarly in this  life,
because of our lack of real yearning for the  Dharma,  we  have  not  really
practised it. As such, in our past lives all the way till now, we have  only
experienced the problems and suffering of samsara. It is  mentioned  in  the
teachings that we are like dogs looking at grass.  Just  as  a  dog  is  not
interested in grass so even though we  have  met  the  Dharma,  we  have  no
yearning for it. We don’t really want it.

Khen Rinpoche: Yes? No? Do you have yearning for the Dharma?

We have to be honest with ourselves and examine how we  feel.  Are  we  like
the dog looking at grass? How much of the Dharma do we really  want?  Do  we
want the Dharma or not? Do we yearn for it or not?   That  is  the  question
that we all have to ask ourselves.

What is the essential point that this verse is driving at? For  someone  who
has the intelligence and the ability to discriminate well and  at  the  same
time looking for real long-term  everlasting  happiness,  that  person  will
never give up the Dharma.

What is the reason for being inappropriate for us giving up  our  aspiration
for the Dharma? The reason is that the  Buddha,  the  Subduer,  himself  has
said that aspiration is the root of every class of virtue.

I mentioned earlier that before you actually want to engage  in  anything—in
this context, virtue, Dharma or the cause of happiness—first you have to  be
thoroughly convinced of the benefits. You must be thoroughly convinced  with
respect to  the  goal  you  are  aiming  at  and  that  conviction  must  be
heartfelt. Thorough conviction is faith.

Based on this faith of conviction, you then  yearn  for  that  object,  i.e.
whatever you have faith in. It is only when you have this yearning that  the
practice begins because your yearning will start you off.  Therefore  it  is
said that aspiration, which is yearning, is  the  root  of  every  class  of
virtue.
 • If you have a very strong aspiration or yearning for the Dharma, then you
   will become a strong and good practitioner.
 • If your yearning for the Dharma is average, then you will end  up  as  an
   average practitioner.
 • If your yearning for the Dharma is below average or  mediocre,  you  will
   end up as a mediocre practitioner.

You must want the Dharma from your heart. That is what we call  yearning  or
aspiration. That kind of yearning for the Dharma is not something that  just
drops from the sky, i.e., most people are not born wanting the  Dharma  from
their own side. That is not the case for most people.

But without yearning, you are not going to  have  joyous  perseverance.  You
are not going to have any virtue. The question now is: How  do  you  produce
this yearning? How do you make yourself want the Dharma?

You have to start with education, learning  about  the  teachings,  thinking
about them and critically analysing them. That is how you  start.   What  is
the cause of aspiration or this heartfelt yearning for the  Dharma?  How  do
you produce it? What is its root? Its root is  the  constant  meditation  on
the fruitional effects of karma.

The way to produce yearning for the Dharma  is  to  reflect  and  understand
well the presentation of cause and effect and in particular, karma  and  its
consequences. In particular, it  is  about  understanding  and  finding  the
conviction that certain actions would  definitely  produce  certain  results
and other actions  would  produce  other  kinds  of  results.  The  root  of
yearning for the Dharma lies in that faith of conviction.

Acquiring this  faith  of  conviction  in  karma  and  its  consequences  is
therefore indispensable. Everything boils down to that. Whether one is  able
to practise and practise well  or  not,  it  all  boils  down  to  how  much
conviction one has in karma and its effects. In order to develop  that,  one
has to really understand the workings of karma and its consequences such  as
the general characteristics of karma—karma is definite,  karma  is  certain,
karma increases, one will not meet with the results of karma  that  one  did
not do and the result of the karma that one has done  would  not  perish  on
its own accord.

Gyaltsab Je said, “If one has not ascertained and  developed  conviction  in
the karma and its consequences, then one has not found  the  realisation  of
the Dharma that will please the buddhas.”

We have heard these teachings many times. We have heard them before  and  we
are still hearing them. But that hardly does anything for  us.  So  that  is
not enough. We have to sit down and meditate, i.e., critically  analyse  the
teachings until we gain a conviction in them. We should ask ourselves,  “How
much faith in karma do I really have? Do  I  have  any  faith  at  all?  How
strong is that faith?”
It is said there are people who claim  they  have  realised  emptiness,  the
ultimate nature of reality, yet at the same time when you look at  how  they
behave, they act and talk as if karma does not exist; that  is  one  of  the
signs that that person does not have such a realisation. He  has  completely
understood the teachings  wrongly  and  has  no  realisation  whatsoever  of
emptiness.

Actually the situation should be this: If you  are  talking  about  somebody
who has a really good understanding of the ultimate  nature  of  reality—the
emptiness  of  inherent  existence—the   stronger   his   understanding   of
emptiness, the stronger his appreciation of cause and effect will be.

The  meaning  of  emptiness  is  the  meaning  of  dependent   arising,   in
particular, subtle dependent arising. Before  you  can  hope  to  understand
subtle dependent arising, first you must understand  the  coarser  level  of
dependent arising without which there is no way you  can  understand  subtle
dependent arising. Those people who claim that they have some  understanding
of emptiness and have realised it but at the  same  time  do  not  give  any
consideration at  all  to  karma  and  its  consequences,  then  you  should
understand  that  that  person  has  a  completely  wrong  understanding  of
emptiness.

                                 ~~~~~~~~~~~

Question: This is relates to Verse 7.34  to  7.36,  which  are  supposed  to
encourage us to generate joyous effort by  showing  us  the  faults  of  the
practices we had done. How do we keep a proper balance between  not  putting
ourselves down so much that we give up and  at  the  same  time  not  to  be
discouraged? How do we manage this at the emotional  level?  At  the  mental
level, they are easy to understand.

Khen Rinpoche: When you hear these three verses, you feel some emotion?  You
really feel that?

It  happens  to  some  people  that  when  they  think   about   death   and
impermanence, they become discouraged. That has  never  been  the  point  or
purpose behind meditating  on  death  and  impermanence.  In  fact,  if  you
meditate on death and impermanence, it gives you strength and  determination
to think, “I must do something right now. I can do something about it and  I
must start right now.” That should be the message  that  people  should  get
when they look at death and impermanence.

When you look at those Verses 7.34, 7.35 and 7.36,  you  get  a  message  of
discouragement or a message of hope?

The purpose  and  the  end  result  of  reflecting  on  our  own  death  and
impermanence are to give us strength and determination. It is  a  completely
different matter if we don’t know how to think  about  it  or  if  we  think
about it in a wrong way. If you think about it  correctly,  the  result  you
get is that it gives you real strength and determination.

The meditation on death and impermanence is not directed at everybody.  This
advice is directed at and is meant for people who are  sincerely  interested
about their long- term future. This advice is directed  at  people  who  are
looking beyond this life.  It  is  directed  at  people  who  are  seriously
thinking about what is going to happen to them in their future lives. It  is
also directed at people who are  looking  for  something  better,  a  higher
level or order of happiness.

As in all Buddhist practices, this  meditation  on  death  and  impermanence
does not stand on its own. It is part of the components  of  an  overarching
practice. Everything is linked together. You must be able  to  situate  each
practice within the entire practice. It  is  not  a  stand-alone  thing.  As
such, there is the advice that one has to balance one’s reflection on  death
and impermanence with the reflection on  the  human  life  of  freedoms  and
endowments. People who  get  it  wrong  will  be  depressed  or  discouraged
because they think too much of death and impermanence.  Then  they  have  to
balance that reflection with the reflection on this human life  of  freedoms
and endowments. This is mentioned in the lam-rim.

You have to apply that understanding to this situation as well.  You  cannot
take these three verses out of context. You have to situate them within  the
whole context. I don’t think that just superficially looking at these  three
verses you will get discouraged  or  depressed.  I  don’t  think  that  will
really happen.

But if you really think about it, in the earlier part of the chapter,  there
is a discussion on how fortunate we are to have this human life of  freedoms
and endowments, if we work at it, then there is no reason why we  cannot  be
enlightened and so forth. You have to combine everything  together  and  not
look at these verses as a stand-alone piece of advice.

It is the same with this: We are advised to work non-stop  and  continuously
with joyous effort like a flow of river. When people take  that  advice  out
of context, then people will say, “Practise non-stop? I  will  surely  die.”
This is thinking out of context.

If they know the whole picture, they would know that there is the  power  of
relinquishment. So when you need to rest, you rest at the appropriate  time.
If you understand the whole context, then that should not  be  any  problem.
There will be no worries at all.


Interpreted by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme; transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek,  Vivien  Ng
& Rachel Tan; edited by Cecilia Tsong.

-----------------------
[1] Ven. Gyurme interpreted “interest” as “aspiration.”
[2] Alternative interpretation by Ven. Gyurme: “I will accomplish  numerous/
Good qualities for myself and others. /  To  cultivate  each  good  quality/
Requires an ocean of eons.”

[3] Ven Gyurme: It should be, “aspiration in the Dharma,”  as  “interest  in
the Dharma” sounds too weak.


