Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Engaging in the Deeds of a Bodhisattva/BP2 M5 L14 final.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:52:13.376730
================================================================================


Transcript of the teachings by Khen Rinpoche Geshe  Chonyi  on  Engaging  in
the Bodhisattva Deeds, 2014

Root text: Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds by  Shantideva,  translated  by
Toh Sze Gee. Copyright: Toh Sze Gee, 2006; Revised edition, 2014.

Lesson                                                                    14
25 March 2014


Meditating on guru devotion. More on the eon of abiding. Chapter Three:
Verses 3.21-3.32.       Training the mind that gives away the body,
material wealth and roots of virtue (cont’d). The actual. Concluding
actions.


MEDITATING ON GURU DEVOTION

I have already talked about the meditation program. For  those  of  you  who
have committed yourself to it, this is just a reminder  that  the  topic  of
meditation for now is correctly relying on the virtuous friend.

Sometimes it is helpful to memorise certain scriptural citations as a  basis
for meditating on the topic. For example, there  is  this  verse  by  Gyalwa
Ensapa that says:

      In brief:
      Your experiences and realisations will be great or small
      Just as your familiarity with faith is great or small.
      Your kind guru is the source of siddhis.
      Contemplate his qualities and ignore his faults.
      Hold his instructions in your palm,
      And promise to keep them to the last.[1]


It is the same when you look at the first verse of  The  Foundation  of  All
Good Qualities:

      The foundation of all good qualities is the perfect pure guru.
      Correct devotion to him is the root of the path.
      By clearing seeing this and applying great effort
      Please bless me to rely upon him with great respect.

Meditating on this topic of correctly relying  on  the  virtuous  friend  is
mainly cultivating faith in the virtuous friend and the guru.

One may then ask, “What is the sign of having faith in the  guru?  How  does
one know whether one has faith in the guru?”
This is what I think: when you are reprimanded or scolded by  the  guru  and
you are able to see that reprimand  or  scolding  as  the  recitation  of  a
wrathful mantra, perhaps this is a sign that you have faith in the  virtuous
friend. I remember the master Padampa Sangye said this. He  also  said  that
to be hit by the guru is like receiving an empowerment. When you receive  an
empowerment, you generate the thought that such  and  such  an  obstacle  or
hindrance is removed.  It is said that getting hit or struck by the guru  is
like receiving an empowerment that clears away your obstacles.

Of course, this only applies when the guru is a valid  qualified  guru.  The
qualified guru is the  destroyer  of  our  three  mental  poisons—ignorance,
anger  and  attachment—and  our  self-cherishing  attitude.   This  is   the
function of the guru.

The disciple or student also has to be qualified.

But in this day  and  age,  it  is  extremely  difficult  to  find  a  truly
qualified guru and it is also extremely rare to have qualified students.  In
this day and age, students consider:
 • gurus who hurt their self-cherishing to be bad
 • gurus who support their self-cherishing to be good
 • gurus whose wishes accord with their own wishes to be good
 • gurus whose instructions do not accord with their own wishes to be bad

What I think is that these days the roles  of  the  guru  and  student  have
reversed. Essentially, the student becomes the guru of the guru.

Khen Rinpoche: When you think about this very carefully, it has become  like
that.

These days, in the way they act and speak,  the  gurus  have  to  take  into
consideration how the students may think and feel.  Nowadays,  it  has  come
to  a  point  when  the  guru  cannot  even  speak  directly,  honestly  and
truthfully to the students. In reality that should not be the case.

In the context of a qualified guru:
 • When one has faith, one will be able to follow the advice given  by  the
   guru and there is no difficulty in following such advice.
 • When one has faith, being reprimanded or scolded by the  guru  does  not
   become an issue or problem.
 • When one has faith,  not  only  would  one  not  feel  bad  about  being
   reprimanded or scolded but instead one feels happy because one sees that
   one’s fault or mistake has been exposed and therefore one can change.

It is only through such a process that one can  progress,  change  and  gain
realisations.

Therefore this particular verse by Gyalwa Ensapa is very effective  for  the
mind. You should memorise it and use it  as  a  basis  for  reflection,  “In
brief: Your experiences and realisations will  be  great  or  small/Just  as
your familiarity with faith is great or small.”

This is something you have to figure out for yourself. It all boils down  to
faith. You have to see for yourself that your  own  level  of  progress  and
attainment is commensurate with your  faith  and  how  when  you  have  more
faith, you will profit more.  This is something for you to think  about  and
to keep in mind.

This is very  important  because  the  teachings  on  guru  devotion  always
mention that faith is  very  important.  When  you  have  faith,  everything
works. It is evident that whenever you have faith in something, whatever  it
may be, it is very helpful. When you have faith, it urges you on to want  to
attain, learn or understand that thing.  So when you are meditating on  guru
devotion, primarily it has to do with cultivating faith in your guru.

As of now we have allocated three months to this topic but  we  may  shorten
it to two months if you find it too long. We will see how it goes.

                                 ~~~~~~~~~~

MORE ON THE EON OF ABIDING

I mentioned that during the eon of abiding, the average  lifespan  of  human
beings starts from an infinite lifespan, i.e.,  a  very  long  lifespan.  It
then gradually decreases to 80,000 years all the way down to 10  years.  The
averages lifespan of human beings then increases  again  from  10  years  to
80,000 years.

When the average lifespan starts to decrease from 80,000 years, this is  the
time when Maitreya Buddha will descend.













Some students have mentioned to me that Maitreya Buddha  will  descend  when
the average lifespan of human being reaches 10 years .

Maitreya Buddha will not descend when the average lifespan of  human  beings
is 10 years in the form of the supreme emanation body. Rather  an  emanation
of Maitreya Buddha will appear during that time. When the  average  lifespan
is 10 years, the human beings of that period  will  be  very  short  with  a
height of about six inches.  The emanation of Maitreya Buddha  will  have  a
height of 12 inches, i.e., double that of an average human being.

When the human beings of that time see that  Maitreya  Buddha  is  different
from them, they will ask him, “Why is it that you have a  much  bigger  body
than us?” This emanation of Maitreya Buddha will then reply, “I have such  a
body because I have abandoned killing, I practised patience and so forth.”

As a result of  hearing  this,  these  human  beings  will  also  start  the
practice of abandoning the ten non-virtues. As a result  of  practising  the
ethical discipline of abandoning the ten non-virtues, the  average  lifespan
of the human beings will then start to increase all the  way  up  to  80,000
years. Only then will Maitreya Buddha descend in the  form  of  the  supreme
emanation body. It is said that Maitreya Buddha will be born  in  the  place
where Shakyamuni Buddha showed the deed of passing  away  into  parinirvana,
i.e., Maitreya Buddha will be born in Kushinagar. This  is  the  explanation
in some commentaries.

                                 ~~~~~~~~~~

TRAINING IN THE MIND THAT GIVES AWAY BODY,  MATERIAL  WEALTH  AND  ROOTS  OF
VIRTUE (cont’d)

Aspiring for virtue to become a cause for material resources and so forth
~ Aspiring for more extensive times and functions
We  have  finished  the  verses  of  dedication  that  are  essentially  for
generating very extensive aspirations.

      Verse 3.21
      Just like the great elements, such as earth,
      And like space,
      May I always be many varieties of bases of sustenance
      For the boundless sentient beings.

~ Aspiring for no discontinuity in object and times
      Verse 3.22
      Likewise, until all attain nirvana,
      May I also be the source of sustenance
      For all the realms of sentient beings
      That reach unto the ends of space.

This verse is saying, “For as long as sentient beings exist, may  I  be  the
source of sustenance for them.” This is making extensive aspirations  to  be
able to benefit sentient beings for a very long time. Here  you  are  making
the aspiration to be able to actualise this.

If you remember, the context of  our  discussions  here  is  that  prior  to
adopting bodhicitta, one has to train the mind in  some  preliminaries,  one
of which is to dedicate one’s body,  possessions  and  roots  of  virtue  to
others. Initially one trains in giving one’s body, possessions and roots  of
virtue and dedicating them to all sentient beings at a mental level.

But even after one has generated bodhicitta, one has  to  continually  train
the mind to be able  to  dedicate  these  things  to  others.  Through  such
training, there will come a time when one  will  be  able  to  dedicate  and
actually give them away. In fact, there must come a time when one must  give
these away.

You  may  recall  during  the  module  on  the  stages  of   the   path   to
enlightenment, there was the discussion on how we should make  use  of  this
body after we have, from the bottom  of  our  heart,  dedicated  it  to  all
sentient beings. We still have to use our body. We still  have  to  eat.  We
still have to take care of the body by putting on clothes and so forth.  But
all these have to  done  with  the  motivation  of  benefiting  others.  The
teachings tell us that we should keep this  in  mind  as  much  as  possible
whenever we utilise the various objects of enjoyment.

So now we have concluded the preliminaries for adopting  bodhicitta  through
a ritual. Now is  the  actual  adoption  of  bodhicitta,  i.e.,  taking  the
bodhisattva vows.

THE ACTUAL

      Verse 3.23
      Just as the previous Sugatas
      Generated the mind of enlightenment,
      And just as they dwelt according to the stages
      In the trainings of a bodhisattva;


      Verse 3.24
      Likewise for the benefit of migrating beings,
      I shall generate the mind of enlightenment,
      And likewise I shall
      Learn the trainings according to the stages.

Verse 3.23 is saying that we  take  the  buddhas  as  an  example:  how  the
buddhas generated bodhicitta, abide on the grounds and how they  engaged  in
the bodhisattva deeds, the training of bodhisattvas.

“Likewise for the benefit of migrating beings,/I shall generate the mind  of
enlightenment”: This is generating the aspirational mind of enlightenment.

“And likewise I shall/ Learn the trainings according to  the  stages”:  This
is taking the engaged bodhisattva vows.

Verse 3.24 is saying, “I generate the  aspirational  mind  of  enlightenment
and the engaged mind of enlightenment and likewise, I shall  also  abide  in
the bodhisattva trainings.”

One can take the bodhisattva vows from a master who has the  vows.  If  not,
one can take the vows in the presence of a visualised  field  of  merit.  In
the presence of the field of merit, one adopts bodhicitta  using  these  two
paragraphs.

In these two paragraphs, in terms of the words of the ritual  here,  one  is
adopting both aspirational bodhicitta and engaged bodhicitta in one go.

I have a question myself, “When you receive the vows in your  continuum,  do
you first receive  the  aspirational  bodhicitta  vows  that  comes  with  a
commitment followed by  the  engaged  bodhisattva  vows  or  are  these  two
received at the same time? When you receive these vows  in  your  continuum,
do you receive them at the same time or sequentially?”

In the lam-rim literature, these two are adopted sequentially. When  one  is
able  to  handle  the  commitments,  first  one  adopts   the   aspirational
bodhicitta vows that come with a commitment.  Subsequently  when  one  feels
that one can practise the perfections, the deeds of  the  bodhisattva,  only
then does one take the engaged bodhisattva vows. This is clear in  the  lam-
rim literature. One takes these vows sequentially.

But when you look at the words of the ritual here in Verses 3.23  and  3.24,
both the aspirational bodhisattva vows with a  commitment  and  the  engaged
bodhisattva vows are taken at the same time in one ritual.

My question is, “When you receive the vows, are they  received  sequentially
or are they received simultaneously?” This is my question.

“And likewise I shall learn the trainings according to the stages”: One  has
to train in the bodhisattva deeds in stages. For example,  the  practice  of
dedicating and giving one’s body, when one  is  an  ordinary  person  on  an
ordinary path, that practice is only done mentally. When one abides  on  the
grounds, it is said that one would then be able  to  give  away  one’s  body
without any difficulty. It is a fault and a mistake to  actually  give  away
one’s body when one is not ready. But when one is ready, for instance,  when
one is abiding on the  bodhisattva  grounds,  the  teachings  say  that  the
bodhisattvas are able to give away their bodies as easily as someone  giving
away a plate of vegetables to someone else.

Here we are talking about the  practice  of  a  generous  attitude  and  the
practice of increasing  that  attitude.   The  practice  of  increasing  the
generous attitude is to reduce our miserliness. When we reach a point  where
there is no miserliness in the mind, then giving away  everything  including
the body will be easy.

CONCLUDING ACTIONS

After adopting the vows, there is the conclusion whereby you  rejoice  after
having adopted bodhicitta and you cause others to rejoice also.

Cultivating joy oneself
~ Cultivating joy by uplifting the mind

      Verse 3.25
      Those intelligent ones have concluded lucidly seizing
      The mind of enlightenment in this way,
      But, in order to increase it,
      They should highly praise it in the following manner:


      Verse 3.26
      Now my life is fruitful.
      I have attained a good human existence,
      Today I have been born in the buddha lineage.
      I have become a child of the Buddha.

It is important to rejoice in the benefits of bodhicitta  by  reflecting  on
the benefits of bodhicitta prior to generating  bodhicitta.  After  one  has
generated bodhicitta, it is also very important to rejoice in the fact  that
one has generated bodhicitta. It is important to uplift the mind  after  one
has generated bodhicitta.

“Now my life is fruitful./ I have attained  a  good  human  existence”:  “At
this time while I am still alive, I have had this  opportunity  to  generate
bodhicitta and take the vows. This is something very meaningful.”

You have to reflect on this on your own after taking the  bodhisattva  vows,
“This is really something very meaningful especially at  this  time  when  I
have this precious human rebirth. Due to generating bodhicitta, I  have  now
become a child of the victorious ones.”

This is rejoicing. Next is meditating on conscientiousness.

~ Having found that mind, meditating on conscientiousness
      Verse 3.27
      Now whatever happens,
      I will act to not sully
      This flawless, holy buddha lineage,
      Initiating actions concordant with this lineage.

You should think, “After having taken the bodhisattva vows, whatever  I  do,
I will make all  my  actions  harmonious  and  concordant  with  the  buddha
lineage.” This means, “Whatever I do, I am doing it for the benefit  of  all
sentient beings.”

This verse is also saying, “After taking the bodhisattva vows,  as  much  as
possible, in whatever I do, I will not do it for  selfish  reasons  and,  as
much as possible, I will not allow myself to be stained by  the  bodhisattva
downfalls and faults.”  The teachings are telling you that in  whatever  you
do, as far as possible:
 • do it with the thought of benefiting others
 • make sure that your actions are not mixed  with  personal  interest  and
   selfish purposes
 • be conscientious in checking whether  you  are  committing  any  of  the
   downfalls and faults of the bodhisattva vows

The main thing  is  that  after  taking  the  bodhisattva  vows,  we  should
continually rely on mindfulness and introspection  (or  vigilance)  to  make
sure that whatever we do, we do it with the  thought  of  benefiting  others
and to make sure, as much as possible, that it is not done  because  of  our
self-cherishing attitude.

~ Cultivating joy by gaining the mind that is difficult to find
Next we rejoice by thinking how we have found something that is very rare.

      Verse 3.28
      Just like a blind man
      Discovering a jewel in a heap of rubbish,
      Likewise by some coincidence
      This mind of enlightenment has been born within me.

This verse says that taking the bodhisattva vows is as rare as a  blind  man
finding treasure in a rubbish bin.  When you think about this, you  can  see
that it is  very  true  because  as  ordinary  individuals,  our  minds  are
completely filled with the  garbage  that  is  our  afflictions,  the  three
mental poisons, in addition to the great demon that is  our  self-cherishing
attitude.

Despite this, we now have this opportunity  to  reflect  on  bodhicitta,  to
generate bodhicitta and to take the bodhisattva vows.  This is  indeed  very
rare. We have been able to reflect and think  of  bodhicitta  and  take  the
bodhisattva vows due to the  power  of  our  merit  and  the  power  of  our
virtuous friend. It is as if something that is an impossibility  has  become
possible.

This is rejoicing by understanding the rarity of such  an  occurrence.  When
we actualise bodhicitta, bodhicitta will fulfil all our own wishes. It  will
also enable us to fulfil the wishes of  others.  The  next  few  verses  are
rejoicing in this fact.

The accomplishment of others’ welfare
~ Destroying the lord of death

      Verse 3.29 a,b
      This is also the supreme ambrosia
      That overcomes the lord of death of migrating beings.

Bodhicitta can overcome the lord of death. With bodhicitta, when  one  shows
and teaches the path to sentient beings, they can be placed in  the  undying
state, i.e., the state of full enlightenment. Bodhicitta is like the  nectar
that bestows this undying state.

Bodhicitta can also stop untimely death.  In  most  cases,  when  you  think
about it, untimely death is caused by the self-cherishing attitude  so  when
one has bodhicitta, one will be able to avoid untimely deaths.

~ Destroying poverty
Bodhicitta also destroys the experience of poverty of sentient beings.


      Verse 3.29 c,d
      This is also the inexhaustible treasure
      That eliminates all poverty of migrating beings.

When one achieves the eighth ground, one achieves mastery  or  control  over
many things including mastery over life, mastery  over  possessions  and  so
forth. A bodhisattva on the eighth ground is  said  to  possess  innumerable
resources like the sky treasury with which they can  eliminate  the  poverty
of sentient beings. Such mastery over  resources  possessed  by  the  eighth
ground bodhisattvas is due to their bodhicitta.

~ Destroying disease
Bodhicitta can  also  eliminate  the  diseases  or  sicknesses  of  sentient
beings.

      Verse 3.30a,b
      This is the supreme medicine
      That quells the disease of migrating beings too.

In medical literature, it is mentioned that there are 404 kinds of  diseases
that are caused by the three  mental  poisons  and  that  can  be  generally
classified into three classes of disorders:
1. Wind disorders related to the subtle energies of the body that are  also
   called lung is said to arise from bewilderment or ignorance.
2. Disorders related to bile arise from anger.
3. Disorders related to phlegm arise from attachment.

The 404 diseases are divided into:
 • 101 diseases that do not last for a long time
 • 101 diseases that are related to karma
 • 101 diseases that are related to spirit interferences
 • 101 diseases affecting the life force

These 404 diseases have their  source  in  the  three  mental  poisons.  The
bodhisattvas overcome these diseases by meditating on  love  and  so  forth.
The bodhisattvas also pacify these diseases that sentient beings  experience
by giving  them  teachings  on  love,  on  the  twelve  links  of  dependent
origination and on, say, ugliness,  in  order  to  help  them  overcome  the
mental poisons that are the source  of  these  404  diseases.  This  is  how
bodhicitta can destroy the diseases of sentient beings.

~ Destroying in general the sufferings of samsara
Next is how bodhicitta can destroy the sufferings of samsara in general  and
specifically how bodhicitta can destroy the sufferings of the lower  realms.



      Verse 3.30 c,d
      It is the tree of rest for migrating beings
      Wandering and weary on the path of conditioned existence.

This shows how bodhicitta destroys the sufferings  of  samsara  in  general.
Since bodhisattvas have to work for the welfare of others, it is  stated  in
the teachings that bodhisattvas should train in the  paths  of  the  hearers
and solitary realisers. The bodhisattvas then work for the  benefit  of  the
hearers and solitary realisers by  helping  them  achieve  their  respective
enlightenments, i.e., the bodhisattvas help those who are weary  in  samsara
by showing them the paths of the hearers and solitary realisers.

Depending on the power of their bodhicitta, bodhisattvas show some  sentient
beings the paths of the hearers and solitary  realisers,  enabling  them  to
liberate themselves from samsara  and  achieve  the  enlightenments  of  the
hearers and solitary realisers.

~ Destroying specifically the sufferings of the lower realms
      Verse 3.31 a,b
       It is the universal platform that leads all migrating beings
      To freedom from the bad migrations.

Bodhisattvas show the persons of small capacity how to accomplish virtue  by
showing them what they need to adopt and  what  they  need  to  abandon.  In
doing so, they protect these sentient beings from  falling  into  the  lower
realms. All this happens due to their bodhicitta.

~ The potential to dispel the obscurations, the causes of suffering
Bodhicitta is said to eliminate both the  afflictive  obscurations  and  the
knowledge obscurations.

      Verse 3.31c,d
      It is the dawning moon of the mind
      That dispels the torment of afflictions of migrating beings.

This shows that bodhicitta eliminates the afflictive obscurations.

      Verse 3.32
      It is the great sun that annihilates
      The cataracts of ignorance of migrating beings.

This shows that bodhicitta can eliminate also the knowledge obscurations.

                                 ~~~~~~~~~~

Medicine Buddha Retreat in Kopan in Oct 2014

Khen Rinpoche: This is a short announcement.

I think probably many of you know that we are organising a retreat in  Kopan
in October. This retreat will last about eight days. I did this retreat  two
years ago and we are going to do the same thing again.

The idea is to do the retreat in Kopan. The goal is to generate  a  peaceful
mind.
We will not do so much recitation but  mainly  we  will  give  you  time  to
meditate. Probably in one day we will have six hours in which  to  meditate.
Each session will be one hour, not too long and we will break the  day  into
six sessions. Probably that will be easy.

Last time I did that and some people requested  that  we  do  this  Medicine
Buddha retreat again. This is why I am  organising  this  retreat  in  Kopan
again.

Probably you all know that this retreat will be a silent retreat  for  eight
days. Remember that the discipline is to be silent for eight days.  Remember
that. People who had done this retreat last time said they  enjoyed  it  and
liked it. If they said they didn’t like it, I don’t think I  would  organise
this retreat again.

These people said they liked  it.  Many  people  thought  they  couldn’t  be
silent for eight days. They thought it would  be  impossible  but  something
they thought would be impossible became possible for them. They said it  was
OK and they enjoyed it.

I think the silence makes  a  difference.  When  you  go  for  retreat,  the
feeling is different when you are in silence,  especially  when  you  switch
off your TV, your mobile, your computer and your iPad!

I suggest that you do not use these devices during the  retreat  unless  you
have an emergency. Then that is different. Otherwise, I suggest you  try  to
cut down for one week and see how you find this new experience  during  your
meditation.

The basic idea is keeping silent. This means that your mind will be  silent.
Everyone has to be silent. There is nothing to do there  since  you  are  in
the monastery. So that is the idea.

Basically we are trying something new, looking for some kind of peace,  some
kind of happiness, some kind of experience. Once you find some peaceful  and
happy feeling, of course that is good. This will encourage you to do more.

This is something I’m trying to do here in this retreat.  Because  here  [in
Singapore] with this busy life, I think there is  no  time  for  meditation.
Even now when we try to do this lam-rim meditation in  the  morning,  it  is
not easy. When you sit down, your mind is not sitting  still  but  thinking,
“I need to do this, …this, …and this.” It is not easy.

I feel that sometimes you really need to just leave all this behind  and  go
on holiday for one  week.  Really  leave  everything  behind  and  go  to  a
different place and forget all these things. Then you do not have to  think,
“I have to do this, that and the other.”

Even for myself, it  makes  a  difference.  When  you  really  get  out  (of
Singapore) and  especially when you go for retreat, then that  becomes  like
your job and your mind becomes more focussed.

Also this is a group  retreat  so  there  is  some  kind  of  energy  there.
Everybody is doing the same thing. Everybody is silent. Everybody is  trying
to do a good thing.  Everybody is sitting very straight.  (Laughter).  There
is always some kind of encouragement. So it is good to  do  retreat  with  a
group.

During the break time, for those of you who have  not  been  to  Kopan,  the
place is big. You can walk around, go around the stupa  and  go  around  the
gompa. You can do walking and at the same time you can chant the  mantra  of
Medicine Buddha. If you think your mouth is not moving, then you  can  chant
as loud as possible. (Laughter).  You think your mouth  is  itchy  then  you
chant the mantra. I am just kidding.

Anyway those who wish to go to the retreat can sign up for it. I  understand
that people don’t have much time so you have to choose what you want to  do.
You want to go here, here, and here but you  can’t  go  everywhere.  So  you
have to choose where you wish to go.


Interpreted by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme; transcribed by Phuah  Soon  Ek,  Patricia
Lee & Julia Koh; edited by Cecilia Tsong.


-----------------------
[1] Page 274-275, Liberation in the Palm of Your Hand: A  concise  discourse
on the path to enlightenment by Pabongka  Rinpoche,  translated  by  Michael
Richards. Copyright: Michael Richards, 1991.  Wisdom  Publications,  Revised
Edition, 1993.

