Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Engaging in the Deeds of a Bodhisattva/BP2 M05 L11 final.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:52:21.891773
================================================================================


Transcript of the teachings by Khen Rinpoche Geshe  Chonyi  on  Engaging  in
the Bodhisattva Deeds, 2014

Root text: Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds by  Shantideva,  translated  by
Toh Sze Gee. Copyright: Toh Sze Gee, 2006; Revised edition, 2014.

Lesson                                                                    11
13 March 2014


Advice on fulfilling one’s daily commitments. Chapter Two: Verses
2.23–2.65. Confessing negativities with the four powers (cont’d).


ADVICE ON FULFILLING ONE’S DAILY COMMITMENTS
I mentioned before that  when  we  recite  the  preliminary  prayers  before
class, we should visualise Shakyamuni Buddha in front of us. We then  recite
the prayers on the basis of recollecting the qualities of his exalted  body,
speech and mind. We are very fortunate indeed when we are able to do this.

You need to remember all the time that you are very  fortunate  just  to  be
able to think of the  Buddha,  recollect  his  qualities  and  recite  these
verses of praise, even if it is only for  a  few  minutes.  When  you  think
about this, doing all  this  makes  this   particular  day  meaningful.  You
should rejoice that you have made this day meaningful.

I thought to mention this. There are many people  who  have  taken  on  many
recitation commitments that come from attending many  empowerments.  Because
of this, they have accumulated whole sets of recitations that they must  do.
But after some time,  most of these people feel that it is  pointless  doing
such prayers and commitments. They feel that it is something that they  have
to do but they do not see the purpose and the meaning behind  these  prayers
and commitments.

If it is a commitment, one has to do it. Ideally, when one  is  doing  self-
generation practices or one’s sadhanas, as one  recites  the  words  of  the
practice, one should be reflecting on their meaning. When one is  unable  to
reflect and meditate on the entire practice, at  the  very  least,  one  can
hold on to the divine pride of being the deity and then  recite  the  words.
This is one method. We are talking about this in the context of doing  self-
generation deity practices.

If one is not able to do  that,  one  should  at  least  focus  on  the  six
sessions guru yoga. Guru yoga is the main thing so one recites  that  prayer
and reflects on it.

If one cannot handle any meditation  or  any  reflection,  then  one  simply
verbally recite the prayer. It is called a daily recitation  because  it  is
meant as a recitation.

Some people may then wonder, “Is there any point in just  blurting  out  the
words?”

Well, it is a commitment that you have already committed yourself to so  you
just have to do it. When you are merely  reciting  the  words  in  order  to
fulfil your commitment, at least, you are  purifying  the  negativities  and
obscurations you have accumulated with your  speech.  When  you  pay  homage
physically, it is said that you purify the negativities of your  body.  When
you recite the prayers  of  your  daily  recitation  commitments,  you  will
purify the negativities of your speech. By believing in this,  you  have  to
continue doing your commitments without giving them up.

This is in response to those people who come and tell me, “Oh,  I  have  all
these commitments. I just can’t handle them. Can I just not do them?”

Let’s say you have daily commitments that take one or two hours to  do.  You
just have to recite them. You have to do them. It is better than  not  doing
them.

In my opinion, it is a different matter if, instead of spending the  one  to
two hours simply reciting your prayers, in its place,  you  are  doing  some
other virtuous and meaningful practices or meditation.  Then  at  least  you
are doing something as a substitute. But if  in  place  of  merely  reciting
your daily prayers, you decide not to do anything at all and  end  up  doing
nothing, then it is far better to spend the one or two hours  reciting  your
prayers rather than not doing anything at all.

When people come and ask me about this, if I were to tell  them,  “Yes.  You
can stop your practice,” they will  stop  their  practice.  They  will  stop
doing their recitations and end up doing nothing in their place. This  would
not  be  right.  You  should  at  least  replace  them  by  doing  something
meaningful and virtuous.

It seems that many people have this problem. They take on  all  these  daily
recitation commitments or sadhanas. Then some  of  them  do  not  feel  like
continuing to do them. They feel that they are a chore and burden but  since
there is no choice, they just do them.

As I said earlier, ideally, you should be reflecting and meditating  as  you
recite the words and do the practice. When  you  cannot  do  that,  then  at
least you have to recite the words of the practice. You have to do  this  as
it is a commitment. Merely reciting the prayers will purify an  immeasurable
amount of negativities accumulated with your speech.  So it  is  not  as  if
merely reciting the prayers does not have any benefit. There is benefit.

If you cannot do even that, then in its place, if  you  can  do  some  other
good practices and do them well, in my opinion, at least  they  can  act  as
substitutes.  Let’s  say  in  place  of  your  commitments,  you  think   of
Chenrezig, recite Om Mani Padme Hum and work on cultivating  a  good  heart.
At least you are doing something virtuous. My point is that you have  to  do
something meaningful and virtuous. If you want to give up your  commitments,
in their place, at least you should do something virtuous.  In  my  opinion,
at least this is good.

Khen Rinpoche: At the same time, I am not saying that you can give  up  your
commitments. I am not saying that! But when you want to  give  them  up,  do
something else. But I am not saying that you can give up  your  commitments.
Do not misunderstand me.
One of my teachers had so many commitments. His commitments came up  to  one
thick volume of prayers. He  would  start  his  prayers  from  5.30  in  the
morning and he would carry on till 11.30am. I  don’t  know  whether  he  had
time to meditate. I am not sure. I saw  that  he  just  read  them  quickly.
There were more than 200 to 300 pages of prayers. I don’t think he had  time
to meditate on everything. But even at the age of 80,  he  was  doing  that.
Probably he was meditating but  I  am  not  sure  how  to  tell  if  he  was
meditating or not. But I saw that this was how he did his commitments.

I mentioned this because people ask me, “Can I not do  my  commitments?”  It
is difficult for me to answer that question. If I was the one who  gave  the
commitment, then I can say, “OK. You do not have to do them.”

My idea  is  that  when  you  really  cannot  or  do  not  want  to  do  the
commitments, then do  something  else,  such  as  some  meditation  or  some
chanting. I think this is the way to go.  Hopefully  I  have  answered  this
question for everyone. Please do not ask me again next  time!  This  is  the
answer for everyone.

I understand how it feels.  Personally, sometimes I feel a little  bit  like
that as well. “What is the point of reciting  so  many  prayers?”  When  you
think like that, then ask yourself, “If I don’t do these prayers, what am  I
going to do in their place? What better alternative do I have?”

If you can meditate as you recite, this should be the way. But even  if  you
cannot meditate, at least reciting the words themselves, i.e., they are  the
speech and teachings of the Buddha,  have  the  benefit  of  purifying  your
negativities.

Everyone likes to recite sutras such as  the  Golden  Light  Sutra  and  the
Sanghatasutra. Everyone also likes to recite a  long  list  of  mantras  and
dharanis. Why do you recite them? Because you believe that there is  benefit
in doing so. So if there is benefit in reciting these  sutras  and  mantras,
there must be benefit in reciting your daily prayers as  well  because  they
are all teachings of the Buddha.

Here we are talking about commitments. Since you have  already  promised  to
take on the commitment of doing the practice, it is best that  you  continue
doing them and not  stop doing so.

In the case of self-generation practices, even if you cannot  meditate  from
beginning to end, you can focus on one aspect of  the  practice,  e.g.,  the
section on generating yourself as the deity. At  the  very  least,  you  can
focus on doing that and then you can just recite the rest of the practice.

                                 ~~~~~~~~~~

CONFESSING NEGATIVITIES WITH THE FOUR POWERS (cont’d)

The power of applying the antidote (or the power of the remedy) (cont’d)
We started on the power  of  applying  the  antidote.  The  text  gives  the
example of how a sick person would rely on a skilled doctor and  follow  the
doctor’s advice. This being the case, it will be even  more  important  that
we, who are afflicted by the sickness of the afflictions, follow the  advice
given by the skilled doctor, the Buddha.

~ It is reasonable to practise in accord with the words of the Teacher,  the
supreme doctor
The ordinary  sicknesses  associated  with  our  physical  health  are  only
confined to one life. Sooner or later, the sickness will stop when  we  die.
But the sickness of the afflictions goes beyond one life. It goes on and  on
and harms us in myriad ways. Not only that. The sickness of the  afflictions
does not harm us alone. It can  potentially  cause  us  to  harm  numberless
sentient beings. Therefore it is appropriate to practise in accordance  with
the advice of the Buddha to pacify the sickness of the afflictions.

      Verse 2.56
      Then the intention not to act in accordance
      With the words that can uproot every misery
      Of the all knowing physician
      Is extremely bewildered and an object of scorn.

In order to pacify the sickness of the afflictions, we have to rely  on  the
instructions of the All-Knowing One, the omniscient Buddha, who can help  us
eliminate the root of all our physical and mental suffering and  sicknesses.
When we do not follow his advice but engage in behaviours that are  contrary
to his advice, this will be extremely  foolish.  Instead  of  following  the
teachings  of  the  Buddha,  if  we  were  to  live  our  life  continuously
accumulating negativities, we would become an object of ridicule of all  the
buddhas and bodhisattvas.

The great master Nagarjuna gave the analogy  of  someone  vomiting  into  an
extremely precious container made of jewels and gold.  The  person  vomiting
into that container will be considered very foolish. Likewise, having  found
this human life of freedoms and endowments, it would be  even  more  foolish
if, instead of using it to accomplish what is meaningful, we only engage  in
negative actions and constantly accumulate non-virtue.

I think this verse is about  making  a  pledge  to  practise  the  teachings
exactly as they were taught by the Omniscient One, the  Buddha  who  is  the
supreme physician.

~ The analogy of an abyss
      Verse 2.57
      If I need to be conscientious
      Near a small, ordinary precipice,
      Then how much more so near the precipices of long duration
      That drop for thousands of yojanas?

When we are climbing or going down a  flight  of  stairs,  we  usually  move
cautiously  knowing that if we  are  not  careful,  we  may  slip  and  hurt
ourselves.

If we are so careful with climbing or going down a flight of stairs  due  to
our fear of slipping and hurting ourselves, it goes without saying  that  we
need to be even  more  careful  and  cautious  when  it  comes  to  creating
negative karma. This is because negative karma will throw us into the  abyss
of the lower realms. Once we fall into the abyss of  the  lower  realms,  we
will have to stay there for a very long time and it will be  very  difficult
to be liberated from those realms. Therefore we need to  be  extra   careful
and cautious not to create negative karma. Remembering we  will  go  to  the
lower realms and suffer there for  a  long  time  when  we  accumulate  non-
virtue, we cultivate conscientiousness.

~ The reasonableness of making effort quickly
The text talks about applying the antidotes  to  the  negativities  that  we
accumulate and applying them immediately.

      Verse 2.58
      It is inappropriate to stay happily
      Thinking, “Today alone I shall not die,”
      For inevitably the time will come
      When I shall go out of existence.


You should apply the antidotes right away and not think that you will do  so
in the future after a  month  or  even  a  year.  It  is  inappropriate  and
incorrect to do that because there is no guarantee that  you  will  not  die
tomorrow. It is not correct to think, “I will not die today.”  Understanding
that the time of death is uncertain, you have to apply the  antidotes  right
away since there is no guarantee that tomorrow will come.

~ As there is absolutely no reason not to fear suffering, being  lazy  about
cultivating the path is unreasonable
      Verse 2.59
      Who will grant me fearlessness?
      How can I be surely freed from this?
      If I shall inevitably go out of existence,
      How can I remain in mental happiness?

If you think, “I do not fear death. I will not be  afraid  at  the  time  of
death so there is no  point  worrying  about  it,”   this  is  inappropriate
because, whether you like it or not,  at  the  time  of  death,  because  of
having accumulated negativities throughout your life, fear  will  arise.  At
that time, nobody can help you. The buddhas cannot take away your fear.  The
results of those non-virtues will ripen and there will be suffering  in  the
future.

Whether you like it or not, fear will arise at the time of death.  There  is
nobody,  not  even  the  buddhas,  who  can  guarantee  that  you  will  not
experience any fear and any worries at that time. Nobody can do  that.  Fear
will naturally arise. Therefore it is  wrong  to  just  live  life  happily,
without worry, eating, sleeping and enjoying yourself and not  caring  about
death. This is wrong.

Without a doubt death will come and at the time  of  death,  there  will  be
worry and fear. Therefore you have to start  applying  the  antidotes  right
away.

You may think, “I am not afraid of death.” This is only because it  has  not
knocked on your doors yet. Because it has yet to happen, you  are  confident
that death would not  be a problem.  But  when  death  happens,  there  will
definitely  be  worries.  At  the  very  least,  there  will  be  some  fear
especially when you know that you did not spend  your  life  in  a  virtuous
way.

It is said that there are three levels of real Dharma practitioners:
• The junior Dharma practitioner dies  without  regret,  knowing  that,  “At
  least I did something in this life.”
• The middling Dharma practitioner dies without fear, knowing that,  “I  did
  some good practices in this life.”
• The best Dharma practitioner faces death happily as he  is  ready  to  go.
  The teachings say that such practitioners go happily.

We need to keep this in mind. When our time comes,  even  if  we  cannot  go
happily, at least, we should go without regret. We should  remind  ourselves
of the opportunity we have now. We  are  still  healthy  and  have  all  the
favourable conditions for us to learn  and  practise.  Therefore  we  should
take this opportunity to do as  many  meaningful  and  virtuous  actions  as
possible.

This completes the power of applying the antidotes  (or  the  power  of  the
remedy).

The power of restraint (or the power of turning away from wrongdoing)
Next is the power of  refraining  from  engaging  in  negativities.  We  are
talking about relying on the mind of restraint.

~ As material wealth is unreliable, it is unreasonable to be attached to it
      Verse 2.60
      What remains with me now
      From the past experiences that have gone?
      Through my adherence to them
      I have gone against my spiritual masters’ advice.

This verse is talking about abandoning attachment to objects of  desire.  We
have been utilising these objects of desire—forms,  sounds,  smells,  tastes
or tactile objects— since beginningless lifetimes.  When  these  objects  of
desire come into contact with the consciousness, we experience pleasure  but
that pleasure lasts only for a very short time. When the pleasure  ends,  we
carry on looking for the next pleasurable experience. This is  how  we  lead
our life, going from one short  pleasurable  experience  to  another.  Isn’t
that how we spend our life,  looking  for  the  one  pleasurable  experience
after another? But whatever pleasure we may be talking about,  it  does  not
last. Then we have to find the next pleasurable experience.

When we experience pleasure again through coming  into  contact  with  these
objects of desire—forms, sounds, smells, tastes  or  tactile  objects—it  is
meaningless to be emotionally involved with and attached  to  that  pleasure
because that experience is no different and  will  never  be  any  different
from the past pleasurable experience. All the past  pleasurable  experiences
that we had arise and last for a very short time and  then  they  disappear.
Whatever new pleasurable experience that may arise will be no different.

The teachings are saying that while we know that whatever  pleasure  we  are
going to experience will never be any different from  our  past  experiences
and will only last for a short time, we disregard this fact. We continue  to
be emotionally involved and attached to this pleasure that we work  so  hard
for.

We disregard the teachings of the guru and the teachings of the  buddhas  in
running after pleasure and letting ourselves be emotionally attached to  it.
In the process, we keep on accumulating non-virtue and negativities  but  we
disregard that too. This is what many of us are doing and the teachings  are
telling us not to do that.

Here we are talking about applying the power of  restraint  by  bringing  to
mind how we have transgressed the advice of the guru and  the  buddhas  thus
far.

~ Inappropriate to be attached to close friends and so forth
      Verse 2.61
      Leaving behind this life
      And likewise my friends and relatives,
      If all alone I must go elsewhere
      How appropriate are friends and enemies?

Everything  we  consider  to  be  so  important  in  our  life—our  parents,
relatives, loved ones and close friends as well as our  possessions  and  so
forth—when our time to die and to leave this world come, none  of  them  and
nothing can accompany us. When we die and leave for the next life,  we  have
to go alone. It is not as if we can choose where we want to  go.  This  will
be determined by our karma, which can throw us  anywhere  from  the  deepest
hells to the peak of cyclic existence.

On the day when we are going to die, no one  can  follow  us.  None  of  our
loved ones will be of any benefit nor can  they  help  us  at  the  time  of
death. We can only go on alone. The  teachings  say  that  at  the  time  of
death, the king leaves behind his kingdom while  the  beggar  leaves  behind
his begging bowl  and  walking  stick.  What  they  leave  behind  maybe  be
different but their way of going on to the next life is  exactly  the  same.
They have to leave everything behind and they have to go on alone.

The point here is that there is no reason to be attached to  or  emotionally
involved with our friends and loved ones. Why? Because we  often  accumulate
non-virtue due to our attachment to them. By thinking about this,  we  apply
restraint as much as possible in avoiding such non-virtues.

~ Making effort day and night  in  the  methods  for  being  liberated  from
negativities
The next verse talks about the need to strive  day  and  night  to  liberate
ourselves from negativities.

      Verse 2.62
      “How can I be surely freed
      From non-virtue, the source of suffering?”
      Continually night and day
      Should I only consider this.

At the time of death, loved ones  are  of  no  benefit  whatsoever  and  our
enemies can no longer harm us. What can harm us, at the time of  death,  are
all the non-virtues and negativities, i.e.,  the  innumerable  instances  of
the ten non-virtues that we have accumulated  for  their  sake.  These  non-
virtues  and  negativities  that  we  have  accumulated  will  cause  us  to
experience great suffering. As such, it is only appropriate  to  strive  day
and night thinking about how we can be liberated from such negativities.

This involves thinking about the presentation  of  cause  and  effect.  More
importantly, it is about generating the faith of  conviction  in  karma.  On
the basis of reflecting on and  understanding  the  workings  of  cause  and
effect, karma, and, in  particular,  all  the  suffering  that  we  have  to
experience when the non-virtues that we have accumulated ripen, as  much  as
possible, we should strive to purify our negativities day and night.

~ What is it that one is confessing?
Next we identify what exactly we are confessing.

      Verse 2.63
      Through unknowing and ignorance,
      Whatever I have committed,
      Be it a natural misdeed
      Or a stipulated negativity,

The non-virtues that we have accumulated  can  be  divided  into  a  natural
misdeed or a stipulated negativity.

A natural misdeed is a non-virtuous action by nature regardless of  who  the
perpetrator may be. It does not matter whether the person who performs  that
particular karma is holding vows or not.  A natural  misdeed  is  by  nature
non-virtuous.  Whoever engages in such a misdeed accumulates non-virtue.

A stipulated negativity only applies  to  those  who  have  vows  and  is  a
negativity that is committed when one contravenes the rules that  were  laid
down by the Buddha. For example, ordained people are  not  supposed  to  eat
after noon. The act of eating  after  noon  is  not  a  natural  misdeed  in
itself. It is not necessarily negative karma but, for  an  ordained  person,
eating after noon becomes a stipulated negativity. A  stipulated  negativity
includes any kind of vows. When one goes  against  the  vows  that  one  has
taken, that is a stipulated negativity.

~ The way to confess
      Verse 2.64
      I confess all of them directly
      In the presence of the Protectors
      With folded hands, prostrating again and again,
      My mind terrified by suffering.

You think of all the buddhas and bodhisattvas of the ten directions  abiding
in the space in front of you. Then you recollect and bring to mind  all  the
negativities that you have accumulated. With folded palms and  with  intense
regret, you  confess  all  those  negativities  that  you  have  accumulated
without concealing anything to the extent that tears swell up and your  hair
stand on its ends!

~ Requesting the attention of holy beings and pledging  to  turn  away  from
negativities
The last verse is making a pledge or promise to  refrain  from  negativities
after requesting the attention of the holy beings.

      Verse 2.65
      I request the Guides
      To please accept my negativities as being mistakes.
      Since they are not good,
      I shall not do them again.

This is how one confesses: by acknowledging faults as faults, all  the  non-
virtues that one has accumulated as  non-virtues  and  by  pledging  not  to
engage in them again.

This concludes Chapter Two: Confessing Negativities.

SUMMARY

These teachings talk about the great importance of  doing  the  practice  of
confession. It is very  important  that  we  confess  our  negativities  and
engage in purification practices. The teachings say that it is  due  to  our
negativities and obscurations that  when we  listen  to  the  teachings,  we
cannot retain the words. When  we  reflect  on  the  teachings,  we  do  not
understand their meaning and when we  meditate  on  the  topics  or  try  to
internalise them, we do not achieve any realisations. All  this  is  due  to
our negativities and obscurations obscuring our mind.

We have to engage in the practice  of  purification  by  applying  the  four
powers.

1. The power of regret (or the power of eradication)
The first power is the power of regret or the power of eradication. We  have
to generate genuine regret for all the non-virtues that we have  accumulated
since beginningless lifetimes. We confess all the non-virtues that  we  have
performed ourselves and made others engage  in.  We  also  have  to  confess
having rejoiced in the non-virtues  of  others.  We  also  accumulated  non-
virtues in relation to special powerful karmic objects.  We  have  to  bring
all these non-virtues to mind and confess them.

The way to generate regret is to bring to mind all the future  suffering  we
will experience when these negativities ripen.

One also develops regret by reflecting on these three points, that:
• death is certain
• the time of death is uncertain
• at the time of death, nothing except the Dharma is of any benefit

We should also generate regret by reflecting on the fear  and  suffering  we
will experience at the time of death. On top  of  that,  we  have  to  think
about all the future suffering, i.e., the result of  our  non-virtues,  that
awaits us after we have taken rebirth.
2. The power of the support
Essentially this is going for refuge to the Three Jewels. Going for  refuge,
we bring to mind the buddhas and bodhisattvas such as the eight  great  sons
and offer ourselves to them and promise to follow their advice.

3. The power of applying the antidote (or the power of the remedy)
Here we bring to mind all the faults and disadvantages of  the  sickness  of
the afflictions, how it harms us as well as causing us to harm others.  With
this in mind, we apply the antidotes,  i.e.,  the  teachings  given  by  the
Buddha, on the basis of acknowledging that the Buddha, the  Omniscient  One,
is the supreme physician.

The  teachings  also  mention  the  importance  of  relying  constantly   on
mindfulness and vigilance to spot the  arising  of  any  non-virtue  in  the
mind. When we notice that non-virtue has already arisen, i.e., that we  have
accumulated non-virtue, we should  confess  and  purify  it.  We  should  do
something about it right away without postponing it till a  future  time  by
reflecting on how the time of death is uncertain.

4. The power of restraint (or the power of turning away from wrongdoing)
Here the text  talks  about  recollecting  how  all  the  pleasure  that  we
experienced in the past  is  meaningless.  This  applies  also  to  all  the
pleasure that we are currently  experiencing.  We  then  restrain  ourselves
from committing non-virtue out of attachment and so forth.

Chapter Two, this chapter on confession, is telling us  to  apply  the  four
opponent powers and to purify our negatives as much as possible.


Interpreted by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme; transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek, Vivien  Ng,
Aki Yeo; edited by Cecilia Tsong.


