Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Engaging in the Deeds of a Bodhisattva/BP2 M5 L25 final.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:52:21.665972
================================================================================


Transcript of the teachings by Khen Rinpoche Geshe  Chonyi  on  Engaging  in
the Bodhisattva Deeds, 2014

Root text: Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds by  Shantideva,  translated  by
Toh Sze Gee. Copyright: Toh Sze Gee, 2006; Revised edition, 2014.

Lesson                                                                    25
     8 May 2014


Discussion on the twelve links of dependent origination.


Question: Of the two karmas of the twelve links (of dependent  origination),
can we say that:
 • the actualising karma actualises uncontrolled rebirth in cyclic existence
   whereas
 • the projecting karma projects either a higher or lower rebirth,  i.e.,  a
   virtuous projecting  karma  for  a  higher  rebirth  and  a  non-virtuous
   projecting karma for a lower rebirth?
Furthermore the actualising karma only comes into play at the time of  death
whereas the projecting karma is accumulated during our entire lifetime?

Answer:  Projecting karma is  essentially  like  the  seed  from  which  the
sprout appears. Without the seed, you are not going to have a  sprout.  This
is the principal cause.

In  order  to  address  the  question  of  whether  a  projecting  karma  is
accumulated or not, you have to understand the discussion in the lam-rim  on
how karma is accumulated.

In order for karma to be accumulated, that karma has to be powerful or  done
over a period of time. There  was  a  discussion  you  will  recall  of  the
permutations between karma that is  accumulated  and  karma  that  is  done.
There were examples of karma that is both accumulated and done.

What determines the kind of rebirth you will take, be it  good  or  bad,  is
primarily  dependent  on  the  projecting  karma.  In  order  to  accumulate
virtuous projecting karma, i.e., the cause for a good rebirth, the  virtuous
karma accumulated has to be powerful and strong and done  consistently  over
a period of time.

This projecting karma will  manifest  as  the  actualising  karma  prior  to
death. According to the twelve links of dependent origination, prior to  the
manifestation of actualising karma before the  time  of  death,  that  karma
must be nourished by craving and grasping.

The questions I mentioned a few lessons ago was about these two points:
1. With regard to the nourishing of this actualising karma, when do  craving
   and grasping come into play?
2. Is the  desire  or  attachment  of  the  desire  realm  necessarily  non-
   virtuous?

Khen Rinpoche: Have you thought about  this?  Does  anyone  have  any  idea,
especially the senior students? There was one lady  who  said  she  had  the
answer but she is not here today. I don’t see her.

Actualising karma  manifests  prior  to  the  time  of  death.  Craving  and
grasping cause this karma to manifest. During death, the inner  elements  of
the physical body undergo the dissolution process  with  the  earth  element
dissolving into the water element, the water  element  dissolving  into  the
fire element and so forth.

What I think is this: the craving and grasping arise and  have  to  manifest
during the first three stages of the  entire  death  process.  When  craving
arises, depending on which karma  is  stronger,  virtuous  or  non-virtuous,
there is the craving for a future existence.  Perhaps  this  craving  for  a
future existence relates less to craving for a particular or  specific  kind
of body or existence but it is a general kind of craving that wants to  take
on an embodied existence again. There is this kind of craving.

What I am stating here is just my personal opinion. This is  not  stated  in
any texts.

After  craving  comes  grasping,  i.e.,  essentially  a  stronger  form   of
attachment. The earlier craving  for  an  embodied  existence  becomes  much
stronger. One is really wanting badly to get, i.e., grasp at,  a  particular
kind of existence.

This is something that requires much thought. You have to think  about  this
for yourself because you will not find  any  description  or  discussion  of
this in many of the texts pertaining to this topic.

At the time of grasping, there is this  very  strong  desire  or  attachment
that wants to be embodied again, i.e., to take on an  existence  again.  One
is wondering, “What rebirth will I get?” and this nourishes the karma.

This craving and grasping nourish the karma that  was  accumulated  earlier,
depending on whether  it  is  virtuous  or  non-virtuous  projecting  karma.
Whatever it is, craving and grasping give  it  strength  and  make  it  very
powerful.  Then one dies and goes on to the next life.

In the sutras, there is no further description  beyond  the  dissolution  of
the elements. It is only in tantra that we talk about the later stages  that
make up the entire dissolution  process,  i.e.,  the  stages  of  the  white
appearance, red increase, black near- attainment and so forth.

Whether you get a good rebirth or a bad rebirth, let’s say if you are  going
to get a good rebirth, the primary cause of that  is  the  seed,  i.e.,  the
projecting karma that was accumulated earlier. The primary cause  for,  say,
a good rebirth is not craving and grasping. They  are  the  conditions  that
nourish the primary cause, i.e., the seed or the karma that was  accumulated
earlier. So the  primary  cause  of  a  good  rebirth  is  not  craving  and
grasping.

Khen Rinpoche: Are you listening? Contemplating?  Thinking?  This  one,  you
really need to think.  If you are interested, then I will  talk  more  about
it. Otherwise, I will leave it at this.

The point is the primary cause of a  good  rebirth  is  virtuous  projecting
karma, not craving and grasping.

As to whether the  attachment  of  the  desire  realm  is  necessarily  non-
virtuous or not, this is also something that we can think  about.  According
to  the  Hinayana  tenets,  the  Abidharmakosha  (or  Treasury  of  Manifest
Knowledge), the attachment of the desire realm is necessarily  non-virtuous.
It is stated very  clearly  in  the  Treasury  of  Manifest  Knowledge  that
afflictions such as ignorance, the view of the transitory collection,  could
be unspecified. This means it can be neither virtuous nor non-virtuous.  But
it is stated very clearly in that text that all the  other  afflictions  are
necessarily non-virtuous.

Ignorance, the first of the twelve links of dependent  origination,  can  be
said to be unspecified. So the  projecting  karma  that  is  accumulated  is
karma  that  is  propelled  or  motivated  by  this   ignorance   which   is
unspecified. Based on this, there is nothing wrong in  saying  that  craving
and grasping can nourish a virtuous projecting karma.

In the Hinayana tenets, when we look at texts like the Treasury of  Manifest
Knowledge, the afflictions such as the attachment of the  desire  realm  are
necessarily non-virtuous. This is clearly stated.

But when we look at the Treatises of the Middle Way,  the  Mahayana  tenets,
it is not so clear-cut. It is mentioned in those teachings  that  there  can
be instances of attachment that is an apprehension  of  true  existence.  As
such, I think perhaps one can say that the attachment of  the  desire  realm
is not necessarily non-virtuous.

Would it be all right then to say that it is possible to have an  attachment
of the desire realm that is unspecified?

Anyway I am just sharing with you my personal opinion. No one  can  say  for
sure, “This is it.”

Khen Rinpoche: Are you happy with what I have said? If you  are  not  happy,
you must rebut, “What you have said, this is not correct!”

Question: When you  are  talking  about  unspecified  karma,  based  on  the
example of an attachment that is an  apprehension  of  true  existence,  how
does this fall into the general division given  in  the  Lam-rim  Chenmo  of
contaminated  and  uncontaminated  karma?  In  this  case,  is   there   the
possibility here that contaminated virtuous  karma  can  throw  one  into  a
rebirth in the desire realm?

Answer: The discussion on projecting karma in  the  context  of  the  twelve
links of dependent origination is necessarily contaminated  karma.  Look  at
the process of  how  projecting  karma  is  accumulated,  motivated  by  the
ignorance of the twelve links of dependent origination.

In short, contaminated karma is the karma that is accumulated, motivated  by
ignorance.

Khen Rinpoche:  I translate for him! Ven. Gyurme  is  asking  what  kind  of
karma it takes to be able to take rebirth in the pure land? Do you not  need
karma  to  be  reborn  in  the  pure  land?  Is  it  contaminated  karma  or
uncontaminated karma?

(Student’s response is inaudible).

Student: I have a problem with Amitabha pure land!  Due to the power of  the
prayers of Amitabha Buddha, he  promised  that  whoever  recalls  his  name,
recites his sutra and visualises …

Khen Rinpoche:  Essentially you are saying that to  be  born  in  Amitabha’s
pure land is a result of karma and that karma was  motivated  by  ignorance.
Are you saying that?

Student: Yes.

Khen Rinpoche: So it follows that the body of  the  sentient  being  in  the
pure land is true suffering?

Student: Yes.

Khen Rinpoche: It follows that there is suffering in Amitabha’s pure land.

Khen Rinpoche: Is there suffering in Amitabha’s pure land?

Student: No.

Khen Rinpoche:  Why do we have suffering?

Student: The person (in the pure land) has no gross  suffering—no  suffering
of  suffering  and  no  suffering  of  change—but  he  still  has  pervasive
compounded suffering.

Khen Rinpoche: Why do we have suffering?

Student: Due to our karma and delusions.

Khen Rinpoche: In Amitabha’s pure land, there are karma and delusions?

Student: Yes. There are some sentient beings reborn in Amitabha’s pure  land
who still have karma and delusions.

Khen Rinpoche: So they have suffering?

Student: Yes.

Khen Rinpoche: They are the same as us? No difference? Then we may  as  well
just stay here instead of going there!
Student: Just now I was joking.

Khen Rinpoche: Joking? You joke with me? (Laughter).

Student: I will go back and do prostrations!

Question: Is the attachment to inherent existence an unspecified  attachment
that is neither virtuous nor non-virtuous?

Let us say I pray to have a precious human rebirth. Whatever I  do  in  this
lifetime, I dedicate the merit to have a precious human rebirth in  my  next
life. But while I am making this dedication,  I  have  no  understanding  of
emptiness. My prayer  is  fully  contaminated  thinking  that  there  is  an
inherently existent next life. It is a dedication made with a mind  that  is
grasping at true existence.

Will such a dedication result in virtuous karma  or  result  in  a  precious
human rebirth with a mind still grasping at inherent existence?

Khen Rinpoche: I don’t know what you are saying. You  are  saying  something
like, “In order to achieve a precious human rebirth,  you  need  to  realise
emptiness?” You are saying something like that?

Student: Not necessarily.

Khen Rinpoche: Then I think you got the answer already.

Khen Rinpoche: It is clearly stated in the teachings that the  ignorance  of
the twelve links of dependent origination is unspecified.

But the karma that is motivated by this ignorance can be  virtuous  or  non-
virtuous.  There are varieties. This is clearly stated  in  the  explanation
of the twelve links  by  the  Svatantrika-Madhyamika  (Autonomy  Middle  Way
School).

My earlier question was whether craving and grasping  are  necessarily  non-
virtuous or not. According to the Hinayana tenets, they are necessarily non-
virtuous. Craving and grasping belong to the desire realm. This  means  that
the attachment of the desire realm is necessarily non-virtuous.

But when you bring the Mahayana tenets into the picture, perhaps  you  could
say that the  attachment  of  the  desire  realm  is  not  necessarily  non-
virtuous.

According to the  Middle  Way  Consequence  School,  there  seems  to  be  a
discussion of an attachment that is the apprehension of true  existence.  As
such,  based  on  my  personal  opinion,  perhaps  you  could  say  that  an
attachment of the desire realm is not necessarily  non-virtuous.  These  are
just my personal thoughts.

The reason I asked you the question is this:  when  we  assert  craving  and
grasping to be necessarily non-virtuous, in  the  case  of  someone  who  is
going to get a good rebirth, what they nourish is  nevertheless  a  virtuous
projecting karma. Even if craving and grasping are non-virtuous, is there  a
problem in saying that they can nourish a virtuous  projecting  karma?  This
is why I brought up this issue for discussion.

We can substantiate and justify that craving and grasping, even if they  are
non-virtuous, can act as the conditions for a  good  rebirth.  The  main  or
primary cause of a good rebirth is virtuous projecting  karma,  not  craving
and grasping.

The karma that throws us into the next  rebirth  is  the  projecting  karma.
This can be virtuous or non-virtuous. Which karma will ripen earlier?
 • The stronger of the two will ripen earlier.
 • If both are of equal strength, the karma that one is more  familiar  with
   will ripen first.
 • If one is equally familiar with both, then the  karma  that  was  created
   earlier will ripen.

Depending  on  which  karma   is   stronger,   virtuous   or   non-virtuous,
correspondingly, you have craving and grasping.

Let us say that you are going to get a good rebirth.  At  the  time  craving
arises, you have a desire and a craving to have a future existence.

Can we then say that at the time when  grasping  arises,  there  is  also  a
desire for a specific kind of existence?

So craving and grasping nourishes the karma and activates  it.  When  it  is
fully potentialised, you are definitely going to a particular rebirth.

Khen Rinpoche: What do you think? Are you happy  with  that?   You  have  to
think at the next level and not just stop here.

In the case of someone who is going to get a good rebirth, at the time  when
there is grasping, let us say that there is a desire for a  particular  good
rebirth. Do you accept that? If you accept  that,  then  you  also  have  to
accept that the same thing will apply for someone who is going to the  lower
realms.

For someone who is going to the lower realms,  when  there  is  craving  and
grasping,   he is thinking, “I want to go to the lower  realms.  I  want  to
get this hell body. I want  to  get  this  hungry  ghost  body.”  Does  such
thoughts arise or not?

Khen Rinpoche: That is the question. It never ends. You think that  happens?
When there is craving, at that time, do you think like that?  No?  You  said
no?

Why can’t that happen? Your karma forces you to think like that.

(Response from student is inaudible).

For those who are going to the lower realms, do they have  the  thought,  “I
want to go to the lower realms”?
Khen Rinpoche: I speak like a Singaporean now. Have or  don’t  have?  Easier
to communicate!

(Response from student is inaudible).

Student: Don’t have! How can there be a  craving  for  an  existence  to  be
burned in the hells when we cannot even imagine the fires in the hells?  How
can we crave for a potential existence that we cannot even imagine?

Khen Rinpoche: You don’t have craving at that time? There is no craving?

Student: I think there is the craving for the experience of warmth when  one
feels cold and that nourishes the particular projecting  karma  for  rebirth
in the hell realms. You are not craving for a specific  hell  existence.  It
is just the experience of wanting warmth.

Khen Rinpoche: But how does that nourish the particular karma to be born  in
the hell realms? When you are reborn as a human,  you  can  also  feel  hot,
yes?

Student: I don’t know but maybe you crave for a human existence  before  you
experience it. But I cannot imagine that we will crave for a hell  existence
that entails burning in the hells for hundreds of ...

Khen Rinpoche: Why not? The question is why not?

Student: Because  all  sentient  beings  want  happiness  and  do  not  want
suffering. Not everyone is a masochist and there are so many hell beings.

Ven Gyurme:  We are asking, is it possible or not?

Student: I mean  it  is  possible  but  we  are  saying  that  this  is  the
experience for a large number of  hell  beings.  There  cannot  be  so  many
masochists in the world. I may have an explanation of how the nourishing  of
the karma works.

Khen Rinpoche: First you answer this,  “When  does  the  nourishing  of  the
karma take place?” At which age? At eighty years? One year before  the  time
of death?

Student: I don’t know.  My explanation is  like  this.  Let  us  say  it  is
attachment. I have an attachment towards a lady. I crave her. Then  grasping
follows. In a way, this is a kind of craving and grasping.

In my past life, I  have  committed  acts  of  sexual  misconduct  and  they
produce seeds in my mind. At that moment of time, since I have  these  seeds
that are about to  bear  fruit,  my  craving  and  grasping  for  this  lady
actually  nourishes  these  seeds.  This  experience  is  the  same  as  the
fruitional effect. It brings the karmic  seeds  to  fruition.  This  is  how
craving and grasping actually nourishes …

Khen Rinpoche: The example is actually quite nice. Now  you  apply  that  to
the meaning, ok?
Student: Similarly, at the point of time when I am about to  die,  for  some
reason, I feel cold so I crave and grasp  for  warmth.  This  nourishes  the
seed that I had created to be reborn in a hell realm. The experience is  the
same.

I feel that it cannot be a specific hell  experience  that  one  is  craving
for. To crave for a hell existence that is like living in the  sun,  so  hot
that one is melting? It is difficult to imagine that  one  would  crave  for
that kind of existence at the time of death.

Khen Rinpoche: You are saying that if a person is going to take  rebirth  in
the human realm, he doesn’t have any craving  for  heat  or  cold?  Are  you
saying that? So when there is the craving for heat and cold, one must go  to
the lower realms? Your idea is something  like  that?  Not  necessarily  so,
right?

Student: Then what do you crave for in order to be reborn as a human being?

Khen Rinpoche: Even if you were to have a human rebirth, sometimes  you  can
crave for heat or cold. It is possible, is it not? It is not necessarily  so
that if at the time of death, you grasp at heat or you grasp at  cold,  then
you will go to the lower realms. I don’t think so.

At the time of death, if you were to feel hungry, that does  not  mean  that
you will go to the realm of the hungry ghosts. It  is  not  necessarily  so.
When you feel hungry now, you do not go to the lower realms!

Your example is good but when you transfer it to the meaning,  it  does  not
match.

Isn’t it all determined by karma? So then there is no point  in  remembering
your guru. There is no point in remembering the Buddha. There  is  no  point
in remembering the Three Jewels. It is fixed already. Your karma throws  you
in that direction and there is nothing you can do about it.

Khen Rinpoche: At the time of death, whatever virtue you can  think  of,  it
doesn’t change (the rebirth you will take),  is  that  right?  That  is  not
likely to change.

What are you going to say if  someone  were  to  say  to  you,  “Your  karma
decides everything. What is the point then of generating virtue at the  time
of death?” What will your answer be?  Since your karma  decides  everything,
even if you were to generate virtue at the time of death, can it change  the
outcome or not?

Student: Even if you have the negative karma, you can cut off  your  craving
and grasping so that they do not come to fruition.  In  that  way,  you  can
actually control the outcome.

Student 2:   I  remembered  a  story  about  a  great  lama  who  had  great
compassion for everyone, especially the  beings  of  the  lower  realms.  He
wanted to take rebirth in the lower realms but he dreamt that  he  would  go
directly to the pure land. Even though he desired and was  attached  to  the
lower  realms,  somehow  his  karma  propelled   him   to   liberation   and
enlightenment.

Answer: What you said actually supported the position that  it  is  not  our
wish  but  our  karma  that  will  determine  where  we  go.  Everything  is
determined by karma.

This lama had the wish to go to the lower realms  to  help  sentient  beings
but because he did not have the karma to go to the lower  realms,  therefore
he did not go to the lower realms. So it is all determined by karma.

Without the strong karma that will propel one into the  lower  realms,  even
if one were to have the wish to go to the lower realms, one will not  go  to
the lower realms. But if one had both the strong non-virtuous  karma  to  go
to the lower realms and if one were to have the wish to go there,  one  will
go there.

From this, it is clear that the main deciding factor  is  karma—whether  you
have the karma or not. Is that not so? You accept that?

(Student’s reply is inaudible).

There is no need for you to state this because I believe it  is  very  clear
in the text that just having the karma alone is  not  sufficient.  In  order
for it to ripen, it must be activated by craving  and  grasping.  Nobody  is
disputing that.

The two primary causes of cyclic existence are karma and  afflictions.  From
the text, of the  two,  the  afflictions  are  the  principal.  Without  the
afflictions that nourish the karmic seed, no matter what karma you have,  it
would not be activated and it cannot be ripened. Nobody is saying that  just
because you have the seed, you would definitely have a sprout.

Khen Rinpoche: You still need to put water. You know how  to  do  gardening?
You don’t put your seed on the table and wish for it to  grow.  It  wouldn’t
grow.

Some things that you need to think about:
 • What does craving nourish?
 • What does grasping nourish?
 • What is their manner of nourishing?
 • Is there a difference in the way they nourish karma?
 • Can we say that the difference in their manner  of  nourishing  karma  is
   this—craving nourishes it in a general way and grasping nourishes it in a
   specific way?

I guess perhaps it is all right to say that  when  there  is  single-pointed
faith in the guru or in the Three Jewels, it can change things.  Perhaps  we
can say that that is an exception to the  rule.  Generally  speaking,  as  a
rule, karma dictates everything. But  in  the  case  of  someone  generating
single-pointed faith in the guru or in the  Three  Jewels,  then  those  are
exceptions. This is where the power of the object comes into play.

In the lam-rim, we talked about the  power  of  the  object.  The  teachings
mention that in most cases:
 • When the motivation is non-virtuous, the action is non-virtuous.
 • When the motivation is virtuous, the action is virtuous.
This is the general rule that is applicable to almost all  situations.  What
differentiates non-virtue from virtue is the  quality  of  the  mind,  i.e.,
whether the mind was non-virtuous or virtuous.

It is mentioned clearly in the Lam-rim Chenmo by Je Rinpoche that  when  the
power of the object comes into play,  that  is  the  exception.  This  means
regardless of  your  motivation  behind  making  offerings  to  the  Buddha,
constructing holy objects and so forth,  even  if  the  motivation  is  non-
virtuous, the karma becomes virtuous due to the power of  the  object.  This
is the exception.

Khen Rinpoche: You understand what I just said? Do you get the point that  I
am driving at?

The essential point is this: At the time of death, if we  can  remember  the
guru, if we can remember the Buddha, then that can change the karma.

Question: Among the four divisions of craving, which is virtuous,  which  is
non-virtuous and which is unspecified?

Answer: In the explanation of  craving  and  grasping,  different  kinds  of
craving are mentioned. There is:
1. the craving for the goal
2. the craving for existence
3. the craving for the view
Grasping is like clinging on to something.

Maybe there isn’t a division  of  these  different  forms  of  craving  into
virtuous  and  non-virtuous.  It  is  stated  very  clearly  in  the   lower
Abhidharma, i.e., the Treasury of Manifest Knowledge,  that  the  attachment
of the desire realms is necessarily non-virtuous.

Question: If a little baby dies, he doesn’t have  a  consciousness  that  is
able to properly think of virtue  or  non-virtue.  There  is  also  no  holy
objects around for him to see.  Where will he go?

Answer: The rule of thumb is that whether it is a  good  rebirth  or  a  bad
rebirth, it is all dependent on karma. When we talk about karma, which is:
 • heavier?
 • more familiar?
 • created earlier?

So what determines the rebirth is which karma is heavier.

If both karmas are equally heavy, then which karma  are  you  more  familiar
with?

If you are  equally  familiar  with  both,  then  which  karma  was  created
earlier?

The karma that will ripen is  the  heavier  of  the  two—virtuous  and  non-
virtuous karma. If they are equally heavy, the next criteria  is  the  karma
that one is more familiar with. Whatever manifests at the time of  death  is
likely to be the karma that one is more familiar with.

Student: There are four permutations.

Khen Rinpoche: What is number four?

Student: According to the Lamrim Chenmo, the four are: (1) weighty (2)  what
is manifest (3) what is familiar (4) what is created first.

Khen Rinpoche: Generally, of the two—virtuous or non-virtuous karma:
 • The heavier of the two will ripen.
 • If they are equal in weight, the one you  are  more  familiar  with  will
   ripen first.
 • If you are equally familiar with virtuous and  non-virtuous  karma,  then
   the karma that you created earlier will ripen.

I think it is only these three.

Khen Rinpoche: I don’t remember.

Back to taking rebirth in a pure land. For ordinary  beings  like  ourselves
to be born in a pure land, we must have accumulated the  karma  to  be  born
there. Of course whatever the karma is, it is impelled  by  ignorance.  Then
you accumulate the karma. That karma would have to be nourished  by  craving
and grasping. Of course, there are many other conditions that are  necessary
before one can get the result of going to the pure land.

First, one must have accumulated very strong  and  powerful  virtuous  karma
without which there is no basis to be reborn there. For us ordinary  beings,
the way we accumulate karma necessarily  involves  ignorance.  Ignorance  is
always there.

Then at the time of death, there must be very strong  craving  and  grasping
to be born in a particular pure land. You need that strong  wish.  Once  you
get yourself there, you are still an ordinary being. It is said  that  there
are ordinary beings in the pure land, i.e., ordinary  beings  who  have  not
entered  any  paths.  Of  course,  you  will  also  find  hearers,  solitary
realisers, bodhisattvas and all kinds of people there. It is also said  that
in the pure land, there is no non-virtue and there is no suffering.

Khen Rinpoche: How nice!

Are there afflictions in the pure land? Is  there  attachment  in  the  pure
land?

(Student’s response is inaudible).

When you are reborn in the  pure  land  and  you  see  all  these  beautiful
palaces and beautiful goddesses, does attachment arise or not?

Actually I don’t know much about the pure land.

Question: It is said in some texts that for ordinary beings who are born  in
the pure land, it is more difficult for  them  to  develop  bodhicitta?  Can
this be due to attachment arising?

Khen Rinpoche: Not necessarily so.

When there is no suffering in the pure land, won’t it be very  difficult  to
generate renunciation? If you cannot  generate  renunciation,  how  are  you
going to generate bodhicitta?

Khen Rinpoche: Is this true? You must listen  carefully  to  what  he  (Ven.
Gyurme) said.

It is clear that there is no suffering in the pure land.  Because  there  is
no suffering, you cannot generate renunciation.  When  you  cannot  generate
renunciation, it is going to be very difficult to generate bodhicitta.

Ven. Gyurme to Khen Rinpoche: It follows then that going to  the  pure  land
is an obstacle for generating bodhicitta.

Khen Rinpoche: It is not impossible but it just takes a long time.

Ven. Gyurme to Khen Rinpoche: How long?

Khen Rinpoche: There is no time limit. Not one  year,  not  ten  years.  You
have to develop renunciation, then bodhicitta and then you  get  enlightened
there.  Without  renunciation,  without   bodhicitta,   you   wouldn’t   get
enlightened. Only it takes a long period of time.

Question: There are ordinary beings in the pure land.  Therefore  there  are
still non-manifest afflictions  in  the  minds  of  these  ordinary  beings.
Therefore would it not follow that in the pure land there is suffering?

Khen Rinpoche: You are not listening. I told you from the beginning that  in
the pure land, there is no suffering.

Question: To me, the state of people in the pure land  is  like  people  who
have attained calm-abiding. Their afflictions  are  temporarily  suppressed.
However  since  they  have  not  realised  emptiness,  the  seeds   of   the
afflictions are still there. Therefore there is still  pervasive  compounded
suffering?

Answer: Whether they have pervasive compounded suffering or not  remains  to
be examined. It is said that people who are born in  the  pure  land  attain
the five super-knowledges simply by virtue of being born there. If  that  is
the case, this suggests that such people automatically have calm-abiding.

It is also stated clearly in the teachings that once  one  is  born  in  the
pure land, one will never be reborn in any inopportune state.

Khen Rinpoche: Today we never read the text. Anyway, it  is  good  to  think
about the twelve links. Sometimes they look easy but when  you  think  about
them more deeply, so many questions arise in the mind. Even I have  so  many
questions but there is no book to read to find the  answers.  I  also  don’t
know who I can ask.



Interpreted by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme; transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek,  Vivien  Ng
& Aki Yeo; edited by Cecilia Tsong.



