Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Engaging in the Deeds of a Bodhisattva/BP2 M5 L47 final .doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:52:13.389290
================================================================================


Transcript of the teachings by Khen Rinpoche Geshe  Chonyi  on  Engaging  in
the Bodhisattva Deeds, 2014

Root text: Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds by  Shantideva,  translated  by
Toh Sze Gee. Copyright: Toh Sze Gee, 2006; Revised edition, 2014.

Lesson     47                                                              2
September 2014


Question and Answer session.


Student 1: A bodhisattva superior who has realised  emptiness  directly  has
overcome the intellectually acquired obscurations. But in  his  mind,  there
are still the innate obscurations. Is  that  mind  that  is  afflicted  with
innate obscurations true suffering? Does such  a  mind  have  the  pervasive
suffering?[1]

(Khen Rinpoche clarifies what the student is asking).

Khen Rinpoche: You are asking whether the mind of the  superior  bodhisattva
is true suffering? If you are asking that, then that is a  big  question.  I
don’t know what you are trying to ask.

Student 1: The superior bodhisattva is still in samsara because his mind  is
still afflicted with the innate afflictive obscurations. Does  such  a  mind
still have pervasive suffering?

Khen Rinpoche: I don’t know what you are trying to ask.

Student 2: We are trying to figure  out  where  the  boundary  of  pervasive
suffering lies.  To me it seems that it  is  only  from  the  eighth  ground
onwards that sentient beings would not have  pervasive  suffering.  But  she
(Student 1) is saying that once a person attains the path of  seeing,  there
is no more pervasive suffering. So we are wondering where  the  boundary  of
pervasive suffering is?

Khen Rinpoche: You are asking where the boundary of true suffering is?

Student 2: Is true suffering the same  as  compounded  pervasive  suffering?
That is also another question.

Khen Rinpoche: Yes, you can say that. That is your question?

Student 2:  Where is the boundary? When does  one  overcome  this  pervasive
suffering?

Khen Rinpoche: Somebody give the answer. The senior students. Where  is  the
boundary?
Student 3: I guess that once a bodhisattva has reached the stage when he  no
longer returns to samsara like a non-returner, I think that is  the  end  of
his pervasive suffering.

Khen Rinpoche: The non-returner bodhisattva? What did you say?  Non-returner
what?

Student 3: There is a stage for arhats when they are non-returners and once-
returners. I don’t know whether there is such a stage for bodhisattvas.

Khen Rinpoche: You are saying that  you  cannot  differentiate  between  the
arhat once-return and arhat non-returner?

Student 3: That is my mistake. A non-returner means he doesn’t come back  to
samsara anymore. This is  his  last  life.  I  think  that  is  the  end  of
pervasive suffering for the non-returner  arhat.  But  I  don’t  know  about
bodhisattvas though. At what stage is the end  of  pervasive  suffering  for
them?

Khen Rinpoche: Why do you think non-returners has no more true suffering?

Student 3: Having to  return  means  that  you  acquire  the  aggregates  of
suffering. So if you are a non-returner that is  the  boundary  after  which
you no longer have pervasive suffering.

Khen  Rinpoche:  Correct!  What  is  the  meaning  or  definition  of   true
suffering?

At the same time, you must all listen. When I am asking you, how I  ask  the
question, you have to listen because I’m asking you in different ways.

Now you have to explain to me what is true  suffering?  You  already  accept
that when you have achieved the state of  non-returner,  there  is  no  more
true suffering. Before that,  he  has  (true  suffering)  because  he  takes
rebirth. So what is true suffering?[2] You still don’t know?

Student 3: It seems to imply that it has more to do with the mind  than  the
body. Are you saying that true suffering has to do more with the  mind  than
the body?

Khen Rinpoche: You just give me (the answer to) what is true suffering?  You
give me some kind of  idea.  Of  course  not  many  people  understand  what
Student 3 is saying about the non-returners.

For those who do understand, is what Student 3  has  said  correct  or  not?
When you have achieved the state of a  non-returner  stage,  you  no  longer
have true suffering. Do you agree with that?  (I  want  to  hear  from  the)
senior ones. Maybe the new ones won’t know the answer.

Are all the seniors meditating? (Laughter).

Student 4: I don’t really have much of a response because  first  of  all  I
don’t think that there is such a thing  as  a  non-returner  bodhisattva.  I
think non-returners only applies to hearers and solitary realisers.

If you are asking whether the body of a buddha is  true  suffering,  is  the
mind of a buddha true suffering, I cannot  answer  these  questions.  I  can
only think that true suffering relates to the appropriation of physical  and
mental  aggregates.  Usually  we  think  of  that  as  the  nature  of  true
suffering. I may be wrong.  Having  the  appropriated  physical  and  mental
aggregates, I’m not sure whether that is true suffering.

Khen Rinpoche:  Just go with Student 3’s idea, what he  has  said.  Is  that
correct or not? Just answer that. If you say you don’t agree, then  give  me
your reason. If you agree, then also give your reason.  Just  go  direct  to
that question. Otherwise it will take a long time.

Student 1: I disagree because I think the aggregates of the non-returner  is
still true suffering. This is because the cause of that  body  is  inherited
in that very lifetime from his human father and mother. Therefore  the  body
is still true suffering.

Khen Rinpoche:  You mean a human body must be true suffering?

Student 1: Yes?

Khen Rinpoche:  Are you saying that the  human  body  that  comes  from  the
father and mother must be true suffering? That is your idea?

Student 1: What is the definition of human?

Khen Rinpoche:  Now I’m asking (the questions) and you have  to  answer.  Is
the human body necessarily true suffering?

Student 1: Yes.

Khen Rinpoche:  Is Buddha Shakyamuni’s body true suffering?

Student 1: No.

Khen Rinpoche:  Isn’t his body a human body?

Student 1: Yes.

Khen Rinpoche:  Then you go and sit down!

(Addressing another student) Student 3  said  that  a  non-returner  doesn’t
have true suffering. Do you accept that or not? Just answer, yes or no.
Student 5: No, I don’t agree. Being a non-returner  means  that  he  is  not
going to come back for another rebirth but the current body that he  has  is
still a human body with its appropriated contaminated aggregates unlike  the
case of the Buddha.

Khen Rinpoche:  Why is his body true suffering? Now you give your reason.

Student 5:  His body is true suffering because it is  still  the  result  of
karma and afflictions. When he came out from his mother’s womb, he  was  not
a non-returner yet.

Khen Rinpoche:  When this person becomes an arhat, is his  body  still  true
suffering?

Student 5:  Yes.

Khen Rinpoche:  So an arhat has not abandoned true suffering?

Student 5: If I follow my line of argument, I would have to say no.

Khen Rinpoche:  The arhat is not free from true suffering?

Student 5: No.

Khen Rinpoche:  The arhat still has suffering?

Student 5: I would have to say no. An arhat is liberated and is free of  his
afflictions. But is he free from his suffering and coming back  for  another
uncontrolled rebirth? I’m not sure. I have not thought it through.

Khen Rinpoche:  You are not sure whether an arhat still takes  rebirth?  I’m
surprised.

What she has said, some parts are correct, some parts are not correct.

Next student, just answer that.

At the same time everybody must listen. This is  how  you  discuss  a  topic
over a long period of time. Sometimes we discuss, ask one question,  someone
answers and after that, you have nothing to say. Finished.  But  it  doesn’t
end there. If you ask in different ways, there are more questions. Then  you
have a longer discussion.

Student 6: When the non-returner steps on a nail, he experiences pain.

Khen Rinpoche:  So the non-returner has true suffering.  His  body  is  true
suffering because …

Student 6: Due to his contaminated appropriated  physical  aggregates.  When
he steps on a nail, he experiences pain.

Khen Rinpoche:  So the arhat also has true suffering?

Student 6: Yes. His body is a contaminated physical body. Once  he  abandons
that at the end of his life, this being his last life, when he  enters  into
nirvana, then there won’t be any (true suffering).

Khen Rinpoche:  When you achieve arhatship, you reach the peace of  nirvana.
Nirvana means being free from true suffering and  the  cause  of  suffering.
You entered the path and achieved the peace of nirvana.

You know the four noble truths? They  are  true  origins,  true  sufferings,
true paths and true cessations. So when you achieve  nirvana,  doesn’t  that
mean that you have abandoned true suffering and the cause of the  suffering?
So doesn’t that mean that an arhat has  abandoned  true  suffering  and  the
cause of the suffering? An arhat won’t have (true suffering  and  the  cause
of suffering)  would  he?  So  that  means  an  arhat  does  not  have  true
suffering.

Student 6: But there were accounts  of  arhats  experiencing  headaches  and
when he stepped on a nail, he experienced pain.

Khen Rinpoche: So (to you) that means that an arhat has not  abandoned  true
suffering. Is that what you are saying?

Student 6: I have difficulty reconciling these two: what has just been  said
and the accounts of him having headaches and so forth.

Khen Rinpoche:  I understand what you are saying but what  is  your  answer?
Has the arhat  abandoned  true  suffering  or  has  he  not  abandoned  true
suffering?

Student 6: By that account, you have to  say  that  he  has  abandoned  true
suffering but  …

Khen Rinpoche: Now the question  is  what  is  your  answer?  Has  an  arhat
abandoned true suffering?

Student 6: Yes.

Khen Rinpoche:  That means an arhat doesn’t have true suffering?

Student 6: He has abandoned true suffering but …

Khen Rinpoche:  He has abandoned true suffering so  that  means  he  doesn’t
have true suffering.

Student 6: What about the imprints?

Khen Rinpoche: You don’t ask me questions. I’m asking you.

Student 6: He has abandoned true  suffering  but  he  has  not  abandon  the
imprints.

Khen Rinpoche:  So he has abandoned true suffering.  He  doesn’t  have  true
suffering.
Student 6: But he has imprints. There is no true suffering but he still  has
imprints of true suffering.

Khen Rinpoche:  You must go one (point at a time).  An  arhat  doesn’t  have
true suffering.

Student 6: Yes, he doesn’t have true suffering but he has imprints.

Khen Rinpoche:  An arhat doesn’t have  true  suffering.  Aren’t  you  saying
that because he has abandoned true suffering? So an arhat doesn’t have  true
suffering.

Student 6: This part is difficult to reconcile.

Khen Rinpoche:  Abandoned means “don’t have”.

Student 6: He has abandoned that mind  but  I’m  not  sure  about  the  body
because the body is still the result of contaminated actions.  At  the  time
when his  mind  reached  the  stage  of  foe-destroyer,  his  body,  due  to
imprints, still has to  experience  (suffering).  Now  it  is  difficult  to
reconcile whether he has abandoned true suffering but  his  body  itself  is
still a result of true suffering.

Khen Rinpoche: What is the conclusion then? What are you  going  to  say  if
somebody asks you, “Has an arhat abandoned true suffering or not?”

Student 6: Yes.

Khen Rinpoche:  You have to say “yes.” That  means  an  arhat  doesn’t  have
true suffering.

Student 6: No. Not necessarily so.

Khen Rinpoche: Haven’t you already accepted that an arhat doesn’t have  true
suffering? He has abandoned true suffering. The  second  question  is  this,
“Does he have true suffering.” You agree to that?

Student 6: No, he has.

Khen Rinpoche:  That means he has not abandoned (true suffering).

Student 6: He has abandoned true suffering but he still has  the  experience
of true suffering.

Khen Rinpoche:  If that is the case, how can you say he has abandoned  (true
suffering)? What do you mean by abandon?

Student  6:  Because  true  suffering  is  defined  as   both   contaminated
appropriated physical and mental aggregates. For the physical  part,  it  is
very difficult to reconcile. That one I’m not sure.

Bodhisattvas on the first ground do not experience both physical and  mental
suffering. For the physical part, due to having abandoned all  negativities.
I am not sure about the arhats because  we  have  not  had  lessons  on  the
twenty sanghas.

Khen Rinpoche:  What?

Student 6: We have not had lessons on the arhats in detail.

Khen Rinpoche:  Next student, do you agree with what  Student  3  has  said,
that a non-returner doesn’t have true  suffering  because  he  doesn’t  take
rebirth again in samsara?

Student 7: No, I disagree. He still has ignorance.

Khen Rinpoche:  So once you have ignorance that means you  necessarily  have
true suffering? Are you saying that?

Student 7: Yes.

Khen  Rinpoche:   So  that  means  the  arya  bodhisattvas  also  have  true
suffering?

Student 7:  Yes.

Khen Rinpoche:  I think we just completed one of the lessons  where  it  was
mentioned that even if you cut his body, there is no mental and no  physical
pain.[3]

After achieving the path of seeing, that body totally changes. It becomes  a
mental body.

Maitreya has mentioned in one of his texts that when you have  achieved  the
path of seeing,  you  no  longer  have  true  suffering.  You  also  do  not
experience aging and death. All these do not exist once you become  an  arya
bodhisattva.

When the path of seeing is achieved, the  bodhisattvas  don’t  age,  die  or
fall sick. Even if their bodies are cut up, there is no pain.  It  is  clear
then that the arya bodhisattva doesn’t have true  suffering.  But  according
to you, his body is true suffering because he has ignorance.

Student 7: I wasn’t thinking about his body per se. I was  thinking  of  him
having ignorance, therefore he still has true suffering.

Khen Rinpoche:   Why is the body of the non-returner true suffering?

Student 7: If you are talking about the body itself, then …

Khen Rinpoche:   Isn’t  it  the  case  that  you  cannot  say  that  he  has
ignorance? So your reason is not correct.

Student 7: If you are talking about the body, then it is a different  thing.
Just now I was thinking in terms of him having true suffering.

Khen Rinpoche:  Because he has true suffering what is your reason?

Student 7: If we are just talking about whether he  has  true  suffering  or
not, then I would say that as he still has  ignorance,  therefore  he  still
has true suffering. The  reason  is  because  ignorance  is  a  contaminated
phenomena and a contaminated phenomenon is miserable  in  nature.  Therefore
if he still has ignorance, he will still experience  misery.  He  still  has
true suffering.

Khen Rinpoche:  Same thing: Do the arya bodhisattvas have ignorance?

Student 7: That’s why I said arya bodhisattvas still  have  true  suffering.
He may not suffer physical or mental pain but he still has true suffering.

Khen Rinpoche:  What kind of suffering does he have?

Student 7: Because he still has contaminated  phenomena  so  he  will  still
have true suffering.

Khen Rinpoche:  But his body is totally changed after  he  has  reached  the
path of seeing.

Student 7: But his mind still has ignorance. Among the five aggregates,  one
of them is ignorance. There is the mental factor of ignorance so he  is  not
totally free from contaminated phenomena.

Khen Rinpoche:  But he don’t experience anything.

Student 7: Yes. That is feeling, that is experiencing but in  terms  of  the
phenomena being contaminated phenomena, isn’t it the case  that  there  will
still be  true  suffering?  Because  he  still  has  the  mental  factor  of
ignorance in his continuum.

Khen Rinpoche: Then what Maitreya Buddha said is incorrect?

This is what I remembered before I was 30 years old.  We  have  to  memorise
(the text)..

Student 7: I’m just presenting another view. That’s all. Everyone says  that
they have suffering.

How do you explain that  in  view  of  the  fact  he  still  has  ignorance?
Ignorance is a contaminated phenomenon  and  as  such,  it  is  a  cause  of
suffering. How do we explain that? I’ve no qualms about it being  scriptural
authority.

Khen Rinpoche: In the first place, positing  the  boundary  of  contaminated
and non-contaminated phenomena in itself is already complicated  because  it
depends on which tenet system we are referring to.

Student  7:  How  do  you  explain  that  he  still  has  this  contaminated
phenomenon and yet does not have true suffering?
Khen Rinpoche:  I don’t know. I think I  may  have  mentioned  this  in  the
previous Basic Program but not during these classes. This  time  round,  I’m
not sure.

The  contaminated  appropriated  aggregates  that  arise  from   karma   and
afflictions are posited as true suffering. As to what  defines  contaminated
phenomenon, different tenets have  their  own  assertions.  In  general,  we
could say that any phenomenon that arises from karma and  afflictions  is  a
contaminated phenomenon.

You  could  say  that  the  physical  body  in  the  continuum  of  Hinayana
superiors—in  particular,  the  stream-enterers,  once-returners  and   non-
returners—are necessarily true suffering.

With  regard  to  the  physical  aggregates  of  foe-destroyers,  there  are
instances where they are true suffering but there are  also  instances  when
they are not true suffering. For example,  if  a  person  becomes  an  arhat
without discarding the previous physical aggregates he had  when  he  was  a
non-returner,  his  physical  aggregates  would  be  an  instance  of   true
suffering since he hasn’t discarded them  yet.  According  to  the  Hinayana
tenets, such individuals have achieved  the  nirvana  with  remainder.  Once
they  have  achieved  the  nirvana  without  remainder,  then  the  physical
aggregates in his continuum will not be true suffering.

The difference between  the  nirvana  with  remainder  and  nirvana  without
remainder is made on the basis of  whether  that  individual  possesses  the
contaminated physical aggregates or not. Of course, this  is  the  assertion
of the Autonomy Middle Way School. The Prasangikas have a different take  on
this.

As all of you have already studied tenets,  how  do  the  Prasangikas  posit
nirvana with remainder and nirvana without remainder?

Student 1: According to the Prasangikas, an arhat with remainder is when  he
is out of  meditative  equipoise  directly  realising  emptiness.  An  arhat
without remainder is when he is in  direct  meditative  equipoise  realising
emptiness.

Khen Rinpoche: When he is in meditative  equipoise  focusing  on  emptiness,
what is it that is not  remaining?  When  he  emerges  from  his  meditative
equipoise, what is  it  that  is  remaining?  You  have  to  explain,  “with
remainder” and “without remainder.” The meaning has to go with the words.

Student 1: He has the remainder of seeing the appearance of true  existence.
While in meditative equipoise, he does not have such an appearance.

Khen Rinpoche:  A short answer is enough. Very good. You say too much,  then
it is not so good. It is because he remains with  the  appearance  (of  true
existence). That is enough.

In essence, this is what the Prasangikas  assert:  That  when  an  arhat  in
meditative equipoise directly perceives emptiness, there  is  no  appearance
of true existence. But when she is out of  meditative  equipoise,  then  the
appearance of true existence arises. This is what remains.

It is clear that the body in  the  continuum  of  those  who  have  achieved
nirvana with remainder is true suffering while the body in the continuum  of
those who have achieved nirvana without remainder is not true suffering.

It is also clearly mentioned in the texts that for ordinary beings  who  are
reborn in the pure land,  such  as  Amitabha’s  pure  land,  although  their
bodies are the bodies in the continua of ordinary beings, nevertheless  they
are not true suffering.
]
Likewise there are also arhats abiding in  the  pure  land.  Their  physical
aggregates in their continua are not true suffering. It is said  that  there
is no suffering in Sukhavati, Amitabha Buddha’s pure land.

As mentioned earlier in Verse 7.27 a, b

      … their bodies are happy due to their merits
      And their minds are happy due to their skill

These two lines of Verse 7.27  a,  b  are  stated  in  the  context  of  the
bodhisattva superiors.

For those who have achieved nirvana with remainder,  since  they  have  true
suffering, we can’t say that they have abandoned it. That is why  there  are
accounts of such individuals who experience headaches and pain.

Khen Rinpoche: As mentioned earlier, arhats also have headaches.

Arhats have achieved liberation, the freedom  from  samsara.  As  such,  you
have to say that arhats have abandoned samsara.  Because  they  are  arhats,
you have to say they have liberated themselves from cyclic existence.

The question now is: Is true suffering synonymous  with  samsara?  Obviously
you cannot say that this is the case.

The pervasion works like this: “If there is samsara, it is necessarily  true
suffering. But if it is true suffering,  it  is  not  necessarily  samsara.”
This may be quite difficult to understand. How  does  this  work?  Therefore
you have to use some illustrations.

For example, the physical aggregates  in  the  continuum  of  an  arhat,  in
particular, an arhat who has achieved nirvana with remainder. That  is  true
suffering.

Then another question arises, “What is samsara? Where is its boundary?  What
is the definition?”

A foe-destroyer is an arhat. Has  an  arhat  completely  abandoned  all  the
twelve links of dependent arising? We say that  arhats  have  already  freed
themselves from  samsara  or  cyclic  existence.  Do  you  agree?   Can  you
confidently say that arhats are liberated from samsara?

Khen Rinpoche: You still have doubts that an arhat is  freed  from  samsara?
There should be no doubt.

As such, isn’t it the case that they are no longer have any  of  the  twelve
links?

If you say yes, then in their continua, they will  not  have  the  projected
results and the actualised results. The arhats don’t have the  six  sources?
No aging? No dying? No feeling?

Student 3: They are experiencing the  results  of  the  last  cycle  of  the
twelve links.

Khen Rinpoche: So does this not mean that the arhat  is  still  experiencing
the twelve links? Won’t that mean that he still has the twelve links if  you
were to say that the last results have not  been  completed  because  he  is
still experiencing the last cycle of the twelve links?

Student 3: The arhat is experiencing the results of the last cycle.

Khen Rinpoche: That means  he  still  has  (the  twelve  links).  He  hasn’t
completed them.

Student 3: Last projected cycle.

Khen Rinpoche: So he still has them?

Student 3: After that, he doesn’t (have them).

Khen Rinpoche: After what?

Student 3:  After that, he will not  suffer  another  cycle  of  the  twelve
links.

Khen Rinpoche: Before being arhat, then after being arhat?

Student 3: After being an arhat, he will not have them.

Khen Rinpoche: Of course, I agreed with that. During the  (time  he  is  an)
arhat, have?

Student 3: Yes, he experiences the last twelve links.

Khen Rinpoche: So during the time he is an arhat, he is not freed  from  the
twelve links?

Student 3: That is why he is with remainder.

Khen Rinpoche:  What are you talking about?

Student 3:  That is why he has the nirvana with remainder.

Khen Rinpoche: Now are you saying that arhats remain in samsara?

Student 3:  You said that arhats have true suffering but  they  are  out  of
samsara.

Khen Rinpoche: Yes.

Student 3: So there is true suffering because they are suffering. They  have
their old bodies that came from  before  and  that  goes  on  to  aging  and
suffering but they are not subject to a new cycle of rebirth.  So  they  are
out of the twelve links. They  have  their  old  bodies  from  the  previous
rebirth so that is suffering.

Khen Rinpoche: So the arhat is not really free of the twelve links?

Student 3:  I mean they are somewhere in between. I think you  know  what  I
mean.

Khen Rinpoche: I don’t know what you mean.

Student 3: I have a question. When we see  Shakyamuni  Buddha  and  our  own
guru, Lama Zopa Rinpoche who we see as a buddha who suffers, is  it  because
they have true suffering but they are not in samsara?

Khen Rinpoche: You are now in the second round of the Basic Program!

Student 3: Please don’t take back my certificate! (Laughter).

Khen Rinpoche: With long khata and mandala and  three  prostrations,  return
it tomorrow! (Laughter). You don’t have  to  return  back  but  you  take  a
second round. Joking …

We have looked at this quite a fair bit when we  were  studying  tenets.  It
depends on the perspective of the tenets that you are taking.

According to the Hinayana tenets,  essentially  the  physical  body  of  the
buddha is true suffering because it is in the same continuum as the body  he
had when he was on the  path  of  preparation.  According  to  the  Hinayana
tenets, one progresses from the path of preparation up to the  path  of  no-
more-learning in one sitting. That is how the Buddha became enlightened.  As
such because his body is in the same continuum  as  that  old  body,  it  is
posited as true suffering. From  the  perspective  of  these  lower  tenets,
enlightenment or buddhahood is posited mainly from the  perspective  of  the
Buddha’s mind.

But the Mahayana tenets’ explanation of the Buddha is  much  more  profound.
In short, the Buddha doesn’t have  true  suffering.  The  Buddha’s  physical
body is not true suffering. The Buddha’s body is buddha.

In the Mahayana tenets, there  is  the  presentation  of  the  four  bodies,
namely:
1. the nature truth body
2. the wisdom truth body
3. the enjoyment body
4. the emanation body
This assertion of the four bodies is not found in Hinayana tenets

As to the question whether your virtuous  friends  have  true  suffering  or
not, earlier in  this  text,  there  is  the  discussion  of  how  when  the
bodhisattva superiors give away their body, even if  they  were  to  be  cut
into pieces, they  do  not  experience  any  physical  and  mental  pain  or
suffering (Verse 7.27). Instead it is said that they  experience  incredible
joy.

If in reality your virtuous friend is a buddha, if you  perceive  suffering,
then that  is  just  an  appearance.  In  reality  there  is  no  suffering.
According to the Mahayana tenets, the buddhas don’t die.  Nevertheless  they
show the appearance of passing away  into  parinirvana  just  as  Shakyamuni
Buddha did showing the aspect of passing away. In Shakyamuni  Buddha’s  life
story, he went through many hardships in his practice and then  he  achieved
enlightenment under the bodhi tree and so forth. According to  the  Mahayana
tenets, these are just a display of his  deeds.  In  fact,  he  had  already
achieved enlightenment a long time ago. During the  fortunate  eon  of  this
world, among the thousand buddhas that will come, he was the fourth one.  So
he has already achieved enlightenment a long time ago. All these  activities
mentioned above were just a display.

Shakyamuni Buddha did not newly achieve enlightenment. Likewise  the  future
Buddha, Maitreya Buddha, the fifth of  the  thousand  buddhas,  has  already
achieved enlightenment too. But when he descends  on  this  earth,  he  will
also show the aspects of being born, growing up and practising  austerities.
Then he will show the aspect of achieving enlightenment and  the  aspect  of
passing away as well. All these will be mere displays, i.e., simply  showing
the aspects of these activities.

If your virtuous friends or your gurus in reality are  buddhas  and  if  you
see them suffering, then those are just appearances and not real  suffering.
But if your virtuous friend in reality  is  an  ordinary  being  and  not  a
buddha, when you see him suffering, then he is suffering. As has  been  said
before, whatever appears to us is  not  certain  and  is  not  definite.  So
whatever appears to you is not necessarily the truth.

The seventh Dalai Lama, Kelsang Gyatso said, “All the phenomena  of  samsara
and nirvana are fabrications of  one’s  conceptual  thought.  They  are  not
truly existent.”

As such, do not cling to phenomena as being truly existent but rather,  look
at everything as being empty.

As to whether someone—be it your guru or anyone you see—is really  suffering
or not, it depends. One way is to look at it from the  perspectives  of  the
different tenets.  You also have to understand that there  are  cases  where
the bodhisattva superiors don’t experience physical suffering  because  they
have abandoned all negativities.

The point here is that whatever appears is not certain. Just because we  see
somebody suffering, it does not mean he is suffering.

Khen Rinpoche: I am answering your question. You  understand  now?  You  can
keep your certificate.

Are you all falling asleep? You must wake up. During discussion,  your  mind
must be awake. What  they  are  talking  about?  You  shouldn’t  think,  “It
doesn’t matter as it does not concern me.” Don’t shut down your  brain!  You
should be active, “Why did he say this? Why did he say that?” You  must  ask
yourself these questions.

As said in Maitreya’s Uttaratantra, the Mahayana  Sublime  Continuum,  there
is no aging and sickness for bodhisattvas superiors. They  also  don’t  die.
As  such  bodhisattva  superiors  don’t  have  suffering.  They  don’t  have
physical suffering and they don’t have mental suffering.

This is complicated and you have to think about it. It  is  said  that  when
one becomes a bodhisattva superior, one acquires the body  that  is  in  the
nature of mind, a mental body.

The question is this: the bodhisattva was on the path of  preparation  prior
to that. He had an ordinary body. During  the  transition  when  he  crossed
over to the path of seeing, does his old body have to die? Does it  need  to
be discarded or does it simply change in nature?

If you say that he now has this mental body, what is the  substantial  cause
of this mental body, the body that is in the nature of the mind?

When he became a bodhisattva superior, he  acquired  the  mental  body  that
will last him right up to his last moment as  a  sentient  being,  his  last
moment of being a non-buddha.

This mental body is said to arise from the level of  the  predisposition  of
ignorance together with uncontaminated karma. This body will exist  all  the
way up to the end of the mental continuum of being a sentient being.

When this individual becomes a buddha, then what happens to his  body  is  a
completely different story. When he achieves enlightenment,  his  form  body
is something else. From the perspective of  Mahayana  tantra,  what  is  the
substantial  cause  of  the  form  body  of  a  buddha?   According  to  the
perspective of Mahayana tantra, just prior to achieving  enlightenment,  the
body in the continuum of a sentient being cannot be  the  substantial  cause
of a buddha’s form body. Why? Because the mental body  of  that  bodhisattva
arose from the level of the predisposition of ignorance. As such, it  cannot
be posited as the substantial cause for the form body of a buddha.

Thus, from the perspective of tantra, the sutric explanation  for  achieving
the form body of a buddha is inadequate. Therefore when one analyses  tantra
in detail, particularly highest yoga tantra, the conclusion  there  is  that
the substantial cause of buddhahood, including a buddha’s form body, has  to
be the extremely subtle wind and mind. Such an explanation is found only  in
highest yoga tantra.

When one’s investigates deeply, what exactly is  the  substantial  cause  of
enlightenment? There must  be  something  within  each  individual  and  the
buddha lineage (or buddha  nature)  is  referred  to  here.  There  must  be
something within each individual that an individual already  possesses  that
continues up to  enlightenment.  It  cannot  be  fabricated.  Applying  deep
analysis, what is that?  Combine  this  analysis  with  the  question:  What
exactly is the substantial cause of enlightenment,  the  substantial  causes
of a buddha’s mind and a buddha’s body?

Considering all these things together, one then  looks  at  the  explanation
given in tantra. That really highlights  the  extraordinary  characteristics
and features of tantra. If one thinks about it, definitely one  gains  trust
and conviction in the validity of the Mahayana tantra.

If we start from how the Hinayana tenets  explain  enlightenment,  they  are
only able to talk about enlightenment from the perspective of  the  mind  of
the Buddha but they don’t know how to  explain  why  Buddha  has  suffering.
They say Buddha has true  suffering  and  that  the  Buddha’s  body  is  not
buddha.

Then we go on to Mahayana  sutra.  There  is  an  explanation  of  the  four
bodies. Mahayana sutra does talk about the causes  for  and  certain  things
that will transform into  the  body  of  a  buddha.  Although  there  is  an
explanation, if you were to analyse  their  explanation  more  deeply—as  to
whether it is adequate or not, as to what exactly is the  substantial  cause
of a buddha’s form body and so forth—you will find  their  explanation  also
inadequate.

This is where the Mahayana tantric explanations  come  in.  Then  everything
fits very nicely.

Even if we were look to look at just reincarnation—what moves on  from  life
to life— of course there are explanations  in  both  Hinayana  and  Mahayana
sutra. But the tantric explanation is qualitatively very different.

All Buddhists talk about something that moves from life  to  life  but  what
exactly  moves from life to life? The body doesn’t move but the mind  moves.


Then when you examine this in detail, you ask,  do  all  consciousnesses—the
sense consciousnesses and the  mental  consciousness—move  on  to  the  next
life?

Within the category of mental consciousnesses, there are so  many  different
kinds of mental consciousnesses—contaminated, uncontaminated, subtle,  gross
and so forth. Although there are explanations in sutra but when  you  looked
at the tantric explanations of the extremely subtle winds and mind  and  how
they move from life to life, then you  can  really  see  the  profundity  of
tantra.

The point is that tantra is something that is extremely  precious  and  very
profound. We will get to look at tantra in a little bit more detail  in  one
of the modules. It is very profound, contrary to  what  most  people  think.
People think, “Oh, Vajrayana or tantra  is  about  doing  rituals,  reciting
mantras, reciting sadhanas and so forth.” It is not that  at  all.  That  is
not the real deal, not the essence. The  tantric  teachings,  starting  from
its explanation of reality, what is  our  body  and  mind,  their  different
levels, what exactly moves from life to  life,  what  exactly  moves  on  to
enlightenment, what is the substantial cause of enlightenment—these are  all
the finer points found in tantra. As such, it is  very  important  to  study
and to understand what tantra really is. That is extremely important.
Of course, in the first place you need to have a  very  strong  yearning  to
understand tantra. That is very important.

If in the future, we can make a connection with, study, learn  and  come  to
understand a little bit about tantra, then we place very  positive  imprints
in our mind.

Student 6: Is the substantial cause for a bodhisattva  superior  necessarily
the level of predisposition of ignorance? If that is the case, how does  one
posit the mental body of the bodhisattva on the first ground? As  he  enters
the path of seeing, from an ordinary path,  is  his  body  the  body  of  an
ordinary being?

Also if we cannot find the substantial cause for the mental  body,  does  it
mean that there is no mental body, that it does not exist in the pure land?

Khen Rinpoche: (The mental body) is an existent. It exists.  It  is  not  an
assertion. So there are mental bodies.

Bodhisattva superiors have mental bodies. From the  sutra  perspective,  the
mental body arises from the level of the predisposition  of  ignorance.  The
next question is: What  exactly  is  the  level  of  the  predisposition  of
ignorance or these subtle obscurations to omniscience?

Student 6:  If there are levels of predisposition of  ignorance,  they  will
come under the category of non-associated compositional factors. If that  is
the case, how can this be a substantial cause for the  mind?  Also  what  is
the substantial cause for form, the body?

Khen Rinpoche: Form cannot act as a  substantial  cause  for  consciousness.
Consciousness cannot act as a substantial cause for form. But we would  have
to  say  that  a  non-associated  compositional  factor  can  act   as   the
substantial cause for form and consciousness.

For example, someone from the formless realm is taking rebirth in  the  form
realm. How are you going to posit the substantial causes here?

As for form itself, it cannot act as a substantial cause for  consciousness.
That is clear. Consciousness cannot act as a  substantial  cause  for  form.
That is also clear. This was mentioned by Dharmakirti in his  Commentary  of
Valid Cognition.

You can see that, just by using the example of samsara, there  are  so  many
unanswered questions and so many qualms. We always  think  samsara  is  easy
but what exactly is samsara? What is its boundary? What is  its  definition?
Then we get stuck.

Khen Rinpoche: I myself also don’t know what exactly samsara is!

Student 1: I am more confused now. Please do not faint.

Khen Rinpoche: If you are confused, I will not faint.

Student 1: As  the  Student  2  asked  earlier:  What  is  the  boundary  of
pervasive suffering? Does it pervade  true  suffering  or  does  it  pervade
samsara? Because we have established that the boundaries of  true  suffering
and  samsara  are  different.   Then  pervasive  suffering   pervades   true
suffering or samsara …

Khen Rinpoche:  What  is  your  question  now?  You  are  asking  about  the
boundaries?

Student 1: Boundaries. Pervasive suffering will  follow  samsara  or  follow
true suffering?

Khen Rinpoche: I already told you earlier that samsara is  necessarily  true
suffering but true suffering is not necessarily  samsara.  So  what  is  the
boundary of true suffering? The boundary is from being an ordinary being  up
to being an arhat.

Student 1: Ok. An arhat without remainder or with remainder?

Khen Rinpoche: Alamak![4] I already explained how to  differentiate  between
remainder and no remainder.

I already  explained  earlier  that  if  you  don’t  have  the  contaminated
aggregates, you don’t have anything remaining.  So if you have a  remainder,
what is remaining?

Student 1: The projected effects of the twelve links. For the higher  school
this is the …

Khen Rinpoche: The twelve links is a different question. Twelve links  is  a
different question from me.

An arhat who has achieved nirvana with remainder has true suffering.  Anyway
the boundary of true suffering is from being an ordinary sentient  being  up
to becoming an arhat.

Khen Rinpoche:  I have answered your question, What is  the  boundary?  That
is the boundary.

Student 1: In your explanation about the mental body,  if  the  mental  body
doesn’t die, how do you explain this statement in the Lam Rim Chen Mo  which
says a superior that has overcome the ignorance of the  twelve  links  still
takes rebirth due to their karma  previously  accumulated  if  their  mental
body doesn’t die. If the bodhisattva superior is still taking rebirth,  then
we will have the case of someone who has no true suffering but is  still  in
samsara.

It seems to me that true suffering has a bigger pervasion then samsara.

What is the entity of the bodhisattva superior that takes rebirth if he  has
a mental body that doesn’t die?

Khen Rinpoche: Hearers and solitary realisers do take  rebirth  in  samsara.
They do not accumulate fresh projecting  karma  but  they  take  rebirth  in
samsara due to previously accumulated karma.

Bodhisattva superiors do not take rebirth  due  to  karma  and  afflictions.
Bodhisattva superiors do not die due to karma and afflictions.

The bodhisattvas superior do not experience death  arising  from  karma  and
afflictions but they undergo the inconceivable transference of death.


Interpreted by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme; transcribed by Phuah  Soon  Ek,  Patricia
Lee & Rachel Tan; edited by Cecilia Tsong.


































-----------------------
[1] Pervasive suffering used here in this discussion  refers  to  compounded
pervasive suffering.
[2] True suffering refers to  the  contaminated  appropriated  physical  and
mental aggregates. These aggregates are  by  nature  impermanent  and  arose
from karma and afflictions. Therefore they are in the nature  of  suffering.
As long as we continue to acquire and are not  free  from  the  contaminated
physical and mental aggregates, we will continue  to  experience  suffering.
(Second Basic Program, Module 1, Lesson 49, p. 1).

[3] If their bodies are happy due to  their  merits/  And  their  minds  are
happy due to their skill/ Then, even if they remain in cyclic existence  for
the sake of others,/ Why  would  the  Compassionate  Ones  be  disheartened.
(Verse 7.28)
[4] Local colloquialism for an exclamation.

