Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Engaging in the Deeds of a Bodhisattva/BP2 M5 L24.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:52:17.073723
================================================================================


Transcript of the teachings by Khen Rinpoche Geshe  Chonyi  on  Engaging  in
the Bodhisattva Deeds, 2014

Root text: Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds by  Shantideva,  translated  by
Toh Sze Gee. Copyright: Toh Sze Gee, 2006; Revised edition, 2014.

Lesson                                                                    24
     6 May 2014


Chapter Five: Verses 5.37 c, d - 5.54. 3. The way to train in the conduct
of guarding the mind by means of mindfulness and introspection. A. The way
to train in the ethics of refraining from negative actions. 1. Making
effort to purify all conduct of the three doors. 2. Guarding against all
deterioration. A. Guarding against deterioration in the training of the
body.


We  have  been  talking  about  guarding  our  mind  with  mindfulness   and
introspection. In the context of this text, we have to  guard  our  training
in the bodhisattva deeds with mindfulness and introspection. With regard  to
our training, this refers primarily to guarding our training in  ethics  (or
ethical discipline). As you know, there are three types of ethics:
1. the ethics  of  refraining  from  negative  actions  (or  the  ethics  of
   restraint)
2. the ethics of gathering virtuous dharmas
3. the ethics of working for the benefit of sentient beings

We are now looking at the ethics of refraining from negative  actions.  With
regard to this particular ethics of  restraint,  in  this  text,  Shantideva
talks about keeping our behaviour and actions of our body, speech  and  mind
pure.

3.   THE WAY TO TRAIN IN THE CONDUCT  OF  GUARDING  THE  MIND  BY  MEANS  OF
   MINDFULNESS AND INTROSPECTION (cont’d)

   A.  The way to train in the ethics of refraining from negative actions
     1. Making effort to purify all conduct of the three doors
        A. Examining the conduct of body and speech
           2.  Advice related to actions like looking etc.
               D.  How to act when resting
      Verse 5.37 c, d
      To rest, I should turn my head around
      And then look behind me.

Prior to this, there  was  a  discussion  of  how  we  should  look  at  our
surroundings. We were advised not to look about  in  a  distracted  way  but
rather, we should cast our gaze downwards towards the space in front of  us.
Why is this so? For if we were to look around, there is the danger that  the
mind will be distracted by some objects.

“To rest, I should turn my head around/ And then look behind me.”:  This  is
in the context of being in a dangerous area where there may be wild  animals
or robbers around. When we  are  adopting  the  physical  demeanour  of  not
looking around us but just looking ahead by gazing downwards,  when  we  are
tired, we can take a rest. But if we see some danger behind  us,  we  should
continue to move forward. However  if  we  see  some  danger  ahead  of  us,
obviously we have to move backward.

Khen Rinpoche: Shantideva is teaching you how to move and how to walk.

           3.  Application to other behaviours
      Verse 5.38
      Having examined both ahead and behind,
      I should proceed to either come or go.
      Being aware of the necessity
      I should act like this in all situations.

For ordained people, whether they are  in  the  monastery,  going  to  town,
seated in a prayer session, eating, walking, talking and so  forth,  whether
they are doing something to benefit themselves or others, this is  the  kind
of conduct that they are supposed to engage in.

The point here is that  with  regard  to  whatever  activities  one  may  be
engaged in, one is supposed to do so with a mind of introspection. When  one
is a Dharma practitioner, this is what one has to do whether one is  eating,
walking, sitting, sleeping and so forth. One should engage in these  actions
with introspection.


           4. Examining the posture
      Verse 5.39
      Having prepared for an action with the thought,
      “My body will remain in such a way,”
      Then periodically I should look to see
      “How is the body abiding?”

For example, when we are engaged in  a  practice  session,  right  from  the
beginning of the  session,  we  are  seated  in  the  sevenfold  posture  of
Vairocana. We generate the  intention  to  remain  seated  in  that  posture
throughout the entire session. Only then do we start our session.  But  that
does not mean that we will necessarily be able  to  remain  seated  in  that
posture  throughout  the  session.  So  every  now  and  then,   we   should
investigate with introspection to  check  whether  we  are  sitting  in  the
correct posture or not.

We have now finished the section on examining the conduct of  the  body  and
speech. Next we have to examine the conduct of the mind itself.

        B. Examining the conduct of the mind
           1. Focusing the mind on a virtuous object
      Verse 5.40
      With utmost effort I should check
      To see that the crazed elephant of my mind
      Is not wandering off but is bound
      To the great pillar of thinking about the Dharma.


Here the untamed and crazy elephant is used as  an  analogy.  When  we  have
such an untamed and crazy elephant on our hands, it is  extremely  important
to tie it up to a strong pillar to prevent it from doing what it wishes  and
causing a lot of damage.

Our untamed and  unsubdued  mind  is  likened  to  this  untamed  and  crazy
elephant.  We  have  an  unsubdued  mind  that  is  afflicted  with   anger,
attachment and other afflictions, yet  we  do  not  fasten  our  mind  to  a
virtuous object of  observation  by  using  mindfulness  and  introspection.
Rather we allow this untamed mind to wander off to  wherever  it  wishes  to
go. Then when the untamed and unsubdued mind  comes  into  contact  with  an
object that causes it to be upset or to be attached to it,  that  will  lead
to the accumulation of all kinds of non-virtuous karma. This  in  turn  will
lead us to the lower realms. So rather than let our mind wander off and  run
after external objects, we should fasten our mind to  the  great  pillar  of
the Dharma.

“…  bound/ To the great  pillar  of  thinking  about  the  Dharma”:  We  can
explain this to mean that when we are  reflecting  on  the  meaning  of  the
teachings, we should fasten our mind to the meaning of  whatever  Dharma  or
practice that we are doing. Even when we are meditating,  we  should  fasten
our mind to the chosen virtuous object of observation with  mindfulness  and
introspection. In this way, we will not lose our object of observation.

This advice also applies to when we are listening to the teachings.
Whenever we are listening to the teachings, we should apply mindfulness  and
introspection so that we can remain focused on hearing what has  been  said,
i.e., remain focused on the words and their meaning.

           2. Examining whether or not the mind is one-pointed in virtue
      Verse 5.41
      I who strive by all means for meditative stabilization
      Should not wander off even for a moment.
      Thinking, “What is this mind of mine doing?”
      I should investigate my mind.

When we are striving to achieve concentration, it is extremely important  to
fasten the mind to the object of observation and to investigate whether  our
focus and attention is being placed on the chosen object of  observation  or
not.

Concentration means being able to stay  focused  on  the  chosen  object  of
observation without being distracted. With  mindfulness  and  introspection,
when we find our mind going off somewhere else rather than being focused  on
the object of observation, we should  hook  our  mind  back  and  bring  its
attention back to the object of observation.

        C. Explaining the contexts for permitted and prohibited actions
      Verse 5.42
      But if I am unable to do this when involved in fear or
      Celebrations and the like, then I should relax.
      Thus it has been taught that at times of giving,
      You may be indifferent to ethics.
Generally speaking, there are certain actions of the body and mind  that  we
are supposed to engage in. However in certain situations—such as when  there
is a danger to our life, there is a special occasion where we  are  focusing
on paying homage, making obeisance and making offerings to the Three  Jewels
or where one has to engage in certain actions that will  bring  about  great
benefit to others—then perhaps there are exceptions.

For  example,  one  is  engaged  in  a  sustained  practice  of   developing
concentration and there is some special opportunity in a  Buddhist  festival
to pay homage or make offerings to the Three Jewels. At  that  time,  it  is
all right to stop temporarily one’s practice of concentration and engage  in
making offerings while maintaining one’s mindfulness and introspection.

The essence is that when there is a special purpose or occasion, then it  is
all right if one is unable to adopt certain subtle behaviours or actions  of
the body and speech that normally one has to engage in.

Another example explained in the commentary is when one is  engaged  in  the
practice of generosity and one wants to further  strengthen  that  practice.
In those situations when one  is  actually  carrying  out  the  practice  of
generosity, it is said that it is all right that one is unable to engage  in
certain modes of conduct that are required when one is practising ethics.

To give an example, generally speaking,  in  the  training  of  an  ordained
person, when one is walking around, one  is  not  allowed  to  do  so  while
making all kinds of unnecessary gestures with the hands. For  instance,  one
is not supposed to walk around swinging one’s arms as this is considered  an
unnecessary gesture. However when one is practising generosity, one  has  to
distribute gifts with one’s hands, i.e., one has to  walk  around  and  move
one’s hands. This is an exception.

The other point is that when one is primarily engaged  in  the  practice  of
generosity  at  a  particular  point  in  time,  during  this  time,  it  is
permissible that one does not adhere to some of the subtler aspects  of  the
practice of ethics.

Yet another example is this. Say you are engaged  in  the  practice  of  the
generosity of fearlessness, i.e., you are protecting others  from  fear.  In
that context, if you were to see an animal pass by and a hunter comes  along
and asks you, “Did you see the animal?”  since  you  are  supposed  to  give
fearlessness and protect that animal, you  are  permitted  to  say,  “No,  I
didn’t see it.”

You saw that animal pass by but you say to the hunter,  “I  didn’t  see  the
animal.” This is a lie and is necessarily a non-virtue. Did the Buddha  give
permission to engage in a natural misdeed? Lying is a  natural  misdeed  and
is by nature non-virtuous. But in one commentary, in such  a  situation,  it
is said that it is all right for you to say, “I didn’t see the animal.”  One
mind training text suggests that you could say,  “I  didn’t  see  the  truly
existent animal!”

Khen Rinpoche: Is that lying? You are not lying, isn’t it? You  are  telling
the truth but you still deceived the person.
There is an account of one of the past lives of the Buddha before he  became
a buddha. He was travelling in a ship with many  people  and  he  discovered
that one of the passengers on board  planned  to  kill  everyone  else.  The
Buddha-to-be then killed that person.

In essence, this particular verse is  saying  that  when  one  is  primarily
engaged in or focusing on the practice of generosity, during that  training,
it is all right if one is unable to guard some of  the  subtler  aspects  of
the training in ethics.

But isn’t the practice of ethics superior to the practice of generosity?  As
such is it not wrong to be indifferent to the practice of ethics  while  one
is engaged in the practice of generosity? What would you say to this?

      Verse 5.43
      I should undertake whatever deed I have intended to do
      And think of doing nothing other than it.
      With my mind focused upon that,
      I should set about for the time being to accomplish it.

Prior to engaging in any practice or before doing any work or  job,  at  the
very beginning, we need to set the intention to start that  particular  task
and to accomplish it. Normally we tell ourselves,  “Until  I  complete  this
task, I will continue with it.” For example,  when  you  are  studying  this
text here, Shantideva’s Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds,  right  from  the
beginning when you decide to start, you have to tell yourself that  you  are
going to finish studying it. If you do  not  do  that  but  in  between  you
decide to study another text, then you will not be able  to  accomplish  the
task of studying Shantideva’s text.

Back to the question about being indifferent to  one’s  practice  of  ethics
while one is engaged in the practice of  generosity.  The  context  here  is
referring  to  someone  who  is  primarily  focused  on  the   practice   of
generosity. For  someone  who  is  primarily  focused  on  the  practice  of
generosity, she has to start with  the  practice  and  make  sure  that  she
brings that practice to completion. However, during  that  process,  if  she
were to get distracted and start doing something else, then she  will  never
be able to finish the practice of generosity.

For a person who is primarily focused on the practice of generosity but  who
does not stay  the  course  because  her  attention  is  diverted  elsewhere
thinking, “I’m going to do this  that  and  the  other,”  in  the  end,  she
achieves nothing. There is  no  practice  of  generosity  to  speak  of  and
neither is there any practice of ethics.

Khen Rinpoche: This is from my own example.  When  I  read  a  book  because
others say, “This book is very good,” maybe I read 10 pages. After  that,  I
think, “Oh, maybe this other book is good.” Then I read 10 pages of  another
book.

In the end, I never complete any book. The idea is  that  when  you  read  a
book, you should focus on completing the book. When you complete  one  book,
then you read another book. I’m sharing my own experience of how  bad  I  am
with regard to reading books. I never complete any  book  except  the  texts
that I studied. Those are different because I have to finish them.

Whether it is your studies or your practice, you  have  to  do  them  in  an
orderly way. You should not skip about, i.e., first, you have to finish  the
earlier practices before you begin the later ones. Otherwise you will  never
finish anything. You start on something and before you  can  actualise  that
practice, you turn to something else. Then you move on  again  to  something
else. You will never achieve anything. It has  to  be  done  in  an  orderly
manner. You have to start from the beginning of your  practice.  You  cannot
jump about as you have to  finish  the  earlier  practices.  Once  you  have
accomplished that, then you move on to the next practice and so forth.  Only
then can you complete your practice and bring it to fulfilment.

For example, when you walk, you lift up  your  right  leg.  But  before  you
plant your right foot on the ground, you  would  not  lift  your  left  leg,
right? That only happens when your right  foot  is  firmly  planted  on  the
ground. If your right foot is still in mid-air and  you  try  to  lift  your
left leg, then you know what will happen next.

While it is true that the practice of ethics is superior to the practice  of
generosity,  until one has gained some stability and familiarity with  one’s
practice of generosity and have done it well, one  cannot  move  on  to  the
next practice.

Up to here, in the sections prior  to  the  next  verse,  those  verses  are
talking about investigating our body, speech and mind.

(Verse 5.44[1] was not covered in class).

Next is guarding oneself from  deterioration.  Here  we  are  talking  about
gaining mastery or control of one’s training.
Guarding against all deterioration consists of two points:
A. Guarding against deterioration in the training of the body
B. Guarding against deterioration in the training of the mind

Guarding against deterioration in the training of the body will  be  covered
in these points:
1. Not allowing oneself to fall under the sway of distraction
2. Abandoning pointless activities
3. Examining the motivational thought when acting

     2. Guarding against all deterioration
        A. Guarding against deterioration in the training of the body
           1. Not allowing oneself to fall under the sway of distraction
      Verse 5.45
      If I engage in a variety
      Of senseless talk
      Or in many kinds of spectacular shows,
      I should abandon attachment towards them.

It says here that it  is  possible  that,  for  the  purpose  of  benefiting
someone, one may engage in meaningless talk, singing, dancing or  some  such
activities, i.e., “spectacular shows.”  But  one  has  to  engage  in  these
activities mindfully without attachment. In  the  first  place,  meaningless
chatter, singing, dancing, seeing shows and so forth are  distractions.  But
when there is a purpose for engaging in such activities in order to  protect
the minds of others, then one must engage  in  them  mindfully  and  without
attachment. The point here is that it is never correct to let  the  mind  be
distracted.

           2.  Abandoning pointless activities
      Verse 5.46
      If for no reason I dig the earth,
      Cut grass, draw patterns in the earth, and the like,
      Then, recalling the advice of the Sugatas,
      I should immediately stop out of fear.

Some people cannot sit still and have  to  do  something.  In  a  distracted
state of mind, they end up digging holes in  the  ground  or  just  plucking
leaves from the plants or trees for no reason.

Khen Rinpoche: There is one restaurant here where they put a piece of  paper
and chalk for you to do something. They purposely put them there. They  know
what we want to do!

Some of these examples that are mentioned  such  as  cutting  grass  and  so
forth primarily relate to the vows of a fully ordained monk. Fully  ordained
monks are not supposed to do these things. There is a purpose  behind  these
vows. For example, we are not supposed to  cut  grass  because  there  is  a
danger of killing if we were to do that. So that is the purpose.

The point is that when we find ourselves distracted and about to  engage  in
some of these meaningless activities, we have to bring our  mind  back  with
mindfulness and introspection. We have to remember that it is  mentioned  in
the bodhisattva trainings that we should not engage  in  any  activity  that
does not bring any benefit to sentient beings.

Next is analysing or checking one’s motivation at the time  of  the  action.
Under the outline, examining the motivational  thought  when  acting,  there
are the:
A. Brief presentation
B. Extensive explanation
C. Synopsis

           3. Examining the motivational thought when acting
              A. Brief presentation
      Verse 5.47
      Whenever I have the desire
      To move or to say something,
      First of all I should examine my mind
      And then, with steadiness, act in the proper way.

Before we start to move or walk around,  before  we  change  or  adjust  our
physical posture, before we speak or  say  something—whatever  it  is,  this
verse is telling us that we should examine  and  check  our  motivation  for
wanting to do so.

Whatever physical or verbal activity we are about to  engage  in,  prior  to
engaging in it, we should investigate and check what our motivation  is.  Of
course, if it is non-virtuous, ideally we should stop ourselves and  not  do
it. If it is virtuous, we can engage in it.   It  is  through  checking  our
motivation that we can stop ourselves from committing faults and downfalls.

For a person who is seriously committed to and engaging in the  practice  of
the  training  to  develop   bodhicitta,   before   she   engages   in   any
activity—before   moving   about,   walking,   sitting,   talking   and   so
forth—ideally, she would look at her own mind. She  would  examine  her  own
motivation to see whether her motivation for wanting to  do  the  action  is
motivated by self-cherishing or by the thought of  benefiting  others.  Upon
such examination, if the motivation is found to be that of  self-cherishing,
she would not engage in that action. If the action  is  motivated  primarily
by the heartfelt thought of benefiting others, she would proceed  with  that
action.

              B. Extensive explanation
                 1. How to act when one wishes for afflictions to arise
      Verse 5.48
      Whenever there is attachment in my mind
      And whenever there is the desire to be angry,
      I should not do anything nor say anything,
      But remain like a piece of wood.

When we see something desirable, an external object or a person, there is  a
wish to be attached to it. The mind is desirous  of  that  object.  When  we
think of or see an unpleasant object then there arises the wish to be  upset
and angry.
At those times, the verse is saying that we should remain still and  not  do
or say anything. The advice is that, in those situations, we  should  remain
physically and verbally still.  We should not move or do or say anything.

In those situations, doesn’t the  mind  also  wish  to  follow  after  one’s
attachment? Doesn’t the mind wish to follow after one’s anger? So the  point
here is not to let ourselves follow after the afflictions of  attachment  or
anger physically, verbally and mentally. We should  remain  still  on  those
three levels.

                 2. How to act when excitement and so forth arise
      Verse 5.49
      Whenever I have excitement, the wish to verbally belittle others,
      Pride and arrogance;
      When I have the thought to describe the faults of others,
      Cunningness and the thought to deceive others;


      Verse 5.50
      Whenever I am eager for praise
      Or have the desire to blame others;
      Whenever I have the wish to scold and quarrel;
      At such times I should remain like a piece of wood.

The examples given here  are  those  times  when  we  find  that  pride  and
arrogance are arising or there is a wish to expose the  faults  or  mistakes
of others and so forth. The advice is the same. We should not  follow  after
the desire to engage in those actions but rather we should remain still.

                 3. How to act when [you are  the  recipient  of]  gain  and
                    honour
      Verse 5.51
      Whenever I desire material gain, honor, or fame;
      Whenever I seek servants or a retinue,
      And when in my mind I wish to be served;
      At these times I should remain like a piece of wood.

Once again, the advice is the same. When one  has  the  desire  for  and  is
hankering after wealth, praise, good reputation and cultivating  and  having
many followers, we are advised to  remain  still  and  not  to  follow  such
thoughts.

                 4. How to act when thinking of others’ welfare
      Verse 5.52
      Whenever I have the mind wishing to neglect the welfare of others
      And to pursue my own welfare,
      Wishing to say something,
      At these times I should remain like a piece of wood.
For a person who is  seriously  engaging  in  the  practice  of  cultivating
bodhicitta, benefiting others takes priority over benefiting  himself.  When
such a person has thoughts of cherishing himself at the  expense  of  others
or the thought of neglecting the welfare of others arises, I guess he  would
have to remain still. He should not entertain or follow  those  thoughts  of
self-cherishing or thoughts of benefiting himself.

When there is the desire to say something motivated by  self-cherishing,  or
that benefits oneself or when one feels like saying  something  because  one
is angry or upset, at those times, one should  remain  silent  and  not  say
anything.

There  is  a  saying  in  Tibetan,  “Our  mouth  is  like  the  treasury  of
negativities.”

Essentially, the advice is for us to remain still physically,  verbally  and
mentally in  situations  where  we  are  about  to  engage  in  non-virtuous
actions. It is about checking our motivation.

                 5. How to act when you wish  for  fury  and  discouragement
                    etc. to arise
      Verse 5.53
      Whenever impatience, laziness, fear,
      And likewise shamelessness or the talking of nonsense,
      And thoughts of partiality arise,
      At these times too I should remain like a piece of wood.


              C. Synopsis
      Verse 5.54
      Having in this way examined his mind for afflictions
      And for thoughts that strive for meaningless things,
      The hero should hold his mind steady
      By means of the antidotes.

                                 ~~~~~~~~~~

Question: Why is it that when you are lazy, you are advised to  remain  like
a piece of wood and continue to be lazy?

Answer: Joyous effort is the mind that is  enthusiastic  about  virtue.  The
opposite of that is laziness which is the mind that is unenthusiastic  about
virtue. When laziness arises, we have to stop our mind from  following  that
thought.

Khen Rinpoche: If you follow that thought,  you  become  lazier.  So  it  is
better not to follow that thought. Maybe this is what the text means.

Question: When Shantideva says, “remain like a piece  of  wood,”  does  that
mean if I want to go to sleep because I am  lazy—and  I  have  already  been
sleeping the whole day—I try to check myself by not  following  my  laziness
and my thought of wanting to lie down again when I am near the bed?

Khen Rinpoche: So you do not lie down. You stand still. (Laughter).

Question: So the spirit of this section  is  that  when  you  are  going  to
engage in some action with a wrong motivation, you do  not  carry  out  that
action. But if I am going to get angry, I cannot just  remain  still.  If  I
were to remain still,  my  anger  will  simply  build  up.  So  while  I  am
remaining still, what should I be doing?

Khen Rinpoche: When you are angry, do not say anything!

Student: But if I do not say anything, my anger will just build up. Maybe  I
can remain still for one or two minutes but five  minutes  later,  something
will come out of my mouth!

Khen Rinpoche: This is why it should not come out, i.e., you should not  say
anything.

Student: From a practical point of view, I feel that  other  than  remaining
still I should be doing something else.

Khen Rinpoche: You can do something else  but  the  whole  idea  is  not  to
follow that emotional thought.

Student: So it is all right as long as I do  something  to  stop  the  anger
from building up and making me want to shout back?

Khen Rinpoche: Yes.



Interpreted by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme; transcribed by Phuah  Soon  Ek,  Patricia
Lee & Julia Koh; edited by Cecilia Tsong.




-----------------------
      [1] Verse 5.44
        By acting in this way, all will be done well,
       Otherwise neither will be done.
       There will thus be no increase
       In the secondary affliction of non-introspection.

In this context,  the  secondary  affliction  of  non-introspection  is  the
ignorance of the order of the proper stages of  training  the  mind  in  the
path. When we understand the proper stages  of  training  the  mind  in  the
path, the secondary affliction of non-introspection will not increase.  This
is the explanation of the last two lines of verse 5.44, “There will thus  be
no increase/ In the secondary affliction of non-introspection.”

The point here is to have a good understanding of the proper stages  of  the
path, of the ways of training the mind. This is a gradual  process  and  the
order must be correct. First, we should ascertain the order  of  the  proper
stages  of  training  in  the  path.  We  must  follow  the  proper  way  of
transforming the mind according to  the  actual  stages.  On  the  basis  of
having ascertained the proper stages of the path, we should then  train  our
mind according to that ascertainment, ensuring that we finish  our  training
in the first topic before we move on to the next topic and so forth.

When we do not do this, we will not achieve much. This is applicable to  our
practice. In the beginning, nothing is stable.  Sometimes  people  look  for
initiations or  lamas,  doing  different  kinds  of  daily  prayers  without
developing a stable relationship or practice with  a  single  teacher.  Then
they move on to the next teacher, the next deity or the  next  practice.  At
the end of the day, nothing is achieved. (First  Basic  Program,  Module  5,
Lesson 29, page 3).

