Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Engaging in the Deeds of a Bodhisattva/BP2 M5 L15 final.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:52:17.813823
================================================================================


Transcript of the teachings by Khen Rinpoche Geshe  Chonyi  on  Engaging  in
the Bodhisattva Deeds, 2014

Root text: Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds by  Shantideva,  translated  by
Toh Sze Gee. Copyright: Toh Sze Gee, 2006; Revised edition, 2014.

Lesson                                                                    15
27 March 2014


Meaning of Calling the Guru from Afar. Chapter Threewo: Verses
32.3123–32.34. Concluding actions (cont’d). Chapter Four: Teachings on
Conscientiousness. Verses 4.1-4. 11. Brief presentation of the way to
cultivate conscientiousness. Extensive explanation: Cultivating
conscientiousness with regard to bodhicitta.  Homage.  Refuge. Confessing
negativities with the four powers.


Question: I refer to Verse 3.26:
      Now my life is fruitful
      I have attained a good human existence,,
      Today I have been born in the Buddha lineage.
      I have become a child of the Buddha.

Tthe entrance to  the  Mahayana  has  been  established  to  be  uncontrived
bodhicitta or the generation of the  mind  of  enlightenment  in  meditative
equipoise. I, it seems thatlike  the  generation  of  bodhicitta  through  a
ritual is contrived bodhicitta. H, how can would  a  person  who  generatesd
contrived bodhicitta be called a bodhisattva, i.e., ?
iIn this case, how candoes a person who has not entered  the  Mahayana  path
beis  called a bodhisattva?

Also is there a difference between the terms, buddha  lineage  and  Mahayana
lineage?
Also iIs there a difference between the term bBuddha  lineage  and  Mahayana
lineage?


Answer: One  is  only  athe  child  of  the  bBBuddhas  when  one  generates
bodhicitta. So prior to generating bodhicitta, one is not  a  child  of  the
bBuddhas.

Therefore prior to generating bodhicitta, one is not called a child  of  the
Buddha.
When great compassion arises in the  mind,  then  the  Mahayana  lineage  is
awakened , but thisat is not called the bBuddha lineage.

Student: Is a person called a bodhisattva only upon  entering  the  Mahayana
path? Or can he be called a bodhisattva before entering the  Mahayana  path?
For Mahayana path  of  accumulation,  is  the  entrance  the  generation  of
uncontrived bodhicitta?
Answer: Yes.
Student: Question: At this stage of generating bodhicitta through a  ritual,
is it still contrived bodhicitta?

Answer: In the context of this text, tThe discussion refers to in  the  text
is in the context of someone who develops the  the  actual  bodhicitta,  the
uncontrived bodhicitta.

QStudentuestion: Does he generate uncontrived bodhicitta  upon  taking  this
ritual  or  during  calm  abiding??  Because  I  My  understanding  is  that
understand that  uncontrived  bodhicitta  is  generated  in  the  meditative
equipoise of calm abiding.

Answer: One needs to have developed  calm   abiding  prior  to  actualiszing
uncontrived bodhicitta. Thatis  at  discussion  is  not  about  actualiszing
bodhicitta within meditative equipoise.

Khen Rinpoche (In English): Do yYou understand?  If  you  don’t  understand,
listen again.

It is said that one needs to  have  calm  abiding  in  order  to  actualisze
bodhicitta. but  But there isn’t necessarily a pervasion that bodhicitta  is
developed within calm abiding. That is a separate discussion.

The discussion in this chapter is adopting bodhicitta through a  ritual.  So
Oone generates the aspirational bodhicitta that comes with  the  commitment,
and then one takes on the bodhisattva vows. It is within that  context  that
one generates bodhicitta.

Whether the bodhicitta is developed within calm abiding or not this  can  be
an object of discussed further ion for  as  this  is  not  stated.  What  is
stated in the teachings is that,  in order  to  actualizse  bodhicitta,  one
must have calm abiding.

The discussion in Cchapter Three 3 iis about adopting bodhicitta  through  a
ritual and on the basis of that one  develops  the  actual  bodhicitta,  the
uncontrived bodhicitta.

                                 ~~~~~~~~~~

CONCLUDING ACTIONS (cont’d)

The accomplishment of others’ welfare
|The potential [power] to dispel the            |
|obscurations - the causes [of suffering]       |
|1 Dispelling afflictive obscurations           |
|2 Dispelling the obscurations to knowledge     |


The text says that bodhicitta eliminates  the  afflictive  obscurations  and
the knowledge obscurations.

In the previous lesson, we saw:
 • - how the bodhisattvas show the path of liberation to those persons of
   medium capacity in order for them to achieve liberation from the cyclic
   existence.
 • - how the bodhisattvas show the persons of small capacity the methods
   that will enable them to achieve the higher status of  - good rebirth as
   a human being or celestial being.
The final motive, the ultimate goal of  the  bodhisattva,  is  to  lead  all
these beings to the state of full enlightenment.
 of full enlightenment. In order to do this, place the  sentient  beings  in
the state of full enlightenment, bodhbodhisattvas have to help the  sentient
beings to overcome the manifest afflictions and through  that,  enable  them
sentient beings to develop bodhicitta.

~ Dispelling afflictive obscurations
|1 Dispelling afflictive   |
|obscurations              |


      Verse 3.31c,d
      It is the dawning moon of the mind
      That dispels the torment of afflictions of migrating beings.

This shows that bodhicitta eliminates the afflictive obscurations.
The teachings eachings liken bodhicitta to the the cool moon light that  can
dispel the discomfort of heat, i.e., . That bodhicitta can help  to  protect
one from  or eliminate the heat of the afflictions.
In theis  context here here, this means that the bodhicitta  has  the  power
to eliminate those the manifest or coarse afflictions such  as  miserliness,
bad ethics, anger, attachment and so forth.

~ Dispelling the obscurations to knowledge
If  one  has  bodhicitta,  then  these  manifest  afflictions   (or   coarse
afflictions) such as miserliness, bad ethics, anger,  attachment,  jealousy,
pride can be eliminated.
So this is the meaning of the last two lines of verse 3.31.

It is also said that bodhicitta can eliminate the knowledge obscurations.
[BP1 L18] According to the highest tenet system,  the  Prasangika-Madhyamika
school, the hearers and solitary realisers can  achieve  liberation  through
the wisdom that  realises  selflessness.  Although  the  hearer  arhats  and
solitary realiser pratyekabuddhas are able to achieve liberation,  they  are
not able to eliminate the imprints  of  their  negative  emotions.  Although
they have abandoned their negative emotions from the  root,  they  have  not
abandoned the root itself. Why?  This  is  because  they  do  not  have  the
support of the vast accumulation of merit that comes from bodhicitta.
We have to be able to explain how bodhicitta can eliminate the  obstructions
to omniscience. We have to say that obstructions to omniscience are  removed
by the wisdom that realises selflessness that is  conjoined  with  the  vast
accumulation of merit that comes from bodhicitta. We have to explain  it  in
this way. The obstructions to omniscience are not  abandoned  on  the  first
seven bodhisattva grounds. Once  the  bodhisattvas  have  achieved  the  8th
ground, the bodhisattvas have abandoned  all  the  afflictions  or  negative
afflictions from the root. The process of  abandoning  the  obstructions  to
omniscience starts from the 8th ground. On the 8th, 9th  and  10th  grounds,
they require the accumulation of vast amounts of  merit  in  order  to  help
them to abandon completely the obstructions to omniscience.
Whether one is able to remove the obstructions  to  omniscience  depends  on
whether one has bodhicitta or not. The bodhisattvas only  start  to  abandon
the obstructions to omniscience from the 8th ground onwards  but  they  have
already abandoned the afflictions. They  have  abandoned  their  afflictions
through  the  wisdom  that  realises  emptiness.  The  hearer  and  solitary
realiser also have the wisdom that realises  emptiness.  When  they  achieve
liberation, they will have abandoned their afflictions from  the  root.  But
why is it that they cannot abandon the imprints of these afflictions,  which
the bodhisattva is able  to  do?  This  boils  down  to  having  bodhicitta.
Bodhicitta is likened to the great sun. In the root  text,  “the  great  sun
removes the misty ignorance.”
|2 Dispelling the obscurations to    |
|knowledge                           |


      Verse 3.32 a,b
      It is the great sun that annihilates
      The cataracts of ignorance of migrating beings.

This is sshowsing that bodhicitta can eliminate the  knowledge  obscurations
t.  That which interferes with or hinders the  achievement  of  omniscience.
is called the knowledge obscurations. As  you  know,  the  various  Buddhist
philosophical  systems  or  the  tenets  posit  the  knowledge  obscurations
differently.

In short, bBoodhicitta is  said  to  be  able  to  eliminate  the  knowledge
obscurations.
Bodhicitta can destroy the knowledge obscurations  just  as  like  how  tthe
sun can eliminate the darkness of the three billion- folds world systems.

As you know, Tthe only very thing that destroys the  knowledge  obscurations
is only the wisdom of realiszing selflessness. What is it  that  gives  this
wisdom of realiszing selflessness  the  power  to  eradicate  the  knowledge
obscurations? It is bodhicitta. Without it,  bodhicitta,  ttheis  wisdom  of
realiszing selflessness does not have the power to eliminate  the  knowledge
obscurations but . So when it is this wisdom of  realizing  selflessness  is
conjoined with bodhicitta,  it can eliminate the knowledge obscurations.

~ Accomplishing all benefit
|The potential [power]to accomplish  |
|all benefit and bliss               |
|1 Accomplishing all benefit         |
|2 Accomplishing all bliss           |

|1 Accomplishing all benefit         |


      Verse 3.32 c, d
      It is the quintessential butter
      From the churning of the milk of the holy Dharma.

The Buddha gave numerous teachings. For instance, t  and  there  wereas  the
three turnings of the wheel of Ddharmaas.  It  is  commonly  said  that  the
Buddha  is  commonly  said  that  the  Buddha  gave  84,000  teachings  Many
teachings were given, but if one were to ask, : “What is the very  heart  or
the essence of all those  teachings?”   iIt  is  the  ultimate  good  heart,
bodhicitta,; .
It is commonly said that the Buddha gave 84,000 teachings. The very  essence
or the heart of those teachings is bodhicitta; just as butter  is  the  very
essence of milk. When If you churn milk, what you get at the end is its  the
essence, i.e.,  of the milk; which is bbutter.

Therefore the ultimate purpose of hearing,  reflecting  on  and  practiscing
the teachings is to develop the  good  heart  and  to  actualisebe  able  to
generate bodhicitta.
The whole point of listening, hearing, studying and reflecting  on  so  many
Buddha’s  teachings  is  to  develop  the  good  heart  and   to   actualize
bodhicitta. The  teachings  tell  us  that  once  bodhicitta  is  generated,
developed, thiit s bodhicitta will enable us to  actualize  or  achieve  all
the  benefits  and  every  happiness.  .  Bodhicitta  can  bring  about  the
achievement of all happiness.

~ Accomplishing all bliss
|2 Accomplishing all bliss           |


      Verse 3.33
      For all those guests who are migrating beings journeying on the path
      of cyclic existence
      Who wish to utilize the resources of happiness,
      This will place the great travellers of sentient beings
      In supreme happiness and satisfy them.

“The great travellers” are the limitless sentient beings,  - i.e.,  the  six
types of sentient beings.

“The path of cyclic existence” is basically the the entire samsara  starting
from the lowest of Avici hells up to the Peak of Cyclic Existence.
 up to the peak of cyclic existence.

Bodhicitta is that which enables these various sentient  beings  to  partake
of all the  enjoyments  as  .  So  the  bodhisattvas  abide  in  the  cyclic
existence to work for sentient beings.

A great traveler or frequent traveller is someone who does  not  remain  n’t
stay in one place for long but travels very frequently,   i.e.  moving  from
one place to placeanother. So tThe six types of sentient beings  in  samsara
are like that. T; they do not n’t abide in one state of  existence  but  are
constantly moving from one state to another in samsara.

Khen Rinpoche (In English): It is lLike when you go to a  hotel.  The  owner
would consider the frequent guests as their , those who comes the most  then
the owner would consider as their big guests because  they  come  again  and
again and give them business. They give money so they  are  called  “my  big
guest or my big customer or something likes that” because  they  come  again
and again. So It is similar to thishere.

[BP1 L18] In the text it says, “For all those guests travelling on the  path
of samsara”. The guests here refer to us, sentient beings  in  samsara.  Why
is the word “guests” used here? It describes the condition that we  are  in,
always hurrying from one place to the next, without an end in  sight  as  to
the number of places that one has to go to.  Despite  having  gone  to  many
places, we have never arrived anywhere. We are constantly  on  the  move  in
the sense that we are constantly changing.
We are always moving towards death in  each  and  every  single  moment.  We
think that we will be staying for a while in  this  life  but  the  fact  is
that, in each and every single moment, we are moving closer  and  closer  to
death. When we reach death, we do not stop there. We have  to  take  another
rebirth again. When we  die,  we  immediately  have  to  go  on  to  another
rebirth. The number of rebirths we have taken  is  limitless.  That  is  the
meaning of “guests.”
Bodhicitta can actualisze all the wishes of and  all  the  benefit  all   of
tthese sentient beings. These couple of verses areis  related  to  rejoicing
for in oneself.

The last verse, Vverse 3.34, is causing  is inducing others to rejoice.
to rejoice.

Causing others to develop joy
|Causing others to develop joy       |


      Verse 3.34
      Today in the presence of all the Protectors
      I invite the migrating beings to be guests
      In happiness until they attain the state of Sugata.
      May gods, anti-gods, and so forth be joyful.

ThThe “I” that is mentioned here refers to  the  person  who  has  developed
bodhicitta and who has adopted it bodhicitta through this ritual and who  is
. So this person, the “I”, inow s inviting all sentient beings to be his  or
/hher guests.

How In what manner does one invites all sentient beings to be one’s  guests?
Here in the presence of all the buddhas and bodhisattvas and  with  them  as
the witness, one undertakes the pledging to work for their benefit. This  is
what one has done during the ritual.
When one adopts the bodhicittta with the buddhas  and  bodhisattvas  as  the
witnesses, one is inviting all sentient beings to be one’s  guests  in  that
one makes the pledges to work for  their  benefit,  and  to  accomplish  all
their temporal and ultimate goals. Since As such one has done this,  such  a
thing, then may all the gods,  and demigods and so  forth  rejoice  in  what
one has done in this.
, i.e., oOne is inducing or asking the gods and the demigods to be  joyful.;
which means to rejoice in what one has done.   Of course when they  rejoice,
they accumulate merit and it. It is said that these gods and  demigods  will
thus protect one when one is doing one’s practice.
So we have completed the third chapter of  the  text  [Thoroughly  embracing
bodhicitta]

CHAPTER FOUR: TEACHINGS ON CONSCIENTIOUSNESS
The Fourth Chapter: Teaching Conscientiousness
|The way to train in the conduct once one has     |
|developed the two bodhicittas                    |
|A Embracing bodhicitta [Chapters 2 and 3]        |
|B The way to train in the conduct of the         |
|perfections [Chapters 4 to 10]                   |

|The way to train in the conduct of the perfections                   |
|1 The way to cultivate conscientiousness: The branch that prevents   |
|the deterioration of bodhicitta and [its associated] conduct         |
|2 The way to train in ethics: A specific explanation given with      |
|regards to mindfulness and alertness- the methods for purely guarding|
|all virtuous dharmas [Chapter 5]                                     |
|3 Explaining the way to train in the remaining four perfections      |
|[Chapter 6 to 9]                                                     |
|4 Explaining, by way of the branch of dedication, the way to train in|
|giving away body, material wealth, and the roots of virtue for the   |
|welfare of others [Chapter 10]                                       |

If we go by the outline of the commentary by Gyaltsab Je, the outline says:
The outline of the commentary by Gyaltsab Je is as follows:

The way to train in the conduct of the perfections
1. The way to cultivate conscientiousness: The branch that prevents the
   deterioration of bodhicitta and its associated conduct[1]
2. The way to train in ethics: A specific explanation given with regard to
   mindfulness and introspection—the methods for purely guarding all
   virtuous dharmas[2]
3. Explaining the way to train in the remaining four perfections[3]
4. Explaining, by way of the branch of dedication, the way to train in
   giving away body, material wealth and the roots of virtue for the welfare
   of others[4]

The way  to  cultivate  conscientiousness:  The  branch  that  prevents  the
deterioration of bodhicitta and its associated conduct  is  further  divided
into:
A. Explaining the chapter’s material
   1 A brief presentation of the way to cultivate conscientiousness
   2 An extensive explanation
       3 Synopsis
The chapter’s nameThe way of training in the perfections:
1. The way in  meditating  on  conscientiousness;  which  ensures  that  the
bodhicitta together with the practices does not degenerate
2. The way  of  practicing  ethical  discipline:  Explaining  vigilance  and
mindfulness separately which is the method for protecting all  the  virtuous
dharma.
3. Explaining in the way of training in the remaining four perfections.
B. 4. Explaining, by way of the limb of dedication, the  way  of  practicing
   generosity and offering one’s body, possessions and roots of  virtues  to
   others.
|The way to cultivate conscientiousness: The branch that prevents the |
|deterioration of bodhicitta and [its associated] conduct             |
|A Explaining the chapter’s material                                  |
|B The chapter’s name                                                 |

|Explaining the chapter’s material         |
|1 A brief presentation of the way to      |
|cultivate conscientiousness               |
|2 An extensive explanation                |
|3 Synopsis                                |

The   main   point   of   Cchapters   Ffour   and   Ffive   is   practiscing
conscientiousness and introspection or vigilancevigilance. Earlier, one  has
adopted bodhicitta through a ritual and in particular,  one  has  taken  the
bodhisattva vows. When one takes the bodhisattva  vows,  one  has  to  guard
there are many precepts and trainings to  guard.  One  has  to  guard  one’s
training  without transgressing them. In order to be able to  do  that,  one
needs conscientiousness and introspectionvigilance. Hence we have  Cchapters
Ffours and Ffive.

Having
So after adopteding bodhicitta through athe ritual, it is important  not  to
allow :
- to not let the bodhicitta that has been generated developed to  degenerate
and not to
- to nnot to  transgress the trainings of the bodhisattva vows.
For that reason, Ttherefore one needs to apply conscientiousness.

A BRIEF PRESENTATION OF THE WAY TO CULTIVATE CONSCIENTIOUSNESS
|1 A brief presentation of the way to      |
|cultivate conscientiousness               |


      Verse 4.1
      Having firmly upheld the mind of enlightenment in this way,
      A Victors’ Child should always make effort
      To not transgress the trainings
      Without ever wavering.

Earlier on,  one has generated bodhicitta. In the generation of  bodhicitta,
there were are:
-
 • the preliminaries,
 • - the actual adoption generation of bodhicitta through a ritual
 • t
 • - the conclusion

After this, without postponing the intention of  wanting  to  practisce  the
trainings,  and thinking,  “I am’m going to do this it in the future,”,  one
applies conscientiousness and thinks,  “I  am’m   going  to  practisce  this
right away.”.

Here,  Iit  is  very  important  to  apply  conscientiousness  in  order  to
counteract distractions,  and laziness and so  forth.  Conscientiousness  is
placing one’s mind on a virtuous object  without  letting  the  mind  become
contaminated. This conscientiousness is  essentially  a  derivative  of  the
joyous effort that one is appliesapplying. perseverance.  Here  one  applies
the effort.

After taking the bodhisattva vows, one has to guard one’s trainings  without
letting them degenerate.  The  trainings  here  areis  essentially  the  six
perfections and the four ways of gathering the sentient beings  into  one’ts
fold (or the four ways of gathering disciples). o be  ??


When If one has only generated the aspirational bodhicitta that  comes  with
the commitment, one  has  to  guard  against  and  abandon  the  four  black
dharmas, abandon the  four  black  dharmas  and  cultivate  the  four  white
dharmas.

On top of that, when  if one has taken the  bodhisattva  vows,  one  has  to
guard against the 18 root downfalls and the 46 faults.
T 18 root downfalls and the 46 faults.

To summarisze, after taking the bodhisattva vows, there are  two  things  to
do:
1. NNot to let the bodhicitta that has been generated to degenerate.
2. One also has to prevent the degeneration of one’s  in  the  trainings  in
   the perfections.
Without letting the mind come under the control  or  influence  of  laziness
and distraction, one applies effort and strivess in such training.

So  This   that   is   the   brief   explanatioon   of   the   practice   of
conscientiousness.
xxxxxx

EXTENSIVE EXPLANATION:
A.  CULTIVATING  CONSCIENTIOUSNESS  WITH  REGARD  TO  BODHICITTA  [BP1  L19]
Conscientiousness   is   the   opposite   of   non-conscientiousness.   Non-
conscientiousness is one of the 20 secondary afflictions and is  a  negative
emotion. It is a mind that does not guard  or  protect  itself  against  the
afflictions and the faults that arise from such afflictions. It is the  mind
that does whatever it wants without considering the  consequences.  That  is
non-conscientiousness. The function of non-conscientiousness is to  increase
negativities and to weaken positive actions.
Conscientiousness is a mental factor, which is a mind that is not under  the
influence of negative emotions or afflictions. While  it  abides  in  joyous
effort or joyous perseverance, it accomplishes virtue. It is the  mind  that
protects from contaminated phenomena.
The   opposite   of   conscientiousness   is   non-conscientiousness.   Non-
conscientiousness is a mind that does not protect from afflictions  and  the
faults of afflictions. It is basically a mind that gives in to  afflictions.
Conscientiousness is the basis for the excellent collection of all the  good
things of both samsara and nirvana.
“Firmly upheld” refers to  the  time  of  taking  the  vows,  when  one  has
promised that  one  will  never  give  up  bodhicitta  and  one  will  never
degenerate the practice even at the cost of  one’s  life.  In  the  previous
chapter, we looked at how the bodhisattva vows are taken. At that time,  one
has promised never to give up the practices,  even  at  the  cost  of  one’s
life.  In  that  sense,  one  has  thoroughly  embraced  and  firmly  upheld
bodhicitta in this way. After having taken  the  vows,  bodhisattvas  should
always work at keeping their vows and ensure that they do not degenerate.
|2 An extensive explanation              |
|A Cultivating conscientiousness with    |
|regards to bodhicitta                   |
|B Cultivating conscientiousness with    |
|regards to the training                 |

|A Cultivating conscientiousness with    |
|regards to bodhicitta                   |
|1 The reasons it is inappropriate to    |
|discard bodhicitta                      |
|2 The disadvantages of discarding it    |

|1 The reasons it is inappropriate to    |
|discard bodhicitta                      |

The reasons it is inappropriate to discard bodhicitta
Here  we  are   mainly  are  talking   about   cultivating   meditating   on
conscientiousness with regard to for  bbodhicitta.  This  starts  with  From
here it looking s at the reasons why it is inappropriate to  give  up  theis
bodhicitta that one has generated.


      Verse 4.2
      In the case of a reckless undertaking
      Or one not well examined,
      Although a promise may have been made,
      It is reasonable to examine, “Shall I do it or leave it?”


      Verse 4.3
      But how can I ever withdraw
      From what has been examined by the great wisdom
      Of the buddhas and their children,
      And has been examined and examined by myself?

Verse 4.2 is saying that  there  are  people  who  undertake  certain  tasks
without examining the pros and  cons,  i.e.,  properly  examining,  of    of
theat particular course of action.
Or tSome people also undertake some  tasks  without  a  proper  examination.
They undertake a task without  proper  examination,  i.e.,  they  may  think
about it a little bit and carry it out for do aa  little bit but  the  taask
nd think a little bit is not thought through well.   but  not  well  thought
out. But they do undertake such tasks as well.
Whether it is is the first or  the  second  situation,  example,  there  are
people who then also give up whatever  they  have  ustarted  to  undertaken.
With regard to sSuch cases in general, whether they follow through  up  with
what they have decided to do or they give up after  starting  on  what  they
have decided to do, undertake, whatever it is in these cases,  it  does  not
n’t really matter so much.

But when it comes to if you are talking about  bodhicitta,   then  it  is  a
completely  different  matter.  This  is  because  the  pros  and  cons   of
generating bodhicitta and examining what bodhicitta really is  have  already
been thoroughly examined  or  analyszed  well  by  theose  bodhisattvas  who
possessing great wisdom such as the bodhisattvas Manjushri, Maitreya and  so
forth.

Likewise here, one should think, “:
“I have thought about the qualities  and  benefits  of  bodhicitta  and  the
qualities of bodhicitta, and I have a heartfelt appreciation for  it.  Based
oOn  that  basis,  I  have  generated  bodhicitta  and  taken  I  took  tthe
bodhisattva vows”. Now, if I do not am to  not  train   in  the  bodhisattva
vows due to being distracted by something else or due to my  laziness   then
that would be incorrect and that would be inappropriate. For that reason,  I
myself have to strive in practiscing the deeds of the bodhisattvas”.”

So, Tthe point is that one must strive in one’s practice and  for  that  one
must rely on conscientiousness. There are
Ggreat disadvantages, shortcoming and faults if one were  to  gives  up  the
bodhicitta after generating it. It is said that one would  be  born  in  the
lower realms if one does that.

The disadvantages of discarding bodhicitta
|2 The disadvantages of discarding       |
|[bodhicitta]                            |
|A The disadvantage of going to the lower|
|realms                                  |
|B One ceases to work for the sake of    |
|others                                  |
|C Attainment of the grounds is postponed|

|A The disadvantage of going to the lower|
|realms                                  |
|1 The reasons one migrates to the lower |
|realms                                  |
|2 Stating the proof for that            |
|3 Abandoning contradictions             |


~ The disadvantage of going to the lower realms
   1. The reason one migrates to the lower realms
|1 The reasons one migrates to the lower |
|realms                                  |


      Verse 4.4
      If, having made such a promise,
      I do not accomplish it through action,
      Then by deceiving all those sentient beings
      What kind of rebirth will I take?

At the time of adopting bodhicitta through a ritual, and i.e., at that  time
of generating bodhicitta and taking the vows, one took  the  oath  and  made
the pledged to work for the benefit of all sentient beings.

If Aafter taking thate oath, wihen f one does  not  act  on  one’s  promise,
then one would have deceived all sentient beings. When one
If one has deceived all sentient beings, the text  asksed,   “What  kind  of
rebirth will I take?” Of course, there is no way that one will  get  a  good
rebirth. If Tthat being is the case, one  will  only  get  rebirths  in  the
lower realms.

At the time of taking the  bodhisattva  vows,  one  had   inviteds  all  the
sentient beings to be one’s guests and one made . One is making the oath  to
actualisze all their temporal and ultimate wishes  and  to  work  for  their
benefits. WheIn f one discards bodhicitta, one  is  discarding  thate   oath
and the promise to work for one’s guests,   –  the  migratory  ing  sentient
beings. When If oone breaks one’s promise to all these  numberless  sentient
beings,  then the ensuing misdeed/fault would be  great  because  one  would
have deceived all sentient beings. The result of that can only  be  is  only
rebirth in the lower realms. Keeping this in mind,  one  should  never  ever
give up one’s bodhicitta. Thus
Oone  has  to  depend  and  rely  on  conscientiousness   after   generating
bodhicitta in order to stop one’s bodhicitta fromor degenerating.

   2. Stating the proof for that
|2 Stating the proof   |
|for that              |


      Verse 4.5
      If it has been taught
      That he who does not give away
      The smallest thing he mentally thought to give
      Will become a hungry ghost,


      Verse 4.6
      Then if I should deceive all migrating beings
      After having from my heart invited them
      To unsurpassable happiness,
      What kind of happy migration will I go to?

It  is  mentioned  in  the  Saddharmasmrtyupasthana  Ssutra[5]  [The   Close
Placement of Mindfulness] that one will be reborn as a hungry ghost when  if
one does id not actually give away what one has intended to  give,  even  if
it is a small thing such aths ough it could be a small little thing such  as
a plate of vegetables or something. If one you hadve intended  to  give  but
one did not act on it due to being bound by the bond  of  miserliness,  this
becomes a cyou didn’t act on it that would be a cause for one to  be  reborn
as a hungry ghost (or preta).

If one has bound by the bond of miserliness and due to  that  one  does  not
give what one has intended to give then one will  be  born  as  a  preta  or
hungry ghost. This is stated in the sutras.
If that is the case,  then how is it possible for that one  to  will  get  a
good rebirth after having invited all sentient beings  to  be  one’s  guests
and making after having made thean  oath sincerely from the depth  of  one’s
heart  to  fulfill,  actualisze  and  accomplish  all  their  welfares   but
thereafter, .
After making the promise, one does not act on that one’s oath  and  promise?
Is it  then not the case that one would one will  have  deceived  all  these
sentient beings, isn’t it? If that is the  case  then  Wwhat  kind  of  good
rrebirth can one be possibly take place get when that happenswill  you  get?
Furthermore Or oone would have deceived all the buddhas,  and  bodhisattvas,
 and all the gods and demigods and so forth.

Keeping  With  this  thought  iin  mind,   one  should  not  let  the  one’s
bodhicitta thaten one has generated to degenerate.

What follows is
Next, is refuting any objections to this reasoning.

   3. Abandoning contradictions.
|3 Abandoning          |
|contradictions        |


Some people may object to the idea that one would be  reborn  in  the  lower
realms when one if one gives up one’s bodhicitta.

In a one of the historical accounts, it wasis  said  that  after  Shariputra
having generateding bodhicitta and was engageding in  the  practice  of  the
perfections,  he was approached by a Brahmin who was an emanation of Mara.

This The MMara came and ddemanded his right hand. Shariputra  then  cut  off
his right hand.
As Shariputra had cut off his right hand, he had to give his right  hand  to
the Mara using his remaining left hand. Because of giving the cut off  right
hand with his left hand to the Mara, Tthe Mara was very unhappy  as  in  the
cultural  context  ofat   that   time,   this   was   that   is   considered
disrespectful.

Shariputra was then being severely abused, criticiszed  and  reprimanded  by
this Mara.  Shariputra  then  becaomes  disheartened  and  he  gave  up  his
bodhicitta. Although Shariputra gave up his bodhicitta, later  on  he  still
became a foe- destroyer,  – an arhat.

Based  on  this  account,   tthere  are  people  who  say  that  this  is  a
contradiction, as it clearly shows clearly that when if one gives  up  one’s
the bodhicitta,  it does not necessarily n’t mean that one is going  to  the
lower realms.

      Khen Rinpoche (In English): If we give  with  the  left  hand,  is  it
      disrespectful?
      Verse 4.7
      Only the Omniscient Ones can discern
      The inconceivable manner of the action of
      Those who give up the mind of enlightenment
      But are liberated.

Khen Rinpoche: This  is  the  an  (In  English):  Answer  to  that  apparent
contradiction. Tis that. Thisat is all!.

If one’s bodhicitta degenerates it is a very heavy downfall  and  that  will
cause  one’s  activities  that  one  does  for  the  welfare  of  others  to
degenerate too.
~ One c[BP1 L19] Why did Shariputra not go to the lower realms?  The  answer
is beyond the scope of (ordinary)  thought”.  This  is  because  the  subtle
details of karma are the sole objects of knowledge of the buddhas alone  and
are beyond the understanding of us ordinary beings.eases  to  work  for  the
sake of others
|B One ceases to work for the sake of others                          |
|1 As the deterioration of bodhicitta involves a serious [lit. heavy] |
|downfall, the welfare of others deteriorates                         |
|2 It is equivalent to obstructing the virtue of another bodhisattva  |
|[and thus] one migrates to the lower realms                          |
|3 The reasons for that                                               |


  1. As the deterioration of bodhicitta involves  a  serious  downfall,  the
     welfare of others deteriorates
|1 As the deterioration of bodhicitta involves a serious [lit. heavy] |
|downfall, the welfare of others deteriorates                         |


When one’s bodhicitta degenerates, it is a very  heavy  downfall  that  will
cause the activities that one does for the welfare of others  to  degenerate
too.

      Verse 4.8
      This, for a bodhisattva,
      Is the heaviest of downfalls.
      If it were to occur, the welfare of
      All sentient beings would be weakened.

Degenerating one’s bodhicitta is  one  of  the  18  root  downfalls  of  the
bodhisattva vows. When one’s bodhicitta  degenerates,  one  commits  a  root
downfall,  which is a very heavy transgression. Due to committing this  root
downfall,  one will not be able to accomplish extensive  works  for  others.
Keeping this in mind,  then one then applies  conscientiousness  to  not  to
let one’s bodhicitta degenerates.

The text called tThe  Superior  Compendium  states  that  although  one  has
practisced the paths and ten grounds for ten millions  eons,  when   but  if
one generates the wish to be a self-liberator or  or solitary  realiszer  or
arhat, then at that moment, one’s ethical  discipline  has  degenerated  and
received a fault has been committed. and degenerate. So  the  generation  of
such a mind is mind generation is much heavier than the root downfall.

The explanation to this verse is from The Superior Compendium  which  states
that if a bodhisattva who  possesses  the  vow  gives  up  his  aspirational
bodhicitta then he receives a root downfall. If this  bodhisattva  who  does
not have the bodhisattva vow then his negativity is  still  heavier  than  a
root downfall of the pratimoksha vow.
The explanation of this  verse  in  What  GGyaltsab  Je’s  commentary,  also
citing the Superior Compendium, is saying that wif hen  a  bodhisattva  with
ho has a bodhisattva vows gives up histhe aspirational bodhicitta,  then  he
incurs a root downfall. But in a case  of  a  bodhisattva  who  does  notn’t
have a bodhisattva vows,  the negativityies that he incurs  from  giving  up
bodhicitta  is  still  heavier  than  committing  a  root  downfall  of  the
pratimoksha vows.

This seems to be saying that  one  can  generate  bodhicitta  and  have  the
actual bodhicitta without the bodhisattva vows. When you read this  section,
tThis is what the text seems to be implying.  when you read it.
Is there such a thing as having generating ed bodhicitta when one  does  not
have the bodhisattva vows?

If this exists and if this is possible,  then the bodhicitta in the mind  of
this person who  has  generateds  bodhicitta  but  does  not  n’t  have  the
bodhisattva vows then  that  bodhicitta  in  his  mind  is  an  aspirational
bodhicitta.
It is clear in the texts that when if engaged  bodhicitta  is  present,  the
bodhisattva vows are is  necessarily  present.  Going  by  this,   then  the
bodhicitta in the mind of the so-called bodhisattva who has  bodhicitta  but
who does not have the bodhisattva vows then  that  bodhicitta  in  his  mind
wwould be an aspirational bodhicitta.

However isIs there such  a  thing  as  having  the  bodhicitta  without  the
bodhisattva vows?

Khen Rinpoche (In English): What do you think?

In This is what Gyaltsab Je’s commentary,  says. hHe says very clearly  that
when if a bodhisattva who has the vows gives up bodhicitta,  then he  incurs
receives a root downfall of the bodhisattva  vows.  That  iswas  clear.  But
when such a bodhisattva if he has no vows,  then his negativity  (of  giving
up his bodhicitta)ies is still  heavier  than  athe  root  downfall  of  the
pratimoksha vows. How are you going to interpret read this?

  2.  It is equivalent to obstructing the virtue of another bodhisattva [and
     thus] one migrates to the lower realms
|2 It is equivalent to obstructing the virtue of another bodhisattva  |
|[and thus] one migrates to the lower realms                          |


When If one obstructs the  work  or   virtue  of  another  bodhisattva,  the
ensuing fault is also said to be very heavy. It can even be a   and  also  a
cause to go to the lower realms.
      Verse 4.9
      Should others for even a single instant
      Hinder or obstruct his merit,
      By weakening the welfare of sentient beings
      There will be no end to their unfortunate rebirths.

If a bodhisattva obstructs the work or the virtue  of  another  bodhisattva,
the ensuing fault is also very heavy and that can even be a cause for  lower
realms.
In Gyaltsab Je’s commentary, he cites tThe Sutra of Magical  Emanation  That
Definitely Pacifying thatying which says that it is a heavier  transgression
to obstruct the virtue of a bodhisattva of offering aone morsel of  food  or
drink to an animal than to rob all sentient beings  of  this  world  of  the
sSouthern cContinent world of all their possessions and  to  food  and  kill
them.[6]

Since this is so, it is said like that one should be careful regarding  this
point. One does not know where there are bodhisattvas are.  and  Sso  it  is
very easy to make this mistake. When If  one  is  able  to  protect  oneself
from this,  then one will be able to abandon the fault door of  accumulating
or creating such faults with regards to others.
The point here is that onewe  should not  obstruct  or  cause  hinder  rance
when others from are engaging in  virtuous  activities.  The  commentary  is
also saying that since we do not know who is or who is  not  a  bodhisattva,
one has to be careful about this point so as not to interrupt  the  virtuous
activities of others.

  3. The reasons for that

|3 The reasons  |
|for that       |


      Verse 4.10
      If I shall degenerate
      By destroying the happiness of even one sentient being,
      Then what need is there to mention destroying the happiness
      Of all embodied beings vast as space without exception?

The ensuing negativity is very heavy when  If  oone  interrupts  the  virtue
that someone is accumulating which  that  will  enable  that  person  to  be
reborn as a god or a human being or as a god. , the  ensuing  negativity  is
very heavy. If Tthat being is the case, then it  goes  without  saying  that
the negativity will be very heavy when  one  hinders  or  if  one  is  doing
something to hinder or  to  interrupts   the  work  of  a  bodhisattva  that
bodhicitta which iiss the cause  of  the  hhappiness  of  all  the  sentient
beings.
[BP1 L19] In some other commentaries, the reasons why we  go  to  the  lower
realms when we obstruct the virtue of another bodhisattva are  explained  in
two ways:
   1. Reasoning employing scriptural authority
   2. Reasoning employing logic
Verse 4.10 establishes the reason using logic. Destroying the  happiness  of
just one sentient being will cause  us  not  to  be  reborn  in  the  higher
realms. It goes without saying then that there will be much  more  suffering
if we destroy the happiness of  all  sentient  beings.  Why  is  it  such  a
negative action to obstruct the activities of  a  bodhisattva?  Because,  by
causing obstacles to the bodhisattva’s practice of virtue, we  are  actually
causing obstacles to the cause of a buddha; the cause of  enlightenment.  By
obstructing the works of a bodhisattva, we are  creating  obstacles  to  the
cause of  happiness  of  all  sentient  beings,  the  enlightenment  of  all
sentient beings.
|The disadvantages of discarding  |
|[bodhicitta]                     |
|A The disadvantage of going to   |
|the lower realms                 |
|B One ceases to work for the sake|
|of others                        |
|C Attainment of the grounds is   |
|postponed                        |

Attainment of the grounds is postponed
When  If  one  abandons  bodhicitta,   then  one  isbecomes  very  far  from
actualiszing or attaining the grounds.

      Verse 4.11
      Thus if those who have the force of a downfall
      And the force of the mind of enlightenment
      Were to stay revolving within cyclic existence,
      For a long time they would be hindered from attaining the grounds.

It is said that when those who have taken the  bodhisattva  vows  ,  and  if
they were to incur the a root downfall of abandoning bodhicitta, after  that
even after that iif they were to were to generate  very  strong  virtue  and
again generate bodhicitta again, , tthey would remain  be  still  in  cyclic
existence. S; sometimes they may gogoing to the lower realms.  S,  sometimes
they may getting a good rebirth but they would  still  be  remain  very  far
away from actualiszing the first 1st  bodhisattva  ground  which  is  called
Very Joyous.

The point is that after one has  generated  bodhicitta  and  has  taken  the
bodhisattva vows, it is important to strive from the very beginning  not  to
be stained by the downfalls, and not to let one’s bodhicitta degenerated.

One You may think,  “My The bodhicitta may degenerate but I can develop  get
it back again.” It is true that oneyou  may  be  able  to  develop  get  the
bodhicitta back again but  even  then,  because  having  incurred  the  root
downfall earlier, the  consequence  is  that  one  will  be  very  far  from
actualiszing the bodhisattva grounds.

When  If  one  incurs  a  root  downfall,  one  can  purify  the  negativity
accumulated through the practice of confession whereby one applies the  four
opponent powers. As a result of purifying the negativity,  one  does  notn’t
have  to  experience  the  result  of  going  to  the  lower  realms.    but
Nnevertheless because of having incurred that root  downfall  in  the  first
place, that acts as a hindrance  and  a  great  obstacle  to  achieving  the
realiszations and the higher qualities. Therefore it is important not to  be
stained by a downfall from the beginning.

Up to here at this point, we have been discussing it is a discussion of  how
importantce it is not  to  let  one’s  bodhicitta  degenerates  by  applying
conscientiousness. One does  that  by  thinking  of  the  great  faults  and
negativities that will ensue  from  letting  one’s  bodhicitta  degenerates.
Instead one So, one has to try to always  strengthen  and  to  increase  the
bodhicitta that one has already generated.




Interpreted by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme; transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek,  Vivien  Ng
& Aki Yeo; edited by Cecilia Tsong.


-----------------------
[1] Chapter Four
[2] Chapter Five
[3] Chapter Six to Chapter Nine
[4] Chapter Ten
[5] Saddharmasmrtyupasthana Sutra, Thog. Pg. 57: “If one does not  give  the
slightest thing (one) once intended (to give), one can be born as  a  hungry
ghost; and if one does not give something (one) promised (to give), one  can
be born in hell.” (Note no. 8, pages 170-171,  Guide  to  the  Bodhisattva’s
Way of Life, translated by Stephen Batchelor. Copyright: Library of  Tibetan
Works and Archives, Dharamsala, 1979.)

[6] Prasantaviniscayapratiharya Sutra, Thog.  Pg.  59:  “Should  one  person
steal the possessions of and kill every  being  in  the  world,  and  should
another obstruct the slightest virtue of a  bodhisattva,  such  as  that  of
giving a morsel of food to an animal, the transgression of the latter  would
be incalculably greater than the former. This is  so  because  he  would  be
obstructing the virtue which gives rise to  the  occurrence  of  a  buddha.”
(Note no. 9, page 171, Guide to the Bodhisattva’s Way  of  Life,  translated
by Stephen Batchelor. Copyright: Library  of  Tibetan  Works  and  Archives,
Dharamsala, 1979.)

