Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Engaging in the Deeds of a Bodhisattva/BP2 M5 L40 final.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:52:18.216687
================================================================================


Transcript of the teachings by Khen Rinpoche Geshe  Chonyi  on  Engaging  in
the Bodhisattva Deeds, 2014

Root text: Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds by  Shantideva,  translated  by
Toh Sze Gee. Copyright: Toh Sze Gee, 2006; Revised edition, 2014.

Lesson                                                                    40
 24 July   2014


Chapter Six: Verses 6.112 a, b - 6.134.
         2.  It is unreasonable to be furious with that which hinders merit
         (cont’d)
              C.  Reflecting on it as an object one ought to have respect
         for
                    1.  As it is something that acts to develop qualities,
         one should respect it (V. 6.112 a, b – V. 6.118)
                    2.  Due to faith in the Teacher, one should have
         respect (V. 6.119 – V.126)
2.  The benefits of cultivating patience (V. 6.127 – V. 6.134)


In the last lesson, we saw how patience cannot be  developed  in  dependence
on a person who is kind to us and always benefiting us. That  person  cannot
be the object for our development of patience.

Rather the object for our development of patience has to be someone who  has
a hateful mind towards us, someone who is upset and angry with  us,  someone
who wishes to harm us or who is harming us. That person has to exist  before
any patience can be cultivated. As  such,  the  enemy  or  harm-doer  is  an
indispensable cause and condition for our development of patience.

As such, just as we respect and venerate the Dharma, likewise the  teachings
tell us that we should also venerate the enemy. This is  because  the  enemy
is like the Dharma as he is an indispensable  cause  for  us  to  accumulate
virtue.

Because  the  enemy  is  an  indispensable  cause  for  our  development  of
patience, it  doesn’t  matter  whether  that  enemy  or  harm-doer  has  the
intention to benefit us or not. Regardless of that, since the enemy or harm-
doer is an indispensable cause for our development  of  patience,  therefore
he is worthy of  veneration  just  like  the  Dharma.  Although  the  Dharma
benefits us, the Dharma also does not have any intention to benefit us.

Next is the explanation of why we should consider the  enemy  or  the  harm-
doer to be special and exalted, i.e., why we should view  the  enemy  to  be
like the Buddha. In essence, the following section talks about how  precious
sentient beings are and why we should respect them.
 • One reason is that sentient beings are like a merit field for us. That is
   one reason for respecting sentient beings.
 • The other reason for respecting sentient beings is that when we do so, we
   please all the buddhas and bodhisattvas.
 • Another reason is that any help or benefit extended  to  sentient  beings
   from our  side  brings  about  great  positive  results  in  the  future.
   Conversely any harm that we inflict on sentient beings will  bring  about
   great suffering results for ourselves in the future.
So analysing and distinguishing well the  consequences  of  both  benefiting
and harming others is another way to  cultivate  our  respect  for  sentient
beings.

2.   IT IS  UNREASONABLE  TO  BE  FURIOUS  WITH  THAT  WHICH  HINDERS  MERIT
(cont’d)

          C.  Reflecting on it as an object one ought to have respect for
                1.  As it is something that acts to develop  qualities,  one
should respect it
                      C.  Seeing it to be like the Teacher
                            1.   Extensive explanation
                                   A.   The scriptures teach  that  sentient
                  beings and the buddhas are comparable fields of merit
      Verse 6.112 a, b
      Therefore the Muni taught
      The field of sentient beings and the so-called “field of Victors.”

Essentially the Buddha said that both sentient beings and  the  buddhas  are
equal in being merit fields for us, i.e., they are equal  in  being  objects
in relation to whom we can collect merit.

In one sutra, the Buddha said that the  field  of  sentient  beings  is  the
field of the buddhas. From the field of the  buddhas,  the  Buddhadharma  is
obtained, so it will be unsuitable  to  mistreat  them.  That  is  what  the
Buddha said. Following this is establishing this with reasoning.

                                   B. Establishing that by reason
                                        1.  One attains the final object  of
                    desire[1] by having faith in the  buddhas  and  sentient
                    beings
      Verse 6.112 c, d
      Many who have pleased them
      Have thereby reached perfection.


Many have become buddhas and achieved the fulfilment  of  the  two  purposes
through cultivating and generating love and compassion for sentient  beings.
As such, this is a reason for us to respect sentient beings.

                                        2.   As  having  faith  in  both  is
                    comparable in  terms  of  attaining  Buddhahood,  it  is
                    unreasonable to discard one and embrace the other
      Verse 6.113
      A buddha’s qualities are accomplished
      From sentient beings and the Victors alike,
      So what kind of system is it that
      I do not respect sentient beings in the same way I respect the
      Victors?
The achievement of the qualities of enlightenment such  as  the  ten  powers
and the four fearlessnesses come about in dependence upon both  the  buddhas
and sentient beings. If that is the case, the teachings are questioning  why
on the one hand, we venerate the  buddhas—prostrating  to  them,  cherishing
them and making offerings to them—but on  the  other  hand,  we  do  not  do
likewise to sentient beings? We do not respect them. As such, the  teachings
say that respecting the buddhas and at the same  time,  neglecting  and  not
respecting sentient beings are  behaviours  that  are  discordant  with  one
another.

We may have qualms about this. For example, we may accept that  the  buddhas
and sentient beings are equal in being fields of merit. However the  buddhas
and sentient beings are vastly different in that the buddhas  have  all  the
qualities and do not have any faults. This is  not  the  case  for  sentient
beings who are full of faults. As such, it is only appropriate  to  venerate
and make offerings to the buddhas and not to sentient beings. The answer  to
our qualm is in verse 6.114.

                                   C.  Abandoning objections
                                         1.   Rejecting  the  position  that
                    holds that is it invalid to  cultivate  equal  faith  in
                    objects that are not equal in terms of their qualities
      Verse 6.114
      They are not similar in the excellent qualities of their intentions
      But in the results.
      Sentient beings also have excellent qualities
      And they are therefore equal.

In relation to what we have said so  far,  we  are  not  claiming  that  the
buddhas and the sentient beings are equal in terms of  their  qualities.  Of
course, it is not the case that the buddhas and sentient  beings  are  equal
in terms of their qualities. But they are equal in  terms  of  being  causes
for achieving the final fruit of enlightenment. Since we need to  depend  on
both the buddhas and sentient beings to achieve our desired result  of  full
enlightenment, as such, we also have to respect sentient beings.

                                          2.   The  greatness  of  faith  in
                    both: It is reasonable to cultivate equal faith  on  the
                    basis that they are comparable in terms of their ability
                    to act as causes for Buddhahood
      Verse 6.115
      Whatever veneration of one with a loving mind
      Is the greatness of sentient beings.
      Whatever merit of faith in the buddhas
      Is the greatness of buddhas.


      Verse 6.116 a, b
      Therefore, they are asserted to be equal
      In the share they have in establishing a buddha’s qualities.

If someone who is cultivating love  and  has  entered  into  the  meditative
equipoise  concentrating  on  love,  when  that  person  arises  from   that
concentration on love and if we were to venerate and make offerings to  this
person, it is said that we would accumulate a  vast  amount  of  merit.  The
merit that we collect in relation to making offerings to such  a  person  is
so powerful that it can bear fruit even in this  life.   Why  is  the  merit
that is created so  powerful?  The  amount  of  merit  that  we  collect  in
relation to making offerings to a person who has achieved the  concentration
of love is so great because sentient beings are the objects  of  observation
of that person’s love.

Because  of  our  faith  in  them,  we  venerate  the  buddhas   by   making
prostrations, offerings and so forth. We accumulate so much merit  by  doing
so.  Such  merit  is  said  to  last  all  the  way  to  our  attainment  of
enlightenment. As we make offerings due to our faith, the result we  get  is
very powerful because the object of our  veneration  and  offerings  is  the
Buddha. In  this  case,  the  Buddha  is  the  object  that  enables  us  to
accumulate such vast merit.

In the earlier example, we  can  accumulate  so  much  merit  when  we  make
offerings to someone who has achieved the concentration of love  because  of
sentient beings. So, in the first example,  we  accumulate  that  amount  of
merit in dependence upon sentient beings.

In the second example, we accumulate that much merit in dependence upon  the
Buddha.

The point is that in order to achieve the state of full  enlightenment,  our
ultimate goal, we need one of  the  causes  for  doing  so,  i.e.,  sentient
beings. So besides the buddhas, we need  to  depend  upon  sentient  beings.
Since in that sense sentient beings are equal to the buddhas  in  being  the
necessary  cause  and  condition  for  us  to  achieve  full  enlightenment,
therefore it is correct to be equally respectful to sentient beings.

                                         3.  It is reasonable to have  faith
                    because there is unlimited merit in making offerings  to
                    sentient beings who  possess  only  a  fraction  of  the
                    qualities of a buddha
      Verse 6.116 c,d
      They are not equal with the buddhas
      Who are boundless oceans of excellence.


      Verse 6.117
      Even if the three realms were offered
      For the sake of venerating
      Some person in whom a mere share of the good qualities
      Of the unique Assembly of Supreme Excellent Qualities appears, it
      would be little.


In terms of qualities, the buddhas and sentient beings are  not  equal.  The
buddhas have boundless oceans of qualities. That is true.

Although  sentient  beings  are  not  equal  to  the  buddhas  in  terms  of
qualities, the sentient beings do have some portion of  the  qualities  that
the buddhas possess.

It is said that for the sake of venerating sentient beings, even if we  were
to offer the entire three realms to  one  sentient  being  who  has  a  mere
fraction  of  the  qualities  of  the  buddhas,  that   offering   will   be
insufficient.

                            2. Synopsis
      Verse 6.118
      Thus since sentient beings have a share
      In giving rise to the supreme qualities of the buddhas,
      It is correct to venerate sentient beings
      Due to similarity through just these.

The next section talks about how we should be respectful to sentient  beings
if we really have faith in the Buddha. I guess  one  of  the  main  ways  to
repay the kindness of the buddhas is to  respect  and  to  cherish  sentient
beings.

                2.  Due to faith in the Teacher, one should have respect
                      A.  One should respect the Teacher  because  he  acted
            as if all sentient beings were his only child
                            1.  Accomplishing the principal method  required
of buddhas
                                  A.  Showing respect and  cherishing  other
                  beings is identified as the principal method for  repaying
                  the kindness of the buddhas in the light of what they have
                  done
      Verse 6.119
      Furthermore, what way is there to repay
      Those without dissimulation who are a friend
      And grant immeasurable benefit,
      Other than by pleasing sentient beings?

The buddhas look upon all sentient beings as their loved  ones  without  any
discrimination, deceit and pretension.
 • It is said that there is no better way to honour and please  the  buddhas
   than to cherish and respect all sentient beings.
 • It is also said that there is no better way to repay the kindness of  the
   buddhas than to cherish and help sentient beings.
 • In fact, it is said that there is no higher offering to the buddhas  than
   to help and benefit sentient beings.

As such, there is really no way to please the buddhas if, on the  one  hand,
we venerate and make offerings to them and then, on the other hand, we  harm
sentient beings, get  upset with them, look down on them or bully them.

If there is this need to respect sentient beings, then what is  the  way  to
do it? One of these ways is to be patient when we are harmed by them.

                                  B.  Establishing that
                                        1.  One should be patient with  harm
                  done by sentient beings
      Verse 6.120
      Because benefiting them will repay
      Those who give up their holy bodies and enter Relentless Torment,
      Therefore even if they cause me great harm
      I shall behave impeccably in all.

The buddhas worked very hard in order to become buddhas. Even  if  they  had
to give up their exalted bodies to fulfil the welfare  of  sentient  beings,
they would do it. They would even go to the lowest of  the  hot  hells,  the
unrelenting hot hells, for the benefit of the sentient beings.

So if we really have faith in such buddhas, then we should benefit  sentient
beings. That would be the best way to repay the kindness of the  buddhas  in
whom we have such faith.  As such, if our  possessions  or  our  bodies  are
harmed in any way by sentient beings, the practice here is  to  be  able  to
train our mind to look at these enemies and harm-doers in  a  positive  way,
just as we would view our spiritual teachers or gurus. When we look  at  our
gurus, we look at them as only wanting to benefit and to help us.

A person who is able to devote correctly to the virtuous friend  is  someone
who is able to see good in every action of the virtuous friend  due  to  her
training in how to look at the virtuous friend. Likewise the  practice  here
is to train the mind to look at sentient beings, especially  the  enemy  and
harm-doer, in a positive light regardless of what they do  to  us.  That  is
one way to train our mind.

This verse is the advice to, from our side,  look  at  everything  that  the
harm-doer does as something that is good and positive.

Next is the advice to abandon  arrogance  in  relation  to  sentient  beings
because if we are arrogant, it is difficult to do what we have  set  out  to
do here, i.e., developing respect for sentient beings.

                                       2.  Abandoning conceit one  feels  in
                  relation to other sentient beings
      Verse 6. 121
      Because those who are my Lords, for the time being
      Disregard even their own bodies,
      Then why does the confused I
      Act proud and not behave with the attributes of a servant toward them?

The “Lords” here refer to the buddhas and bodhisattvas whom  we  love,  hold
in high regard and respect very much. From  the  side  of  the  buddhas  and
bodhisattvas, they have the intention and the wish to  give  themselves  up,
even their lives and their bodies, if there is  such  a  need  in  order  to
benefit others.

If the buddhas and bodhisattvas whom we  respect,  love  and  hold  in  high
regard would disregard even their own lives in  order  to  benefit  sentient
beings, then why do we, out of our confusion, behave  with  such  pride  and
arrogance  towards  sentient  beings?  Why  are  we  doing  that?   That  is
incorrect. Rather the training here is that we should strive to  regard  all
sentient beings with respect just as we would the buddhas.
Usually a servant would do his best  to  please  his  master  by  acting  in
accordance with what the master wants. Likewise here,  we  should  work  for
sentient beings, just as a servant would serve his master. One of  the  main
reasons why we are unable to respect others is because of our arrogance.  As
such, from our side, if we are able to regard sentient beings as our  master
and we ourselves as servants, then it would be easier for  us  to  work  for
others.

Next is the explanation of why it is inappropriate to harm others.

                                      3. Abandoning harm
                                            A.   The  reasons  why   it   is
                  unreasonable to cause harm
      Verse 6.122
      Because of their happiness the Munis will be pleased
      But if they are harmed they will be displeased.
      By making them happy I shall delight the Munis,
      And by harming them I shall harm the Munis.

This verse is very straightforward and not difficult to  understand.  If  we
can keep these words in our mind, it will be helpful  to  mentally  go  over
them every now and then or to recite them. In particular, at times  when  we
have thoughts of wanting to harm others, then we can  bring  this  verse  to
mind: if we harm sentient beings, then there is no way we would ever  please
the buddhas.

                                             B.  There is no way to  please
                       the buddhas while one is harming others
      Verse 6.123
      Just as anything desirable would give my mind no pleasure
      If my body was ablaze with fire,
      Likewise when sentient beings are harmed
      There is no way for the Great Compassionate Ones to be pleased.

If, for whatever reason, your body is set  ablaze  with  fire,  if  somebody
were to come along and give you a plate of  delicious  food  or  some  other
desirable object, there is no way you could enjoy it. You will not  be  able
to find anything that is given to you  as  pleasurable  or  desirable  while
your body is on fire.

Likewise there is no way that the buddhas can really be pleased  if  on  the
one hand, you are harming sentient beings while at the same time  venerating
the buddhas with offerings.

Now we should confess whatever actions of harming sentient  beings  that  we
have done in the past.

                            2. Confessing previous displeasing actions
      Verse 6.124
      Due to having harmed migrating beings,
      I have displeased the Great Compassionate Ones.
      Therefore today I confess individually all my negativities.
      I request your forgiveness, Munis, for this displeasure I have caused.

If you have accumulated such negativities in the  past,  then  such  actions
would have displeased the buddhas. As such, you should confess them  without
any concealment in the presence of the  buddhas  and  also  not  do  similar
actions again in the future. Verse  6.124  is  confessing  the  disrepectful
actions that we have engaged in in the past.

The next verse is refraining from any such similar actions in the future.

                            3.  Refraining  from  allowing  negativities  to
arise in the future
      Verse 6.125
      From now on, in order to delight the Tathagatas,
      I shall be subdued and be a servant to the world.
      Although many beings may kick and smash my head or kill me,
      I shall not retaliate and may I delight the Protectors of the World.

You confessed whatever mistakes that you have done in  the  past.   Now  you
should refrain from such similar  actions  again  in  the  future  with  the
thought of pleasing the buddhas.  You  should  refrain  from  arrogance  and
pride which is the meaning of the second line, “I shall be  subdued,”  i.e.,
to subdue one’s arrogance and pride and to view  oneself  as  a  servant  to
sentient beings with the attitude to benefit them.

The highest part of the body is the head and the lowest part of the body  is
the feet. It is said that from one’s own side, even if someone were to  kick
one’s head and even if they were to take one’s life, from  one’s  own  side,
one is not to view those actions with anger or to retaliate with anger.

Here we are applying the mind of restraint, i.e.,  cultivating  the  thought
that even if such things happen to us, from our side, we will not  retaliate
with anger. Instead we will voluntarily  accept  that  situation.  We  offer
these thoughts of restraint to the buddhas with the hope that it may  please
the buddhas.

                      B.  Thus, this shows in brief that we  should  respect
            sentient beings as well
      Verse 6.126
      There is no doubt that those with the nature of compassion
      Regard all these migrating beings as themselves.
      These very ones seen in the entities of sentient beings are the
             Protectors themselves;
      Why then do I not respect them?

Through the practice of having exchanged themselves with  others,  there  is
no doubt that  the  buddhas  consider  sentient  beings  to  be  similar  to
themselves. In  fact,  they  cherish  sentient  beings  more  than  they  do
themselves. As such, from our side, we should regard  every  sentient  being
in such a way, i.e., as being like a buddha.

What do you think is the meaning of the third line of  verse  6.126:  “These
very ones seen in  the  entities  of  sentient  beings  are  the  Protectors
themselves”? Here it is saying that the sentient beings are in the  entities
of the buddhas.

Khen Rinpoche: How are you going to explain that sentence? Make it short  as
I have to finish this chapter on patience today. There is  still  some  more
verses to cover.

Student: This verse means that the way the Buddha treats sentient beings  is
the way he sees himself. If sentient beings were to suffer, he feels  as  if
he himself is suffering.

Khen Rinpoche: The Buddha feels suffering also? So the Buddha  is  not  free
from suffering?

Student: This is due to his compassion.

Khen Rinpoche: Due to his compassion, he suffers,  so  he  is  not  free  of
suffering?

In the  teachings  on  equalising  self  and  others,  there  is  a  way  of
equalising self and  other  from  the  ultimate  point  of  view.  From  the
ultimate point of view, if you look at  the  ultimate  nature  of  both  the
Buddha’s mind and sentient beings’ minds, both are the same in never  having
been  polluted  by  the  defilements  since  beginningless  lifetimes.   The
defilements are not one with the mind.

If we look at  the  words  of  this  sentence,  what  it  seems  to  suggest
literally is this: the sentient being who I see is a buddha. It seems to  be
telling us that whoever we see is a buddha. But it is not that the  sentient
beings are buddhas. Sentient beings are not buddhas. But by seeing  sentient
beings as being in the nature of the buddhas, it is  giving  the  result  to
the cause in that  although  the  sentient  beings  are  not  buddhas,  they
possess right from the beginning the potential to become  enlightened.  That
is, they have the fundamental cause or the nature of enlightenment  in  them
so they will be future buddhas.

The essence is that by respecting sentient beings, from our  side,  we  will
swiftly achieve the state of full enlightenment.

The remaining verses of this chapter  are  talking  about  the  benefits  of
meditating on patience.

2.   THE BENEFITS OF CULTIVATING PATIENCE[2]

        A.  Brief presentation
      Verse 6.127
      It delights the tathagatas
      And perfectly accomplishes my own purpose as well.
      It dispels the suffering of the world.
      Therefore I should always practice it.

Here it says that when we are harmed by sentient  beings,  if  we  cultivate
patience, do not  retaliate  and  if  we  are  respectful  towards  sentient
beings, then this alone is the supreme way of pleasing the buddhas.

Meditating on patience  is  also  the  supreme  method  to  fulfil  our  own
purposes  of  this  life  and  our   ultimate   goal   of   achieving   full
enlightenment. Our own practice of the  meditation  on  patience  alone  can
dispel the sufferings of the world.

In Gyaltsab Je’s  commentary,  these  are  stated  to  be  the  benefits  of
patience. In some other commentaries, there is a list of benefits that  come
from respecting others. But whatever it is—whether  it  is  a  list  of  the
benefits of respecting sentient beings or a list of benefits  of  meditating
on patience—the  point  is  that  through  ascertaining,  acknowledging  and
accepting those benefits, the practice of  patience  is  something  that  we
should always practise.

Next is explaining the benefits through an example.

        B.  Explaining the benefits by means of an analogy
              1.  The meaning of the analogy in terms of benefit
                     A.  Analogy
      Verse 6.128
      For example, should even some of the king’s men
      Cause harm to many people,
      Farsighted men would not retaliate
      Even if they were able to.


      Verse 6.129 a, b
      For they are not alone;
      The might of the king is their might.

When we know how to think in the long-term,  then  for  whatever  reason  if
somebody who is very powerful sends his subordinates to  give  us  problems,
even though we may have the capacity to retaliate, we will  not  do  so.  We
will think carefully first before doing anything because we know  that  that
person has the support of someone who is very powerful. This is  an  example
of not retaliating because of fear. So we just put up with it.

                     B.  Meaning
      Verse 6.129 c, d
      Likewise I should not underestimate
      Weak harmers.


      Verse 6.130 a, b
      For the guardians of hell and the Compassionate Ones
      Are their army.

Likewise when pitiful sentient beings cause us  harm,  even  though  we  can
retaliate, we should not do so. We should not put them down,  look  down  on
or kill them.

Here it is mentioned that we should not underestimate  the  “weak  harmers”.
We may think the weak harmers are insignificant or very weak.  For  example,
the mosquito is insignificant to us. We have all the capacity  to  smash  it
and destroy it if we wanted to. But the point  is  that  we  should  not  do
that.
Although we may be in a position to overcome these weak  enemies  and  harm-
doers, we shouldn’t because behind them are the armies of the  guardians  of
hell and all the buddhas.

How does the army of the hell guardians come into the picture?  If  we  harm
sentient beings, we accumulate the non-virtuous karma that will produce  the
appearance of the hell guardians in the future  when  we  are  born  in  the
hells.

What  about  the  army  of  the  conquerors  that   are   supporting   these
insignificant weak harmers? As I mentioned earlier, any actions we  do  that
harm sentient beings are  actions  that  would  displease  the  buddhas.  By
harming sentient beings, we displease the buddhas and we move  further  away
from them. We will not have the fortune to meet  up  with  the  buddhas.  We
will not have the  bases  to  receive  the  blessings  of  the  buddhas  and
bodhisattvas.

So that is the explanation through the analogy but in reality,  the  meaning
itself is even greater than the analogy, i.e., what happens  in  reality  is
greater than what we see in the analogy.

              2.  Explaining that the reality of it surpasses the analogy
      Verse 6.130 c, d
       Just as subjects behave towards a fierce king,
      I should please sentient beings.


      Verse 6.131
      Even if such a king were to become angry,
      Could he cause the harm of hell,
      Which is what I would have to experience
      By displeasing sentient beings?


      Verse 6.132
      And even if such a king were to be pleased,
      He could not possibly grant me buddhahood,
      Which is what I would obtain
      By pleasing sentient beings.

Here it says that we should please sentient beings  in  the  same  way  that
subjects would behave towards their fierce king. In the case of the  example
here, if the king that we are trying to please is fierce, even  if  he  were
upset with us, from his own side, the king cannot throw us into  the  hells.
But if we harm sentient beings, we will be thrown into the lower realms.  On
the other hand, even if the king is happy, no matter how happy  he  may  be,
he can never grant us enlightenment. But if you look  at  the  meaning,  the
king is really the sentient being for if we please sentient beings,  we  can
achieve enlightenment.

                     C.  A condensed presentation of the types of benefit
                          1.  The principal effect
      Verse 6.133 a, b
      Let alone my future attainment of buddhahood,
      Which comes from pleasing sentient beings,


                          2.  The visible effect
      Verse 6.133 c, d
      Why do I not see that there will be great glory,
      Fame, and happiness in this very life?

By respecting sentient beings and practising patience in relation  to  them,
the state of full enlightenment will be ours in the future.  As  such,  here
is the justification to be respectful of others and to  cultivate  patience.
Even in this life, it is quite obvious that through  respecting  others  and
cultivating patience, we would have a good reputation, peace  and  happiness
in this life. By seeing that there are these visible results such as  having
fame, good reputation, peace and happiness in this  life,  then  one  should
practise patience and have respect for others.

Lastly by understanding the fruitional effects,  we  cultivate  respect  for
and patience with others.

                          3.  Explaining the fully ripened effect
      Verse 6.134
      While in cyclic existence patience causes
      Beauty, freedom from sickness, and fame.
      Because of these I shall live for a very long time
      And win the prosperous pleasures of the wheel-turning kings.

The result of the practice of patience  is  that  while  we  are  in  cyclic
existence, we will achieve  a  body  that  is  pleasant  in  appearance  and
pleasing to others. We will also be able to have good helpers.  It  is  said
that the practice of patience results in a very long life as well as a  life
that is free of sicknesses. It will also result in fame and we will be  able
to obtain the enjoyments of the wheel-turning kings.

2.   THE CHAPTER’S NAME[3]

The name of this chapter is “Teaching patience.”

SUMMARY

In the face of experiencing harm or disturbances from others, if  we  become
overly upset and we react with too much anger  and  unhappiness,  then  life
becomes really complicated. In the case  of  a  Dharma  practitioner,  being
overly upset and  agitated  really  harms  our  practice.  It  becomes  very
difficult to practise. In particular, for someone  who  is  aiming  for  and
trying to cultivate bodhicitta, becoming overly upset is a huge obstacle.
The antidote to that is cultivating the patience of disregarding  harm  done
to us. If we look at the teachings pertaining to  this  particular  form  of
patience, many reasons are  put  forth  in  order  to  help  us  change  our
perspective of the harm-doer from  someone who is totally bad  into  someone
who is truly good and beneficial. These are all methods  to  help  us  avoid
developing any anger towards harm-doers.

Another source of  disturbance  and  obstacle  to  our  Dharma  practice  is
meeting with difficult  situations  and  challenges,  difficult  people  and
problems in life such as sicknesses and  so  forth.  Often  people  give  up
their Dharma practice in the face of such problems. As such, these  problems
become obstacles, interfering with our Dharma practice. To  counteract  this
danger, there is the practice  of  cultivating  the  patience  of  accepting
suffering. We acknowledge and accept the  suffering  so  that  it  does  not
detract us from the practice but rather, we are able to persevere  with  our
practice.

In the section dealing with this particular form of patience,  the  patience
of accepting suffering, in the beginning, there is  a  discussion  prompting
us to look at whatever problems we are facing to see if  there  is  anything
that can be done about it. Can it be solved? If it cannot  be  solved,  then
why are we worried? So that is the analysis to be done.

Then there is the discussion of the benefits of suffering.  It  is  actually
good to have suffering  because  it  is  very  useful.  There  is  also  the
discussion of how we  can  actually  deal  with  these  sufferings.  We  can
actually put up with them or even develop a  liking  for  them.  After  all,
this is only a matter of familiarity. Once we  are  accustomed  to  changing
our ideas about suffering, we can really put up with it.

Yet another source of problems—why we do not succeed in  our  practice—is  a
lack of desire for the Dharma in the  first  place.  Dharma  is  not  really
desirable for some people. We may want to  practise  a  little  bit  but  we
don’t really want to do it. One of the reasons is because we don’t  see  the
benefit of Dharma practice. Basically we don’t have faith and trust  in  the
Dharma. That is another reason.

In order to counteract that,  we  have  an  antidote  in  the  form  of  the
patience that is intent on the Dharma  or  developing  certitude  about  the
teachings, which counteracts our lack of faith or trust  in  the  teachings.
The way to cultivate this particular form  of  patience  is  to  develop  an
ascertainment of the Buddha’s teachings—in particular the  workings  of  the
law of cause and effect, i.e., karma—by thinking about them  and  developing
conviction in them. In particular, we need to develop the ascertainment  and
certitude about dependant arising on  its  subtlest  level.  It  is  through
these methods that we gain stability in our faith and trust  in  the  Dharma
that provides us with the foundation to actually practise and continue  with
our practice.

On the basis of thinking about the presentation of the principles  of  cause
and effect, one then thinks about dependant arising at its  subtlest  level.
This is the main  contemplation.  Through  this  contemplation—when  we  are
really able to ascertain that both the ‘I’, the person receiving  harm,  and
the harm-doer, although they exist, but they do not exist by  way  of  their
own nature, from their own side or in and of  themselves—this  understanding
serves as the supreme antidote to counteracting anger. If you  remember,  in
the earlier section of this chapter, there  is  an  explanation  of  how  to
regard ourselves and the harm-doer as emanations or  illusions,  i.e.,  both
we ourselves and the harm-doer do not exist from their own side.

In summarising his commentary on this chapter on patience, Gyaltsab Je  said
that although one may meditate on the virtues of  generosity  and  the  like
for many eons, these are destroyed by the  tongue  of  the  fire  of  anger.
Therefore one needs to cultivate the force of patience over and  over  again
and not to give anger any chance to do this.

This advice is really very essential for us.  Even  if  the  Buddha  was  to
appear in person directly before us, in the context of  patience,  there  is
nothing more that he could say to us than this particular quotation.

We have to pay attention to  and  really  take  these  teachings  to  heart.
Sometimes when we have the opportunity to hear teachings many times  to  the
point where the mind becomes hardened to the Dharma, we  tend  to  disregard
these teachings, thinking,  “It  is  one  of  those  things  again!”  It  is
essential that we don’t end up like that.

We should learn the Dharma. From our own side, we must seek out  the  Dharma
with great interest. The Dharma should be of the  utmost  priority  for  us.
The Dharma should be so important to us that we would  give  up  everything,
including our life, in order to receive the Dharma, to be  educated  in  it,
to learn and practise it. Ideally it should be like that.

It should be like that but we are not like that. It seems that what  happens
to people at times is  that  after  having  listened  to  too  much  Dharma,
instead of having benefited, their minds harden to the Dharma  and  they  no
longer value the Dharma. We have  all  the  opportunities  but  we  tend  to
think, “Oh, it is just another teaching.”

Therefore we should not disregard this text and look down on  it.  In  fact,
this text is a very precious instruction.  It  is  a  very,  very  precious,
very, very holy text in that even if the Buddha is  to  appear  directly  in
front of us, there is nothing more that he  can  say  beside  what  we  have
already seen here in this text. We have to keep  that  in  mind.  So  it  is
important to know the text and to familiarise ourselves with it, mixing  our
mind with what is said in the text.


Interpreted by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme; transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek,  Vivien  Ng
& Aki Yeo; edited by Cecilia Tsong.





-----------------------
[1] “The final object of desire” refers to buddhahood.
[2] A.  Abandoning hindrances  to  the  accomplishment  of  abiding  by  the
   antidote: Devoting oneself to the   cultivation of patience (V. 6.1 – V.
   6.6)
   B.  Engaging the mind in the methods for accomplishing patience  (V.  6.7
– V. 6. 134)
         1.  Arresting the causes of anger (V. 6.7 – V. 126)
         2.  The benefits of cultivating patience (V. 6.127 – V. 6.134)
[3] 3.  Explaining the way  to  train  in  the  remaining  four  perfections
(Chapters 6 – 9)
       A.  The way to train in patience
              1.  Explaining the chapter’s material (V. 6.1 – V. 6.134)
              2.  The chapter’s name


