Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Engaging in the Deeds of a Bodhisattva/BP2 M5 L37 final.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:52:18.655643
================================================================================


Transcript of the teachings by Khen Rinpoche Geshe  Chonyi  on  Engaging  in
the Bodhisattva Deeds, 2014

Root text: Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds by  Shantideva,  translated  by
Toh Sze Gee. Copyright: Toh Sze Gee, 2006; Revised edition, 2014.

Lesson                                                                    37
 26 June 2014


Chapter Six: Verses 6.74 - 6.83.
B.   Arresting fury towards those who wrong those dear to oneself
       2. Arresting it by means of the patience that pays no heed to those
    who cause harm (V.   6.74 – V. 6.75)
C.    Arresting fury towards those who do well by one’s enemies
        1.  Abandoning impatience with the praise and renown of one’s
    enemies (V. 6.76 – V. 6.79)
        2.  Abandoning impatience with the accomplishment of our enemies’
    pleasure (V. 6.80)
        3.  Abandoning impatience with the accomplishment of material gain
    (V. 6.81 – V. 6.83)


I believe I mentioned this in the  past.  There  is  a  quotation  from  the
sutras that mentions how much merit one gets if one make offerings  of  food
and clothing for eons equaling the number of grains of sand  in  the  Ganges
River. That merit, of course, is huge.

But comparing that merit to the merit of just hearing  the  name,  “Buddha,”
or seeing the representations of the Buddha  in  the  form  of  a  painting,
statue and so forth, the latter  merit  that  one  accumulates  is  so  much
greater than the earlier example.

Basically it is saying how much opportunity we now  have  to  accumulate  so
much merit just by hearing  the  name,  “Buddha,”  or  just  by  seeing  the
representations of the Buddha in the  form  of  holy  objects.   If  we  can
accumulate so much merit just by hearing the  name,  “Buddha,”  or  just  by
seeing the representations of the Buddha in the form  of  the  holy  objects
such as statues, paintings and so forth, then it  goes  without  saying  how
much more merit we will accumulate, if out of faith,  we  were  to  put  our
palms together and  pay  homage  to  the  Buddha  or  praise  his  qualities
verbally.

If that is  the  case,  then  by  extension,  the  fact  that  we  have  the
opportunity to come into contact  with  these  instructions  that  show  the
stages of proceeding towards omniscience or enlightenment, a  path  that  is
praised by all the buddhas, to educate  ourselves  with  these  instructions
and, on top  of  that,  to  analyse  and  reflect  on  them,  the  merit  we
accumulate from doing all  this  will  be  even  greater  than  the  earlier
examples.

That is why I have always mentioned the need to read your text.  By  reading
the text and educating yourself, you can see how much benefit  you  can  get
from these examples. So it is important to read the text. On  the  basis  of
reading the text, if you are able to analyse and think about what  you  have
read, then of course the benefit is really great.

The essential point I am trying to make here is  that  you  should  keep  in
mind the benefits of and the purpose of your studies. You  have  to  educate
yourself by continually reading your text. As you read, you have to  analyse
and think about what you have read. By doing so, you plant imprints in  your
mind. It is important to plant stable imprints. As I mentioned  before,  you
plant imprints from merely reading the text. You  plant  imprints  when  you
reflect on and analyse the teachings.  You  also  plant  imprints  when  you
familiarise yourself with the teachings through meditation.

The imprints of the latter are superior to the former,  i.e.,  the  imprints
from reflection and meditation are superior to those  from  hearing  and  so
forth. At this time, you still have this  human  life  and  having  met  the
Buddha’s teachings, you must try your best to place as many stable  imprints
in your mind as possible.

Recently we had quite  an  extensive  discussion  of  the  twelve  links  of
dependent origination. From this, you can see it is vital to plant good  and
stable imprints while you are still alive. If you  haven’t  done  that,  yet
you expect that you can suddenly think of something virtuous at the time  of
death that can be nourished and ripened, this will be quite far-fetched.  It
is not impossible but it is difficult. If one cannot  plant  imprints  while
the mind is clear, it is going to be even more  difficult  at  the  time  of
death.

So while one is still alive and the mind is still fresh, it is important  to
plant as many stable imprints on the mind as  possible.  Only  then  at  the
time of death can there be a really good chance of getting  a  good  rebirth
because of the familiarity one has cultivated with virtue.

At this time when you are still alive, you can put your mind to good use  as
it is still fresh and alert. If you cannot figure out things such as how  to
plant imprints and so forth, how is it then possible to do so  at  the  time
of death? If you cannot do it now when your mind is clear, then at the  time
of death when the mind is disturbed and so forth, how is that  possible?  To
say, “I don’t do anything now but at the time of  death,  it  will  happen,”
that is a bit far-fetched. I wonder how that is possible. The point here  is
that while you  are  alive,  as  much  as  possible,  work  continuously  at
learning, educating yourself,  practising  and  so  forth  to  plant  stable
imprints.

If we think about craving, I don’t think craving starts only at the time  of
death. It starts when you are alive. We are talking about the  craving  that
nourishes the karma. I don’t think  that  craving  starts  at  the  time  of
death. Craving has already started in this life.

There are  the  projecting  causes  and  the  projected  results.  The  four
projected results are name and form, the six sources, contact  and  feeling.
When the four projected results come into being, I would think that  craving
already starts. We have  craving  already  because  we  have  the  projected
result of feeling—pleasant  feelings  and  unpleasant  feelings.  We  desire
pleasant feelings and we don’t like unpleasant  feelings.  When  pleasurable
feelings arise, there is craving for them. This  is  how  the  craving  that
nourishes comes about. That is when it is call nourishment.

We don’t like suffering. Because of attachment and craving, we  want  to  be
free from suffering. Also when we are alive, we have this  feeling  that  we
have come into existence. We do not want to  lose  this  existence.  We  say
that we do not want to lose this body, we do not  want  to  be  parted  from
this body. That is also due to  craving.  Through  this  craving  alone,  we
accumulate so much fresh karma.

What about grasping? Grasping arises primarily during the time of death.  It
is a stronger form of craving that manifests mainly at the  time  of  death.
If we look at how this is phrased, that  it  manifests,  ‘primarily  at  the
time of death,’ from that perhaps we can say that there could  be  instances
when there could also be grasping before death.

The main point is,  “How  does  actualising  karma  manifest?  What  is  the
process?” At the  time  of  accumulating  projecting  karma,  when  that  is
finished, something  is  left  on  the  causal  time  consciousness.  Simply
speaking, a karmic seed, an imprint is planted on this mind. From  then  on,
there is no projecting karma. The projecting karma is finished, i.e., it  is
done.

But how does this  projecting  karma  transform  into  or  manifest  as  the
actualising karma? What is this process? How does it come about? This  is  a
question for everyone.

You all already understand the 12 links?

Khen Rinpoche:  You have already graduated (from  the  first  round  of  the
Basic Program).

That is why it is important to think about karma. There are so  many  things
for you to think about. It is not enough to just say, “I  have  heard  this.
It is like that.” You need to think about it until you get  a  decisive  and
definite ascertainment, “Yes, it is like this and not like that.”  In  order
to reach such ascertainment, you need to understand this topic and in  order
to understand it, you really need to think about it  from  many  angles  and
ask questions.

Karma that is  accumulated  is  karma  whose  results  you  will  definitely
experience. In order  to  experience  the  results  of  the  karma  that  is
accumulated, must that karma be complete in the  sense  of  having  all  the
four elements of the basis, attitude, performance and completion?

For example, the karma of killing is  the  karma  that  is  accumulated.  In
order  to  experience  the  result  of  this  karma  of  killing   that   is
accumulated, in order for that karma of killing to  be  powerful  enough  to
issue forth an effect so that you will experience the result, must  the  act
of killing be completed? The definition of completion  is  that  the  person
dies before you do.

This is not wasting time. This is a very important exercise  that  everybody
should be involved in. You have to focus on this. Why yes? Why no?
Student 1: For karma to be accumulated, it doesn’t have to be completed.

Khen Rinpoche: You said the lam-rim says it doesn’t need  to  be  completed?
Are you sure? Where does the text say that it doesn’t have to be complete?

Student 1: (Reading from the Lam Rim Chen Mo[1] ):

      Karma that you  have  accumulated  is  that  not  included  among  the
      following ten types of actions: actions done in dreams, …  those  done
      without wanting to …

So anything that is other than these ten instances is karma accumulated  but
they do not have to be completed.

Khen Rinpoche: That is not the question. Let’s say there  is  the  karma  of
killing. For completion, the victim must die before you do.  Where  does  it
say that you do not need completion?

Student 1: It doesn’t say nor does it say.

Khen Rinpoche: Where does it say, “the karma that is accumulated but  it  is
not completed”?

Student 1: It doesn’t say nor does it say.

Khen Rinpoche: So in order for the karma of killing  to  be  karma  that  is
accumulated, do you need all these four  factors  of  the  attitude  and  so
forth?

Student 2: You do not.

Khen Rinpoche: If you say you  do  not  need  all  four,  then  give  me  an
example.  Which  one  among  the  four  is   not   needed—basis,   attitude,
performance  or  completion?  To  make  it  simple,  we  refer  to  the  (1)
motivation, (2) performance and (3) completion of the act.

Student 2: You need the motivation but  you  do  not  need  performance  and
completion.

Khen Rinpoche: Give an illustration of what you have just said: a  karma  of
killing that is karma accumulated just based on having the motivation.

Student 2: I’m motivated by anger. I wanted  to  kill  Peter  but  ended  up
killing John.

(Student changes her mind). I think performance  is  needed  but  you  don’t
need to identify the object correctly and you do not need completion.

Student 3: I will use an example where  a  non-virtuous  motivation  is  not
required for killing. In the case of the bodhisattva who killed the  sailor,
the motivation to kill is not non-virtuous. He performed the act of  killing
and actually experienced its result in the end by being reborn in the  hells
for a short time. So this is a case of killing that does not have  the  four
factors because the motivation is  not  totally  non-virtuous  but  it  does
result in a rebirth in the hell realm. So this is  a  case  where  there  is
killing that is accumulated, producing a result but which did not  need  all
the four factors.

Khen Rinpoche: When you  kill,  you  accumulate  negative  karma.  Did  that
bodhisattva accumulate negative karma or not?

Student 3: Yes, he did.

Khen Rinpoche: It follows that you can accumulate negative  karma  motivated
by a good motivation.

Student 3: Uh-oh. I pass this one!

Let me give another example. Nagarjuna was supposed to live  for  600  years
but he was killed by someone who used a blade of grass to cut off his  head.
That was because in the past when he  was  cutting  grass,  he  accidentally
killed an ant whose head was cut off by a blade of  grass.  He  didn’t  have
the motivation of killing the ant yet he had to  experience  the  result  of
having his own head cut off[2]. That is  a  case  where  there  is  no  non-
virtuous motivation involved yet he experienced the  result  of  having  his
head cut off.

Is that not a case of not having all the four factors,  i.e.,  there  is  no
motivation in the killing and yet he had to experience the result?

Khen Rinpoche: In this case, there is performance and completion.

Student 3: But there is no non-virtuous motivation.

Khen Rinpoche:  This is an example of a karma that is created (or done)  but
not accumulated.

In order to be  a  karma  that  is  accumulated,  do  you  need  all  three:
motivation, performance and completion?

In order for it to be covetousness, you need all three factors:
1. the basis of the action
2. the performance
3. the completion
Even if all three factors are present, it doesn’t manifest in a physical  or
verbal way. But through the coming together of the  basis,  performance  and
completion, then one accumulates karma.

In the case of covetousness, in order for it to be complete,  you  need  the
motivation, performance and completion. What is posited  as  the  completion
of covetousness?

Student 2: The thought that I will make that particular thing I covet  mine.
I make that decision.

Khen Rinpoche: That was well said. Everybody must remember  that.   What  is
posited as the performance of covetousness?

Student 4: A strong desire to have the thing.

Student 5: According to this book (student refers to Path  to  Enlightenment
in  Tibetan  Buddhism  by  Geshe  Acharya  Thubten  Loden),  it  seems  that
covetousness is mainly mental action. You just need to  think  about  it  to
trigger off covetousness. There seems to be only one component.

Ven Gyurme (clarifies the question): There are  three  factors:  motivation,
the performance and completion. These three constitute  a  complete  act  of
covetousness. So what is posited as the performance?

Student 4:  The  motivation  is  the  strong  desire  for  the  object.  The
motivation becomes stronger. That is the performance. Once you have  decided
that this is mine, then that is the completion.

Khen Rinpoche: That is well said.

Student 5: You need the intention. There is no  mental  action  without  any
intention to think about it. (Student quotes from  his  book):“There  is  no
such thing as mental action that is not done intentionally because  you  are
forced to do it by someone else.”

Khen Rinpoche: The motivation of covetousness  is  posited  as  the  thought
wanting to have an object that belongs to somebody else. That is posited  as
the motivation— just that thought  of  wanting  to  have  that  object  that
belongs to someone else.

Essentially covetousness is the continuity of a  similar  thought  with  the
intensity of that thought increasing.
 • In the beginning, you have the thought, the motivation. You see something
   that belongs to someone else. Then you think, “I want that object.”
 • That thought then grows stronger and stronger until it reaches the  point
   where it is performed.
 • You reached the point where you think decisively, “I  really  want  this.
   How wonderful  it  would  be  if  this  object  is  mine.”  That  is  the
   completion.
So it is a continuous stream of a similar thought.

When you have the motivation,  performance  and  completion,  you  have  the
complete act of covetousness in dependence on which  you  accumulate  karma.
We are not saying that covetousness is karma.  It  is  not.  But  through  a
complete act of covetousness, which is an affliction, based  on  that,  then
you accumulate karma.

 • In terms of the karma of killing, to be a karma that is  accumulated  but
   not done, you have the motivation to kill.
 • Then the thought becomes stronger and  stronger.  You  are  thinking,  “I
   really want to kill this person.” Let’s say we use the term, performance,
   for this.
 • Then you reach that point in time where you mentally decide, “I am  going
   to kill this person.” Perhaps we can use the term, completion,  for  this
   phase.

In that sense, you have the motivation, performance and completion.  Perhaps
it is through this process that the karma of killing is accumulated but  not
done. This is what I think.

In order for the karma of killing to be a karma of that is  accumulated  but
not done, initially there must be the thought or  intention  to  kill.  This
intention then grows stronger and it reaches the point where you  think,  “I
am going to kill this person.” I think that when you reach  this  point,  it
becomes the karma of killing, that is, a  karma  that  is  accumulated  that
will definitely bring about a result.

The teachings classify killing as physical or bodily karma among  the  three
non-virtues of the body and four of the speech.  Also  the  teachings  posit
that the completion of an act of killing is the death of the victim who  has
to die before you.

You have to think about this.

Back to the question about the manifesting of actualising  karma.  How  does
it manifest? When does craving nourish the karma?

From this exercise, you can see that things are not so straightforward.  You
can just look at them superficially and accept, “It is like  that.”  But  if
you really think deeply about the subject, there are so many questions.  You
cannot actually say with certainty that you know the subject. That  requires
constant thinking and analysis.

From this, you can see that you can look at the subject casually.  But  when
you really start thinking about it, often you cannot  say  with  confidence,
“I actually know this. I actually believe  in  this.”  To  reach  the  point
where you are able to say with conviction, “It is like that. It is not  like
this,” that is the result  of  having  really  reflected  or  thought  about
things well for some time. You really have to think  and  dig  deep.  It  is
only then that you can say with conviction, “It is  like  that.  It  is  not
like this.” Only then does that make you a high quality Buddhist!

It is really important to read and think about the subject.  When  you  have
questions, bring them up in class. If you don’t think about the subject,  it
all looks very easy, isn’t it? When you think it is easy, that  is  when  it
becomes boring. You start to think, “It is boring coming to  class.  I  just
sit and listen. He talks and I listen. That is so boring.”

This happens when you don’t think deeply about  the  subject.  If  you  just
look casually look at this text,  Engaging  in  the  Bodhisattva  Deeds,  it
seems quite straightforward and easy. But when you start to think about  the
subjects covered, you discover that you actually  have  difficulty  speaking
with conviction about the various topics. You don’t have the  confidence  in
your own answers when you are asked.

Here we have been talking about  this  chapter  on  patience.  In  order  to
cultivate patience to deal with anger, we have to use  a  whole  variety  of
reasons. The chapter is telling  us  how  we  should  think,  what  line  of
thinking is wrong, what is right and so forth. Basically,  we  have  to  see
what the text is telling us and we have to think about it for ourselves.

If you don’t agree with any of the reasoning that  is  brought  up,  if  you
have really thought about it and you disagree with it,  then  you  must  say
with confidence, “I don’t agree with this.” You can challenge it  and  bring
it up in class.

Even if the reason given by Shantideva is correct and  valid,  you  have  to
think about it more deeply for yourself to reach the  point  where  you  are
confident that it is really like that, that what the  text  says  is  really
true. Without that effort on your part, this is not going to happen.

                                 ~~~~~~~~~~~

B.  ARRESTING FURY TOWARDS THOSE WHO WRONG THOSE DEAR TO ONESELF (cont’d)

       2.   Arresting it by means of the  patience  that  pays  no  heed  to
those who cause harm
              D.  Reflecting on  the  benefits  of  this  specific  kind  of
patience
                   3.  It is reasonable to enjoy hardships  that  accomplish
greater purposes
                        A.  Feeling regret  for  how  many  bodies  we  have
            wasted in the past and still not accomplished either our own or
            others’ welfares
      Verse 6.74
      For the sake of my desires
      I experienced thousands [of eons] in hell,
      But I enacted the purpose
      Of neither others nor myself.

Earlier on we saw how it is possible that we may raise  a  qualm,  objecting
to the idea of being emotionally parted from or not  being  so  attached  to
our loved ones and the people who matter to  us.  We  say,  “I  cannot  bear
this. It is unbearable.”  If there are such thoughts,  then  verse  6.74  is
the answer to them.

In the past, out of the desire for material gain  or  acquiring  pleasurable
objects of form, sound, smell, taste, touch and so forth, we bore a  lot  of
hardships including sacrificing our limbs. Somehow this happened due to  the
karma that we have created out of attachment.  We have  even  been  born  in
the hells and experienced so much suffering because of following  after  our
desire and attachment.

But all those experiences of suffering were for  nothing.  Our  desires  are
still not met; our own purposes and goals are not  fulfilled.  Nor  have  we
fulfilled the purposes, goals or welfare of any other  person.  Experiencing
all these problems and suffering for so long a time has  not  brought  about
any benefit. We have not achieved anything meaningful.

If that is the case,  should  we  not  put  up  with  the  problem  that  we
experience now that comes about through practicing patience?  Why  can’t  we
put up with and tolerate those difficulties  since  they  will  bring  about
something greatly meaningful?

                        B.  It is  reasonable  to  enjoy  accomplishing  the
            welfare  of  all  migrators  by  being  patient  with   present
            hardships
      Verse 6.75
      But now since great purpose will be established
      From harm which is not as much,
      I should be solely joyful
      Towards such suffering that dispels the harms of migrating beings.

By being patient with and voluntarily accepting the suffering we  experience
as a human being, we will be able  to  avoid  the  suffering  of  the  lower
realms such as the suffering of the hells. As such,  our  suffering  is  not
great and is nothing compared to the suffering of the hells.

As mentioned earlier, we should put  up  with  and  voluntarily  accept  the
problems and suffering that we  experience,  seeing  this  as  a  method  to
purify the negativities that we have  accumulated  in  the  past  and  using
those experiences of suffering to persuade ourselves to  accumulate  virtue,
the  cause  of  happiness.  As  such,  therefore,  it  is   reasonable   and
appropriate for us to meditate on and cultivate patience.

This concludes the section that talks about the need for us  to  be  patient
when the people who matter to us are harmed.

The next section is about stopping ourselves from being angry at  those  who
benefit our enemies. Why do we need to do that?  Because  since  it  is  the
cause for one’s own happiness, it is suitable for us to want to do that.

C.   ARRESTING FURY TOWARDS THOSE WHO DO WELL BY ONE’S ENEMIES

   1.  Abandoning impatience with the praise and renown of one’s enemies
      A.  As it is the cause of one’s own happiness, it  is  reasonable  to
         wish for such
      Verse 6.76
      Should others find joyous happiness
      By praising someone having excellent qualities,
      Why, mind, do you not praise him too
      And be joyful?


      Verse 6.77
      That joyous happiness of yours
      Is a source of joy without misdeed,
      Permitted by those having excellent qualities
      And is also a supreme means for gathering others.
When our enemy is praised, the person who is praising our enemy  also  feels
happy in doing so. As such, since that person is happy when he  praises  our
enemy, likewise, shouldn’t we also praise our enemy? The  argument  here  is
that if we see that, then why is it that we do not also praise our enemy?

The point this verse is driving at is that when we see someone praising  our
enemy, we shouldn’t be disturbed. If we praise our enemy or  the  person  we
dislike, we will also experience happiness in the heart. That  happiness  is
the highest kind of happiness. It is the kind  of  happiness  and  joy  that
pleases all the buddhas and bodhisattvas. It is  the  best  kind  of  speech
that makes others happy. In so doing, that is how we bring people  into  our
fold. Instead of being jealous, by praising  the  enemy  or  the  people  we
don’t like, this is said to be the best way to make the person  like  us  or
to make the person come into our fold.

      B. As it is the cause of others’ happiness, it is unreasonable to not
         wish for it
         1.  If you do not want others to be happy, your own happiness  will
            decline
      Verse 6.78
      Furthermore, it is said that others will be happy in this way.
      If you do not want this happiness,
      Then you should stop giving wages and the like.
      Thus you would be adversely affected both in this and future lives.

This verse is saying that if we do not wish for others to be happy, our  own
happiness will deteriorate.

Our normal reaction is that we don’t like to praise our enemy or the  people
that we dislike because of jealousy. We cannot tolerate the  fact  that  the
enemy will be happy if we praise him.

Earlier on, we had established that if  we  can  praise  the  enemy  without
jealousy, we ourselves would be happy. But now, we  are  the  ones  who  are
stopping ourselves from being happy  by  not  praising  the  enemy.  We  are
stopping our own happiness on account of the reason that he  will  be  happy
if we praised him and we do not want him to be happy.

If that is the case, then this is the same as not paying  your  staff  wages
because when you pay them their wages,  you  will  make  your  staff  happy.
Since paying your staff would make them happy, if you don’t want them to  be
happy, then you should stop paying your staff.

But when you do not pay your staff, you will be really unhappy  because  you
will get a lot of problems in this life. They will make  many  problems  for
you. That is the visible effect that you can see in this life.

And because of depriving your staff their  salaries,  even  in  your  future
lives, you will not have possessions and so forth because  not  paying  your
staff wages is a kind of stealing.

Next is if we do not wish others to have happiness then  our  own  happiness
will degenerate.

         2.  Thus, it is reasonable to wish for others to be happy
      Verse 6.79
      When people describe my own good qualities
      I want others to be happy too,
      But when they describe the good qualities of others
      I do not even wish them to be happy.

We will be elated and very happy if our enemies were to praise us.  In  fact
we also want that to happen. But when we see  another  person  praising  our
enemy, we do not like it. That is really a very mistaken way of  looking  at
things.

We feel happy when others praise us, including when  our  enemy  praise  us.
Just as we want that praise, so it is entirely  appropriate  to  feel  happy
when others are praised, including our enemy because they also  want  to  be
happy. They also experience happiness when they are praised. They also  want
to be praised.

When our enemy or somebody we don’t  like  praises  us,  we  feel  good  and
happy. We like it and we want it. We should remember that  experience.  Just
as we want to be treated in such a way, when others are  praised,  including
our enemies, we should also wish them well.

   2.  Abandoning  impatience  with  the  accomplishment  of  our  enemies’
   pleasure
   Verse 6.80
   Having generated the mind of enlightenment
   Through wishing all sentient beings to be happy,
   Why do you become angry
   If sentient beings find happiness themselves?

Most people here have taken great empowerments  with  the  bodhisattva  vows
and some even have tantric vows. When you take these vows, you are making  a
pledge to achieve the highest unsurpassed state  of  full  enlightenment  in
order to place all sentient beings in that  state  as  well.  That  was  the
pledge and the oath most of you took—to  achieve  omniscience  in  order  to
accomplish the welfare  of  all  sentient  beings—during  the  time  of  the
initiation.

Here in this context, we are talking primarily about those  we  consider  to
be our enemies and the people we dislike. Without you  having  to  make  any
effort, the enemy is experiencing these  kinds  of  happiness—becoming  more
powerful, more well-known, having more possessions and so forth.  All  these
good things are happening to him without us having to do  anything  at  all.
In other words, he has achieved the happiness that you had promised to  give
him. He is achieving all  this  happiness  without  you  having  to  lift  a
finger.

The question that is now directed at you is this: Why should  you  be  upset
when that happens to your enemy? That is the question that you have  to  ask
yourself.

Therefore a person who is seriously and sincerely working to  actualise  the
pledge he had taken to help all sentient beings, such  a  person  would  not
get  upset  when  she  sees  others  achieving  these  different  kinds   of
happiness. This is especially so if they  had  achieved  such  happiness  on
their own without her having to do anything  at  all.  She  should  not  get
upset at all.  In fact, when she sees others  achieving  such  happiness  on
their own, she should feel even happier.

Verse 6.80 is about  abandoning  our  intolerance  when  we  see  the  enemy
gaining some kind of happiness.

Verse 6.81 is giving up such intolerance with regard to our enemies  getting
some material gain, possessions or wealth. When we see  that  happening,  we
should also not be intolerant.

   3.  Abandoning impatience with the accomplishment of material gain
        A.  Reflecting on how it accomplishes one’s own desires
             1.  It is reasonable for  oneself  to  enjoy  sentient  beings’
           accomplishment of material gains
     Verse 6.81
     If I wish for all sentient beings to become
     Buddhas worshipped by the three worlds,
     Then why am I tormented
     Due to seeing them receiving just vile gain and honor?

People who have taken the bodhisattva vows, such  as  ourselves,  are  those
who are working to make every sentient being a buddha who is worshipped  and
honoured by all kinds of praise and offerings in the three realms.  This  is
what we are working for.

If that is the case, then why are we upset when we see our  enemies  or  the
people that we don’t like getting some praise, material  gain  or  receiving
some offerings? Why are we so upset? Why do we  dislike  that?  Why  are  we
jealous? In fact, it is inappropriate to be jealous.

Aren’t most of us like that? When the people we dislike are happy, we  don’t
like it. When something good happens to them, we don’t like it.  Often  this
has to do with jealousy. So the teachings are asking us, “What  do  you  get
out of that? What purpose is there to feeling that way?”

Next is using an example to illustrate this point.

     2.  Example
     Verse 6.82
     If relatives for whom you are caring
     And to whom you practice giving
     Are able to find their own livelihood,
     Would you not be happy, rather than angry?

If we do not wish for our enemies to be happy, to receive material gain  and
so forth, the bodhicitta that we had generated will decline.
     3. If one does not want that, bodhicitta will deteriorate
     Verse 6.83
     What [kind of person] wishes enlightenment for migrating beings
     If he does not wish for them to have even this?
     And where is there a mind of enlightenment
     In him who becomes angry at the wealth of others?

How is it  possible  for  someone  to  generate  bodhicitta—the  thought  to
achieve omniscience in order to  accomplish  the  welfare  of  all  sentient
beings—when he cannot even  tolerate  others  receiving  some  small  little
profit or gain?

For someone who has that kind of jealousy and negative  competitiveness  and
who is at the same time very attached to money, possessions  and  so  forth,
the teachings are asking, “How is it possible for such a person  to  develop
bodhicitta?”

Even if such a person adopts bodhicitta, won’t that  bodhicitta  degenerate?
As such, that person’s merit will also decline.

So far, this particular section is saying that there is no  way  to  develop
bodhicitta if we cannot wish  for  our  enemies  to  have  even  some  small
happiness. If we cannot even tolerate them  having  some  small  benefit  or
profit, then there is no way we can develop bodhicitta.

What is the essential point here?  The  essence  is  not  to  be  upset  and
jealous with our enemies when they are doing well, gaining some  respect  or
material gain. We shouldn’t let our mind be disturbed by this.

We cannot tolerate other people doing well,  especially  enemies,  primarily
because of jealousy. But why are we jealous in the first place?  Because  we
ourselves want respect, material gain and so forth. That is  the  condition.
Therefore when we see others having these things, we cannot accept it.  When
we see other people respecting our  enemy,  honouring  him  and  giving  him
things, we cannot bear it. The mind is  really  deeply  disturbed.  That  is
what we call jealousy.  That is what jealousy  is.  Essentially  here,  this
section of the teachings is telling us, “Don’t be jealous!”


Interpreted by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme; transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek,  Vivien  Ng
& Aki Yeo; edited by Cecilia Tsong.

-----------------------
[1] Page 241, The Great Treatise on the Stages of the Path to  Enlightenment
by Tsong-kha-pa, Volume One,  Snow  Lion  Publications,  Ithaca,  New  York.
Copyright © 2000 Tibetan Buddhist Learning Center.
[2] Ven. Gyurme corrected  this  story  with  another  version:  Nagarjuna’s
brother wanted to inherit the kingdom.  Since  Nagarjuna  had  such  a  long
lifespan and could not die, the only way he could die was  to  cut  off  his
own head with a blade of grass.

