Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Engaging in the Deeds of a Bodhisattva/BP2 M5 L28 final.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:52:20.130710
================================================================================


Transcript of the teachings by Khen Rinpoche Geshe  Chonyi  on  Engaging  in
the Bodhisattva Deeds, 2014

Root text: Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds by  Shantideva,  translated  by
Toh Sze Gee. Copyright: Toh Sze Gee, 2006; Revised edition, 2014.

Lesson                                                                    28
  27 May 2014


Chapter Five: Verses 5.83 - 5.93. 3. The way to train in the conduct of
guarding the mind by means of mindfulness and introspection (cont’d). B.
The way to train in the ethics of gathering virtuous dharmas. 2. One should
be knowledgeable about accomplishing virtue. C. Being knowledgeable about
performing actions of the three doors. C. The way to train in the ethics of
working for the benefit of sentient beings. 1. Devoting oneself to the
welfare of others. 2. Conduct that gathers others without sullying oneself
with wrongdoing. 3. Looking after the minds of sentient beings and training
in the conduct that is unsullied by wrongdoing.


Question: It is mentioned in the Lam Rim Chen Mo that at the time of  death,
due to the attachment to a self, one has the thought, “I am going  to  cease
to exist.” Because of this attachment to a self, the craving for  embodiment
arises. Is this attachment to a self the same as the attachment that is  the
apprehension of true existence mentioned previously in class? Are these  two
attachments different or the same?

Answer: Of the  three  mental  poisons,  attachment  and  anger  have  their
origins in ignorance, which is the basis or condition  for  the  arising  of
attachment  and  anger.  As  to  what  this  ignorance  is,  there  are  two
interpretations. One is according to the logician  Dharmakirti  and  one  is
according to Chandrakirti.
 • According to Dharmakirti, ignorance is posited  as  mere  unknowingness,
   i.e., merely not knowing.
 • Chandrakirti posits ignorance as something more than that. On top of not
   knowing, it is the misapprehension of true existence.
In short, attachment arises due to the apprehension of true existence.

What I said earlier is not a definitive position. I was not saying  that  if
it is attachment, it is necessarily ignorance and if it is ignorance, it  is
necessarily attachment.

I am just wondering, according to the Madhyamika  interpretation,  is  there
something that is both an  attachment  and  ignorance,  i.e.,  is  there  an
ignorance that is attachment? This is something for you to think about:
 • is there an ignorance that is in the entity of attachment?
 • is there an attachment that is in the nature of ignorance?

Khen Rinpoche: Can you think about this? I talked about  this  before  Vesak
Day. You heard me? What do you think was the point of me saying that  before
Vesak Day? Did you get the point?
Khen Rinpoche (asking student): Why did I bring up this issue then?

Student: It is because from the viewpoint of  the  Hinayana,  attachment  of
the desire realm is necessarily non-virtuous, but from the viewpoint of  the
Mahayana viewpoint, attachment of the desire realm is not  necessarily  non-
virtuous. This is why this was mentioned. Because  there  is  an  attachment
that is  an  apprehension  of  true  existence.  So  to  the  Mahayana,  the
attachment of the desire realm is not necessarily non-virtuous.

Khen Rinpoche: Great!

This discussion was brought up when we were talking about the twelve  links.
The first of the twelve links is ignorance. No matter which great  treatises
we look at, it is stated decisively that ignorance is unspecified, i.e.,  it
is neither virtuous nor non-virtuous. But the karma  that  is  motivated  by
ignorance can either be virtuous or non-virtuous.

According to Vasubandu’s Abhidharmakosa, with the  exception  of  ignorance,
the view of the transitory  collection  and  the  view  holding  on  to  the
extreme, i.e., with the exception of these three, all the other  afflictions
are non-virtuous.

The qualm raised earlier relates to how craving  and  grasping  nourish  the
projecting karma  that  was  accumulated.  The  projecting  karma  that  was
accumulated needs to be nourished or activated by craving and  grasping.  In
the case of a virtuous projecting karma, if craving  and  grasping  is  non-
virtuous, then it is rather odd to having a  non-virtuous  nourishing  agent
while the projecting karma that is being nourished  is  virtuous.  This  was
the qualm.

As result of this qualm, when we look at this from the  perspective  of  the
higher  tenets,  the  Mahayana  tenets,  I  wonder  whether  attachment   is
necessarily non-virtuous. Having said that,  I  am  not  implying  therefore
there could be an attachment that is virtuous.

                                ~~~~~~~~~~~~

3.  THE WAY TO TRAIN IN THE  CONDUCT  OF  GUARDING  THE  MIND  BY  MEANS  OF
   MINDFULNESS AND INTROSPECTION (cont’d)

   B. The way to train in the ethics of gathering virtuous dharmas
       2.  One should be knowledgeable about accomplishing virtue.
            C. Being knowledgeable about performing  actions  of  the  three
           doors
                  3. Connecting oneself solely with virtuous karma
                      C.  Entering into higher and higher virtues and having
              examined whether there is a purpose, acting upon it
      Verse 5.83
      The perfections such as generosity
      Are progressively more exalted,
      But for a little I should not forsake something greater.
      Principally I should consider the welfare of others.

In the section on  the  six  perfections  in  the  stages  of  the  path  to
enlightenment, it was stated that in terms of the order of the  perfections,
the latter are superior to the former,  i.e.,  the  latter  perfections  are
more exalted and has more benefits  than  the  former.  So  if  we  were  to
compare generosity and ethics, ethics is superior to and more  exalted  than
generosity.

If we were to choose between these two, we will choose the  more  important,
the higher or better one. We will not forsake the greater  for  the  smaller
or something that is less important. So generally speaking, if  we  were  to
choose between generosity and  ethics,  we  will  choose  ethics,  which  is
superior in terms of the order.

Generally  it  is  like  that  but  there  can  be  exceptions  in   special
situations. When one can do something that will  greatly  benefit  others—as
the purpose and  welfare  of  others  are  more  important  than  one’s  own
welfare—one will choose that option. So  in  situations  where  there  is  a
greater purpose and more benefit to others in making extensive giving,  then
it is all right to remain indifferent to certain aspects of ethics that  are
practised for one’s own purpose.

Another  example  of  an  exception  could  be  this:  One  is  engaged   in
meditation, but there are people  who  have  come  a  long  way  to  receive
teachings  from  oneself.  They  have  a   great   interest   in   receiving
instructions from one. Since there is  the  greater  purpose  of  benefiting
others,  in  such  a  situation,  one  should  temporarily   suspend   one’s
meditation and make the gift of Dharma to these people.

Generally  speaking,  when  we  compare  generosity  and  the  practice   of
concentration (or meditative stabilisation), the practice  of  concentration
is superior and much more important than generosity.  But  in  the  case  of
someone who holds the bodhisattva vows and is being requested  to  teach  by
people who have great interest in the Dharma, by not teaching, there is  the
danger that this person will commit one of the bodhisattva downfalls of  not
giving the Dharma.

      Verse 5.42
      But if I am unable to do this when involved in fear or
      Celebrations and the like, then I should relax.
      Thus it has been taught that at times of giving,
      You may be indifferent to ethics.

Verse 5.42 talks about remaining indifferent to certain  aspects  of  ethics
when one is practicing generosity. This verse should be  understood  in  the
context of someone who has the ability to practise generosity but,  at  that
moment, may not be able to practise the very subtle  and  finer  details  of
the rules and regulations of ethics. So for  this  person,  she  can  remain
indifferent to those subtle aspects of ethics.

With this verse, we have finished the ethics of gathering virtuous  dharmas.
Next is the way to train in  the  ethics  of  working  for  the  benefit  of
sentient beings, which is covered in four sections:
1. Devoting oneself to the welfare of others
2. Conduct that gathers others without sullying  (polluting)  oneself  with
   wrongdoing
3. Looking after the minds of sentient beings and training in  the  conduct
   that is unsullied by wrongdoing
4. The branch of method of excellent trainings


   C. The way to train in the ethics of working for the benefit of  sentient
      beings
     1. Devoting oneself to the welfare of others
      Verse 5.84
      When these are well understood,
      I should always strive for the welfare of others.
      The Far-Seeing Compassionate Ones have allowed
      Those that were forbidden.

When one has understood well and is abiding in the trainings of  the  former
two ethics—the ethics of restraint and  the  ethics  of  gathering  virtuous
dharma—without  any  consideration  for  oneself  or  harbouring  any  self-
cherishing thoughts or thoughts of self-interest, then on  that  basis,  one
moves on to the training in  the  ethics  of  working  for  the  benefit  of
sentient beings.

When one needs to work for the benefit and welfare of others,  there  are  a
great variety of activities that one has to undertake. One may ask, “In  the
course of engaging in all these activities to benefit  others,  would  there
not be the danger of being stained by a bodhisattva downfall?”   The  answer
to this concern is in verse 5.84.

The greatly compassionate one, the Buddha, who saw well into the future  and
showed us how to accomplish the highest long-term happiness,  said  that  in
order to accomplish such happiness, one should abandon holding on  to  small
happinesses and happily take on suffering.

The Buddha strictly prohibited the hearers and solitary  realisers  who  are
working mainly for their own purposes  and  self-interest—essentially  those
of Hinayana dispositions who only seek  their  own  liberation  from  cyclic
existence—from committing the ten non-virtues. The Buddha did not  give  any
exceptions in this instance.

But for those who are abiding  in  the  Mahayana—who  truly  have  no  self-
cherishing  and  no  self-interest—the  Buddha  gave  permission  for   such
bodhisattvas to engage in the first seven non-virtues, i.e.,  three  of  the
body and four of speech. When there was a purpose and benefit, this will  be
an exception and the  bodhisattvas  can  engage  in  the  first  seven  non-
virtues. However, no exception is granted in  relation  to  the  three  non-
virtues of the mind: covetousness, malice and wrong view.

You have to understand that these exceptions were granted by the  Buddha  to
the bodhisattvas.

Khen Rinpoche: So it is not for us!

The next section discusses how not to be stained by a  bodhisattva  downfall
or fault when one is working for the welfare of others.  The  example  given
is of the difference between giving food and not giving food.

     2. Conduct that gathers others without sullying (or polluting) oneself
        with  wrongdoing
        A. Gathering through material generosity
           1. The  difference  between  giving  and  not  giving  food  and
              clothing
      Verse 5.85
      I should divide my food amongst those who have fallen into error,
      Those without protection, and those abiding in modes of conduct,
      And eat merely what is suitable for myself.
      Except for the three robes I may give away all.

This is the advice that, when we have enough for ourselves, we  should  give
away our food and clothing to:
 • people around us
 • people who come asking for it
 • people who are abiding in ethics
 • animals

One keeps an appropriate amount for one’s own  consumption  and  then  gives
the rest away. The  amount  of  food  for  one’s  personal  intake  must  be
appropriate. When  one  gorges  oneself  with  food,  this  will  become  an
obstacle to engaging in virtue because the body becomes very heavy.  At  the
other extreme, when one does not eat but gives everything  away,  that  also
becomes an obstacle for  one  to  continue  one’s  practice.  Therefore  one
should take a moderate and appropriate amount of food.

In the case of ordained people, with the exception  of  the  three  sets  of
robes that they must keep and not give away,  when  they  have  other  spare
things such as clothing and so forth, when people ask for them, they  should
be given away.  Giving  away  their  robes  also  becomes  an  obstacle  for
continuing to live in the practice.

This discussion is in the context of benefiting or helping others.  So  when
one has spare possessions such as food, clothing and so  forth,  the  advice
is to give it away.

           2. Not causing harm to the body for the sake of minor actions
      Verse 5.86
      This body that is for practicing the sublime Dharma
      Should not be harmed for only slight benefit.
      If I behave in this way,
      The wishes of all beings will be quickly fulfilled.

The beginner bodhisattvas should protect  their  body  with  an  appropriate
amount of food and clothing without falling into the two  extremes  and  not
give it away for insignificant purposes. The purpose of  doing  this  is  so
that:
 • they can sustain themselves.
 • they can practise the Dharma.
 • they can accomplish the welfare of others.
 • they can dedicate their actions to the welfare of others.

Gradually training in stages in this way, there will come a time when  these
bodhisattvas will be able to accomplish the temporal and ultimate  goals  of
all sentient beings.

Aryadeva in his Four Hundred Verses stated,

      Although one views the body as an  enemy,  one  would  still  have  to
      protect it. When one lives for a long time abiding  in  ethics,  great
      merit will arise from that.

This is stating again that when one is taking care of the  body,  one  needs
to protect it without falling into the two extremes. While abiding  in  that
way, one protects one’s ethics and works for others.

           3. Explaining the time and need for  practicing  the  giving  of
              body
      Verse 5.87
      Those whose attitude of compassion is impure
      Should not give their body away.
      No matter what, both in this and future lives,
      They should give it as causes for fulfilling the great purpose.

“Those whose attitude of compassion is impure” refers  to  the  bodhisattvas
who have  yet  to  achieve  the  first  ground  called  Very  Joyful.  These
bodhisattvas should not give away their body, limbs  and  so  forth.  Rather
they should protect their body that is the basis for them to practise.

It is mentioned in the teachings that  until  one  has  achieved  the  first
bodhisattva ground, one should not give away one’s body. But  once  one  has
reached the first ground, then it is all right to give away one’s body  when
there is a purpose to doing so. The reason  is  that  when  one  gives  away
one’s body before one has reached the first ground, the pain that  one  will
experience from cutting certain parts of one’s body may be a  condition  for
one to generate regret, “I shouldn’t have done this.”

But for the bodhisattvas who have achieved  the  first  bodhisattva  ground,
there is no such danger. The bodhisattvas abiding on the  first  ground  and
onwards are able to give their body away without any regret.  In  fact  they
feel very joyful when doing so.  Therefore it is all right for them to  give
their body away.

The next section talks about gathering sentient beings into one’s  fold  and
under one’s influence by gathering them through the Dharma.

        B. Gathering through Dharma
           1. Physical postures which are appropriate  for  a  listener  to
              assume when the Dharma is being explained


      Verse 5.88
      The Dharma should not be explained to those who lack respect,
      To those who wrap cloth around their heads although they are not ill,
      To those holding umbrellas, sticks, or weapons, and
      To those with covered heads.

What kind of physical demeanour or posture should  the  listener  not  adopt
when listening to the Dharma? To such people it is said that we  should  not
teach the Dharma.

When listening to the teachings, in one’s mind, one should have respect  for
the teacher and the Dharma. One should also  show  such  respect  externally
and physically.

While listening to the teachings,  when  the  listener  does  not  have  any
mental respect for the teachings and the teacher and externally do not  show
a respectful posture and  manner,  then  there  is  no  benefit  at  all  in
conducting those teachings.

This verse relates to the listener. When  one  is  a  listener,  one  should
listen with the appropriate physical  and  mental  attitudes.  Mentally  one
must have respect for  the  Dharma,  the  instructions  themselves  and  the
teacher. Externally and  physically,  one  should  also  show  a  respectful
posture and  manner.  Only  then  will  the  teachings  that  one  hears  be
beneficial for the mind. Otherwise they  will  not  be  beneficial  for  the
mind. This is the reason that there are such rules.

When the listener does not have respect for the teachings and, as a  result,
does not have faith in them, then there  is  the  danger  of  that  listener
accumulating the non-virtuous karma that  will  throw  him  into  the  lower
realms. For that reason, one should not teach such people.

Unless one is sick, one should not  be  listening  to  the  teachings  while
wearing a cap, hat or head-covering  or  carrying  an  umbrella  over  one’s
head. Teachers should not teach such people as  well  as  people  who  carry
weapons to the teaching ground. This list is not exhaustive  but  these  are
seen as gestures of disrespect.

But just using an umbrella,  covering  one’s  head  and  so  forth  are  not
necessarily indicative of disrespect. One has to  judge  this  according  to
the time, situation, environment and the people one is talking to.

Are there any cultural differences? It is fine when those actions are not  a
show of disrespect. But when the teacher assesses them to be  disrespectful,
then the teacher has to reconsider.

Khen Rinpoche: I’m not sure about Chinese people but  when  Tibetans  go  to
see a high lama for blessings, they always take off their  hat.   They  take
off their hat and bend forward  like  this.  (Khen  Rinpoche  demonstrates).
They don’t go with their hats on to receive blessings.

You know why? Because the hat blocks the blessing so it is  better  take  it
off.  Otherwise the blessings do not go inside the head. (Laughter).

I am just joking! I mean it is a sign of respect.  The  highest  thing  they
have on the head is the hat, so they must take it off and bow down. It is  a
sign of respect in the Tibetan culture. But for the Chinese, I’m  not  sure.
They take off their hat?

There are other rules such  as  not  teaching  people  who  are  sitting  on
thrones or people who are seated at a higher level than the teacher  and  so
forth. These are seen as disrespectful. However, in  general,  an  exception
can be made when the listener is sick or whenever it is deemed all right  to
go against some of these rules. Basically, the main point is  not  to  adopt
disrespectful postures.

It is also said in the teachings that one should listen with  single-pointed
faith and respect. One should not deride the instructor or show one’s  pride
by criticising, making fun of the teacher  and  so  forth.  One  should  not
listen to the teachings with such attitudes for it will not be beneficial.

The teachings forbid us from teaching those who are  disrespectful  and  who
act in such ways. Why? Because in these situations, it does  not  serve  any
benefit even we were to teach. Therefore we are not permitted to teach  such
people.

           2. Examining the features of the vessel’s thoughts
      Verse 5.89
      The vast and profound should not be taught to lesser beings
      Nor to a woman unaccompanied by a man.
      Out of respect for the Dharmas of lesser and supreme beings as equal,
      I should utilize all.

For those who are predisposed to  the  Hinayana  such  as  the  hearers  and
solitary realisers, it is not suitable to teach them some  of  the  Mahayana
teachings, such as the extensive  explanations  of  the  paths  and  grounds
because such teachings will not be of great benefit to them.

It is stated in the Vinaya that an ordained person, for example an  ordained
monk, should not teach Dharma in an isolated place to a  woman  who  is  not
accompanied by a member of the opposite sex, a man. Similarly  in  the  case
of a nun, she is not supposed to teach the Dharma in an isolated place to  a
man who is not accompanied by someone else.

It is also incorrect to consider that the Mahayana  Dharma  as  superior  to
the Hinayana Dharma, i.e., holding the view that it  is  not  good  to  talk
about the Hinayana Dharma or to teach the Hinayana Dharma. This is wrong.

The reason for the existence of the Mahayana Dharma and the Hinayana  Dharma
is the differing capacities of the trainees. But one should  understand  and
be able to explain that the Dharma itself, be it the Hinayana Dharma or  the
Mahayana Dharma, is the path for one to reach enlightenment. One should  not
view one Dharma as good and another Dharma as bad. All are paths  that  will
help lead sentient beings to full enlightenment.

When one holds the view that some Dharma such  as  the  Hinayana  Dharma  is
bad, inferior or unnecessary for achieving enlightenment and so forth,  then
one accumulates the very heavy negative karma of abandoning the Dharma.

We all know that food for a child and food for an adult  are  different.  We
cannot say one is better than the other. The food for  the  child  and  food
for the adult have their own purposes as they accord with the needs  of  the
person eating it. So it is important to understand how all the teachings  of
the  Buddha,  including  the  Hinayana  teachings,   will   lead   to   full
enlightenment. This is a very important point.

The Buddha mentioned in the sutras that the  negative  karma  of  abandoning
the Dharma is heavier than (1) destroying  all  the  holy  objects  in  this
world and (2) killing arhats equal in number  to  the  sand  grains  in  the
Ganges River. Accumulating this  heavy  negative  karma  of  abandoning  the
Dharma can easily happen.

One of the best ways to not accumulate such negative  karma  is  to  educate
ourselves  by  learning  the  structure  of  the  entire  teachings  of  the
Buddha—the Hinayana and the  Mahayana,  including  tantra—and  knowing  them
clearly.

The heavy negative karma of abandoning the Dharma is  due  to  not  knowing.
For instance, when we are studying this text, there are  many  advice  given
here. When we think, “There are so many  instructions  here.  They  are  not
beneficial as they do  not  help  me  to  achieve  enlightenment,”  this  is
similar to abandoning the Dharma.

Khen Rinpoche: What do you think?

Therefore we have to be  extremely  careful  not  to  accumulate  the  heavy
negative karma of abandoning the Dharma.

           3. One should not treat a person who esteems the extensive  like
              one who feels an affinity towards the inferior
      Verse 5.90
      I should not connect the Dharma of a lesser being
      To one who is a vessel for the vast Dharma.
      I should not forsake the conduct,
      Nor deceive by means of sutras or mantras.

When one teaches the Hinayana Dharma and connects a sharp-faculty person  of
the Mahayana lineage to the Hinayana path, then there is a danger  that  one
will commit a downfall of the bodhisattva vows.

Another example is when we tell someone who  is  abiding  in  the  Mahayana,
“You just focus on emptiness. When you realise  emptiness,  then  everything
will be fine. You can forget about everything else. Don’t  bother  with  the
ethics of restraint. You don’t have to give up negativities.” If we were  to
say this, then it is also very inappropriate.


If we were to say, “Just focus on emptiness. You don’t have to train in  the
other extensive deeds of the bodhisattvas,” then there is the  great  danger
that we will also be committing a downfall.

If we were to tell practitioners who have the capacity to train in the  vast
and profound aspects of the Mahayana and who are abiding correctly in  their
training in the Mahayana, “This is so complicated. You don’t have to do  all
these practices. Why are you doing so many things? You can just  recite  the
Diamond Cutter Sutra. It is sufficient that you recite this mantra  or  this
sutra. You don’t have to do all those practices.” Saying all  this  is  also
wrong. This is the meaning of, “Nor deceive by means of sutras or  mantras,”
because  when  we  say  such  things,  we  are  actually   deceiving   these
practitioners.

If we really think about this, it is not an easy task to teach  the  Dharma.
When we are teaching the Dharma, we should know what  others  are  thinking,
what they  want,  what  their  inclinations  and  dispositions  are.  It  is
difficult because we can’t tell.

      3. Looking after the minds of sentient  beings  and  training  in  the
        conduct that is unsullied by wrongdoing
           A.  Extensive explanation
               1.  Abandoning the faulty physical conduct and lack of  faith
        in others
      Verse 5.91
      When I spit or throw away a tooth-stick,
      I should cover it up.
      Also it is deplorable to urinate and so forth
      In water or on land that is utilized.


      Verse 5.92
      When eating I should not fill my mouth,
      Eat noisily or with my mouth wide open.
      I should not sit with my legs outstretched
      Nor rub my hands together.


      Verse 5.93
      I should not sit on mounts, upon beds,
      Nor in the same room together with the women of others.
      Having observed and inquired about
      What causes non-faith in the world, I should abandon it.


Some  of  the  activities  mentioned  here  may  not  occur  in   Singapore.
Generally, the idea is not to engage in  behaviours  or  actions  that  will
cause others to lose faith,  to  disturb  their  minds  or  make  them  feel
uneasy.

Nowadays we have toothbrushes but during ancient times  in  India  and  even
today, there are people who brush their teeth using branches from  the  neem
tree. This is how they clean their mouth and teeth. There  were  no  rubbish
bins around in ancient India. When one was done  cleaning,  one  would  just
throw the branch away. Also, people spat and blew their noses everywhere.

Khen Rinpoche: In Singapore I saw some men doing this. They blow their  nose
by closing one of their nostrils and the  snot  would  shoot  out  from  the
other nostril!

One should not engage in such polluting activities in the  presence  of  the
guru, in temples or places that are environmentally clean.  Of  course,  one
should not urinate and defecate in public places,  clean  places  or  places
like parks and so forth.

When eating, there are some people who  have  their  mouth  wide  open  even
before the food reaches it. Also there are some people who  make  a  lot  of
noise while eating.

Khen Rinpoche: There are also people who put too much food  in  their  mouth
when they eat. Then they choke. These are  not  good  manners  when  eating.
Some people think that such behaviour is cool but it is not cool.

Here is the advice not to eat with so much attachment.  There  is  also  the
advice to regard food as medicine. When we take medicine, we do  not  go  to
the extreme of either not taking it at all or just taking  very  little  nor
do we go to the other extreme of taking too much. In order for the  medicine
to work, an appropriate amount should be taken.  Likewise,  when  we  regard
food as medicine, our food intake should also  be  moderate,  i.e.,  neither
too much nor too little.

When eating, one should not eat with attachment or anger:
 • When one eats with the primary motivation of looking good, for  the  body
   to be strong and to build muscles, this is eating with attachment.
 • When one eats food so that one can be physically strong to  defeat  one’s
   enemy in a fight, then probably this is eating with anger.
The point is that we should eat with the motivation  to  sustain  this  body
that is necessary for practising the Dharma and working to benefit  and  for
the welfare of others.

When sitting down, one may sit with the legs fully stretched  out.  This  is
unsightly.

I’m not sure what, “rub my hands together,” mean.

Khen Rinpoche: Do you understand what this is? I don’t know.  Rubbing  hands
together. Maybe it has something to do  with  washing.  Maybe  washing  like
this is not correct (Khen Rinpoche demonstrates).  I am not sure  what  this
means. I don’t know this one.

In general, ordained people should not sit on mounts or  beds  or  being  in
the same place together with women.

In short, these are  advice  for  us  to  abandon  those  actions  that  are
considered by people  at  large  in  society  to  be  culturally  offensive,
unsightly behaviour or behaviour that will  disturb  the  minds  of  others,
causing them to lose faith.

Interpreted by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme; transcribed by Phuah  Soon  Ek,  Patricia
Lee & Julia Koh; edited by Cecilia Tsong.
