Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Engaging in the Deeds of a Bodhisattva/BP2 M5 L35 final.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:52:13.428237
================================================================================


Transcript of the teachings by Khen Rinpoche Geshe  Chonyi  on  Engaging  in
the Bodhisattva Deeds, 2014

Root text: Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds by  Shantideva,  translated  by
Toh Sze Gee. Copyright: Toh Sze Gee, 2006; Revised edition, 2014.

Lesson                                                                    35
 19 June 2014


Chapter Six: Verses 6.50 - 6.61.
1.  being patient with those who would create suffering for you
     C.   Cultivating the patience that pays no heed to those who cause
        harm
           3.    Reflecting on unwanted occurrences being due to one’s own
        faults
                   B.   Abandoning objections (V. 6.50 – V. 6. 51)
2.  Being patient with those who would belittle you and so forth
      A.  Despising and belittling one does not harm one’s body (V. 6.52 –
        V. 6.53)
      B.   It is unreasonable for one to be furious with a person who is in
        a rage (V. 6.54)
      C.   It is unreasonable to be furious because material gain has been
    obstructed (V. 6.55 – V. 61)


Student: I refer to your question as to whether  at  the  time  of  death  a
person can accumulate projecting karma and  whether  that  projecting  karma
can become actualising karma or not.

I think that if a person were to realise emptiness before the dying  process
starts, it is possible for the projecting karma that is created  before  the
time of death to immediately become an actualising  karma  at  the  time  of
death. This will affect the next rebirth due to the heaviness of the  karma,
i.e., whatever karma is weightiest will ripen first.

Khen Rinpoche: Are you asking a question or are you answering  it?  Are  you
just saying your own idea or what?

I am asking you to ask me a question but you are answering my  question?  So
what was the question I asked? Answer me now.

Student: Your question was this: At  the  time  of  death,  i.e.,  the  last
moment of breath, whether a projecting karma can  be  accumulated  and  then
immediately nourished by craving  and  grasping  to  become  an  actualising
karma that will throw one to the next rebirth?

Khen Rinpoche: The question is correct. So what is your answer?

Student: My answer is no. At the time of death, the mind  dissolves  from  a
gross mind into a subtler mind. This is in  accordance  to  sutric  and  not
tantric teachings.

At the stage of the gross mind, the  factor  of  discrimination  is  already
disintegrating; hence the mind is unable to recognise an object clearly  and
therefore is not able to create a very strong karma. At  the  stage  of  the
subtler level of mind, the mind  is  neutral  so  this  mind  cannot  create
projecting karma either. Hence my answer is that at the time of  death,  the
mind cannot create projecting karma.

Khen Rinpoche: No, no. very long. What I want to  know  is  this.  You  said
that at the time of the death, you  cannot  create  projecting  karma.  Why?
Give your answer in one sentence.

Student: At the time of death, the function of  the  mind  is  to  recognise
either a virtuous karma or a non-virtuous  karma  and  then  nourish  it  to
become the actualising karma so as to project the next rebirth. If  that  is
the case, then in one moment of mind, it cannot have two objects  so…

Khen Rinpoche: I don’t know what you are talking about. (Laughs).

Why is it that we cannot create projecting karma at the time of the death?
Because …

Student: Because projecting karma has  to  be  the  karma  that  is  created
before the time of death ...

Khen Rinpoche: Why? Whatever you are saying, the question  is  still  there.
We are going around in circles.  Why  (does  projecting  karma  have  to  be
created) before (the time of) death? Why not (at the) time of the death?

Student: Because at the time of  death,  the  object  of  the  mind  is  the
projecting karma. The function of the mind  at  the  time  of  death  is  to
nourish that projecting karma that  was  previously  created  to  become  an
actualising karma that will project one to the next rebirth.  Therefore  the
projecting karma has to be something that is created earlier on.

Khen Rinpoche: You are not getting the question. You are not  answering  the
question!

At the time of death, can’t a very  strong  virtuous  mind  arise?  In  that
instance, projecting karma is created, is it not?

Student: Sorry, but this projecting karma can only be nourished in the  next
life, right? It cannot be nourished at the same moment.

Khen Rinpoche: At the time of the death, a very  strong  virtuous  mind  can
arise. Possible?
Student: Yes.

Khen Rinpoche: Would that not leave positive imprints in your mind? So  that
means you can create projecting karma at the time of the death, yes or no?

So the question is: At the time of the  death,  can  you  create  projecting
karma or not?
Student: Yes.

Khen Rinpoche: So that is the question: At the time of  death,  whether  you
create projecting karma or not? Now your answer is yes. Earlier on you  said
no because of the (various) reasons (you  gave).  Just  now  you  said  that
projecting karma must be created before the time of death, not at  the  time
of death.

Student: My disagreement is this: at the time  of  death,  the  mind  cannot
create projecting karma that is immediately nourished to become  actualising
karma …

Khen Rinpoche: Projecting karma (can be created). You already accepted  that
part, right?  At the time of the death, you can create projecting karma.

Student: Yes, it is possible for projecting karma to be created at the  time
of death but that  projecting  karma  cannot  be  immediately  nourished  to
become the actualizing karma because  this  projecting  karma  can  only  be
nourished in the next life.

Khen Rinpoche: Again the question is why? Why is  it  that  that  projecting
karma cannot be nourished (immediately as you are asserting)?  Give  me  the
reason why.

Student: In one moment of mind, the mind can only have one  function  so  at
the point of death, the function of the mind is to  nourish  the  projecting
karma that will project one to the next rebirth. Since at this moment  I  am
nourishing the projecting karma, that projecting karma  has  to  be  created
prior to this moment, right?

Khen Rinpoche: A moment doesn’t have to be 10 years, 20 years, right?  Can’t
a moment last for just ten seconds? A moment doesn’t have to be 10 years  or
one lifetime, does it? A moment can  be  one  second,  ten  seconds  and  so
forth.

The time of the death is not only a short period.  At  the  time  of  death,
there is some time gap there. So my question is since  there  is  some  time
there, you can create projecting karma. (That being the case)  why  then  is
it not possible for that karma to produce a result? That is the question.

Student:  So  you  are  talking  about  the  time   when   the   factor   of
discrimination is  still  functioning  and  able  to  recognise  its  object
clearly, at that time, the mind is able to create  projecting  karma.   Then
towards the end, the mind then nourishes that projecting  karma  to  project
another rebirth

Khen Rinpoche: You are still not getting what I’m asking.

Student: Sorry, I will go and think about it some more.
In the last lesson, we saw how the  enemy  or  harm-doer  must  exist  as  a
condition for us to practise patience. In dependence on that  person  acting
as a condition for us to practise patience, if we cultivate  patience,  then
we accumulate the collections and purify our negativities.  In  that  sense,
that person is not a harm-doer.  Instead  that  person  is  our  benefactor,
somebody who is helping us.

                                ~~~~~~~~~~~~
If we get upset with that person and retaliate, that person gets  upset  and
become angry in return. As a result of  being  angry  with  and  retaliating
against us, she will accumulate non-virtue, the karma that will send her  to
the lower realms where she will have to suffer for  a  long  time.  In  that
sense, for that person, we have become the harm-doer instead.

That person is our benefactor but in return we have become the harm-doer  to
that person. As such, the teachings tell us that, for those reasons,  it  is
completely inappropriate to hold on to that person as an  enemy  and  to  be
upset with her.

When we are facing such a person in our lives, it is  good  to  think  about
what we have learnt here in these teachings and analyse whether that  enemy,
the person who is harming us, is the actual harm-doer or whether we are  the
harm-doer. We should  ask  ourselves,  “Is  that  harm-  doer  in  fact  our
benefactor? Or are we in fact  the  actual  harm-doer?”  This  is  what  the
teachings are telling us to do. In reality, we have become the harm-doer.

Having said this, of course we will raise objections against such a line  of
reasoning that says that our enemy is our benefactor and  that  we  are  the
real harm-doer. We will think, “How can  that  be?  How  can  the  harm-doer
actually be my benefactor? That is not possible.”

The line of reasoning is  that  that  person  exists  to  help  us  practise
patience. If we practise patience, we will get  all  the  benefits  of  this
practice. So instead of being harmed, the enemy is actually our  benefactor.


But we may think in this way, “How could that be the case?  Because  of  him
harming me, I got angry. When I get angry, I am  throwing  myself  into  the
lower realms. Without that person harming me, I won’t go to  the  hells.  So
how can that person be my benefactor? He is in fact the condition for me  to
go to the hells.”

C.  CULTIVATING THE PATIENCE THAT PAYS NO  HEED  TO  THOSE  WHO  CAUSE  HARM
   (cont’d)

         3.  Reflecting on unwanted occurrences being due one’s own faults
                B.   Abandoning objections
                       1.   Rejecting that it is invalid for  others  to  do
something that benefits us
      Verse 6.50 a, b
      If I have the excellent quality of thought,
      I will not go to hell.

Although our existence is a condition for that person  to  go  to  hell,  it
doesn’t necessarily mean that therefore we ourselves will also go  to  hell.
Although we may be a condition for that person to  create  negativities  and
to go to hell, it doesn’t mean that we will go to hell.

We will not go to hell if we have the excellent quality of  patience,  i.e.,
if we practise patience. Whatever the situation may be, from  our  side,  if
we practise patience, we will not go to hell. We don’t create the  cause  to
do so.

But if we don’t cultivate patience and we get upset and angry,  we  will  go
to hell.

Here we are refuting the argument that it  is  incorrect  to  think  of  our
enemies as our benefactors.

Next is refuting that it is incorrect to harm others.

                       2.  Rejecting that it is  invalid  for  us  to  bring
harm upon others

      Verse 6.50 c, d
      If I am protecting myself,
      How will they accrue merit here?

We may think in  this  way,  “If  we  say  that  the  other  person  is  our
benefactor, then he is helping us. If he is helping us, then  of  course  he
won’t go to hell. How will he go to hell?”

The third and fourth lines of verse 6.50 are the answer to the thought,  “If
I practise patience, I am guarding myself, but how  does  that  protect  the
harm-doer?”

Yes, if we practise patience, we protect  ourselves.  We  stop  accumulating
negativities. As such, we don’t have to go to the lower  realms  so  we  are
guarding ourselves from the lower realms.

But our practice of patience doesn’t save others  from  going  to  hell.  As
such, if it doesn’t save the other person from going to  hell,  in  reality,
we are still the harm-doer.

We may also think that if the person who  is  harming  us  is  actually  our
benefactor, then  we  should  also  be  considered  benefactors  to  others.
Therefore it is also right for us to harm others because we  are  benefiting
them!

Khen Rinpoche:  Everyone wants to be a benefactor. We  are  all  benefactors
of anger. Sometimes when people get angry, they  say,  “I  am  teaching  you
patience.” But actually they are not  teaching  us  patience.  In  order  to
teach others patience, they themselves must be patient. They are not  really
teaching patience. They are practising un-patience, not teaching patience.

Sometimes I see that in many people. A husband and wife  will  saying  nasty
and bad hings to one another. Then they say, “I am teaching  you  patience,”
but actually they are not really doing that.

Such a way of thinking is inappropriate. It is wrong. Why is that so?

                        3.  Arresting  ingratitude  towards  those  who  act
beneficially
      Verse 6.51
      Nevertheless, should I return the harm
      It will not protect them either.
      By doing so my conduct will deteriorate
      And hence this fortitude will be destroyed.


Let’s say somebody harms you. Instead  of  accepting  that,  you  retaliate.
What will happen? If you retaliate, that harm-doer becomes  more  upset  and
disturbed. He accumulates even more negativities.

If you were to think,  “Actually  I’m  a  benefactor  to  that  person.  I’m
helping that person when I retaliate,” how  does  causing  him  to  be  more
upset and disturbed and accumulating more negativities in the process be  an
act of helping that person? How does your retaliation help and benefit  that
person? In what way are you benefiting him?

There is no benefit whatsoever. When you retaliate, you don’t  benefit  that
person in any way. The person gets more disturbed and upset and  accumulates
more negativity. So your retaliation doesn’t protect that  person  from  his
own anger and on top of that,  you  harm  your  own  practice  of  the  four
wholesome virtues. These are:
1. When we are scolded, we should not retaliate in the same way.
2. When we are hit and beaten, we should not fight back.
3. If somebody exposes our faults, we should not do likewise
4. When somebody is angry with us, we should not react with anger.

Therefore it is completely wrong to think that by retaliating, you are also
benefiting that person.

If you adopt the view that you have now become the benefactor of your  enemy
by retaliating and causing him to  practise  patience,  you  should  analyse
whether there is truly any benefit or not? There is no  benefit  because  it
causes the person to be more upset, angrier  and  as  such,  he  accumulates
even more negativities. So there is no benefit whatsoever.

On top of that, if you are a practitioner training  in  the  cultivation  of
bodhicitta, then when you retaliate,  it  only  harms  your  four  wholesome
practices. It will also harm your practice of patience.

The next two verses are basically telling  us  that  it  is  appropriate  to
meditate on patience when we are on the receiving end of contempt,  slander,
criticism or unpleasant words. The teachings are saying  that  if  we  think
about it carefully,  such  criticism,  contempt,  slander  or  harsh  speech
directed at us do not actually harm our body and mind in any way.

2.  BEING PATIENT WITH THOSE WHO WOULD BELITTLE YOU AND SO FORTH[1]

       A.  Despising and belittling one does not harm one’s body
      Verse 6.52
      Since my mind is not physical
      In no way can anyone destroy it.
      Through it strongly adhering to my body,
      My body is harmed by suffering.


      Verse 6.53
      Since contempt, harsh speech,
      And unpleasant words
      Do not cause any harm to my body,
      Why, mind, do you become so angry?

Our mind or consciousness is immaterial and is  not  physical.  As  such  it
cannot be harmed by any kind of weapons.

How do we suffer physically when  our  body  is  harmed?  It  is  said  that
because we have very strong grasping to  our  body,  holding  on  to  it  as
‘mine,’ therefore when the body is physically harmed, we feel  pain.  It  is
said that if we did not have that concept of  the  strong  grasping  of  the
body, even though somebody may do something physical to the  body,  we  will
not have the thought, “I’m being harmed. My body is being harmed.”

When we face direct criticism, when somebody says something nasty to  us  or
talks behind our back, if we look at that criticism or harsh and  unpleasant
words, they are only words and sounds. Can words and sounds  harm  our  body
in any way? The answer is no. They cannot harm  our  body  in  the  smallest
way.

If unpleasant words, criticism or harsh speech  can  really  harm  us,  they
must either harm our body or harm our mind. If these words or sounds  cannot
really harm our body in any way, then how could  they  ever  harm  the  mind
that is non-physical?

Since they cannot harm the body nor can they harm the mind,  then  there  is
no real reason to feel justified in being  upset  when  we  encounter  those
criticisms or harsh and unpleasant words.

But of course we won’t accept this so easily. We come up with other  reasons
to justify our anger and retaliation. We argue, “The words  cannot  harm  me
physically nor can they damage my mind. But when my critics say such  things
and other people get to hear about them, then they will not like  me.  I  do
not like it when others dislike me. Therefore I don’t like  the  person  who
is saying those things to me.”

The answer to this is in verse 6.54.

       B. It is unreasonable for one to be furious  with  a  person  who  is
himself in a rage
      Verse 6.54
      If others’ disliking me
      Will not devour me
      Either in this or in another life,
      Why do I not want it?

We may think that  the  criticism,  contempt,  unpleasant  words  and  harsh
speech directed at us will cause others to dislike  us.  Therefore  we  feel
justified in being upset. The question that we should then ask ourselves  is
this, “How does people disliking me harm me in this  life?  How  does  their
dislike for me harm me in my future lives?”

We should then think, “It doesn’t harm me in this life and it  doesn’t  harm
me in my future lives. So they can dislike me but I don’t  have  to  dislike
them for disliking me.”

Somebody’s  criticism  and  unpleasant  words  about  us  may  act  as   the
conditions for others to dislike us. But so what if others  dislike  us?  If
they dislike us, so be it. If they dislike us,  we  don’t  have  to  dislike
them in return for if we were to dislike them as a result of  their  dislike
for us, we accumulate additional unnecessary negativities.

However we still have more to say about that. Our counter-argument is  this:
“Yes, they dislike me but I don’t have to dislike them in return.  But  when
somebody says something nasty about me, he  hurts  my  reputation  and  when
others get to hear about it, other people will  also  dislike  me  and  lose
faith in me. That is a problem. When others lose faith in  and  dislike  me,
it will hurt my income, which I could have gained  from  that  relationship.
So I will lose out.

If my critic did not say all those nasty things about me, I would  not  have
lost out. I need such material resources. They are important  to  me.  If  I
lose them, it will become a problem for me. Therefore I have  a  reason  and
justification for feeling upset with the person  who  is  saying  all  those
nasty things about me.”

This way of thinking is addressed in verse 6.55.

       C.   It is unreasonable to be furious because material gain has  been
obstructed
              1.  It is  unreasonable  to  be  furious  at  obstructions  to
        material gain because they quickly perish
      Verse 6.55 a, b
      Because it will hinder my gain,
      I do not want this.

We use that as the reason to feel justified for being upset with the  person
who says nasty things about us.

The reply to that is this:

      Verse 6.55 c, d
      I shall discard my gains here
      And my negativities will remain securely.

Let’s say we retaliate because we feel justified in doing so. We  think,  “I
need to protect my source of income. I need to protect my reputation and  my
material gain. So it is justifiable for me to retaliate.”

Let’s say we do retaliate and we are  successful  in  stopping  people  from
talking about us. We manage to stop people from disliking us. As the  result
of all that, our income or source  of  money  will  not  deteriorate  so  we
manage to get a lot of money.

But even if we manage to do all that, the day will come when  we  will  have
to leave everything behind anyway. For sure, we have to die  and  go  on  to
our next life. But in the process of retaliating,  striving  to  maintain  a
good reputation and having people like us so that we will be  able  to  keep
our  money,  we  accumulate  a  lot  of  negativities,   primarily   through
generating anger.

In that process, anger is embedding itself ever more strongly and deeply  in
our mind. Our anger becomes more stable every time we get angry. We  are  in
fact enhancing and strengthening those imprints.  We are  accumulating  more
non-virtue, all of which will remain with us when we go on to our next  life
and they will cause us to suffer in our future lives.

Therefore it is inappropriate  to  feel  justified  in  retaliating  against
criticism and the people who are damaging our reputation  for  the  sake  of
protecting our wealth, income, material gain and so forth.

The main reason is that even if we do manage to protect our wealth  or  even
accumulate great wealth by retaliating, all that  wealth  have  to  be  left
behind at the time of death. But the negativities  that  we  accumulated  in
the process of retaliating in anger to protect that wealth  remain  securely
and firmly in our mind. They will harm us in our future lives.

Having said all that, we may still object. We say, “Material gain and  money
are important. I need money to survive. Without money, how  am  I  going  to
survive? I need to eat. I need a roof over my head. It is  not  unreasonable
to want all these things for my survival.

So if anybody harms my source of income or takes away my money or  property,
then I will have a very difficult life. I may  even  die.  Therefore  it  is
only right and totally justifiable that I must retaliate  and  do  something
about the situation. I need to fight to get what I need. It is all right  to
do that. What is wrong with that? You mean I can’t fight for my survival?”

Since there is always a rebuttal to whatever we may think, this  appears  in
the next verse.

              2.  Arresting the pursuit of wrongdoing
      Verse 6.56
      Thus it is better that I die today
      Than live a long time through wrong livelihood.
      Even if I should live a long time,
      There will be the very suffering of death.

There are people who accumulate wealth through  harming  others  or  causing
problem to others motivated by their anger, jealousy, competitiveness  in  a
negative sense and so forth. Some are able  to  make  a  good  living  quite
successfully through harming others in the sense that they do  accumulate  a
lot of wealth in the process. They even live for a long time.

But sustaining their livelihood through harming others actually  constitutes
wrong livelihood. So as such, it is better to live  a  short  life  and  die
early than to live a long life that is sustained by wrong livelihood. It  is
better to live a short life that is not sustained by wrong  livelihood  than
to live a long life sustained by wrong livelihood.

Because if you live a long life that is sustained by wrong  livelihood,  you
accumulate so much negativity that will  harm  you  in  your  future  lives.
Putting aside future lives, even in this life, at the time  of  death,  this
will cause you a lot of problems.

The essential point here is that it  is  of  no  benefit  to  sustain  one’s
livelihood through harming others. Even if you do  manage  to  accumulate  a
lot of wealth, actually in reality, it  is  of  no  benefit.  Therefore  the
Kadampa masters said that it is better for the evil ones,  i.e.,  those  who
commit non-virtue, to die early, i.e., to have a shorter life.

Khen Rinpoche: The meaning is the same. That is the meaning.

Next is showing through  example  how  it  is  inappropriate  to  crave  for
material gain.

                3.    Establishing,   by   means   of   an   example,    the
         unreasonableness of craving material gains
             Verse 6.57
      Suppose someone should awaken from a dream
      In which he experienced one hundred years of happiness,
      And suppose another should awaken from a dream
      In which he experienced just a short while of happiness,


      Verse 6.58
      For both of these people who have awakened
      That happiness will never return.
      Similarly, whether my life has been long or short,
      At the time of death it will be finished like that.

Here it gives an example of someone who enjoys many  things  in  his  dream.
This is to illustrate that the craving for objects of  desire  and  material
gain are inappropriate and has no real meaning.

Let’s say you fall asleep and have a very nice dream.   In  the  dream,  you
experience the five objects of desire—form, sound, smell, taste  and  touch.
That dream lasts for a very long time. But  once  you  wake  up,  the  whole
experience is really just an object of memory. There  is  nothing  that  you
can hold on to from the dream, there is nothing that you can utilise.

Likewise in real life, even if you were to live for a very long  time,  say,
a hundred years, where you  have  every  conceivable  object  of  enjoyment,
whatever you want, and you have a very good and enjoyable life  but  at  the
time of death, all those enjoyments  become  only  objects  of  memory.  You
cannot enjoy them  again  as  they  are  already  in  the  past.  All  those
experiences become like a dream. Whatever enjoyments you  may  have  had  in
your entire life, at the time of death, you cannot  experience  them  again.
On top of that, you will never encounter the same experiences again in  your
future lives.

At the time of death, your highly enjoyable life is no  different  from  the
life of a person who has a shorter life. At the time of death,  everyone  is
the same. Whether you had a long enjoyable life or a short  enjoyable  life,
at the time of death whatever enjoyments and pleasant experiences you  might
have had are like a dream. They are just objects of memory, nothing more.

So this is showing  through  example  why  it  is  incorrect  to  crave  for
material gain.

Next is showing the reasons why it is incorrect or  inappropriate  to  crave
for material gain.

              4.  The reasons why craving material gains is unreasonable
      Verse 6.59
      Although I may acquire abundant gain
      And enjoy happiness for a long time,
      I shall go forth naked and empty-handed,
      Just like having been robbed.

Even if we were to spend our  whole  life  accumulating  wealth,  resources,
property and so forth, even if we do manage  to  derive  some  satisfaction,
enjoyment and pleasure from them and even if we do  live  for  a  very  long
time with those  enjoyments,  at  the  time  of  death,  we  have  to  leave
everything behind. At the time of death, we  will  be  stripped  of  all  of
these things just as we are stripped of all our possessions by a robber.  We
can’t bring anything to our next life.

This is similar to what is mentioned in lam-rim in the section on death  and
impermanence. In that outline, it says that at the time  of  death,  nothing
helps except the Dharma. The three points under this outline  are  that,  at
the time of death:
1. Our wealth and our possessions do not help us. They  are  of  no  benefit
   whatsoever.
2. Our friends, relatives and loved ones are of  no  use.  They  are  of  no
   benefit to us whatsoever.
3. Even our  body,  the  thing  we  cherish  the  most,  is  of  no  benefit
   whatsoever.
The conclusion then is that at the time of death, nothing is of any  benefit
to us except the Dharma.

The points we have just mentioned are very obvious. You don’t even  have  to
think to  understand  them.  This  is  the  reality  that  we  can  see  for
ourselves. We see people dying and when they die, they can’t  take  anything
with them.

So far, the  teachings  are  telling  us  that  it  is  not  right  to  have
attachment and craving for material gain, but we have many  reasons  in  our
attempt to prove that there are situations  where  money  is  important  and
beneficial.

In the Buddhist circle, many people may think, “If I have  a  lot  of  money
and I live a long time I can accumulate a lot of merit. I can make a lot  of
offerings and many holy objects. I can print texts and make  stupas.  I  can
do many wonderful things through which I can accumulate merit and purify  my
mind of negativities. So it is good to have money since  it  is  so  useful.
Since I have money, I can do many of these things.

So in order to have money, sometimes I have no choice but to  get  angry.  I
need attachment to material gain but nevertheless  it  is  still  all  right
because with all that money, I can do all  these  wonderful  things.  I  can
accumulate a lot of merit. I can purify my mind of obscurations. So,  it  is
not true that such craving is always bad.”

              5. Refuting the  reasoning  behind  spending  one’s  times  in
         material pursuits
      Verse 6.60
      OPINION: If I were to live due to gain,
      Then I shall exhaust negativities and [increase] merit.
      RESPONSE: If I were to get angry on account of gain,
      Will not my merit be consumed and negativities created?


      Verse 6.61
      If my very life were to degenerate
      For the sake of that,
      Then what will be the use of the life
      Of who commits only negativities?

Khen Rinpoche: OK. So that is the answer!

These verses are telling us that it is incorrect to follow after  anger  and
attachment, in  order  to  accumulate  money  so  that  we  can  use  it  to
accumulate virtue and purify our mind. Basically such a  line  of  reasoning
is incorrect.

We may think, “In order to be able to do some of these things to  accumulate
merit, purify my mind and practise  the  Dharma,  I  need  money  and  other
things. In the process, sometimes it is all right to get angry and  to  have
attachment.” If we were to think in such a way, didn’t we establish  earlier
that anger has many disadvantages? For example, if  we  get  angry,  we  can
destroy the roots of  virtue  accumulated  over  a  thousand  eons.  We  can
deplete so much merit. We have accepted that  there  are  so  many  negative
consequences of anger. Wouldn’t we experience all these disadvantages?

We may say that we follow after anger and attachment in order to be able  to
sustain our life and practise the Dharma. But we also  accept  the  negative
consequences of getting upset and angry.  When we  follow  after  attachment
and get angry, we destroy the roots of virtue accumulated over a  very  long
period of time and we have to experience all the consequences of anger.

Would this not harm our  supposed  motivation  of  sustaining  our  life  to
practise the Dharma? On one hand, we say we want to live a long life and  we
need to have money to practise the Dharma. Yet we are doing the very  things
that  will  destroy  that  opportunity  in  this  life.  So   there   is   a
contradiction there.

We may feel justified in getting angry and having attachment  to  money  and
possession so that we can practise the Dharma, accumulate merit  and  purify
our minds of obscuration. But doesn’t getting angry lead to the  destruction
of the very merit that we say we are trying to accumulate?  Isn’t  there  is
an internal contradiction in our position?

There is much more to come. Essentially whatever the argument  may  be,  the
point that this chapter is trying to tell us is that no matter how we  think
about it, we will not be able to justify our getting  angry.  This  is  what
the text is trying to say. No matter what argument we may come up  with,  we
will not be able to succeed in finding any justifiable  reason  for  getting
upset, contrary to what we may believe.

What we believe is that there are always situations, occasions  and  reasons
for getting upset. We have many excuses. But whatever we may come  up  with,
it is mentioned in the text and the rebuttal  is  given.  We  just  have  to
think about what is mentioned in the text.

                                 ~~~~~~~~~~

DISCUSSION QUESTIONS FOR SUNDAY, 22nd JUNE 2014

   1. Explain the last two lines of Verse 84 from  Chapter  5,  which  comes
      under the ethics of working for the welfare of sentient  beings.  What
      actions are the buddhas allowing?

(Khen Rinpoche:  We should  go  deeper  into  this  question  and  not  just
discuss it in a superficial manner. For instance, killing is said  to  be  a
natural misdeed. What does a natural misdeed mean?

There were times when the buddhas gave permission  to  some  individuals  to
engage in the ten non-virtues. We should also look at issues such as:
    • Who were allowed to engage in the ten non-virtues?
    • Was permission granted to engage in all or only some of the  ten  non-
      virtues?
    • If only some of the ten non-virtues were permitted,  what  were  these
      permitted non-virtues and what was the  reason  for  permission  being
      granted?
    •  What  are  the  circumstances  under  which  these  non-virtues   are
      permitted?
    • Even if these non-virtues were permitted by the buddhas, do the people
      who were allowed to engage in them accumulate negativities or not?
    • Why are some of the ten non-virtues not permitted?
These are some pointers to guide you in your discussion  of  this  question,
to look at it from various perspectives).

   2. What are the faults of anger?

   3. What are the causes of anger? (Khen  Rinpoche:  I  have  mentioned  in
      class that when we elaborate on the causes of anger, we can talk about
      24 situations or conditions).

   4. What advice is given in  the  text  to  cultivate  the  patience  that
      accepts suffering? Similarly, what advice is  given  in  the  text  to
      cultivate  the  patience  that  is  intent  on  Dharma?  What  is  the
      difference between these two types of patience?




Interpreted by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme; transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek, Vivien  Ng,
Aki Yeo & Pang Mui Cheng; edited by Cecilia Tsong.


-----------------------
[1] 2.  Arresting fury towards that which brings unwanted things (V. 6.12  –
V. 6.86)
         A.  Arresting fury towards those who wrong you (V. 6.12 – V. 6.63)
               1.  Being patient with those who would create  suffering  for
you (V. 6.12 – V. 6.51)
               2.  Being patient with those who would belittle  you  and  so
forth (V.52 – V.6.63)


