Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Engaging in the Deeds of a Bodhisattva/BP2 M05 L17final.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:52:21.805501
================================================================================


Transcript of the teachings by Khen Rinpoche Geshe  Chonyi  on  Engaging  in
the Bodhisattva Deeds, 2014

Root text: Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds by  Shantideva,  translated  by
Toh Sze Gee. Copyright: Toh Sze Gee, 2006; Revised edition, 2014.

Lesson 17                                                      3 April 2014


Review. Chapter Four: Verses 4.25–4. 36. Being conscientious about
cultivating virtue (cont’d). Being conscientious about abandoning
afflictions:. A. Reflecting on the disadvantages of the afflictions.



BEING CONSCIENTIOUS ABOUT CULTIVATING VIRTUE (cont’d)
REVIEW

We were at the section of being conscientious  with  regard  to  cultivating
virtue. When one is not conscientious in accomplishing virtue, we  are  told
that suffering will ensue in this life and also in future lives.

In this chapter, there are two main sections:
1. cultivating conscientiousness with regard to bodhicitta
2. cultivating conscientiousness with regard to the training

In tThe earlier section discussed ons, there was a  discussion  about  being
conscientious  in  protecting  one’s  bodhicitta  and   not  letting   one’s
bodhicitta degenerate.

This is followed by a discussion on being  conscientious  in  in  abandoning
non-virtue that is essentially about how it is important not to  be  stained
by the downfalls and faultstraining in the precepts .
The earlier section is being conscientious in  protecting  one’s  bodhicitta
and not letting it degenerate.
Then there is being conscientious in the training in the precepts after  one
has adopted them.
This at discussion covers three points:
1. - being conscientious about in abandoning wrondtgdoinghe faults,
2. - being conscientious about in cultivating virtue, and
3. - being conscientious about in abandoning the afflictions.
Being conscientious in the trainings covers those three points
. Of the three, the first one is being conscientious  aboutin  a  abandoning
wrongdoing or abandoning the faults. Essentially after  having  adopted  the
bodhisattva vows, one has to check every now and then to see whether if  one
is stained by the downfalls and faults.  or not.

Then   Tthe   next    section    is    being    conscientious    about    in
cultivating/meditating on virtue. If you were asked to  give  a  summary  of
this particular section, what would you say? What is  the  essence  of  this
section?

There are two main sections:
A. Being conscientious in not letting one’s bodhicitta degenerates
B. Being conscientious in the training.
Then being conscientious in the training has three points.
1. Being conscientious in abandoning the faults.
2. Being conscientious in cultivating virtue.
3. Being conscientious about abandoning afflictions
What is the difference between these two : - being  conscientious  about  in
abandoning the faults and being conscientious aboutin  cultivating virtue?
[Extract from outlines]
|2 An extensive explanation              |
|A Cultivating conscientiousness with    |
|regards to bodhicitta                   |
|B Cultivating conscientiousness with    |
|regards to the training                 |

|A Cultivating conscientiousness with    |
|regards to bodhicitta                   |
|1 The reasons it is inappropriate to    |
|discard bodhicitta                      |
|2 The disadvantages of discarding it    |

|B Cultivating conscientiousness with    |
|regards to the training                 |
|1 Being conscientious about abandoning  |
|wrongdoing                              |
|2 Being conscientious about cultivating |
|virtue                                  |
|3 Being conscientious about abandoning  |
|afflictions                             |


KhKhen Rinpoche (in English): What is the difference? Did you  You  geot  my
question? So what is the answer?

The first section,  being  conscientious  about  in  abandoning  wrongdoing,
faults, is essentially talking about the need to not to be  stained  by  the
downfalls and  faults.  When  If  one  is  stained  by  these  faults,  then
suffering will ould follow.

The second section is  being  conscientious  in  meditating  or  cultivating
virtue.

Can anybody summarisze what that whole section is driving at?

In Tthe first section, being conscientious about in  aabandoning  wrongdoing
the faults, the emphasises is on not being  stained  by  the  downfalls  and
faults and the downfalls.
But in the second section, being conscientious about in cultivating  virtue,
it is saying that when if one is stained by the downfalls  and  faults,  one
should confess and purify themit. Otherwise, one  will  have  to  experience
the fruitional effects of having committed those downfalls and faults.  This
particular section also states that even when if one does manages to  purify
the negativities that are accumulated from through committing the  downfalls
and faults, one’s realiszations are postponed or are delayed.

I guess the  point  in  the  second  section,  being  conscientious  aboutin
cultivating virtue, is that one has to engages  in  virtue  and  purify  the
downfalls and faults that are  accumulated  by  through  applying  the  four
opponent powers. When If one does not engage in such purification,  y  after
having committed the downfalls and  faults,  then   ssuffering  will  ensue.
Therefore it is important  to  engage  in  virtue  in  order  to  counteract
whatever negativity  one has already accumulated.

BEING CONSCIENTIOUS ABOUT CULTIVATING VIRTUE (cont’d)

C. The reasons why it would be reasonable to make  effort  in  applying  the
  antidotes to negativity
     3.  One will be tormented with the suffering of  the  lower  realms  in
the future
|3 One will be tormented with the suffering of the  |
|lower realms in the future                         |


      Verse 4.25
      If my body burns for a long time
      In the fires of hell which are difficult to bear,
      Inevitably my mind will be tormented
      By the blazing fires of unbearable remorse.

The  fires  of  hell  are  difficult  to  bear  as  they  are  said  to   be
manycountless times hotter . It is said that the fires of hell  is  hundreds
or thousands of times hotter than any fire that we know.  humans  are  aware
of.
The verse is saying that when if we do end up in the hell  realms,  it  will
be as if it is said that oour mind is like being burnted in the hell  fires,
i.e., ,  metaphorically speaking, our mind will be   burnt by ing  with  the
great fires of regret, on top of our  one’s  body  that  is  being  actually
being burnted by the flames. ire


4. Why it would be reasonable to abandon negativities  and  make  effort  in
   virtue
   A. To be led again to the hell realms after having wasted a human life of
      leisure and opportunity would be utter stupidity [lit.  is  equivalent
      to not having a mind]
   B. It is reasonable to think of [such behaviour] as the cause of delusion
      [BP1 L21] Instead of practising virtue, we  engage  in  non-virtue  or
      negativities all the time. In the future,  we  will  be  born  in  the
      unbearable hells where we have to stay for a  long  time.  Our  bodies
      will be roasted in the unbearable flames of hell and mental  suffering
      will torment our minds. Therefore, it is important to strive not to be
      stained by any downfalls or negativities
|Why it would be reasonable to abandon negativities and make effort in|
|virtue                                                               |
|A To be led again to the hell realms after having wasted a human life|
|of leisure and opportunity would be utter stupidity [lit. is         |
|equivalent to not having a mind]                                     |
|B It is reasonable to think of [such behaviour] as the cause of      |
|delusion                                                             |

|A To be led again to the hell realms after having wasted a human life|
|of leisure and opportunity would be utter stupidity [lit. is         |
|equivalent to not having a mind]                                     |


   A. To be led again to the hell realms after having wasted a human life of
      leisure and opportunity would be utter stupidity
      Verse 4.26
      Having found by some coincidence
      This beneficial state that is so hard to find,
      If now while having knowledge
      I am once again led into the hells




      Verse 4.27 a,  b
      Then, as though I were confused by mantra,
      This mind will be reduced to nothing.

“This beneficial state that is so hard to find” refers to the human life  of
freedoms and endowments that we now have now that . Such  a  human  life  of
freedom and  endowments  isis   extremely  difficult  to  findget.  You  can
understand  this  the  difficulty  of  getting  such   a   rebirth   through
understanding that it is difficult by nature to get such  a  rebirth.  Also,
and  Tthe causes for achieving such  a  special  rebirth  are  difficult  to
create. You One can also understand, using  analogies,   the  difficulty  of
getting such a rebirth. n opportunity through the analogies.

This special basis of the a , the human  life  of  freedoms  and  endowments
that we have now obtained now, enables us to practisce the Ddharma  readily.
The reason why we have such an opportunity now is  due  to  the  virtue  and
merit that we have accumulated in  the  past.  F  ainding  finding  such  an
opportunity is something that happens just about only once.

It is not as if we are not able to distinguish between what is  harmful  and
what is beneficial. We, we are able to tell the difference between  what  is
harmful and what is beneficialuseful and what is harmful.  It is not  as  if
we are crazy now. It is not as if we are not able to know what is useful  or
harmful. Despite all theseIf in spite of this, , if we are  once  again  led
into the fires of hell  then that would be very really wrong.

If such a thing was to happens, have we lost our minds?  Has someone cast  a
spell on us? It is like sSome people become who are confused in  their  over
their thoughts and are unable to think when they  are  under  the  spell  of
received some black mblack maagic. I, is that what has  happeneding  to  us?
Or  or is it is just because we have completely lost our minds?

Despite having all the favourable conditionsconditions, we have to  once  go
again to go  to the lower realms.  or into the hells. This Then  this  would
be akin to having lost our mind and sanity. same as having  gone  crazy  and
having lost our minds.

   C.   It is reasonable to think  of  [such  behaviour]  as  the  cause  of
      delusion
|B It is reasonable to think of [such behavior]|
|as the cause of delusion                      |


What has is it that led us back into the lower  realms?  Is  it  because  we
have lost our minds? Are we unable to tell the difference  between  what  is
harmful and beneficial good and what is  beneficial?  good  harmful?  Or  is
itare  we are now confused  by  some  magic  spell?  The  answer  to  theose
questions come at is in the following verse.


     Verse 4.27 c, d
     Even I do not know what confused me;;
     What is there inside me?

“Even I do not know what confused me;/ What is there inside me?” is  a  just
a query directed at ourselves, asking ourselves what exactly  is  it?  “What
is the very thing that is leading me back to the hells realms?”

We may have thoughts of wanting to learn the teachings, wanting  to  wanting
to reflect and meditate on them and , wanting to internalisze  them.  ,  and
wanting to meditate on them. We may have thoughts of  wanting  to  practisce
ethical discipline,  i.e.,  .  Basically,   or,  in  general,  we  have  the
thoughtts of wanting to accomplish the Ddharma.

WWhile we may have such those thoughts, yet at the same time, we do not  n’t
seem to have any independence or any freedom  in  being  aable  to  actually
carrying out our intentions. Whatever intentions  we  may  have  about  with
respect to  accomplishing and practising  the Ddharma,  and  practicing  it,
but yet at the same time, wewe do not n’t seem to be  doing  anything  about
them it. We do not n’t seem to have the any freedom of  choice  in  carrying
out our those intentions.

There must be something that is working in the background .  There  must  be
something that is stopping us. What is it? We  have  to  investigate,  check
and think about this  and look oover and over again and then  discover  what
exactly the this ssource of this “confusion” is. is. T
Well, it is not due to some black magic, it is not due to not  knowing  what
to do, and yet there is something that is stopping us. What is it?  That  is
what we have to find out by thinking over and over again.  So  this  is  the
meaning behind these two lines, sentences “Even I do not know what  confused
me;/ What is there  inside  me?”   This  comes  under  the  outline:  It  is
appropriate to contemplate the cause of ignorance.


Of the three headings sections that  come  under  the  outline,  cultivating
conscientiousness with regard to the  training,  we  make  up  the  outline:
Being conscientious in the trainings, now we have finished with  the  second
heading, being : Being conscientious aboutin cultivating virtue.

|B Cultivating conscientiousness with    |
|regards to the training                 |
|1 Being conscientious about abandoning  |
|wrongdoing                              |
|2 Being conscientious about cultivating |
|virtue                                  |
|3 Being conscientious about abandoning  |
|afflictions                             |


Now we move on to the third heading,  boutline:  Being  conscientious  about
abandoning afflictions which is that are which would be  covered  under  the
three points:
1. rReflecting on the disadvantages of the afflictions
2. iIt  is  inappropriate  to  feel  weary  of  the  hardships  involved  in
  abandoning the  afflictions
3. cCultivating joy that it is  possible  to  abandon  the  afflictions,  if
   effort is made

Being conscientious about abandoning afflictions

Reflecting on the disadvantages A.  Contemplating the faults of the
afflictions
B.  It How it is inappropriate to feel weary of the hardships involved in
be tired of the difficulty of abandoning the  afflictions afflictions
C.  Cultivating joy that it is possible to abandon the afflictions, if
effort is made Meditating on enthusiasm because if one makes an effort,
then one can abandon the afflictions.
|Being conscientious about abandoning the afflictions                 |
|A Reflecting on the disadvantages of the afflictions                 |
|B It is inappropriate to feel weary of the hardships involved in     |
|abandoning the afflictions                                           |
|C Cultivating joy for the very fact that it is possible [to abandon  |
|the afflictions] for, if effort is made, they will be abandoned      |

|A Reflecting on the disadvantages of the afflictions |
|1 Reflecting on the way the afflictions act to harm  |
|oneself                                              |
|2 To cultivate tolerance for [ie. patience towards]  |
|the afflictions is inappropriate                     |
|3 Developing strength of mind in order to destroy    |
|them                                                 |

|1 Reflecting on the way the afflictions act to harm  |
|oneself                                              |
|i)   The way they rob us of independence [of mind and|
|actions]                                             |
|ii)  The way they bring us inestimable (immeasurable)|
|suffering                                            |
|iii) The time period in which they cause harm is     |
|unlimited                                            |
|iv) The reasons why it is inappropriate to befriend  |
|the afflictions                                      |

|i)   The way they rob us of independence [of mind and|
|actions]                                             |

1. Reflecting on the way the afflictions act to harm oneself
  A. The way they rob us of independence of mind and actions
The afflictions caused us suffering in that  they  take  away  our  freedom,
causing . They caused us to act without any freedom or any control. This  at
is stated goes with in the next verse.


     Verse 4.28
     Since enemies such as hatred and craving
     Have neither arms nor legs,
     And are neither courageous nor clever,
     How have I been used like a slave by them?

When If we connect link what we are going to look at here with  the  earlier
question on ““Wwhat exactly isis causing me  the  cause  of  our  confusion;
…,”, here  this is  the  then  we  can  link  the  transition  where   here.
Essentially what we are going to discuss here is like  the  answer  to  that
question. In short, basically it  is  our  afflictions  that  stop  us  from
carrying out our intentions, to practisce  the  Ddharma  and  to  accomplish
virtue.

We are identifying here the culprit, the afflictions, that cause us to  lose
our freedom. Afflictions are our the enemies  that  are  of  anger,  craving
which encompasses of desire and attachment and  the  omnipresent  ignorance,
which is always there. When If we expand and on tthe  list  of  afflictions,
we have the six roots afflictions and the twenty secondary afflictions.

Our Here we are identifying the culprit which is the afflictions that  cause
us to lose our freedom. The afflictions are like anger, craving,  attachment
and so forth.  The  enemies,   of  the  afflictions,   are  unlike  external
enemies. Our enemies, the afflictions, They do not have any form,  hands  or
legs and they do not have legs, do not have  hands  and  do  not  carry  any
weapons. Nor Neither are they  courageous,  .  Neither  are  they  smart,  .
Neither are they wise or  .  Neither  are  they  hardworking.  Although  the
afflictions have anone of these qualities, re neither smart nor  hardworking
and nor courageous, but they act as if they are hardworking and .  They  are
smart. The afflictions harm everyonebody. They harm the rich, they harm  the
poor, they harm the students, and they  harm  the   teachers.   are  harmed.
Everyonebody is harmed by the afflictions.

Our afflictions such as our attachment cause us to be emotionally glued  and
attached to the objects of desire and the objects of enjoyment. We are  kind
of helplessly led by the nose by these afflictions and day in and  day  out,
without any choice, we  running after all these objects  of  desire  without
any choice and do whatever it takes to  acquire  then  doing  everything  to
accomplish and to get theose objects of  desire.  Likewise,  anger  is  also
like that. We are controlled by our anger even to the point that we  do  not
even care about our own lives as . Aanger can  make  us  disregard  our  own
lives. In essence, all of us,  everyonebody  without  exception,  have  been
enslaved by made a slave of their own afflictions.

We are slaves to our afflictions because, we  take  all  these  without  any
choice,  from the afflictions. wWe do exactly what our afflictions  tell  us
to do, . We abide and carrying  out the orders of our afflictions.   without
any choice. In that sense, we have become the servants or slaves of  to  our
afflictions. As Tthe result of  being  enslaved  in  this  way  a  slave  is
suffering.

So Tthis  verse  is  telling  us  that  our  afflictions  have  enslaved  us
basically made us their slaves aand we have  lost  our  independence.  As  a
result of becoming a slave to our afflictions, we  are  led  into  boundless
suffering.


  B.  The way they bring us immeasurable suffering [BP 1 L22] We have hatred
  and attachment/desire. Hatred and desire have their roots in ignorance.
  Ignorance, hatred and attachment are the three mental poisons. These three
  negative emotions are called the enemies. These  enemies,  which  are  the
  afflictions themselves, do not have any form (“arms or legs”), nor do they
  wear any armour. They do not hold any weapons in  their  hands.  They  are
  neither heroic nor courageous nor wise.
  The  afflictions  are  not  hard  working  and  do  not   possess   joyous
  perseverance. In fact, afflictions are concomitant with laziness. What  is
  the entity  of  laziness?  Laziness  is  a  state  of  mind  that  is  not
  enthusiastic  about  virtue  whatsoever.  Since   the   afflictions   bear
  similarities with  laziness,  therefore,  the  afflictions  are  not  hard
  working (literally, they do not possess joyous perseverance or effort from
  their own side.) Therefore, the afflictions are also not courageous.
  The afflictions are also not wise. We are not talking  about  intelligence
  here but the factor of wisdom. The afflictions are not wise  because  they
  bear similarities with ignorance. What is ignorance? Ignorance is  a  mind
  that is unclear with regards to its object.  Since  the  afflictions  bear
  similarities with ignorance, therefore, the afflictions themselves are not
  wise.
|ii)  The way they bring us inestimable    |
|(immeasurable) suffering                  |


     Verse 4.29
     While they dwell within my mind,
     At their pleasure they cause me harm,
     Yet I patiently endure them without any anger.
     This is an inappropriate state and patience is a contemptible state.

Where does theis enemy, the  of afflictions,   does  abides?  Where  is  the
temple that houses theseis afflictions? It is  none  other  than  our  mind.
This enemy,  of the afflictions,  abides as a guest in  this  house  or  the
temple of our mind as a guest. While it is there, it  gives  us  orders  and
tells us what we should do.  and gives us orders. We  happily  follow  these
orders. what it tells us to do and in return, we get harm.  The  afflictions
harm us readily without holding anything back and without  hesitation.  This
is what we get.
Although we listen to the afflictions, following their  advice  and  orders,
in return, they harm us happily and  joyously  we  follow  the  advice,  the
orders and the commands of the afflictions abiding in  our  minds,  what  it
does in return is to harm us without holding anything back.  They  cause  us
harm happily and joyously. This is what the afflictions do.

Since If this is what the afflictions do to us, then it would  be  wrong  of
us to practisce patience with and simply accept them.  the  afflictions  and
just accept it. In this sense, it will be a contemptible  state  of  affairs
if we were to practisce patience with our afflictions and let them  ting  it
do whatever they it want. s to, then this will be a contemptible state.   It
is something that  Tthe  wise  and  the  holy  ones  would  criticisze  such
behaviour on our part. us for.

Essentially  Tthis  verse  is  telling  us  that  we  should  look  at   the
afflictions as ouran  enemy and then  strive to overcome them.

An affliction is defined  as  that  which,  when  it  arises  in  the  mind,
disturbs the mind greatly. Thisat  is what is posited as an affliction.
It i as an affliction. It is s extremely important to contemplate and or  to
realisze the faults of our afflictions. From or the moment they  arise,  our
minds are greatly disturbed, causing . Our afflictions cause  our  minds  to
look at realitythings in a very distorted way.
Whenever the  afflictions  manifest,  they  further  strengthen  those  non-
virtuous imprints in our mind in our minds..
When an affliction arises, it also causes those ose afflictions that ofof  a
 similar type to persist maintain their continuity in ourthe mind.

 • Our afflictions harm us not only in this life but also in future lives.
 • They and they also harm others.
• They disturb our minds, causing us great anguish and suffering and bring
  about all the problems of samsara.
    • Our afflictions will harm us in this life and they will also harm us
      in our future lives.
Afflictions greatly disturb our minds and cause us great suffering and
anguish.
Our affliction is that which brings about all the problems of samsara.
• They Afflictions separate us from and lead us further and further away
  from the permanent  happiness of – lliberation.
They
 • Our afflictions cause our virtue to degenerate.

The purpose oint of understanding the faults of the afflictions is  to  help
us so that we can regard them it as ouran  enemiesy..   On  that  basis  Wwe
will then be able to strive to defeat the afflictions.


     Verse 4.30
     Should even all the gods and demi-gods
     Rise up against me as my enemies,
     They cannot lead me to nor place me in
     The fires of Relentless Torment.


     Verse 4.31
     But this foe, the powerful afflictions,
     In an instant can cast me there,
     Which when met will cause not even the ashes
     Of Mount Meru to remain.

DThe Sanskrit word is translated as demigods can also  be  but  sometime  it
can also be translated as non-humans. Be it Whatever it is,  whether  it  is
demigods or the non-humans, we are talking about  the   interferers,   i.e.,
the  beings who that can harm us. cause us harm.

The point here is to  think  about  the  great  harm  that  our  afflictions
inflict on us. do to us. The verse is telling us that even if all  the  very
powerful gogods such as those very powerful like  Indra,  the  demigods  and
non-human beings were to rise up as our enemies, they cannot’t  do  us  much
harm.  to us. The harm that they can inflict do to us  is  only  limited  to
destroying our possessions  or,  our  enjoyments  and,  at  the  very  most,
causing our deaths us to die bby taking our lives. No  matter  how  powerful
they may be, at the very most, this is what they can do to us.
This verse is saying that no matter  how  powerful  these  interferers  are,
they cause us problems and at the very most they can only kill us.  This  is
about the maximum damage they can do to us. They Oon their  own,  they   can
never send put us to in the lowest of the hell realms,  - the Avici hells.

Our The inner enemy, the  of afflictions,  is  far  so  much  more  powerful
than these external enemiesy..  For this inner enemy of  afflictions  Iin  a
very short moment of time, they can throws us  into  the  lower  realms  and
even cause us to be reborn in the Avici hells. This  causes  us  many  other
problems and suffering.  Furthermore, they can  harm  us  for  a  very  long
period of time. For that reason, Ttherefore, we have to destroy  theis  real
enemy,  – tthe enemy of afflictions.

  This verse is saying that  our  enemy  of  afflictions  is  so  much  more
  powerful. Our afflictions not only caused us problems, suffering, but also
  harm us over very long period of time.C.  The time period  in  which  they
  cause harm is unlimited
|iii) The time period in which they cause|
|harm is unlimited                       |


     Verse 4.32
     All other enemies are incapable
     Of such a length of time
     As can my afflictions,
     The long-time enemy with neither beginning nor end.

Our afflictions have harmed us in the past. When If  we  do  not  apply  the
antidotes now and destroy them,  afflictions they would  continue  to  hharm
us just as they have in the way they have already done so in the past.
Our inner enemy,  of the afflictions, have  harmed us in the past  and  they
would continue to harm us in the future if  we  do  not  do  anything  about
themit.

Our  external  enemies  are  not  like  that  insofar  as  .  Our   external
enemiesthey  do not have that capacity to harm  us  in  the  way  our  inner
enemy,  of the afflictions,  can do.
The person that we dison’t like and whom we consider as our enemy may  harms
us and causes us problems but that . It is  nothing  compared  to  what  our
afflictions can do.

Our afflictions have harmed us since our beginningless lifetimes. , with  no
beginning. If we do not n’t do anything about them, there  will  be  it,  it
will have nono end to the harm they can inflict on us. as  well  in  harming
us. Our external enemies can never harm us in such a way.

In order to destroy this long existent  enemy,   of  the  afflictions,  that
have existed for so long, it is innot sufficient just to apply the  antidote
for just a short period of time or just apply the antidote oonce  or  twice.
There is no way the afflictions can be  defeated  by  such  infrequent  just
this one or two time aapplication of the antidotes. But Rrather we  have  to
continuously apply the antidotes to the afflictions just like the flow of  a
river.

The teaching is telling us how to deal with this very  powerful  enemy,   of
the afflictions. When If the enemy is very powerful and it has  been  around
there for a very long time, and if we do not  n’t  apply  persistent  effort
into dealing with this enemy, there will be is nothing we can do about  this
enemy. it.

Next is the explaination ing why it  is  wrong  to  make  friends  with  the
afflictions.

  D.  The reasons why it is inappropriate to befriend the afflictions
|iv) The reasons why it is inappropriate to |
|befriend the afflictions                   |


     Verse 4.33
     If I agreeably honor and rely upon [others],
     All will enact benefit and happiness,
     But if I rely upon these afflictions
     In return I will be harmed by suffering.

When If wwe give presents and things to the external  enemies  in  order  to
befriend them, at the very least,  we  will  get  something  in  return.  We
Mmaybe we can placate and pacify that external enemy. We may even  get  some
happiness and some benefits in return from that external enemy.

But when if we befriend the inner enemy,  of the afflictions—, we give  them
 wwhat they it wants, we do what they it wants us  to  do—,  not  only  will
they it will not return the favour, they it will not give us  any  happiness
and benefit in return. On top of that, they will cause us more further  harm
and more damage.
The more we befriend the afflictions, the more we do  what  they  like,  the
more problems and more harm we will  receive  in  return.  Therefore  it  is
wrong to regard them as friends. But Rrather we have to regard and  look  at
them as enemies y and strive hard to destroy them. Destroying this  e  inner
enemy of the afflictions is the waymethod to achieve peace and happiness.

Actually Tthe two verses here are saying that while  it  is  appropriate  to
make friends with the external enemy, it is inappropriate and wrong to  make
friends with the inner enemy of the afflictions. The external enemy  is  not
omnipresent and is not  someone body we spend time  hang  around  wwith  all
the time. It is not there and is not something that we have to be around  or
mixed with all the time. But the afflictions  are  ever  present.  They  are
there all the time, keeping us company. . They accompany us all the time.

What Mmost people will usually do is to fight the external  enemy  and  make
friends with the afflictions. What we have to do is the opposite of that.  ,
likeAs  what the Engaging in the Bodhisattva  Deeds  says,  we  should  make
friends with the external enemy and be make enemies with the afflictions.
This verse is saying that  we  should  not  don’t  bebe   friends  with  the
afflictions.

Next is the explanation of how it  is  incorrect  and  inappropriate  to  be
patient with the afflictions.

2.   To cultivate patience towards the afflictions is unreasonable
|To cultivate tolerance for [ie. patience towards]  |
|the afflictions is unreasonable                    |
|A Reflecting on the way they act to harm the mind  |
|B Reflecting on the way they act to harm the body  |


   A. Reflecting on the way they act to harm the mind
|A Reflecting on the way they act to harm the mind  |


     Verse 4.34
     While in cyclic existence how can I be joyful and unafraid
     If in my heart I certainly prepare a place
     For this incessant enemy of long duration,
     The sole cause for the increase of collections of harms?

As Like what was discussed earlier, the afflictions have harmed  us  in  the
past for a very long time  in  the  past.  SoT  the  moment  an  afflictions
manifests in our mind, immediately we are immediately disturbed and  we  are
harmed. They bring about all the problems of this life and they  will  cause
us harm us in our future lives. They will harm our future lives.

This enemy of the affliction has been around for a long  time,   abiding  in
the centreer of our heart: .
• When If we hold in high regard in whatever the afflictions tell us to do,
   then we will be harmed in a great way.
• When If we only hold in middling regard what  for  what  the  afflictions
  tell us to do,  then we will be harmed in athe  middling way.
• When If wwe do not really hold in much regard what the  afflictions  tell
  us to do,  then we will only be harmed only in a small way.
• When If we completely disregard obey the  commands  of  our  afflictions,
  then we will never be harmed.
As long as the afflictions are abiding in the centrer of  our  heart,  there
is no way to be truly really happy in samsara. There , there is  no  way  to
be freed of worries and there is no way to be ffreed of fears in samsara.

  B.  Reflecting on the way they act to harm the body
|B Reflecting on the way they act to harm the body  |


     Verse 4.35
     How shall I ever have happiness
     If in a net of attachment within my mind
     There dwell the guardians of the prison of cyclic existence
     Who become the slayers who kill me in hell and so forth?

Our afflictions are the guardians of the our prison  of  the  three  realms.
When we are hacked and killed by the hell guardians, when we are ile in  the
hell realms, these hell guardians are the products of our afflictions.

There is no room for happiness in this life and in future lives when if  our
minds are snaredtched in theis net of the afflictions  such  as  attachment.
If we are snatched  in  the  net  of  the  afflictions,  it  is  like  being
captured. Then there is no room for happiness.
This is the discussion of how the afflictions harm the mind  and  the  body.
So, Wwe need to develop the courage to destroy the afflictions.

3. Developing strength of mind in order to destroy them
|Developing strength of mind in order to destroy    |
|them/the negative emotions.                        |


     Verse 4.36
     Therefore as long as this enemy is not overcome with certainty  before
     my very eyes,
     I shall never give up exerting myself against it.
     Self-important people who become angry even at slight short-lived harm


     Will not go to sleep until it is overcome.


                                 ~~~~~~~~~~~
Q&A

Question:  Student  1:  There  are  conventional  bodhicitta  and   ultimate
bodhicitta. What is ultimate bodhicitta? What is the definition of  ultimate
bodhicitta?

Khen Rinpoche (in English): Ultimate bodhicitta is ultimate bodhicitta.

Student 1: What is the definition of ultimate bodhicitta?
Ven Gyurme: There is a definition that I don’t know how to translate  but  I
can try.
Answer: It can be defined as aA Mahayana superior knower that is abiding  as
a special type of wisdom that is which is the  subsidence  of  duality  with
respect to the final mode of abiding of complete enlightenment.

To keep it simple, : the ultimate mind generation is  basically  the  wisdom
directly perceiving emptiness in the continuum of a Mahayana superior.
If going by definition,  it is what was mentioned earlier.



Interpreted by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme; transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek,  Vivien  Ng
& Aki Yeo; edited by Cecilia Tsong.


