Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Engaging in the Deeds of a Bodhisattva/BP2 M5 L34 final.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:52:18.094162
================================================================================


Transcript of the teachings by Khen Rinpoche Geshe  Chonyi  on  Engaging  in
the Bodhisattva Deeds, 2014

Root text: Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds by  Shantideva,  translated  by
Toh Sze Gee. Copyright: Toh Sze Gee, 2006; Revised edition, 2014.

Lesson                                                                    34
 17 June 2014


Chapter Six: Verses 6.31 - 6.49.
B.  Cultivating the patience that is intent on Dharma (cont’d)
       1.  Extensive explanation
             B.   Refuting the existence of independent causes (V. 6.31)
             C.   The need to overcome fury (V. 6.32)
        2.  Synopsis (V. 6.33 - V.6.34)
C.   Cultivating the patience that pays no heed to those who cause harm
       1.   Engaging the mind in the method of compassion (V. 6. 35 - V.
        6.38)
       2.   Arresting the causes of fury (V. 6.39 - V. 6.41)
       3.    Reflecting on unwanted occurrences being due to one’s own
        faults (V. 6.42 – V.6.49)


B.  CULTIVATING THE PATIENCE THAT IS INTENT ON DHARMA (cont’d)

  1.  Extensive explanation
     B. Refuting the existence of independent causes
        3.  Once one understands all migrators to be like  emanations  they
          see that it is   unreasonable to be angry with them
      Verse 6.31
      Hence all are governed by others,
      And through the power of that, they have no power.
      Having understood in this way, I shall not become angry
      At all things that are like emanations.

We have looked at Verse 6.31 that talks about how  it  is  inappropriate  to
become angry based on the understanding of  how,  “…  all  things  are  like
emanations.” That is when we looked a little  bit  at  the  presentation  of
causality and how effects are produced  in  dependence  upon  their  causes.
Since effects or products are produced  in  dependence  upon  their  causes,
they are other-powered and they do not have any independence.

Based on that, one can think about dependent arising on a subtler level,  by
understanding how all things are empty of existing inherently.

     C.  The need to overcome fury
     Verse 6.32
     OPINION: What will counteract it?
     Counteraction would also be inappropriate.
     RESPONSE: In dependence upon it the continuity of  suffering  will  be
     severed;
     It is not inappropriate.

Verse 6.32  is  an  indication  of  the  qualms  that  are  raised  by  most
proponents of Buddhist tenets.  When  they  hear  the  presentation  of  the
emptiness of inherent existence, that  is,  how  all  things  do  not  exist
inherently, they cannot accept it. Because, to them, if things do not  exist
inherently, then the methods and antidotes to counteract anger would not  be
valid. They would not work.

Since many of you have already studied the  module  on  tenets,  you  should
have some idea of what I have just said.  In  short,  only  the  Consequence
Middle Way School (CMWS) asserts that all phenomena are  empty  of  existing
inherently. Everybody else starting from  the  Autonomy  Middle  Way  School
(AMWS) and all the tenets below it asserts the contrary.

For the CMWS, anything and everything that exists exist in  mere  name,  are
merely imputed by thought  or  merely  designated.  As  such,  anything  and
everything that exist cannot exist inherently. They are  empty  of  existing
inherently. This  is  the  fundamental  assertion  of  the  CMWS.  But  this
assertion cannot be accepted by the  other  proponents  of  Buddhist  tenets
because it cannot fit their minds.

According to proponents of Buddhist tenets, with the exception of the  CMWS,
if things only exist as merely imputed by  thought,  this  is  the  same  as
saying that everything is just made up by the mind. That means you can  make
up anything with your mind. As long as you make it up  with  your  mind,  it
exists. This is what most proponents of the Buddhist tenets believe.

As such, if things are just made up by the mind, how then  do  you  classify
something as the truth and others as false? How can you  coherently  explain
that in dependence on these sets of causes, you will have these  effects  or
that you will definitely have these effects because there are these  set  of
causes? If you assert that everything is just merely imputed  by  mind,  you
will not be able to coherently posit cause and  effect,  truth  and  falsity
and so forth.

The vast majority of proponents of Buddhist tenets, with  the  exception  of
proponents  of  the  highest  school  (CMWS),  believe  that  anything   and
everything that exists exist from their own side. There is  something  right
there from their own side, something that makes them different from  another
phenomenon.

What is the clear sign of that? For example, a  seed  exists  from  its  own
side. It functions to produce a sprout. That ability to produce a sprout  is
inherent in the seed. It is a special  quality  and  feature  of  the  seed.
Otherwise according to these proponents, if things were just merely  imputed
by the mind—you could make up anything you want—why can't the  seed  produce
a horse or an elephant? The very fact that a seed can only produce a  sprout
is a clear sign that there is something from  the  side  of  the  seed  that
makes it different. Therefore things are not merely  imputed  by  the  mind.
There is something right there from the side of the object.

These are the common general viewpoints of the  vast  majority  of  Buddhist
tenets with the exception of the highest school, the CMWS. What they  assert
is what we think, is it not? When we think of a seed, how does it produce  a
sprout? We think that the seed really produces a  sprout  right  there  from
its own side. We cannot even imagine how that is something which  is  merely
imputed by thought. That cannot fit our mind. There is no way we will  think
that that is merely imputed by thought. There  is  something  right  there—a
seed that has a special potential to produce a  sprout.  What  we  think  is
exactly what most proponents of the Buddhist tenets assert.

In Nagarjuna’s Fundamental Treatise on Wisdom, there is an objection  raised
by the lower tenets that says,

      If things do not exist inherently, they do  not  exist  by  their  own
      nature. Then there is no way you can posit causality. There is no  way
      you can coherently explain the Four Noble Truths.

This is the position of the lower tenets:
 • If things do not exist inherently, then there is nothing right there from
   the side of the object.
 • Then there is no way you can talk about causality.
 • Then there is no way you can talk about the four noble truths.
 • If you cannot coherently explain the four noble truths, there is  no  way
   you can present the Three Jewels.

This is essentially what the first two sentences of verse 6.32  are  saying.
The objection raised there is that if things do not exist  inherently,  then
there  is  no  way  you  can  coherently  explain  how,  in  dependence   on
cultivating the antidotes, you can counteract anger.

Most proponents of Buddhist tenets, except the CMWS, objected, “If  you  say
that things do not exist inherently, that is, that there  is  nothing  there
from the side of the  object  and  that  everything  is  merely  imputed  by
thought, then:
 • There is no way you can explain the creation of things.
 • There is no way to explain how things disintegrate.
 • There is no way to explain the four noble truths.
 • As such you cannot explain causality.
 • As such you cannot coherently posit the Three Jewels.”

The CMWS has a completely different stand.  In  fact  the  CMWS  turned  the
argument against their  opponents  by  asserting,  “If  in  reality,  things
existed inherently from their own side, then:
 • There is no way you can posit causality.
 • There is no way you  can  posit  the  production  and  disintegration  of
   things.
 • There is no way that you can coherently explain the four noble truths.
 • As such there is no way you can explain the Three Jewels.”

The CMWS said that if you assert inherent existence, you  cannot  posit  all
of these things. It is only  when  you  assert  the  emptiness  of  inherent
existence can you then posit causality, production and  disintegration,  the
four noble truths, the Three Jewels and so forth.
This is the debate  between  the  CMWS  and  the  proponents  of  the  other
Buddhist tenets.

According to your view, which is a better position?  All  of  you  will  say
that the position of the Consequence Middle Way School is the best!  But  it
is insufficient to just say that theirs is the best position or that  it  is
the only truth. You have to prove it. Why is this so?

Khen Rinpoche: Somebody explain a little bit why the CMWS  position  is  the
best.

Before we can figure this out, first we have to think about the  meaning  of
inherent existence and then the emptiness of  inherent  existence.  What  do
they mean? What is inherent existence? What is  the  emptiness  of  inherent
existence?

Everybody has to think for himself the meaning  of  inherent  existence.  If
there is such a thing as inherent existence, what  is  it?  Looking  at  the
words, ‘inherent existence’ themselves, what are they trying to tell you?

Inherent  existence  means  existing  from  its  own  side,  i.e.,  existing
inherently. Isn’t it trying to tell you  that  it  can  exist  on  its  own,
independent of other factors, i.e., it can exist without depending on  other
factors? The meaning of inherent existence  is  this:  If  something  exists
inherently,
 • it can exist by its own entity
 • it exists from its own side
 • it exists on its own power
 • it is self-instituting
 • it does not have to depend on any other factors

If things existed inherently, how then can cause and effect  possibly  work?
If there is such a thing as inherent  existence  that  means  something  can
exist in and of itself, from its own side, without depending  on  any  other
factors. It can stand alone. It is self-instituting. So it is independent.

If something can exist independently, there is no need for dependency.

And if there is no need for dependency, how are  you  going  to  talk  about
cause and effect? Don’t effects depend  on  causes?  Causality  then  cannot
work if things are inherently existent.

Precisely because the  view  of  reality  is  that  things  are  dependently
originated, that they are dependent-arising, therefore things  cannot  exist
inherently. While things are empty of existing  inherently,  they  exist  as
dependently originated. Therefore only when  you  assert  the  emptiness  of
inherent existence can you then coherently posit dependent arising.

As such, by depending on the antidote,  the  practice  of  patience  and  so
forth, one can achieve the result, i.e., the abandonment of the  objects  of
abandonment such as anger. That is basically the meaning of  the  third  and
fourth lines of verse 6.32.
Although the antidote and the process of counteracting anger  do  not  exist
inherently, the process of applying the antidotes exist  conventionally.  In
dependence on that, one is able to counteract the object of abandonment,  in
this case, anger. If you counteract  anger,  you  will  not  experience  the
results of anger.

  2. Synopsis
  Verse 6.33
  So when seeing an enemy or even a friend
  Doing something incorrect,
  By thinking, “It arises from such conditions,”
  I shall remain in a happy frame of mind.


  Verse 6.34
  If things were established with one’s freedom,
  Then since no one wishes to suffer,
  Suffering would not occur
  To any embodied creature.

We have seen:
 • how things and events arise from their own causes and conditions
 • how things  and  events  are  dependently  originated  at  the  level  of
   causality
 • that there is something being dependently designated

As  such,  you  apply  this  understanding  to  a  situation  that  involves
somebody, be it a  friend  or  an  enemy,  harming  us  or  doing  something
incorrect. We have to understand that  they  are  doing  something  that  we
don’t like or think is incorrect or harming us in  some  way  because  there
must be certain causes and conditions that lead them to these  actions.  The
whole  situation,  whatever  we  think  is  inappropriate,  has  arisen   in
dependence on some other factors.

Verse 6.33 is saying that as such we should remain calm and happy  in  spite
of these different difficult situations. These situations arose  because  of
various causes and conditions.

If things and events do not arise due to their  own  causes  and  conditions
but rather if they can arise out choice, i.e., one has the freedom  to  make
a choice, why are we suffering? Although all of  us  are  the  same  in  not
wanting suffering and wanting only happiness, how come things do not go  our
way?

So obviously things and events do not arise because we want them  to  or  we
have the freedom of making a choice. No, things and events do not  arise  by
choice. Things and events arise due to the  coming  together  of  their  own
respective causes and conditions. As such whatever situations or  experience
we may encounter is the result of the coming together  of  many  causes  and
conditions. As such they are not independent. Rather  they  are  dependently
arisen.

With that, we have finished with the cultivation of  the  patience  that  is
intent on Dharma. The next division of patience is the  patience  that  pays
no heed to those who cause harm. Cultivating this patience is a  method  for
disregarding the harm that is done to us. In order to do this,  we  have  to
stop ourselves from getting angry with the harm that we receive. One of  the
methods for doing that is to generate compassion.

C.  CULTIVATING THE PATIENCE THAT PAYS NO HEED TO THOSE WHO CAUSE HARM

  1. Engaging the mind in the method of compassion
     A. Some sentient beings cause themselves  harm  due  to  the  lack  of
        understanding
     Verse 6.35
     Through lacking conscientiousness
     People even harm themselves with thorns and other things,
     And for the sake of obtaining women and the like
     They become obsessed and starve themselves.


     Verse 6.36
     And there are some who harm themselves
     By hanging themselves, leaping from cliffs,
     Eating poison and incompatible food
     And unmeritorious deeds.

These two verses are saying that when we experience harm from  somebody,  we
have to focus on  how  they  are  actually  harming  themselves.  Put  aside
getting angry with them, actually there are only  reasons  to  have  concern
for and generate compassion towards them.

     B. If once can kill even oneself due to lack of understanding,  it  is
        not amazing that they can cause harm to others
     Verse 6.37
     If, when under the influence of afflictions,
     People will even kill their treasured selves,
     How can they not cause harm
     To the bodies of others?

If people can harm themselves or take their own lives, their most  treasured
possession,  under  the  influence  of  afflictions,  then  why  are  we  so
surprised when we see them harming others including us.

     C. Therefore it is reasonable to feel compassion for them
     Verse 6.38
     Even if I virtually cannot develop compassion for such people
     Who through the arisal of afflictions
     Set out to kill me and so forth,
     The last thing I should do is to become angry with them.

The verse is saying that it is extremely  inappropriate  to  be  angry  with
those who harm us while under the influence of  their  own  afflictions.  In
reality, it is only appropriate to generate compassion  towards  such  harm-
doers. Even if we can't generate  compassion  towards  them,  the  least  we
could do is not to become angry with them.
The next section is about stopping the causes of anger.

  2. Arresting the causes of fury
     A. It is unreasonable to be angry with a child if it is in his  nature
        to lack understanding and act so
     Verse 6.39
     Even if it were the nature of the childish
     To cause harm to other beings,
     It would be inappropriate to be angry with them,
     For this would be like begrudging fire for having the nature to burn.

When somebody, an ordinary being, is harming us, the first thing to  analyse
is this, “Is the nature of that person childish or not?” If  it  is  in  the
nature of that person to be childish, it is obvious that  person  will  harm
us. Then there is no need to begrudge the  person  for  harming  us  because
that is his nature, just as you would not be angry at the fire  for  burning
your hand if you were to put your hand in it. It is the nature  of  fire  to
burn so what do you expect?

Since it is in the nature of that person to act in  that  way,  then  it  is
inappropriate and incorrect to be angry with him.

But even if it is not in the nature of that person to behave  in  that  way,
it is still inappropriate to be angry with him.

     B. It is unreasonable to be furious even if the  faults  that  brought
        about harm are adventitious
     Verse 6.40
     And even if the fault were incidental
     In sentient beings of definite nature,
     It would be inappropriate to be angry,
     For this would be like begrudging space for allowing smoke to rise  in
     it.

The analysis is of  the  harm-doer,  somebody  who  causes  us  problems  or
difficulties. We should analyse and check whether it is  in  the  nature  of
that person to harm or not. It is either in the nature of that person or  it
must be due to some temporary conditions. If it is in  the  nature  of  that
person to harm, then it is inappropriate to get angry because that would  be
like begrudging fire for burning your hand if  you  put  your  hand  in  the
fire.

If it is not in the nature of the  person  to  harm—meaning  the  person  is
generally by nature  good-hearted,  calm  and  patient—but  due  to  certain
causes and conditions, he may  sometimes  get  upset.  These  occasions  are
incidental or temporary. If it is not in the nature of the person  to  harm,
the harm is really incidental, then all the more it  is  also  inappropriate
to be angry with that person. Because being angry  with  such  a  person  is
like being angry at the sky itself rather than getting angry  at  the  smoke
that is covering the  sky.  Sometimes  when  we  burn  something,  smoke  is
produced. What we are unhappy with is the smoke, isn’t it? But the smoke  is
temporary.  However instead of getting angry at the smoke, we get  angry  at
the sky. Getting angry at the sky is like getting angry at  the  person  who
is generally by nature good-hearted and calm.

Next is analysing how anger  is  inappropriate  by  looking  at  the  actual
causes that brought about the anger and its supporting or indirect causes.

     C. By examining the direct and/or indirect causes, one  comes  to  see
        that being furious is unreasonable
     Verse 6.41
     If I become angry with the wielder,
     Although I am directly harmed by the stick and so forth,
     Then since he too is incited by hatred,
     I should be angry with the two or with the hatred.

When somebody hits us with a stick, we experience pain and  immediately  get
upset. Who are we upset with? We do not get upset with  the  stick  that  is
the actual thing that is causing us pain.  Rather we  get  upset  and  angry
with the person wielding the stick because we think that since the stick  is
wielded by the harm-doer,  the  stick  does  not  have  any  choice.  It  is
actually the person who is wielding the stick who is at fault. This is  what
we think.

If we accept this reasoning, then we should also accept  that  likewise  the
person who is harming us is under the control of his  own  afflictions  such
as his anger. Why are we upset with him  and  not  with  his  anger?  If  we
really want to be upset, we should be upset with the harm-doer’s  anger  and
not the harm-doer himself.

The next section is about understanding that whenever we get something  that
we do not like, it is our own doing and our own fault.

  3. Reflecting on unwanted occurrences being due to one’s own faults
     A.  The meaning of the actual
        1.  Reflecting on the harm brought upon you by another as one’s  own
           fault
      Verse 6.42
      Previously I caused similar harm
      To sentient beings.
      Therefore it is right for this harm to occur
      To me who is the agent of harm to sentient beings.

Whatever undesirable experience befalls us, at the end of  the  day,  it  is
the result of our own doing in the past.  Because  we  have  caused  similar
harm to others in our past lives, as a result, the  karma  is  now  ripening
upon us.

        2. The cause of suffering is a disadvantage of having taken a body
      Verse 6.43
      Both the weapon and my body
      Are causes of my suffering.
      Since he gave rise to the weapon and I to the body,
      With whom should I be angry?

When somebody hits us with a weapon and we feel  pain,  this  experience  of
pain is the coming together of the attacker and  our  own  body.  When  this
body that can experience pain is hit by somebody who is  wielding  a  weapon
then pain arises. The harm-doer and  we  ourselves,  the  victim,  are  both
causes of the suffering that we experience.

In order for anything to arise, there must be the substantial cause and  the
cooperative conditions. So the person who is attacking us and the stick  are
the co-operative conditions for producing the pain we feel and we  ourselves
with our body are the substantial cause for the  experience  of  that  pain.
Essentially  we  are  the  main  cause  for  the  arising  of  that  painful
experience.

If both the harm-doer and we  ourselves  are  equally  responsible  for  the
arising of this painful experience, then we have to ask ourselves, “Why  are
we particularly upset with the harm-doer only?” If we really feel  justified
in being upset, we should be equally upset with ourselves since  we  have  a
role to play in this painful experience.  So there is no  justification  and
no real reason for being upset with the harm-doer.

      Verse 6.44
      If in blind attachment I cling
      To this suffering abscess of a human form
      That cannot bear to be touched,
      With whom should I be angry when it is hurt?

The nature of our body is such that it is easily  harmed  and  difficult  to
sustain. This body of ours is like a huge boil. All it takes is  some  small
little condition for us to feel discomfort and pain.  When  the  temperature
goes up a little bit, just a little bit of heat, we start to  feel  hot  and
uncomfortable. But if the weather turns  a  bit  cold,  we  also  feel  very
uncomfortable. So that is the nature of our body.

Here the verse is saying that the problem  originates  with  us  because  we
have this suffering body in the first place. The body that  we  have  is  in
the nature of suffering. It is  something  that  is  easily  lost  and  very
difficult to keep alive and to sustain. That is the nature of this  body  of
ours. But due to our ignorance, we develop a very strong attachment  towards
our body.  We cling to it very strongly with the notion, “This is my  body.”
Due to that clinging, we find it very difficult to tolerate  any  harm  that
is done to this body. So why is it that we are angry at the harm-doer  when,
in fact, the problem lies with us?

        3. Seeing it as a disadvantage  of  having  created  the  causes  of
           suffering in a former life
      Verse 6.45
      The childish do not wish to suffer,
      And are greatly attached to its causes,
      Thus they are harmed by their own misdeeds;
      Why should they begrudge others?

Although nobody likes to suffer  and  everybody  wants  happiness,  however,
most people run after the causes of  suffering.  Although  they  don’t  like
suffering, they run after the causes of suffering.

Our problems and suffering are the  ripening  results  of  the  non-virtuous
actions that we have accumulated in  the  past.  Although  we  do  not  like
suffering, in the past, we had craved  for  and  ran  after  the  causes  of
suffering. We killed others, we stole their possessions and so forth.  As  a
result of these non-virtuous actions, we are experiencing problems now.

      Verse 6.46
      For example, just like the guardians of hell
      And the forest of sword leaves,
      So this is produced by my actions;
      At what should I be angry?


All the experiences  of  burning  in  the  hells,  being  tortured  by  hell
guardians and having to encounter the forest of sword-leaves  in  the  hells
and so forth are the results of our own non-virtuous karma. In short,  every
suffering and every single problem that we experience is  a  result  of  our
own non-virtue accumulated in the past. As such, it is inappropriate  to  be
upset  with  the  situation  or  with  the  harm-doer.  Rather  we  have  to
understand that all these problems are the results of our own doing.

In fact, when  somebody  harms  us,  we  are  responsible  for  that  person
engaging in non-virtue because in the first place we are the cause for  that
person to harm us. It is our own karma that instigated  this.  In  fact,  we
are causing somebody else to create non-virtue.

        4. As it is one’s  own  karma  that  presses  others  into  bringing
           suffering upon us, it is unreasonable to be furious with them
      Verse 6.47
      Having been instigated by my own actions,
      Those who cause me harm come into being.
      If due to this they should proceed to sentient beings’ hell
      Am I not destroying them?

It  is  due  to  the  instigation,  so  to  speak,  of  our  own  non-virtue
accumulated in the past that we now have a harm-doer  causing  problems  for
us. That harm-doer causing us harm is actually instigated by  our  own  non-
virtuous karma. As such, we are the one who is causing our enemies or  harm-
doers to harm to us. If that is  the  case,  aren’t  we  the  ones  who  are
sending them to the lower realms such as the hells?

If we analyse and think about this, is it not  the  case  that  we  are  the
actual harm-doers, not the other person who we  consider  to  be  the  harm-
doer?  We are actually the harm-doer  because  it  is  our  non-virtue  that
caused that person to harm us. Through  that,  the  person  is  accumulating
negative karma and will go to the hells, so we are the ones sending them  to
the lower realms. When we think about this,  this  can  really  help  us  to
practise patience.


        5. Fury itself is erroneous and thus unreasonable
      Verse 6.48
      By taking them as objects
      I purify much negativity through patience.
      But in dependence upon me they will proceed
      To hell suffering for a long time.


      Verse 6.49
      So since I am causing harm to them
      And they are benefiting me,
      Why, unruly mind, do you become angry
      Erroneously?

If we are able to practise patience in dependence on an  enemy  or  a  harm-
doer, besides being able to develop  our  patience,  we  are  also  able  to
purify negativities accumulated in the past. As such, that enemy  becomes  a
benefactor for oneself.

Due to our own non-virtue, a harm-doer comes into our  life  and  causes  us
problems. It is at the instigation, so to speak, of our own non-virtue.  The
harm-doer harms us and in so  doing,  accumulates  great  non-virtue.  As  a
result, he will have to suffer in the lower realms such as the hells  for  a
very long time. So if we think  about  it,  we  have  become  the  harm-doer
instead.

We have become the harm-doer of the person harming  us.  But  our  harm-doer
can become our benefactor if we are able to practise  patience.  If  we  are
able to cultivate and develop our patience in dependence upon  that  person,
we will complete the accumulation of our merit and purify our  negativities.
We receive all these benefits from our harm-doer.

If the harm-doer is  really  so  very  beneficial  for  us,  helping  us  to
cultivate our patience, then getting angry at him would  be  a  mistake.  So
here the verse is asking, “Why are you angry with your benefactor?”  Putting
aside getting angry with that person, we should in fact  like  and  be  very
happy with that person.

These are the various arguments that we can  use  to  develop  the  patience
that disregards any harm done to us. If we really  think  about  them,  they
are pretty useful and definitely  they  will  help  us  in  controlling  our
anger.
 • Firstly, we should recognise that when we experience harm from  somebody,
   it is incorrect to just put all the blame on  the  harm-doer  because  we
   ourselves are responsible as well. The harm-doer may be the  one  holding
   the weapon but  because we have a body, therefore we can  feel  pain.  We
   are equally responsible for that experience of pain when we are harmed by
   somebody.
 • Second, we have to think about karma. At the end  of  the  day,  whatever
   problems and suffering we experience are the  results  of  our  own  non-
   virtue. As such, we cannot point our finger at anybody else out there. We
   can only point the finger at ourselves.
 • On top of that, we have to think about  how  we  are  the  ones  who  are
   actually the cause of the harm-doer going to  hell  and  how  we  receive
   benefit from that so-called harm-doer in terms of being able to  practise
   patience in dependence on him and so forth.

If we put all these reasons together, then I guess it  is  very  useful  for
cultivating the patience that disregards harm.

There are many reasons or arguments here. The thing that we have  to  do  is
to sit down, reflect and think about them.  If we do not  use  them,  we  do
not reflect on them, then nothing can be done. They are just words.  But  if
we think about them, then they are quite useful.

This is because our instinctive reaction is that whenever  we  experience  a
problem or harm, we never think we are at fault. We are  never  responsible.
It is always the fault of something, somebody or some situation  out  there.
That is our instinctive reaction. But if we sit down  and  think  about  it,
even if we can just acknowledge that we have a role to play,  that  we  have
some responsibility, that  in  itself  alone  is  really  very  helpful  for
controlling our anger.

If we have the ability to think a little bit more deeply—how in fact we  are
the harm- doer and our enemy has become our benefactor in  that  he  is  the
best teacher for cultivating patience and  so  forth—then  our  practice  of
patience becomes more profound and deeper. It is then even possible to  view
that enemy as a teacher and to be able to respect the harm-doer. Of  course,
for those who have reached that level  of  practice,  i.e.,  being  able  to
regard the harm-doer as their benefactor, I think  from  that  day  onwards,
probably the enemy and the harm-doer will not exist for that person.

                                 ~~~~~~~~~~

Question: In Lesson 25, it was mentioned that, as stated in the Treasury  of
Manifest  Knowledge,  afflictions  such  as  ignorance,  the  view  of   the
transitory  collection,  could  be  unspecified.  What  is  the  meaning  of
“unspecified”?

Answer: In the case of ignorance, the view of the transitory collection  and
the view holding on to an extreme, they were not specified by the Buddha  in
his teachings to be either  virtuous  or  non-virtuous.  That  means  it  is
unspecified, i.e., it is neither virtuous nor non-virtuous.

Student:  If unspecified means that it is not specified as to whether it  is
virtue or non-virtue, how different is this  term  from  neutral  karma?  Is
there a term for something that can be virtuous  or  non-virtuous  such  as,
for example, the changeable mental factor of sleep?

Khen Rinpoche: I will think about this.

Interpreted by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme; transcribed by Phuah  Soon  Ek,  Patricia
Lee & Julia Koh; edited by Cecilia Tsong.

