Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Engaging in the Deeds of a Bodhisattva/BP2 M5 L27 final.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:52:14.672158
================================================================================


Transcript of the teachings by Khen Rinpoche Geshe  Chonyi  on  Engaging  in
the Bodhisattva Deeds, 2014

Root text: Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds by  Shantideva,  translated  by
Toh Sze Gee. Copyright: Toh Sze Gee, 2006; Revised edition, 2014.

Lesson                                                                    27
  22 May 2014


Seeing the Dharma as a burden. Chapter Five: Verses 5.77 - 5.82. 3. The  way
to train in the conduct of guarding the mind by  means  of  mindfulness  and
introspection (cont’d). B. The way to  train  in  the  ethics  of  gathering
virtuous  dharmas.  2.  One  should  be  knowledgeable  about  accomplishing
virtue. B. Being knowledgeable in the  way  of  befriending  others  without
incurring misdeeds. C. Being knowledgeable about performing actions  of  the
three doors.


Question: This question relates  to  the  practice  itself.  The  verses  in
Shantideva’s  text  describe  how  a  bodhisattva  should   discipline   his
thoughts, speech and actions. Can the actual practice of training  the  mind
be found in the four placements of mindfulness on the body,  feelings,  mind
and phenomena? Will meditating on the four placements of mindfulness on  the
body, feelings, mind and phenomena enable us to actually  put  the  training
into practice when we face actual situations?

Answer:  Chapter  5  is   essentially   a   chapter   on   mindfulness   and
introspection. In order to generate mindfulness and introspection, you  need
a method. The examples you brought up are methods to develop  that  kind  of
mindfulness. When developing mindfulness, we can do it on the basis  of  the
four close placements of  mindfulness,  starting  with  close  placement  of
mindfulness on the body, followed by feelings, the mind and phenomena.

When we practise the close  placement  of  mindfulness  on  the  body,  that
involves being mindful of our physical and verbal behaviour, i.e., the  kind
of posture and physical demeanour we adopt and how we speak  to  others.  We
also check the activities that we are undertaking, whether those  activities
are harmful to others or not.

The  four  close  placements  of  mindfulness  are  methods  for  developing
mindfulness. Whatever  mindfulness  and  introspection  we  develop  through
these methods, we have to be able to carry them over into  our  daily  lives
as we go about our activities.

We are not short of instructions. We have heard  so  many  instructions.  We
also know many teachings. The problem is that we do not have any  experience
of them. We have not put them into practice on a constant basis.

Ideally, before helping and working to benefit  others,  first  we  have  to
listen to the teachings, internalise and understand them. Then  we  have  to
familiarise our mind with them through constant  practice.  We  have  to  do
this in physical isolation in a retreat. Only when we gain  some  experience
of the teachings will we be in a position to help  others.  As  Je  Rinpoche
says in the lam-rim, without subduing our own mind, there is  no  basis  for
helping others and there is no way we will be able to subdue others.

Ideally, this is how it should be but we are not like that.  We  talk  about
the Dharma.  We listen to the Dharma and we know the Dharma but  we  do  not
practise it. At the same time, we want to go out and help others.

Khen Rinpoche: Actually not helping but creating  more  problems.  Going  to
talk to people when one is not subdued, how can one really subdue  and  calm
down other people? It is not possible.

For now, we are just hearing the teachings, learning  the  theory.  I  don’t
know when we are going to the isolated place. I am also not sure  when  this
will happen.

It is not that there is no benefit to  learning  the  theory.  Learning  the
theory is beneficial because having heard the theory, at a  later  point  in
time, at least we can remember, “There is such a  thing.  I  should  not  be
doing this,” or “I should be doing this.” There is this kind of benefit.

Question: Relating to Lesson 25, it was mentioned that beings  born  in  the
pure land, simply by virtue of being born there, would have the  five  super
knowledges and automatically, they would have calm abiding. Prior  to  being
born in the pure land, must they already achieve the five  super  knowledges
and calm abiding?

Answer: No need. Otherwise the number of  people  going  to  the  pure  land
would be pretty small!

What I mentioned in one of the earlier classes with regard to  calm  abiding
applies to what happens when one is already in the pure  land.  You  do  not
necessarily have to achieve calm abiding prior to going  to  the  pure  land
but I am not sure whether everyone  who  is  born  in  the  pure  land  will
achieve calm abiding. Perhaps this only applies to  those  who  are  of  the
Mahayana lineage. Those of the Mahayana lineage seem to  have  calm  abiding
automatically when they are reborn in the pure land due to the power of  the
pure land itself, i.e., the power of the place and environment where one  is
born.

It is mentioned in  Je  Rinpoche’s  explanation  of  the  qualities  of  the
Amitabha pure land that those of the Mahayana lineage will achieve the  five
super knowledges when they are born in  the  pure  land.  But  I  wonder  if
everyone  who  is  born  in  the  pure  land  will  actually  achieve  these
automatically.

Question: This relates to the twelve  links.  At  the  time  of  death,  one
generates single-pointed faith in and think of  one’s  guru,  “Guru,  please
help me. I am dying and going into non-existence.”  As  an  ordinary  being,
obviously, there is craving and grasping.

Would this single-pointed faith  in  the  guru  be  considered  craving  and
grasping that are virtuous or  is  it  still  craving  and  grasping,  i.e.,
craving for and grasping at the guru for help that are  non-virtuous?  Would
there still be actualising karma also or is it  the  power  of  the  object,
i.e., one’s guru, which propels one into a good rebirth?

Answer: In  short,  the  single-pointed  faith  in  your  own  guru  is  not
attachment. Rather it is faith. But this single-pointed faith in  your  guru
at the time of death is a condition for one of  the  virtues  that  you  had
accumulated in the past to ripen. So your single-pointed faith in your  guru
at the time of death in itself is not the cause of your next  good  rebirth.
In itself, it is not karma but it is a condition  for  one  of  the  virtues
that you must have already accumulated in the past to ripen.

Student: So the actualising karma  is  still  something  else.  (My  single-
pointed faith in the guru at the time of death) is just a condition.

Khen Rinpoche: Yes.

SEEING THE DHARMA AS A BURDEN

Question: In spite of having been a Buddhist for over ten years, whatever  I
do, 99% of the time, my motivation is to  be  loved  and  respected  so  the
motivation is non-virtuous.

So if I follow Shantideva’s advice, should I remain like a piece of wood?

As ordinary people, we use the Dharma to  solve  relationship  problems,  to
overcome our depression and illnesses and so forth. We  have  not  given  up
this life and the eight worldly concerns.

Now we are studying this text by  Shantideva  about  the  practices  of  the
bodhisattvas.  A bodhisattva  is  someone  who  has  calm  abiding  and  has
generated  bodhicitta.  But  based  on  my  conversations  with  some  older
students, there seem to be two mind sets:
1. feeling disheartened because the mind still grasps at this  life  despite
   having listened to the Dharma for so many years, or
2.  feeling disheartened because one still engages  in  activities  that  do
   not accord with the bodhisattva’s way of life.

So instead of being inspired by the teachings in this text,  I  find  myself
using the teachings to beat myself up. How do I stop doing that?  How  do  I
adopt an attitude whereby I can benefit from the teachings in this text?

Khen Rinpoche: You said you are being beaten by the teachings? For over  ten
years, the teachings became a cane for you? That is suffering! You  must  be
quite miserable for over ten years! So  long!  Sorry  about  that.  I  think
there are some verses that respond to that.

Right in the beginning of the lam-rim, there is the advice on how we  should
listen to the teachings. The example of a sick patient is often  given.  The
patient is sick and she knows that she is sick. She goes to various  doctors
asking for opinions and  advice.  But  after  getting  all  the  advice  and
medicine, she stores up the medicine without taking it.
This is like  people  who  listen  to  many  teachings  but  feel  that  the
teachings they have heard are a burden for them. When this happens, this  is
a clear sign that these people have not practised  whatever  teachings  they
have received. This is why they feel burdened by the teachings.

We need to analyse whatever teachings we have heard and studied. We need  to
think about them until we get a taste of  them.  We  ‘taste’  the  teachings
through reflection. Until we get that experience  and  until  we  taste  the
teachings, all the teachings will  become  like  a  burden.  Whether  it  is
taking initiations or with regard to whatever  vows  we  have  received,  we
will feel that they are all burdensome.

There are some people who have  a  lot  of  faith.  This  is  very  helpful,
whether it is single-pointed faith in the guru, faith in the  guru’s  advice
and the guru’s speech or single-pointed conviction in the workings of  karma
and its effects. When one has  such  conviction  and  faith  in  the  guru’s
speech, the guru’s advice or the workings of karma, this  makes  a  positive
difference to the mind.

Then  one  would  not  find  these  teachings  or  advice   a   burden   but
inspirational instead. When one does not have such faith  and,  in  addition
to that, when one does not have any experience of the teachings,  i.e.,  not
having tasted the teachings through critically thinking about and  analysing
them, then the Dharma will feel like a burden.

Later on in the text, we will  see  a  verse  that  mentions  that  when  we
practise the Dharma, we have to do it from our own side. We  should  not  be
practising the Dharma because other people are doing  so  and  we  are  just
following them, i.e., we are just a follower. This is wrong.

Rather we have to see for ourselves the purpose of Dharma practice and  then
we voluntarily and happily do it from our own side. This is how  the  Dharma
should be practised.

The goal and the motivation are so important. In the beginning of  the  lam-
rim, before the actual subject matter is discussed, we  are  taught  how  to
listen  to  and  how  to  teach  the  Dharma.  There  is  a  very  extensive
explanation of this.

It all depends on our motivation and what we are looking for.  When  we  are
listening to the teachings, we are taught to abandon  the  three  faults  of
the vessel and we have to cultivate  the  six  attitudes.  It  is  extremely
important that we start with this. For us, we do not  even  get  that  right
from the beginning. Then of course it is going to be difficult.

It is true that most of the teachings we have heard and learnt  are  out  of
our reach and there are practices that we do not presently have the  ability
to train in. Nevertheless, we have to see the purpose  of  those  teachings;
how they fit into the grand scheme of things, what is their  purpose,  their
goal and so forth. From our own side, we  must  not  see  the  Dharma  as  a
burden. This is important. The practices that we cannot  train  in  now  are
the practices that we can aspire to be able to train in  in  the  future  by
making aspirational prayers.

The main problems for us are our bad habits coupled with  our  laziness.  We
do not bother to think about what is going to happen to  us  in  our  future
lives. We are just thinking about this life. Because of this, we are  stuck.
It is not that we do not know the Dharma. It is not that we do not have  the
ability to practise the Dharma. We have both these  conditions  but  we  are
stuck  because  of  our  bad  habits   coupled   with   our   laziness   and
procrastination. We are primarily interested in this  life  and  we  do  not
bother about our next life.

In Tibetan, the people who are only concerned  about  the  affairs  of  this
life are called tshur tong wa. Literally  this  means  those  who  are  just
focusing on this side, i.e., this life and not looking on  the  other  side,
i.e., the next life. There is this group of people.

When we analyse this further, there are some people who are not  looking  at
this life only. They do not even think about tomorrow.  All  their  concerns
revolve around what they see right now. There are people who  are  concerned
just with today. They do not really care about what  will  happen  tomorrow.
To them, “I am just going to spend my day like that. I am happy today.  That
is all that matters.” Many people are like that!

Having faith is also very important. There is a quotation that says,  “Faith
is the prerequisite of all good qualities— / A procreator of them ….”[1]  So
without faith, there is no hope and there is no way we can cultivate  virtue
and white dharma.

What this student said is the exact truth. This is the reality and  this  is
the situation. To be able to practise the transformational Dharma  that  can
actually move our minds is very difficult. To be able to make  our  practice
pure is  also  very  difficult.  Therefore  it  is  emphasised  and  clearly
explained many times in the teachings what the boundary between  Dharma  and
non-Dharma is and what the signs of someone who  is  practising  the  Dharma
are.

If the practice is an  antidote  to  the  afflictions,  it  is  Dharma.  Any
practice that hurts the afflictions is Dharma. So anyone who  is  practising
the Dharma is harming his or her afflictions. Over  time  the  mind  becomes
more subdued and pacified. This is a real sign that the  person  is  a  true
Dharma practitioner.

On the other hand, if one thinks that one is a Dharma practitioner  and  one
proclaims oneself to be a Dharma practitioner but whatever  one  does—be  it
studying, listening to, meditating  and  reflecting  on  or  practising  the
Dharma—in the end,  all  these  activities  only  serve  to  increase  one’s
afflictions, then one is not a Dharma practitioner at all. One may have  the
appearance of a Dharma practitioner but in  reality  one  is  not  a  Dharma
practitioner at all. So this is a case where the person  is  practising  the
Dharma but that practice does not become Dharma at all. This is  a  case  of
the medicine that is meant to heal becoming a poison. Then there is  nothing
that can be done. Most of us are like  that.  Many  teachings,  rather  than
benefiting us, are turned by us into poison.
Khen Rinpoche: They become poison, become painful, become a burden.

Therefore it is really important that we must try  to  make  sure  from  the
very beginning that we do not end up like that.

This is why in the Lam Rim Chen Mo, right  in  the  beginning,  Je  Rinpoche
gave these extensive explanations  of  how  we  should  actually  study  and
listen to the Dharma. This is why when we practice according to  the  stages
of the path to enlightenment, we are told to adjust our motivation from  the
very beginning when we first receive and hear the teachings.

There is this explanation of how we  should  listen  to  the  teachings  and
immediately thereafter  there  is  the  topic  on  correctly  relying  on  a
virtuous friend, which essentially talks about generating faith.

Having set our motivation in the beginning and  generated  faith,  there  is
the exhortation imploring and  persuading  us  to  practise  the  Dharma  by
reflecting  on   the   topic   of   the   human   life   of   freedoms   and
endowments—identifying what it is,  what  the  great  meaningful  objectives
are, which we can  achieve,  and  the  great  difficulty  to  have  such  an
opportunity again.

When we think of these topics in this way in accordance with the  stages  as
outlined,  going  through  the  topic,  the  human  life  of  freedoms   and
endowments, we will experience only happiness. We will feel  so  happy  just
to be able to listen to the teachings because we realise their  preciousness
and rarity.

This is why when we train our mind according to the stages of  the  path  to
enlightenment, I do not think that we will feel  the  Dharma—including  this
text by Shantideva—burdensome.

When we see these teachings and know how to think, they  only  increase  our
faith  in  and  appreciation  of  the  teachings  and  also  strengthen  our
determination to practise them.

As pointed out by this student,  in  essence  what  we  need  is  analytical
meditation. Simply  hearing  and  studying  the  teachings  alone  will  not
prevent the Dharma from appearing burdensome to us. When we meditate on  and
critically  analyse  the  lam-rim  topics,  through  analytical  meditation,
starting with  the  topic  of  correctly  relying  on  the  virtuous  friend
followed by the human life of freedoms and endowments  and  then  death  and
impermanence, with that experience, we will not feel that the  Dharma  is  a
burden.

So the heart summary is this.

Khen Rinpoche: There are so many summaries but the  heart  summary  is  this
one.

If you want to know the solution to all these problems,  including  stopping
yourself from feeling that the Dharma is a burden,  the  heart  solution  is
that you need to reflect and engage in analytical  meditation  on  the  lam-
rim.
3.  THE WAY TO TRAIN IN THE  CONDUCT  OF  GUARDING  THE  MIND  BY  MEANS  OF
   MINDFULNESS AND INTROSPECTION (cont’d)

   B. The way to train in the ethics of gathering virtuous dharmas
       2.  One should be knowledgeable about accomplishing virtue.
            B.  Being knowledgeable in the way of befriending others without
           incurring   misdeeds
                  5.  The benefits of acting in a way that others enjoy


      Verse 5.77
      All initiatives are a source of joy
      That would be rare even if it could be bought with money.
      Therefore, the excellent qualities causing others [joy]
      Causes the enjoyment of the happiness of joy.


      Verse 5.78
      I shall suffer no losses in this life
      And in future lives shall find great happiness.
      But misdeeds will make me unhappy and bring suffering,
      And in future lives I shall find great suffering.

In whatever we do—whether we are doing it for ourselves or we are  doing  it
for others—what exactly are we seeking? If we really think about it, we  are
seeking happiness, joy and inner satisfaction.

For the bodhisattvas, every single thing they do  with  their  body,  speech
and mind is only to make others happy. This is  their  goal  and  everything
they do with their body, speech and mind  is  to  achieve  this  goal.  When
others are happy, then by the way, the bodhisattvas are also  satisfied  and
experience much inner peace and happiness.  This situation of being able  to
generate happiness in others and oneself is said to be priceless. It  is  so
priceless that it cannot be bought.

When we see  others  doing  well—accumulating  merit,  engaging  in  virtue,
having   many  qualities,  enjoyments   as   well   as   pleasant   physical
appearances, possessing  good  things  and  having  good  things  happen  to
them—and we can rejoice in their good fortune, we ourselves will  also  feel
real happiness in the heart. The teachings here are telling us of this  very
special kind of joy, happiness and  great  satisfaction  that  we  ourselves
will feel  when  we  truly  rejoice  in  the  good  things  of  others—their
qualities, virtue, possessions and enjoyments.  By  rejoicing  in  the  good
things of others, it will not cause our  own  possessions  and  whatever  we
desire to degenerate. When we are rejoicing in this way, we are not  jealous
of the good things of others and thus, have great peace in our heart.  As  a
result, our mind is also able to remain very  calm,  steady  and  happy.  We
would also get good rebirth in our future lives.

But instead of rejoicing, when we see others doing  better  than  ourselves,
having better looks, more possessions and more qualities, we  feel  jealous,
upset or angry, thinking, “Why him and not me?” We  develop  this  sense  of
negative competitiveness wanting to compete with this person.
What happens then is that  in  this  life,  we  will  be  very  unhappy  and
disturbed.  We cannot remain calm. It is said that we will  also  accumulate
the karma to experience suffering in our future lives.

The verse here is an example. It is not a burden is it? It is not as  if  it
is a heavy load that we would have  to  bear,  feeling  so  miserable  about
trying to practise what the  verse  says.  It  is  just  an  observation  of
reality. When we see someone who is doing better than ourselves—having  more
wealth, better looks, more virtue and so forth—if  we  do  not  rejoice  but
feel jealous instead, what does that do to us? Is it not the  case  that  we
will become very miserable and very unhappy?

However, if we feel happy for this person and is able to think that  she  is
experiencing the fruitional effects of the virtue that she  had  accumulated
in the past, then the mind is calm.  With  that  kind  of  attitude,  it  is
easier to make friends with her. Otherwise, we  become  very  miserable  and
unhappy and it is very difficult to make friends with that person.  Is  this
not obvious? Is this knowledge a burden?

The teachings in this text by Shantideva are all wonderful advice. They  are
not a burden. We do not want to follow this advice as we are blinded by  our
ignorance. If we follow this advice, it will definitely be beneficial.

In short, these two verses are saying that when we see the  good  things  of
others, do not be jealous because it is pointless and meaningless to do so.


Next is being knowledgeable about performing actions of the three doors:
1. How to act when speaking
2. How to act when viewing
3. Connecting oneself solely with virtuous karma

           C.  Being knowledgeable about performing  actions  of  the  three
           doors
                1. How to act when speaking


      Verse 5.79
      When talking I should speak from my heart and on what is related.
      Making the meaning clear and the speech pleasing.
      I should abandon attachment or hatred,
      And speak in gentle tones appropriately.

When someone asks us a question, we should answer sincerely and speak in  an
agreeable manner that fits the mind of the person.

We should speak coherently so that what we say in the earlier  part  of  the
conversation is connected with  what  we  say  in  the  later  part  of  the
conversation. What we say has to make sense. When the beginning and  end  of
the conversation are unconnected, when we  contradict  ourselves,  then  the
other party will not believe us. We have to speak clearly in a way  that  is
easily understood by the other person.

This verse is also saying that we should speak  without  the  motivation  of
strong attachment to our own side or our own position. We  should  also  not
have hatred or anger towards others.

Our tone of voice has to be gentle and we are also advised that  the  length
of our reply or conversation should be appropriate, i.e., not  too  long  or
too short. There are people who, once they start talking, they  never  stop.
After a while the listener will get tired. At  the  other  extreme,  certain
people will only give you a monosyllabic answer when you ask them  anything.
 As to the appropriate length of a conversation, this is something  we  have
to figure out for ourselves by watching the facial expression of the  person
we are talking to.

                  2.  How to act when viewing


      Verse 5.80
      When beholding someone with my eyes,
      Thinking, “I shall attain buddhahood
      By depending upon this being,”
      I should look at him candidly with love.

The teachings here are telling us to look upon  others  with  affection.  We
can remind ourselves that the person we see is the object for whom  we  will
generate   bodhicitta,   practise   the   six   perfections   and    achieve
enlightenment. The teachings state that we should look  at  sentient  beings
with the same affection and love as a mother looking at her child.

Our engagement with others have to be  straightforward  and  honest  without
any deceit or guile.

Next is connecting oneself  solely  with  virtuous  karma  which  has  three
parts:
A. Giving to the special fields for giving
B. Virtuous karma occurs through its own power
C. Entering into higher and higher  virtues  and  having  examined  whether
   there is a purpose, acting upon it

             3.  Connecting oneself solely with virtuous karma
                  A.  Giving to the special fields for giving


      Verse 5.81
      Always being motivated by affection
      Or being motivated by the antidotes,
      In the fields of excellent qualities, benefit, and suffering,
      Great virtues will come about.

When giving to the special fields for giving, there are a  few  features  to
be considered:
   • The feature of time is indicated by the word, “always.” This means
     that one has to always give, doing this continually.
   • The feature of the attitude is indicated by the word, “affection.”
     This means having strong love and affection or faith and refers to
     having a very strong aspiration.
   • The feature of the antidote means this: for example, when we are
     practising generosity, all the effort that we put into this practice
     must become an antidote to our miserliness. Similarly, when we are
     practising ethics, our practice must be an antidote to the discordant
     class or the opposite of ethics.
    • The field of “excellent qualities” refer to  the  Buddha,  Dharma  and
      Sangha.
    • The field of “benefit” primarily refers to one’s parents.
    • The field of “suffering” refers  to  those  sentient  beings  who  are
      suffering.
By giving to these various objects, we accumulate great virtue.

These are the factors that make virtue strong and powerful:
 • The feature of time: When we engage in the same virtue continually  over
   and over again, this makes the virtue very strong.
 • The motivation or attitude: When the motivation  behind  the  virtue  is
   virtuous and strongly generated from the depths of our heart, this makes
   the virtue very powerful.
 • When the virtue is directed at special and  powerful  objects  such  as,
   “the fields of excellent qualities, benefit and suffering,”  the  virtue
   created will also be very strong.
 • When the virtue created becomes an antidote to the  various  afflictions
   or an antidote to the discordant classes of that virtue, this also makes
   the virtue very powerful.

However, some of these features also apply to non-virtues:
 • When we engage in non-virtue continually, then the  non-virtue  will  be
   very strong.
 • When we engage in non-virtue motivated by very strong  afflictions  from
   the depths of our heart or with the strong intention to engage  in  such
   non-virtue, then this will also make the non-virtue very strong.

                  B. Virtuous karma occurs through its own power


      Verse 5.82
      I should always perform actions
      Endowed with skill and joy.
      In all actions
      I should not depend upon anyone else.

When we engage in virtue, we should do it from our own side,  based  on  our
understanding of the situation in  reality  and  not  out  of  a  desire  to
imitate someone else. When we see someone engaging in virtue and we  try  to
copy and follow this person’s example, we are not going to achieve  anything
meaningful.

Whatever practice we are doing, be it generating  bodhicitta,  the  practice
of the six perfections and so forth, first, we have to know exactly what  we
are doing and how to go about doing it. We  have  to  gain  the  faith  that
comes from understanding the practice. We need to  know  all  the  essential
points. Then  we  engage  in  the  practice  wholeheartedly  based  on  such
understanding and practice consistently.

Our practice has to be based on a thorough understanding of reality and  the
nature of virtue—what is virtue, what makes virtue powerful,  what  kind  of
motivation we should have, how we should generate such a motivation  and  so
forth. At the end of the practice,  we  should  know  how  to  dedicate  the
merit, what the dedication is for and so forth. The practice has to be  done
with an understanding of all these essential points from one’s own side.  We
cannot practice by just copying what someone else is doing.

Furthermore when we engage in virtue, we have to do it  from  our  own  side
without needing someone to prompt, encourage us or persuade  us  to  do  so.
Engaging in virtue should not be like doing a job where you are waiting  for
a task to be assigned to you.

So before any practice, we have to know:
    • what exactly we are going to do
    • how we are going to go about doing it
    • the essential points of the practice
We have to believe in and have faith in the  practice.  Then  you  will  see
exactly, “It is like  that.  It  is  good.”  Then  naturally  we  will  have
enthusiasm and we will want to do the practice from our own  side.  We  will
not need anyone to tell us to do our practice.

We must engage in virtue wholeheartedly from your own side  without  needing
someone to persuade us to  do  so.  We  cannot  outsource  our  practice  to
someone  else.  For  instance,  we  may  say,  “I  am  going  to  engage  in
prostrations” and then we get someone else to do prostrations for us  or  we
get someone else to offer our water bowls on our behalf.

When we really cannot do  the  practice  for  whatever  reason,  this  is  a
different matter. Otherwise we have to do the practice  ourselves.  This  is
the meaning of the last sentence of the verse, “I  should  not  depend  upon
anyone else,” i.e., we have to do it ourselves and not ask someone  else  to
do it on our behalf.

           C.  Entering into higher and higher virtues and having  examined
              whether there is a purpose, acting upon it


      Verse 5.83
      The perfections such as generosity
      Are progressively more exalted,
      But for a little I should not forsake something greater.
      Principally I should consider the welfare of others.

This verse is extremely complicated. I will talk  about  this  in  the  next
lesson. There seem to be an internal contradiction between verses  5.42  and
5.83.


      Verse 5.42
      But if I am unable to do this when involved in fear or
      Celebrations and the like, then I should relax.
      Thus it has been taught that at times of giving,
      You may be indifferent to ethics.

Verse 5.42 talks about leaving the practice of ethics in equanimity when  we
are primarily focusing on generosity. There was this discussion.

Interpreted by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme; transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek,  Vivien  Ng
& Aki Yeo; edited by Cecilia Tsong.
-----------------------
[1]  Tsong-kha-pa,  The  Great  Treatise  on  the  Stages  of  the  Path  to
Enlightenment, Lam Rim Chen Mo, Volume One. (Ithaca,  New  York:  Snow  Lion
Publications, 2000), 80.


