Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Engaging in the Deeds of a Bodhisattva/BP2 M5 L02 final2.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:52:18.668215
================================================================================


Transcript of the teachings by Khen Rinpoche Geshe  Chonyi  on  Engaging  in
the Bodhisattva Deeds, 2014

Root text: Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds by  Shantideva,  translated  by
Toh Sze Gee. Copyright: Toh Sze Gee, 2006; Revised edition, 2014.

Lesson    2                                                               11
February 2014


The four seals. Chapter 1, Verses 1.1 to 1.5: Expression of homage  (meaning
of Sugata, the excellent abandonments and  excellent  realisations).  Pledge
of composition. Expression of humility. Actual explanation of the stages  of
the path.


THE FOUR SEALS

I had talked about the fFour sSeals in the past. I think this  is  something
All of you all should think about them  on  a  regular  basis.  The  f  Four
sSeals are:
1. All compounded phenomena are impermanent.
2. All contaminated phenomena are in the nature of suffering (or misery).
3. All phenomena are selfless and empty.
4. Nirvana is peace.

The treatises ext  on  logic  reasoning  composed  by  the  great  logicians
Dignaga and Dharmakirti stated that because it  is  impermanent,   therefore
it is in the nature of  suffering.  What  they  are  trying  to  saying   is
similar to the fpretty much the same as  the  Four  sSeals.  I  have  talked
about this before. In the text on reasoning, it is  mentioned  that  because
it is impermanent, it is in the nature of  suffering.  But  what  they  said
this is not meant to  be  taken  literally,  i.e.,   in  that  just  because
something that is impermanent, it is in the nature of suffering. We have  to
understand the import of that statement.

Why is it that contaminated phenomena are in the nature of suffering?
TThis is because they are impermanent.
This is what we have to figure out. Once we understand this,  then  we  move
on to the next seal.

      (Bone.
      Because it is in the nature of suffering, therefore) it is selfless.

Of course  Tthere  are  many  ways  to  interpret  and  to  understand  this
statement.  and  there  are  many  ways  to  understand  it.  But  Tthis  is
something  we  need  to  think  about  and  come  to  an  understanding  for
ourselves.

      Because it is impermanent, it  is  in  the  nature  of  suffering  (or
      misery).
      And And because it is in  the  nature  of  suffering,  misery,  it  is
      selfless.

Once you have understand all of these assertions, then you  will  one  comes
to understand how nirvana is peace.
Although there is no n’t a direct statement directly alluding to this  that,
but,  in meaning, it can be understood that:

      B because it is selfless, therefore nirvana is peace.


This is an extremely important and fundamental point to understand. In  fact
this is the very fundamental vital  point is , the very root of  the  entire
Buddhadharma. When  you  we  understand  for  yourselfves  how  nirvana  (or
liberation) actually exists and how it is possible  for  you  ourselves  tto
achieve it, this is when you that,  then  we  truly  reallybegin   start  to
experience taste the teachings  of  the  Buddha’s  teachings.  WSo  whatever
learning and studying  you   we  do  is  to  move  your  mind  towards  that
understanding. Once you you have gained that kind  of  conviction,  it  will
helps you  to  have  a  belief  and  faith  in  the  Ddharma,  and  to  have
aspireations  to want to actualisze it.

These fFour sSeals attest a doctrine to be a Buddhist doctrine  .  sSo  they
se Four Seals are very important and you . It is something that  you  should
reflect on them continually.


                                 ~~~~~~~~~~

Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds
I have talked about the title of the text and the translator’s  homage.  Now
we start with the actual text that . The actual text starts with the  author
paying homage.

EXPRESSION OF HOMAGE

      Verse 1.1
      Respectfully I pay homage to the Sugatas  who  are  endowed  with  the
      dharmakaya,
      As well as to their children, and to all who are worthy of homage.
      Here I shall describe how to  engage  in  the  vows  of  the  Sugatas’
      children,
      The meaning  of  which  I  have  summarized  in  accordance  with  the
      scriptures.


What are the objects to whom the author is paying homage to?
The objects that he is paying homage to are the Three Rare Sublime Ones,  or
the Three Jewels, together with all those who are worthy of homage.
After paying homage, he states his intention of composing this text.

Meaning of “Sugata”
In the commentary there is an explanation of the word “Sugata”.
In English,  it is translated as ‘gone to Gone to bliss.’ Bliss.
In Tibetan,  it is made up of two words, d“De” and s“Sheg”.
• “De” is translated as ‘bliss.’ , Eessentially it means something  that  is
  good and , something wonderful.
• “Sheg” means is to go,  or to have gone, or to have become that that.

~ The excellent abandonments
“De” is translated as bliss. The bliss here  refers  to  something  that  is
good.  The goodness referred to in de or bliss here refers to the  excellent
abandonments and the excellent realiszations.
In terms of the abandonments, they are usually described  in  terms  of  the
three characteristics or /features.

|Three features of the     |Meanings                            |
|excellent  abandonments   |                                    |
|Abandonment               |Having abandoned the afflictive     |
|                          |obscurations.                       |
|Well abandoned            |Abandoning the objects of           |
|                          |abandonment such that they will it  |
|                          |would never arise again..           |
|Thorough abandonment      |Abandoning the two obscurations     |
|                          |completely..                        |


Abandonment here refers to having abandoned the afflictive obscurations.
Well abandoned refers to abandoning the object of abandonment such  that  it
would never arise again.
Thorough abandonment refers to abandoning the two obscurations completely.
Why are there these three features? There is a purpose  behind  these  three
features.

• The first feature of  abandonment  is  abandonment,   which  means  having
  abandoned the afflictive obscurations. This is to  set  the  Buddha  apart
  from  those  non-Buddhist  practitioners  who  have  achieved  the  actual
  concentrations, such as the concentrations of the formless realm and  even
  in fact the highest level of of samsara  which  is  called  the  pPeak  of
  sSamsara. Theose sentient beings do not have any manifest afflictions.  So
  Tthey have achieved this at kind of quality. But the abandonment  achieved
  by the that the Buddha has achieved is is very different from thisat.

• The second  feature  of  abandonment  is  well  abandoned  ment  (or  good
  abandonment). This is to distinguish the quality of abandonment  that  the
  Buddha has achieved from that as  achieved  by  opposed  to  some  of  the
  Hinayana superiors. In the explanations of the Hinayana paths,  there  are
  individuals who have achieved the Hinayana superior  paths.  Among  Within
  those who have achieved the superior paths, there are different categories
  of beings. There are,  some who are called stream-enterers  and  some  are
  called  once-returners.[1]*.  Although  the  stream-enterers   and   once-
  returners are Hinayana superiors, they have not yet abandoned the seeds of
  the innate afflictions,  i.e.,   (the  innate  apprehension  of  a  self).
  Because this is so, of that they do take  rebirths  in  cyclic  existence.
  uUnlike the Buddha who has achieved the good  abandonment  whereby  .  his
  objects of abandonment The things that he has abandoned wwill never return
  and arise againreturn, and will never arise again.

•
*(BP1 Lesson 2) Stream- enterer refers to a superior being on  the  Hinayana
path of seeing, who will never be reborn in the three  lower  realms  again.
Once-returner refers to a superior being on the Hinayana path of  meditation
who will return to the desire realm only one more time).
So the purpose of explaining  the  second  feature  of  abandonment  -  well
abandonment- is to distinguish the abandonment that the Buddha has  achieved
from the abandonment that is achieved by some of the Hinayana superiors.
• The third feature of abandonment is thorough abandonment ( oor  literally,
  abandonment without leaving anything behind).  This is to distinguish  the
  quality  of  the  abandonment  that  the  Buddha  has  achieved  from  the
  abandonments achieved by the hHearer  foe  destroyers  and  the  sSolitary
  rRealiszer foe destroyers.
•  Thorough  abandonment  means  having  abandoned   both   the   afflictive
  obscurations    and    non-afflictive    obscurations    (or     knowledge
  obscurations)*.[2] This  is  kind  of  abandonment  that  the  Buddha  has
  achieved is something that the hHearer arhats and the sSolitary rRealiszer
  arhats have not achieved.

So apart *(BP1 Lesson 2) All the faults we possess are included in  the  two
obstructions,  obstructions  to  liberation  (also   known   as   afflictive
obstructions)    and    obstructions    to    omniscience    (non-afflictive
obscurations). Obstructions to  liberation  such  as  ignorance,  anger  and
attachment prevent us from attaining liberation from samsara.  The  imprints
of the afflictions are obstructions to omniscience;  they  prevent  us  from
realising all objects of knowledge directly and simultaneously.
We are trying to gain a little bit of understanding of  the  term  Sugata  -
gone to bliss. The bliss here refers to something which  is  good,  and  the
goodness here is  made  up  of  the  excellent  abandonments  and  excellent
realizations.
We have been talking about the excellent abandonments and you need  to  know
that. On top of  from  the  quality  of  abandonment  that  the  Buddha  has
achieved, we can talk about this quality of abandonment in  terms  of  their
three features, i.e.,  ;  which  are  abandonment,  well  abandonedment  and
thorough abandonment.
These three features of the  excellent  abandonments  that  the  Buddha  has
achieved are to enable us:
• -  to understand that the Buddha’s quality  of  excellent  abandonment  is
  different from the abandonment achieved by  those  who  have  reached  the
  pPeak of sSamsara.
• -  to distinguish the Buddha’s quality of excellent abandonment  from  the
  quality of abandonment achieved by the stream-enterers and once-returners.
• -  to distinguish the Buddha’s quality of excellent abandonment  from  the
  abandonments achieved by the hHearers  arhats  and  sSolitary  rRealiszers
  arhats.

When If you know some of these points, then  and when you  think  about  the
Buddha in terms of what he has abandoned, then you  can  see  that  how  the
Buddha is different. The quality of excellent abandonment  that  the  Buddha
he has achieved is very different from those achieved by the non-Buddhists.

In order to appreciate these points, then first one would have  to  actually
know some of these things and you can only do so come to  know  about  these
things tthrough learning.
In order for you to fully appreciate the points that I have just  explained,
you have to know the presentation of the  concentrations  of  the  form  and
formless realmsabsorption (concentration), the process for of  reaching  the
pPeak of sSamsara, the presentation of  the  Hinayana  path,  the  different
kinds of Sangha, what exactly is a stream-enterer, a once-returner and a  s,
Hinayana foe destroyers (or hearer arhat and sSolitary  rRealiszer  arhatand
Hearer)). Ideally we should be explaining all ththeese topics but but it  is
really not possible to do so because we do not n’t have the time.

Khen Rinpoche (spoke in English): Not possible.
If you want a simple explanation, you can just take the Sugata to mean  ‘gbe
gone to bbliss,’ , and the with bliss here  referring  s  to  the  excellent
abandonments and the excellent realiszations.

Khen Rinpoche (spoke in English): So it cCan be very simple or it , and  can
be very complicated. So like that.

~ The excellent realisations
So Sugata is be gone to bliss. The bliss here refers to  something  that  is
good.  The goodness here refers to the excellent abandonments and  excellent
realizations.
When If you look at the bliss  in  terms  of  the  excellent  realiszations,
again we can look at them it in terms of three features.

|Three features of    |Meanings*                                |
|excellent            |                                         |
|realiszations[3]     |                                         |
|1.  Exalted kKnower  |The omniscient wisdom of the Buddha that |
|                     |directly sees the meaning of             |
|                     |selflessness. This knower is superior to |
|                     |a non-Buddhist.                          |
|2.  Stable eExalted  |The stable wisdom of the Buddha that     |
|kKnower              |directly sees the meaning of selflessness|
|                     |and is the antidote to the innate        |
|                     |afflictions and their seeds. This knower |
|                     |is superior to the superior beings of the|
|                     |Hinayana path, the stream-enterers and   |
|                     |once-returners.                          |
|3.  Thorough eExalted|The wisdom possessed by a buddha that    |
|kKnower              |completely understands all the three     |
|                     |paths (the paths of the hearers, solitary|
|                     |realiszers and bodhisattvas) who is also |
|                     |and that is also able to teach it        |
|                     |directly to others. The Sugata is thus   |
|                     |superior to the arhat or foe destroyer.  |


*(BP1 Lesson 2)

These terms are found in the texts of Dignaga and Dharmakirti.  The  purpose
of explaining the excellent realiszations in terms of the three features  is
pretty much tthe same as before. It is to set apart the quality of  the  the
Buddha’s’s  quality  of  realiszations  apart   from   others.   For   those
indiviAgain back to those individuals who have achieved the  formless  realm
absorptions, including those who  have  reached  the  highest  level  of  in
samsara,  which is called the pPeak of sSamsara, that in fact  it  is  quite
an a feat  achievement  in  itself.  But  when  compared  to  the  excellent
realisations of the Buddha’s realization,  it  is  nothing.  Although  these
individuals have achieved the highest possible level state of  existence  in
samsara, they have not realiszed thusness (or selflessness)  directly.

• The first feature is an Why is it an Exalted Knower?  It  is  an  eExalted
  kKnower that that directly knows or perceives thusness (, or you could say
  the Exalted Knower that directly perceives selflessness, the truth).
• The second feature is  the  stable  exalted  knower.  The  Stable  Exalted
  Knower. Again Hinayana superiors, the back to the example of  the  stream-
  enterers and the once-returners, they  are  Hinayana  superiors  and  they
  hhave perceived the truth  the  truth  ddirectly.  However,  their  direct
  realiszation of selflessness is not as stable as the  realisation  of  the
  Buddha’s realization. Why? Because  alAlthough  they  have  realiszed  the
  truth directly, but nevertheless ttheir direct realisation of selflessness
  is not powerful enough y still have not  abandoned  or  to  destroyed  the
  seeds of their  innate self-grasping  yet.  So  uUnlike  the  Buddha,  the
  stream-enterers  and   once-returners   have   not   achieved   a   stable
  realiszation.
Next is Thorough Exalted Knower.
(Ven Gyurme: I said Exalted Knower. You could also look at it  in  terms  of
knowing as a noun or as a verb.)
• The Buddha has a wisdom that is  termed  the  tThorough  eExalted  kKnower
  because he sees each and every thing exactly as it is, including the paths
  of the three vehicles. , and Aas such,  he  can  work  perfectly  for  the
  benefits of the sentient beings; unlike the hHearers arhats and  sSolitary
  rRealizsers arhats.

So in this verse the ““Sugatas” ” here in this verse refers  to  the  Buddha
Jewel who is . Here the Buddha Jewel is the object of homage.

      Respectfully I pay homage to the Sugatas  who  are  endowed  with  the
      dharmakaya,,

“The dharmakaya” here refers to the Dharma Jewel.

T. The dharmakaya is the tTruth bBody, which .
The Truth Body consists of the nNature truth bBody and  the  wWisdom  tTruth
bBody.
• The nNature truth bBody is - the naturally pure sphere  that  is  free  of
  all the stains.
• The wWisdom tTruth bBody  is  -  the  wisdom  or  exalted  knower  in  the
  continuum of the Buddha superior, and the exalted knower in the  continuum
  of the Buddha superior.
These two truth bodies are the ultimate tTrue cCessations and  the  ultimate
tTrue pPaths respectively. These are is is the final  and  or  the  ultimate
Dharma Jewels.

 The text says “I pay homage  to  the  Sugatas  who  are  endowed  with  the
dharmakaya”.
“Those Wwho are endowed with the dharmakaya” is  -  referring  to  a  person
here it is talking about person who is endowed  with  the  dharmakhaya.  it.
This person refers to the Sangha Jewel.

So this first line,  “Respectfully I pay  homage  to  the  Sugatas  who  are
endowed with the dharmakaya” is referring to  the  objects  of  homage.  The
objects of homage are the final Buddha Jewel, the  final  Dharma  Jewel  and
the final Sangha Jewel, i.e., . So the final  (ultimate)  Three  Jewels  are
the objects of homage.

“As well as to their children”: “C - the children”   in  general  refers  to
the bodhisattva, but here it is referring  in  particular  to  the  superior
bodhisattvas.

“To all those who are worthy of homage”:  “  -  Tthose  who  are  worthy  of
homage” are basically the Buddha, Dharma and Sangha of the Mahayana.

I think this verse of homage is paid primarily from  the  perspective  of  a
Mahayana refuge.  from the Mahayana point of  view.  So  it  is  a  Mahayana
refuge. TThe objects of homage are the  final  Buddha  Jewel,  final  Dharma
Jewel and the final Sangha Jewel. In addition to that, On top  of  that  the
superior bodhisattvas and so forth of the Mahayana are also included as  the
objects of homage.

The first line,  “the Sugatas who are endowed with the dharmakaya,” is  also
referring to the four bodies (or four kayas) of  the  Buddha,   four  bodies
(or four kayas [dharmakaya, nirmanakaya, sambhogakaya, svabhavikakaya].
Whilst Through directly indicating the dharmakaya, by the way, the two  form
bodies   are  also  indicated  indirectly.  The  two  form  bodies  are  the
cComplete eEnjoyment bBody, the  [sambhogakaya] and  the  eEmanation  bBody,
the  [nirmanakaya].

There are many explanations about what a bBuddha is. The whole point  is  to
help us to understand who we are taking refuge in. We always go for  refuge,
; “I take refuge in  the  Buddha,  …etc”  and  whether  we  use  the  words,
“Buddha” or “, Sugata” or the “One Gone , to Bliss,” Gone to  Bliss,  or  we
talk about full enlightenment, we are essentially  talking  about  the  same
thing. So Tthis explanation here is just to helps us to  to  gain  a  better
understanding of our objects of refuge.

Pledge of composition

After paying homage to the Three Jewels, what follows is , next  comes  tthe
pledge of composition.

      Here I shall describe how to  engage  in  the  vows  of  the  Sugatas’
      children,
      The meaning  of  which  I  have  summarized  in  accordance  with  the
      scriptures.

Here I shall describe how to engage in the vows of the Sugatas’ children,
The meaning of which I have summarized in accordance with the scriptures.
“Here I shall describe how to engage in the vows of the  Sugatas’  children”
- is the pledge of composition.

“The meaning of which I have summarized in accordance with the  scriptures”:
- here Tthe author is saying that he pledges to give a summary of the  paths
of the bodhisattvas , i.e., paths i.e. how does one generatess the  mind  of
enlightenment and,  on the basis  of  that,  how  does  one  trains  in  the
bodhisattva deeds.

How will is he go about ing to make his explanations?  The  author  said  ys
that he  is  doing  it  in  accordance  with  the  Buddha’s  intent  and  in
accordance wwith  what  is  laid  out  in  the  teachings  of  the  Buddha’s
teachings. He is not composing this text  according  to  his  own  doing  it
through his own whims and or fancy, . He is not writing whatever  comes   to
his mind. He is not creating something new.

If he is going to compose this text in accordance with  the  intent  of  the
Buddha’s intent, and in accordance with what is  already  laid  out  in  the
Buddha’s teachings, what exactly is the point  then  of  writing  this  text
since its contents  is allare  already there in the teachings?  There  is  a
purpose. Shantideva’s His purpose was is to summarisze  the  key  points  of
the path.
Shantideva says that he is making this summary of the Buddha’s teachings  so
that one can easily understand  or  realisze  the  intent  of  the  Buddha’s
teachings for oneself. themselves.

Next is an Eexpression of humility.



      Verse 1. 2
      There is nothing here that has not appeared in the past
      And I have no skill in the art of rhetoric;
      Therefore, not to enact the welfare of others,
      I composed this in order to acquaint it to my mind.

 “There is nothing here that has not appeared in the past”  -  here  iis  an
kind of expression of humility. Shantideva is saying that it is not that  he
is not an the expert in the meanings of the teachings.

“I have no skill in the art of rhetoric”:  - Hhe is also  saysing   that  he
is not skilled “in the art of rhetoric,” i.e., ; he is not an expert in  the
language and the use of words themselves.

The point behind this expression of humility is that pride  is  an  obstacle
to one gaining qualitiesy. The point isSo  whether one is composing a  text,
 or one is studying or  whatever  one  is  engaged  in  ddoing,  es,  it  is
important to do so without it in absence of pride arising.

“Therefore, not to enact the welfare of others”:  - iHe  t  is  saying  that
“he I did not compose this text in order to  help  others  realisze  quickly
the meaning and the intent of the teachings of the Buddha’s teachings”.

Khen Rinpoche (spoke in English): You got it? I  don’t  know.  I  understand
something else.
(Ven Gyurme: I confuse myself)
“Not to enact the welfare of others” refers to those who on their  own  have
the ability to understand the Buddha’s teachings on their  own.   Shantideva
is saying, “I did not compose  this  text  for  their  benefitpurpose,  but,
rather, I composed this in order to acquaint it with my mind.”.

      Verse 1. 3
      For due to acquaintance with virtue,
      The force of my faith will for the  time  being  increase  because  of
      these.
      If, however, these are seen by others
      Equal in fortune to myself, it will be meaningful.

Here it  is  showing  the  reason  why  generating  enthusiasm  and  delight
Wwhether composing a text or engaging in some  other  activity,  doing  some
other thing. bBesides doing so that activity without any pride,  one  should
also engage in the activity happily with a sense of enthusiasm and  delight.
Even though Oone may not have pride, but when if one  is  doesn’t  have  not
enthusiastic or m and feel  discouraged,   then  it  is  also  difficult  to
achieve one’s goal.
Therefore he says,
“For due to acquaintance with virtue,
The force of my faith will for the time being increase because of these.
If, however, these are seen by others
Equal in fortune to myself, it will be meaningful.”

Shantideva is saying that he himself will benefit from  composing  the  text
because when he composes such a text,  which talks about  the  practices  of
the bodhisattva’s, practice it increases his own faith in those e  practices
of the bodhisattva.  If somehow his composition should be is  read  or  seen
by others who are similar to him, it is likely that they  will  also  likely
reap the same benefit as him. So he composed this text wWith thatis kind  of
enthusiasm and delight.  he composes the text.

Here Wwe hadve just looked at the author’s expression of  humility  and  his
expression of the purpose of composing the text. The  lessons  we  can  draw
from this is that in in whatever we do, there should be an absence of  pride
on our part.  we should do it with an absence of pride. At  the  same  time,
weone must have courage. We and one must not be narrow-minded and be  easily
 discouraged. When If one is narrow-minded and one lacking in s  courage,  I
don’t think we would be a suitable receptacle for qualities to arise. So  So
whatever we do, whatever we do, we should not be proud but  instead,  engage
in our activities have to do it with an absence of pride,  with  enthusiasm,
delight and confidence.


ACTUAL EXPLANATION OF THE STAGES OF THE PATH

Next is the actual explanation of the stages of the path thatwhich  consists
of:
1.  exhorting alting one to take the essence of one’s  basis  eendowed  with
   the freedoms and endowments and  and then
2. explaining the method to take the essence.

Of the two, the first one Exhorting one exalting  to  take  the  essence  of
one’s the basis with its freedoms and endowments:
      Verse 1.4
      The leisures and endowments are very hard to find.
      Since they accomplish the purposes of beings,
      If I do not accomplish benefit upon this,
      How will I acquire this in the future?

The topic, subject matter of the human  life  of  freedoms  and  endowments,
has already been discussed in the module[4] on the sStages of the  pPath  to
eEnlightenment in the section on the path that is shared with the person  of
small capacity. Since we have already covered talked  about  this,  I  don’t
think there is any need for further to explanation in this here.

Khen Rinpoche (spoke in English): By So  now,   when  you  merely   heard  a
single one sentence, dal jor di ni nye par shin tu ka,  you should have  the
complete have to get whole understanding  of  that  subject  in  your  minde
sentence by now.

For example, the first line which ssays,   “the  leisures  or  freedoms  and
endowments are very hard to find.” – Yyou should be able to expand  on  this
sentence on your own.

Khen Rinpoche (spoke in English): So wWhen you read that sentence, you  have
to remember the entirewhole lLam-rim!.

*(BP1 Lesson 2) Leisure means freedom from  rebirth  in  any  of  the  eight
conditions that lack leisure, and  opportunity  (endowment)  refers  to  the
good conditions amenable to the practice of Dharma.
The eight leisures are characterised by being born free from  certain  kinds
of existence that lack the conditions to be able to practice  Dharma.  There
are four human states and four non-human states that lack the leisure to  be
able to practice Dharma.
The four non-human states that lack leisure for the study and  practice  the
Dharma are: rebirth as a hell being, rebirth as  an  animal,  rebirth  as  a
hungry ghost, and rebirth as a long-life god.
The four human states that lack leisure to be able  to  study  and  practice
the Dharma are: rebirth in a land where there is no dharma (as  barbarians),
rebirth in a place where a buddha has not descended, meaning a  place  where
a buddha has not come and taught, rebirth with extreme  mental  or  physical
defects, and rebirth with strong wrong views, particularly  in  relation  to
cause and effect, past and future lives, or the three objects of refuge.
The second set of privileges that we experience,  having  gained  a  perfect
human  rebirth,  are  the  ten  opportunities,  five  of  which  pertain  to
ourselves, and five of which pertain to external conditions.
The five opportunities pertaining to oneself are:
1. being born as a human being
2. born in a central place where the dharma flourishes
3. having perfect and complete senses and sense organs
4. not having committed one of the five heinous crimes, and thus having  the
potential to change one's karma.
5. having faith in  the  Lamrim,  and  in  the  three  vast  collections  of
Buddha's teaching
The five opportunities pertaining to external conditions are:
1. having been born in a time when a buddha has descended into the world
2. having been born in a time when a buddha has taught the dharma
3. the teachings of the Buddha still remain in the world
4. there are still people practicing the teachings
5. that, through the kindness and compassion of others, it is possible  that
practitioners have the opportunity to receive material support that  enables
them the freedom to practice.
When we talked about  meditation,  this  is  what  meditation  is.  BOn  the
basedis on  of  some  short  verses,  you  analysze  and  reflect  on  their
meaning.  of that. Basically Tthe text statement is saying  that  our  human
life of freedoms and endowments is  something  that  is  very  difficult  to
achieve and very difficult to attain. For example, Wwhen you  look  at  this
sentence, the question should naturally arise in your mind,  “:  Why  is  it
difficult? Why is achieving a human  life  of  freedoms  and  endowments  so
difficult? What are is the reasons proving that it is  indeed  difficult  to
obtain?”
For example, if we  say  the  human  life  of  freedoms  and  endowments  is
difficult to achieve because the causes for it are difficult  to  actualize.
Using this topic as an example, Iit is put to us here that  the  human  life
of freedoms and endowments that we have achieved is something that is  vvery
difficult to come by.  TThis is just a statement  but  .  But  what  is  the
reason that this is so? The reason is this: this human life of freedoms  and
endowments is difficult to attain come by or obtain because its  causes  are
difficult to achieve.

In general, without a cause, there will it will not be have  an  effect.  By
Llooking at how the principle or the law of causality works in the  external
world, e.g., for example, you see  how  there  is  no  smoke  without  fire.
there is no smokeThere is no sprout w, how without  a  seed.   there  is  no
sprout. Likewise the law of causality also applies , in the  internal  world
of the mind. , the principle of causality also applies.

If that is the case, Iif causes are needed to actualisze this e  human  life
of freedoms and endowments, then the next question that arises  is  thishere
is: Wwhat are the causes for a  human life of freedoms  and  endowments?  It
is not so straight-forward and , so  it  is  something  that  requires  much
analysis and reflection.

To become an ordinary human being, , just a human being in general, one  has
to keep to at least one kind of ethics; refraining from at  least  one  kind
of non-virtue. But with regard to a here the  human  life  of  freedoms  and
endowments, we are not talking about just being born as an  ordinary   human
being. W, we are talking about being born as a  human  being  with  eighteen
qualities,  i.e.,  a human being who is free of eight  features  things  and
who is endowed with ten features. This is the kind of human rebirth  we  are
talking about here,  ii.e.,  the perfect human rebirth. , the human life  of
freedoms and endowments. Such a human life of  freedoms  and  endowments  is
extremely difficult to come by. Why? Because its the  causes  are  extremely
difficult to actualisze.

In order to be born as a human being with these eighteen qualities: ,
• Ffirst we must live a very pure ethical life,  i.e.,  observe   with  very
  pure ethics.
• Our practice of ethics must also be complemented  with  the  practices  of
  generosity and so forth.
• In addition to that, On top of that these practices must be  completed  by
  with pure aspirational prayers, i.e.,  the  aspiration   tto  be  able  to
  obtain such a rebirth again life in the future.

We should ask ourselves and we when we  have a look at  in  oouur  own  mind
and see whether we have these causes or not; whether  we  find  it  easy  or
difficult to create these causes.

When If you look at the words,  “the leisures human  life  of  freedoms  and
endowments,” their meaning should actually immediately  arise  very  clearly
in your minds. Of course tThis can only happen for to someone who  meditates
and reflects regularly. A person who reflects on this regularly will  be  is
very familiar with this because he/she has thought  about  it.  When  he/she
thinks  about  the  words,   “the  human  life  of  freedoms  leisures   and
endowments,” their  meaning will immediately  comes  to  mind.  This  person
will He/she has the understanding, : “Oh, I really have this human  life  of
freedoms and endowments”. This is the result of reflection and meditation.

For those who do not n’t meditate and those who do not n’t reflect,  putting
put aside the meaning of the words arising  clearly  in  their  minds,  they
would not can’t even be able to ccoount what the eighteen features are.  For
example, when they look at the words,  “leisures freedoms  and  endowments,”
only then will they start counting and even counting becomes  difficult.  If
just merely counting the eighteen qualities is really a  challenginge,  then
one can forget about understanding the meaning of these words  of  this.  Of
course When if one does not n’t really know the meaning of these words,  is,
then how can change occur happen in the mind?

When If one is habituated to reflection and meditation  and  reflection,  by
simply even just  seeing  and  thinking  of  the  word,   “leisuresfreedom,”
immediately one feels, get this kind of feeling  “Oh,  Nnow  I  really  have
this wonderful opportunity to practisce the Ddharma because  I  am  free  of
these and all these are major hindrances and obstacles.”.  Because  one  has
this kind of understanding,  then one would be able to  generate  produce  a
great sense of  that kind of feeling of joy that one  has  already  attained
obtain something truly really wonderful.

This is something that everyone body has to do  for  themselves—  –  to  sit
down, reflect, sit down and think: Will I get such an opportunity  again  in
my next life again? The only way to answer that question is to  really  look
deeply inside your own minds to and see whether you  you  have  the  ability
causes or not, whether you are able to create the causes or  not.  Then  you
will know whether you will get such a life life aagain in the future.
Of course, Yyou have to know what the causes are. When If  you  look  at  in
your mind and you will come to realisze that if you  find  it  difficult  to
create the causes or and if you lack the causes for such  a  rebirth  again,
then you have to better identify what the causes are and  start  working  on
actualiszing them.

At In this juncture, when you have found  with such a life with all its  the
conditions for practice, if while you have the opportunity  and  if  you  do
not make use of thise opportunity,  then it will be very difficult  for  you
to obtain such conditions again in the future. It will  be  very  difficult.
You have to think about this for yourself and then really persuade  yourself
to make the most of take this e opportunity while you can. have it.

In  short,  this  verse  1.4  is  exhorting  and  exalting,  imploring   and
persuading us ourselves to take thise opportunity now. We have to take  take
ththis e opportunity to  make  use  of  this  human  life  of  freedoms  and
endowments that we have achieved.

Having  After  persuadeding  ourselves  to  take  advantage  of   this   the
opportunity, how do we actually go about  doing  sotaking  the  opportunity?
What is the best way to extract the meaning and essence out  of  this  human
life of freedoms and endowments? Theat explanation starts with verse 1.55.

There is a general explanation of how to extract the essence and then  there
is the detailed explanation of the individual topics under which points.  In
that section, the benefits of bodhicitta will be explained.

As mentioned before,  that it will not be possible for us to study read  the
text together with all the outlines from the commentary.  Anyway,  today  we
have finished with the exhortation altation  to  extract  the  essence  from
this human life of freedoms and endowments. In  the  next  lesson,  Next  we
will look at the actual way  of  extracting  the  essence  and,  i,  and  in
particular,  we will look at the benefits of bodhicitta.

                                 ~~~~~~~~~~~

The three things that we need to actualisze in order to obtain a human  life
of freedoms and endowments in the future are:
1. 1. Guarding Ppure morality. You need very  pure  morality.  What  is  the
   measure of “pure morality”? What does that it  mean?  We  have  to  think
   about this.
2. 2. The practice of pure morality must be complemented with the  practices
   of the other perfections such as generosity and  so  forth.  Having  said
   that, one question we can ask ourselves thisis: In  order  to  achieve  a
   human life of freedoms and endowments,  do we need to practisce  all  the
   perfections?
3. 3. We need to make very “pure” aspirational prayers. Again wWhat  exactly
   does this mean?
So tThere are many things to think about.

Khen Rinpoche (spoke in English): These three  questions  are  for  the  The
senior students, ones, three questions. You the  have  graduatesd  from  the
Basic ProgramP class.
• What is pure morality?
• One’s practice of morality must be complemented  with  generosity  and  so
  forth. etc. Does this e “etc” include all the other perfections?
• We neeed to make pure  stainless  pure  aspirational  prayers.  What  does
  “pure” here  means?
These points appear throughout the teachings. WIt is  the  same  thing  that
when  you  look  at  the  lLam-rim,   –  the  sStages  of   the   pPath   to
eEnlightenment, - in the section  on  the  f  human  life  of  freedoms  and
endowments, the discussion of these three points are  also  there.  ,  isn’t
it? YYou need to think about them. se.

It is said in the teachings, in order to become a human being, you  need  to
practisce morality. But in order to  have  a  human  life  of  freedoms  and
endowments:-:
• Y- you need to practisce very pure morality,.
• Y- you need to practisce generosity and so forth.  and
• Y- you need to make pure stainless pure prayers.

These three are said to be  very  difficult  to  achieve  achieve  and  very
difficult to practisce. Because the causes are difficult  to  achieve,  then
you know that it will be very difficult for you to achieve  such  a  rebirth
again in the future. When If you  do realisze that at  present  moment  now,
that  it will be very difficult for you  to  achieve  such  a  rebirth  this
again in the future, and you do happen to be someone who  wants  to  achieve
such a rebirththis in the  future,  then  naturallyautomatically  you  would
then want to practisce the causes for achieving such a  rebirth  this  again
in the future. You would strive to at working to actualisze the causes.
When If you then happen to be someone who  really  wants  to  have  such  an
opportunity again in your future life, and you know you have to  create  the
causes, you would automatically you would work at  creating e the causes  on
your own. You do not n’t need somesomeone body to push you or  .  You  don’t
need somebody to remind you. , and  You you will just do  it  on  your  own.
and you strive at it.

                                 ~~~~~~~~~~

MEDITATION PROGRAMMEMeditation program

Remember we announced tYou remember towards the end of the  previous  module
we announced that we will start  a  voluntary  meditation  program?.  It  is
completely voluntary and . It will last for a minimum of one year.

If you want to take part in this one- year voluntary meditation  program  on
the lLam-rim,  – the Sstages of the pPath to  eEnlightenment,   -  then  you
have to register and put your name down. . I guess  you  can  Rregisteration
will start  fairly soon, perhaps in the next lesson.

It is voluntary. If you register, you must commit to  meditate  and  reflect
on the lLam-rim for a minimum of 15 to  20  minutes  a  day.  Regardless  of
wWhether you succeed or not, whether you find that you can meditate or  not,
once you register,  you have to do it every day.  The  point  is  to  do  it
every day. That is the commitment.

Before you can start meditating, first you first must make a  promise  or  a
pledge to yourself. You must have  the  intention  and  the  willingness  to
meditate. You must be able to tell yourself,  “Tthis is something I will  do
every day. I and it will be is part of my life. For 15 to 20 minutes a  day,
 and at this time, I will sit down in this particular place and  I  will  do
it!.”

The meditation is This is to be done on your own at home. We  will  are  not
be doing it together as a group. It is to be done at home on your own  every
day at home..  This is completely voluntary. Only sign up do it if  you  can
commit to it and see it through. Perhaps we can start  registration  in  the
next class. In the meantime, tThink about it.
We are not necessarily looking for many people. This at is  not  the  point.
The point is that you must want to do it and you  must  do  it  voluntarily.
You must feel happy doing it. Even if it is  just  a  few  people—,  two  or
three people—, that it is fine.

The point is that we have to start  because  Lama  Zopa  Rinpoche  has  been
advising us and the centre organization quite a few times to do  it.  So  it
is not right if we do not n’t do it. So we have to start.  Of  course,  this
is voluntary.

Now we are should only be concerned about whether you want to do it  or  not
and starting the programme. This is not the time to think about whether  you
I will get any results out of the meditation  is  or  whether  realiszations
will arise. These are question marks but . if If you do not n’t even  start,
then there is no basis for even thinking about these  or  considering  these
questions:  “Will  I  get  any  results  out  of  this?  Will  I   get   any
realiszations?” There is no basis even to think about these  questions  when
if yyou wdon’t even start. You should start and then we can  talk  about  it
one year later.

The plan is that for those who sign up tofor  the program perhaps every  now
and then, say,  in intervals of three to  four  months,  you  can  all  come
together,  and then share your the experiences and or to discuss  about  the
practice.

Khen Rinpoche (spoke in English): After  three  months,  you  can  Sshareing
with each other your meditation the three months experience. You  may  Might
have very interesting experience. Anyway, we have to try. Those who wish  to
try,  give your the name and contact details. After that, we will  discussed
how to start and when to start. I think I will make some guidelines.


Interpreted by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme; transcribed by Phuah  Soon  Ek,  Patricia
Lee and Julia Koh; edited by Cecilia Tsong.



-----------------------
[1] The stream-enterer refers to a superior being on the  Hinayana  path  of
seeing who will never be reborn in the three lower realms again.  The  once-
returner refers to a superior being on the Hinayana path of  meditation  who
will return to the desire realm only one more time.  (First  Basic  Program,
Module 5, Lesson 2, page 1).
[2] All the  faults  we  possess  are  included  in  the  two  obstructions:
obstructions to liberation  (also  known  as  afflictive  obstructions)  and
obstructions  to  omniscience  (or  non-afflictive  obscurations,  knowledge
obscurations). Obstructions to  liberation  such  as  ignorance,  anger  and
attachment prevent us from attaining liberation from samsara.  The  imprints
of these afflictions are obstructions to omniscience; they prevent  us  from
realising all objects  of  knowledge  directly  and  simultaneously.  (First
Basic Program, Module 5, Lesson 2, page 2).


[3] From First Basic Program, Module 5, Lesson 2, pages 1 & 2.
[4] Second Basic Program, Module 1.

