Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Engaging in the Deeds of a Bodhisattva/BP2 M5 L30 final.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:52:27.434009
================================================================================


Transcript of the teachings by Khen Rinpoche Geshe  Chonyi  on  Engaging  in
the Bodhisattva Deeds, 2014

Root text: Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds by  Shantideva,  translated  by
Toh Sze Gee. Copyright: Toh Sze Gee, 2006; Revised edition, 2014.

Lesson                                                                    30
    3 June 2014


CHAPTER SIX: VERSES 6.1 – 6.7.
A. Abandoning hindrances to the accomplishment of abiding by the antidote:
Devoting oneself to the cultivation of patience (V. 6.1 – V. 6.6)
B. Engaging the mind in the methods for accomplishing patience.
    1. Arresting the cause of anger (V. 6.7)


Student 1: During Lesson 27, I asked about single-pointed faith to the  guru
at the time of death. You mentioned that it is a condition for the  ripening
of past virtue that had been  accumulated  rather  than  being  a  karma  in
itself. My question now is: Can this condition—the single-pointed  faith  to
the guru at the time of death—change  an  actualising  karma  that  is  non-
virtuous to a virtuous karma?

Answer: In general, the projecting karma for  a  good  rebirth  is  virtuous
karma and the projecting karma for a rebirth in the  lower  realms  is  non-
virtuous karma. I think probably it is not possible for  non-virtuous  karma
to transform into virtuous karma.

You were saying that at the time of death,  if  one  dies  with  a  virtuous
state of mind, can that act as a condition to change  a  non-virtuous  karma
into a virtuous one? I think the answer is probably not.

As I said before, the very basis for a  good  rebirth  has  to  be  virtuous
projecting karma. In the first place, the karma must  be  virtuous.  At  the
time of death, let’s say a  virtuous  frame  of  mind  is  manifested.  That
nourishes a virtuous karma that was accumulated in the past thereby  leading
to a good rebirth. You cannot have a virtuous state  of  mind  nourishing  a
non-virtue that will then lead you to a good rebirth. I don’t think that  is
possible.

Khen Rinpoche: Now I have a question for you.

Question from Khen Rinpoche: At the time of  death,  let’s  say  a  virtuous
state of mind is manifested. At that  time,  do  you  freshly  accumulate  a
virtuous projecting karma that transforms into  an  actualising  karma  with
that very same karma sending you off to a good rebirth? Is that possible?

Khen Rinpoche: This is my question for you. Is that possible?  You  got  the
question? Yes, the senior students should answer this one.

You die with a virtuous state of mind. At the time of  death,  due  to  that
virtuous state of mind, you  accumulate  fresh  virtuous  projecting  karma.
This virtuous  projecting  karma  becomes  the  actualising  karma  that  is
nourished and which sends you off to a good rebirth. Is that  possible?  You
must explain why.

First thing, at the time of  death,  is  it  possible  to  accumulate  fresh
projecting karma?

Khen Rinpoche: If you have the answer, then  give  me  the  answer.  If  you
don’t have the answer, then you can think about this. If your answer is  no,
you must give the reason why.

At the time of death, do you create projecting karma or not?

Student 2: No. Because to me, projecting karma should be accumulated  before
the time of death and because it is a karma that is created before the  time
of death, that karma is infused with the consciousness. Then at the time  of
death, this projecting karma is nourished to become actualising karma.

Khen Rinpoche: Go point  by  point.  Why  must  (the  projecting  karma)  be
created before the time of death?

Student 2: Because projecting karma is a throwing karma. Hence it has to  be
a full projecting karma that fulfils  all  the  four  factors  of  attitude,
basis and so forth. That is why it cannot happen at the time of death.

Khen Rinpoche: Why not? The question is still back to, why not? You are  not
addressing that. Why not?

Student 2: Because for a projecting karma to  throw  us  into  a  particular
realm, it has to take three lifetimes.

Khen Rinpoche:  You are saying that it takes three  lifetimes  to  create  a
projecting karma?

Student 2: No. Even at the time of death, if you were to produce  projecting
karma. that projecting karma will not be …

Khen Rinpoche: The question goes back to this: At the time of death, do  you
create projecting karma or not?

Student 2: Yes. It is still possible to create projecting karma.

Khen Rinpoche: What else is there to discuss? So far up to this  point,  you
said no. Now you say yes.  Your answer is different.

Student 2: At the time of death, it is still possible to  create  projecting
karma.

Khen Rinpoche: OK. You stop there. You create projecting karma,  right?  You
can then nourish that projecting karma to become actualising karma and  take
a good rebirth.  That is possible. Again the question is why?

Student 2: Projecting karma created in this lifetime can only  be  nourished
in the next life.

Khen Rinpoche: Who said that?

Student 2: Because in the last cycle of BP  (Basic  Program),  it  was  said
that the 12 links can only be completed in three lifetimes.

Khen Rinpoche: Don’t blame the last BP. It is not  possible.  I  never  said
that. The 12 links can be completed in two lifetimes.

Anybody else wants to try? She did not complete her answer.

One thing that I have to tell all of you. You  must  listen.  When  you  are
discussing, the points must go from one point to  the  next.  When  somebody
asks a question and you are not getting the point, it  takes  a  long  time.
You must learn this. Sometimes somebody  asks  you  something  but  you  are
talking about something else. Whatever question I’m  asking  you,  you  must
answer that question to the point.

Student 2 rephrases Khen Rinpoche’s question: Your question is this:  Is  it
possible for a projecting karma that one creates at the time of death to  be
nourished immediately after  that  to  become  the  actualising  karma  that
throws us to a future rebirth?

Khen Rinpoche: Yes. Finally you got my question!

Student 3: Projecting karma can be created at the time of death. However  it
is highly unlikely that it will be nourished.

Khen Rinpoche: Why do you say that? What is  your  reason  for  saying  that
that particular karma cannot be nourished?

Student 3: It is highly unlikely that that karma will ripen because at  that
time, it is a newly created karma and it is a weak karma. So the karma  that
will ripen is probably a karma that was created earlier. The karma  that  is
newly created is weak.

Khen Rinpoche: You are saying that in order for  it  to  be  nourished,  the
karma has to be strong at that moment?

Student 3: Yes. Because the karma is not strong enough. For a  karma  to  be
ripened at the time of death, it has to be karma created in the past.

Khen Rinpoche: Give your reason for saying that.

Student 3:  Because  karma  grows  over  time  which  is  one  of  the  four
characteristics of karma. Hence a freshly created karma  is  probably  quite
weak, so probably it will not be ripened.

Khen Rinpoche: According to your logic, only karma  created  eons  and  eons
ago will be the karma that is nourished. So in this life, you  create  karma
but that karma cannot be nourished by the virtuous  karma?  Are  you  saying
that?

Now you listen. According to your logic, because the time is  too  short  so
the karma is not strong. So following your logic,  the  virtuous  karma  you
created when you were a child, that karma cannot be nourished  at  the  time
of death. (According to you) that is not possible?

Student  3:  That  is  possible.  Because  during  your  lifetime,   through
purification practice and anger, you may also destroy older karma.

Khen Rinpoche: But according to your logic, the time is too short.

Student 3: At the time of death, the moment is too short.

Khen Rinpoche: So your logic is that the time is too short.

Student 3: That is why it is highly unlikely (to  be  nourished)  if  it  is
freshly created karma.

Khen Rinpoche: So according to your logic, (the  time)  is  too  short,  the
karma is not strong. So here I am talking about the  same  thing.  Comparing
the karma that you create in this life and the karma you created  eons  ago,
the karma that is nourished have to be karma created eons ago  and  not  the
karma that you created in this lifetime because  it  is  too  short  a  time
compared to the karma that you created eons ago.

Student 3: If the karma  was  created  eons  ago  and  it  is  destroyed  or
purified, that could well be the karma that is nourished  first  because  of
the fact that karma grows over time. Also the teachings say if the karma  is
of equal strength, then the earlier  karma  will  be  the  one  that  ripens
first.

Khen Rinpoche: You are saying that the time is too short.

Student 3: Yes, the time is too short  at  the  time  of  death  because  we
talking about a brief moment.

Khen Rinpoche: Based on that reason, it has to be karma that was  created  a
long time ago.

Student 3: If it is a karma that you can  nurture  over  a  whole  lifetime,
that karma can get stronger and stronger. But  karma  created  only  at  the
brief moment before the time at death, it is quite likely  that  that  karma
will be too weak to be the one that is nourished at that moment.

Khen Rinpoche: Your answer is that the time is too short. But  it  does  not
make sense. If you compare your life to eons ago and this present  life,  it
is exactly the same thing. Comparing (the karma  created  at)  the  time  of
death and the earlier  part  of  your  life,  what  is  the  big  difference
(compared to karma created)  eons  ago  and  (the  karma  created  in)  your
(present) life? Is it not the case that karma created in this  lifetime  can
be nourished (in this very life)?

Student 4: I think the answer relates to the 12 links.

You need craving and grasping to actualise the projecting karma. Because  of
that, what you create is not  the  last  moment.  You  need  an  intervening
moment before you die, before you go on to the next life.  The  action  that
produced the projecting karma is not the last  moment.  You  still  need  to
generate craving and grasping. So that becomes your last moment.

Khen Rinpoche: I think you may have something there.  Good  one.  I  am  not
sure. I am still thinking.

Student 4: There is an intervening moment before the  projecting  karma  can
be actualised. You need craving and grasping in that next  moment  of  mind.
Therefore the last moment of virtuous thought is actually  related  to  this
craving and grasping. So it cannot be that virtuous  thought  that  produces
the projecting karma that can be actualised in the next life.

Khen Rinpoche: I ask some similar question (related  to  your  answer).  The
last moment of the mind is craving and grasping or is it the virtuous  mind?
The virtuous mind comes after craving and  grasping  or  does  the  virtuous
mind come before that?

Student 4: The virtuous mind comes before craving and grasping.

Khen Rinpoche: That is it. I got you!

Student 4: OK. I change my answer. (Laughter).

Khen Rinpoche: Now you listen. (If the virtuous  mind  comes)  before  that,
then why not now?

What you said before is totally the opposite of what  you  are  saying  now.
You must listen to what you said and what I say. You  must  listen  actively
with your mind. Before what you said. Now what I say. Because now  what  you
are saying is the opposite (of what you said) before.

Student 4: I don’t know. I have to go back and think some more.

Khen Rinpoche: Yes, you better go back and sit down. (Laughs).

Of course I don’t have a conclusive answer for everyone but this is just  to
give you some idea.

Whatever the other person says, immediately, you  must  target  directly  at
what was said. You are not fighting here but you are using logic  with  what
you say.

The reason that was used, “Because the time is too short,” it doesn’t  makes
sense. But if you don’t think about, you will  just  accept,  “Oh,  that  is
true. It is too short a time, so there is no time to  nourish  that  karma.”
Your mind doesn’t think of anything else.

Kelvin (student 3) said, “The time is too short.” Most  people  will  think,
“OK. That is right.” You don’t really think deeper than that.

Then Swee Kim (student 4) says, “There is craving and grasping,” and so  on.
Then you all think, “Yes, that is also right.”

Then what Mui Cheng (student 2) said is right too. You  do  not  think  much
about what was said.

Here we are learning Buddhist philosophy. You need to think why  the  person
is saying what he or she is saying until you  get  the  point,  “This  makes
sense. This is the right answer.” Whatever logic is  put  forth,  it  should
not be contradictory. Then you will get some idea.

So this is how to learn and how to think. We need to think  more.  Sometimes
when we debate, we just  get  upset.  Our  practice  then  is  also  not  so
correct. We have to be strong but we cannot be upset.

Now we are starting on the chapter on  patience.  I  mentioned  before  that
sometimes this happens in the monastery. First there is this  virtuous  mind
but after really arguing, “My position  is  right,  yours  is  wrong,”  then
anger arises. Sometimes that happens. Anger arises but we don’t  really  hit
one another or fight. But sometimes anger arises.

It shouldn’t be that way. Sometimes when you debate, you have to be  strong.
Otherwise whatever the other person says, you give in, “OK la.” That is  not
really good debate. You give your view but you don’t think  much  about  it.
Then when the other person shares his view, you just say  “OK  la!  Whatever
you say.” That is not really going deep down into the subject. We should  go
deeper to understand better.

Of course in order to go deeper, you must have some knowledge. Otherwise  it
is difficult.

I thought everybody should know the  12  links  very  well.  This  is  basic
Buddhism and I thought everybody knew them very well.

                                 ~~~~~~~~~~~

CHAPTER SIX: RELYING ON PATIENCE

Anger is a big obstacle to the  generation  of  bodhicitta.  The  discordant
class of bodhicitta is anger. Therefore it is said that  the  meditation  on
patience  is  a  very  important  antidote  to  anger.  Chapter  Six  is  an
explanation of the faults of hatred and anger, the benefits of patience  and
the need to respect others and it starts with an explanation of  the  faults
of anger.

The faults of anger consist of the  unseen  or  invisible  disadvantages  of
anger and the visible disadvantages of anger. Of the two, first we  look  at
the unseen disadvantages of anger. The text talks about how:
1. Anger destroys the root of virtue.
2. One should make effort in cultivating patience  after  having  understood
   the faults and qualities of fury and patience.

A.    Abandoning  hindrances  to  the  accomplishment  of  abiding  by   the
    antidote: Devoting oneself to the cultivation of patience

        1.  The disadvantages of anger
               A.   The unseen disadvantages
                      1.   Anger destroys the roots of virtue
   Verse 6.1
   Whatever wholesome deeds,
   Such as generosity and making offerings to the sugatas,
   Have been amassed over thousands of eons,
   Will all be destroyed by anger.

The “thousands of eons” refer to a thousand great  eons.  As  we  have  seen
earlier, one great eon consists of 80 intermediate eons:
 • the eon of formation
 • the eon of abiding
 • the eon of destruction
 • the eon of nothingness

Here the merit amassed over a thousand great eons through practices such  as
generosity,  ethics,  meditating  on  patience  and  cultivating  meditative
stabilization, “will all be destroyed by anger.”  Of  the  two  collections,
all these roots of virtue come under the collection of merit.

The collection of merit amassed over a thousand great eons is  destroyed  by
just one moment of anger directed at a bodhisattva. Here  is  an  indication
of  how  powerful  a  negativity  anger  is.   The  destruction   of   merit
accumulated over a thousand great eons was  taught  by  the  Buddha  in  the
sutras but the context refers to a  non-bodhisattva  who  gets  angry  at  a
bodhisattva.

The Play of the Manjushri Sutra says  that  the  merit  accumulated  over  a
hundred  eons  is  destroyed  by  anger.  This  sutra  is  also   cited   by
Chandrakirti in his Supplement to the Middle  Way.   There  seems  to  be  a
difference here because the context is different. The destruction  of  merit
accumulated over a hundred great eons is in the context of a  more  powerful
bodhisattva who gets angry at a lesser bodhisattva.  So  if  a  higher-level
bodhisattva or more powerful bodhisattva gets angry at a  lesser  or  lower-
level bodhisattva, then he destroys a collection of merit  accumulated  over
a hundred great eons.

Who is a higher-level bodhisattva and  who  is  a  lower-level  bodhisattva?
This is relative. The Mahayana path of accumulation is divided  into  small,
middling and great and the Mahayana path  of  preparation  is  also  divided
into four stages. Let’s say a bodhisattva who is on the Mahayana great  path
of accumulation gets angry or upset  with  a  bodhisattva  on  the  Mahayana
middling path of accumulation. The bodhisattva on the  Mahayana  great  path
of accumulation would destroy the collection of  merit  accumulated  over  a
hundred great eons.

If a lower-level bodhisattva gets angry at a  higher-level  bodhisattva,  of
course this bodhisattva will also destroy his collection of merit.

In the Condensed Sutra, it is mentioned that when a bodhisattva who has  not
received a prediction of his enlightenment gets angry at a  bodhisattva  who
has already  received  the  prediction  of  his  enlightenment,  the  former
bodhisattva will have to start the path all over again.

I think a bodhisattva who has obtained a prediction of his enlightenment  is
at least a bodhisattva on the Mahayana path of preparation.  In  this  case,
when a bodhisattva on the Mahayana path of accumulation is to get  angry  at
a bodhisattva on the Mahayana path of preparation, then that bodhisattva  on
the path of accumulation would have to start his path all over again.

What is the meaning of ‘having to start his path or train all  over  again’?
An example is given in  the  teachings.  Let’s  say  a  bodhisattva  on  the
Mahayana path of accumulation is to attain the Mahayana path of  preparation
within one eon. But before he achieves the  Mahayana  path  of  preparation,
for whatever reason,  he  gets  angry  at  a  bodhisattva  on  the  path  of
preparation.  Because  of  his  anger,  his  achievement  of  the  path   of
preparation will be delayed by one eon. In that sense, it is as  if  he  has
to start again.

Khen Rinpoche:  So  that  means  actually  (he  will  achieve  the  path  of
preparation) in one eon but because of anger, it will now take two eons.

I think that is the meaning of ‘having to start his path or train  all  over
again.’

The teachings also mentioned that  when  a  non-bodhisattva  gets  angry  at
another non-bodhisattva, i.e., we are talking about ordinary beings,  he  or
she will also destroy the merit.

In another text, it gives the example of  the  merit  one  accumulates  from
making one full-length  prostration  to  a  holy  object  such  as  a  stupa
containing the actual relics of the Buddha. The merit that  one  accumulates
will enable one to take rebirth as  a  wheel-turning  king.  The  number  of
times one is able to take such a rebirth is equal to  the  number  of  atoms
covered by one’s body when prostrating on the ground. So one  accumulates  a
lot of merit but that is all destroyed when  one  gets  angry  at  a  fellow
practitioner, somebody who is likewise engaging in virtue like oneself.


|A non-bodhisattva gets angry at |Destruction of merit equal to making|
|another non-bodhisattva         |a full prostration to a stupa (The  |
|                                |sutras say that the number of atoms |
|                                |covered by the body during such a   |
|                                |prostration is equal to the number  |
|                                |of times one will be reborn as a    |
|                                |wheel-turning king).                |
|A non-bodhisattva gets angry at |Destruction of merit accumulated    |
|a bodhisattva.                  |over a thousand great eons          |
|A lower-level bodhisattva gets  |His achievement of the next path is |
|angry at a higher-level         |delayed. E.g., a bodhisattva on the |
|bodhisattva                     |great Mahayana path of accumulation |
|E.g., a bodhisattva who has not |who is due to enter the Mahayana    |
|received a prediction of his    |path of preparation gets angry at   |
|enlightenment gets angry at a   |another bodhisattva who is already  |
|bodhisattva who has received a  |on the path of preparation. Instead |
|prediction of his enlightenment |of entering the path of preparation,|
|                                |his realisation is delayed for one  |
|                                |great eon and he has to retrain for |
|                                |this path all over again.           |
|A higher-level bodhisattva gets |Destruction of merit accumulated    |
|angry at a lower-level          |over a hundred great eons.          |
|bodhisattva.                    |                                    |

The roots of virtue that are subject to destruction when one gets angry  are
the roots of virtue that are included in the collection of merit. The  roots
of virtue that are included in the collection of wisdom  are  not  destroyed
by anger.

The destruction of the roots of virtue should  not  be  taken  literally  to
mean  that  the  roots  of  virtue  themselves  are  destroyed.  Rather  the
destruction of the roots of virtue means that the capacity of  a  particular
root of virtue to produce its fruitional effect is hindered  or  eliminated.
That is the meaning of the destruction of the roots of virtue.

In Chandrakirti’s Supplement  to  the  Middle  Way,  the  hindering  of  the
capacity of the roots of virtue to produce a fruitional effect is  discussed
in terms of extinguishment. There can be a  great  extinguishment,  middling
extinguishment or small extinguishment:
 • Small extinguishment: If a particular root of virtue is not destroyed  by
   anger, it would have produced a great fruitional effect or it would  have
   enabled one to experience its positive fruitional effect for a very  long
   time. But because of anger, although one still experiences  the  positive
   fruitional effect, the result is either smaller or one can only enjoy  it
   for  a  shorter  period  of  time.  These  are  the  examples  of   small
   extinguishment.
 • Great extinguishment: This refers to the  situation  whereby  one  almost
   does not experience anything positive from the roots  of  virtue  because
   its  capacity  to  produce  any  positive  fruitional  effect  has   been
   eliminated.  When  that  happens,  that  is  what  one  calls   a   great
   extinguishment.

Chandrakirti tells us what a small extinguishment is. He also tells us  what
a big extinguishment is. Then based on that, he tells us to figure out  what
a middling extinguishment is.

Essentially the destruction of the roots  of  virtue  is  referring  to  the
elimination or the hindering of the capacity  of  the  roots  of  virtue  to
produce a positive fruitional effect. The destruction  of  roots  of  virtue
could either mean that the roots of virtue will  not  produce  any  positive
fruitional effect or it would only produce a  very  small  positive  effect.
The destruction of roots of virtue does not mean that the seed of  the  root
of virtue is destroyed. That seed is not destroyed but rather  the  capacity
of  the  seed  to  produce  a  fruitional  effect  is  either  hindered   or
incapacitated.

In the teachings on mind training (or lojong), the teachings  advise  us  to
look upon everybody as a virtuous  friend,  as  a  guru.  Also  it  says  to
meditate on the kindness of everyone. If we get angry at someone and if  the
person is in reality a buddha, of course it goes  without  saying  that  one
destroys so much merit. Even if the person is a bodhisattva, so  much  merit
is destroyed. Even if the  person  is  not  a  bodhisattva,  i.e.,  just  an
ordinary being, one also destroys a  lot  of  merit.  Hence  there  is  this
advice to regard everyone as our virtuous friend or guru.

We see such proclamations by the Buddha on the invisible effects  of  anger.
We may find them difficult to believe. They  are  quite  inconceivable,  are
they not? How can it be that one moment of anger can destroy  the  roots  of
virtue accumulated over a thousand great eons?

Remember some time back we had this discussion as to how long one great  eon
is. We are talking about hundreds of billions of years. Here we are  talking
about merit that is accumulated over a  thousand  great  eons  that  can  be
destroyed by just one moment of anger. So is it not quite difficult  for  us
to believe that this  is  so?  It  cannot  fit  our  mind.  But  here  these
proclamations were made by the Buddha who at all times sees correctly  every
single phenomenon including those extremely hidden phenomena as they are.

Also if we think about it, if we apply a little bit  of  reasoning,  we  can
see some truth in this. How I think about it  is  basically  like  this:  it
does not exactly prove that anger can destroy roots  of  virtue  accumulated
over such  a  long  period  of  time  but  anyway  this  is  what  I  think.
Relationships that have been built over a long period of  time—say  over  30
or 40 years, whether it is  a  relationship  between  loved  ones  or  close
friends—can actually be destroyed by just a few harsh  words.  A  few  harsh
words spoken just once can  have  the  effect  of  destroying  relationships
built over 30 or 40 years. If we compare  the  two  timeframes,  it  is  one
moment of harsh speech versus the destruction of a relationship  built  over
30 or 40 years.

We all know that our non-virtuous actions, whether  it  is  anger  or  harsh
speech, are very strong. Our virtue is very weak and it  takes  us  so  much
effort to be able to do even some small virtue. But  our  non-virtue  is  so
powerful that a brief moment of non-virtue can have very bad consequences.

Anyway these are the unseen or invisible faults of anger. The reason why  it
is called invisible is because there is no way for us to  directly  perceive
it. We can only rely on the speech of the Buddha.

                      2.  One should make  effort  in  cultivating  patience
            after understanding  the  faults  and  qualities  of  fury  and
            patience
      Verse 6.2
      There is no negativity like hatred,
      And no fortitude like patience.
      Thus I should cultivate patience
      Persistently through various ways.

We have seen that anger is one of the greatest hindrances to  producing  the
paths within our minds and one of the greatest hindrances to developing  the
experiences and realisations of the path.  Also  anger  is  so  powerful  in
destroying virtue accumulated over such long periods of time.  Therefore  it
says here, “There is no negativity like hatred.”

There is nothing that comes close to patience in acting as the  antidote  to
anger. Since there is no negativity that comes close to hatred and there  is
no fortitude that comes close to patience, therefore Shantideva says,  “Thus
I should cultivate patience/ Persistently through various ways.”  We  should
earnestly and persistently cultivate patience through  the  various  avenues
that will be described soon.

Next is a discussion on the visible disadvantages of  anger  and  how  anger
takes away the opportunity for physical and mental well-being and how  anger
turns away friends and so forth.

               B.   The visible disadvantages
                      1.   Anger eliminates  the  opportunity  for  physical
   and mental pleasure
      Verse 6.3
      My mind will not experience peace
      If it holds painful thoughts of hatred.
      I shall find no joy or happiness;
      Unable to sleep, I shall feel unsettled.

It does not matter who we are upset with. Once we are upset or angry and  if
we keep that anger in our mind, we will not experience any  peace.  This  is
plainly obvious to all of us. When there is anger in the heart, there is  no
peace in the heart and we feel very unsettled.

When we are unhappy inside, we will not be able to fall asleep easily or  we
may not be able to sleep at all, thus affecting our physical well-being  and
health.  Basically  an  unhappy  mind  acts  as  a  condition  for  physical
discomfort and it also affects our health. This is very obvious.

When there is anger, the mind is disturbed and we  will  not  feel  settled.
The mind cannot be at ease. These are the visible faults  of  anger  because
all of us can see them, all of us know them, all of us  are  aware  of  them
and all of us experience them. That is why they are visible.

Khen Rinpoche: That’s why the Buddha said they are visible.

                      2.   Anger causes us to destroy dear  friendships  and
   so forth
    Verse 6.4
    A master who has hatred
    Is in danger of being killed
    Even by those who for their wealth and honor
    Depend upon his kindness.


    Verse 6.5 a, b
    By it, friends and relatives are disheartened;
    Though drawn by his generosity they will not rely upon him;

Even if you were to extend  good  treatment  in  terms  of  giving  material
comfort to the people around you—your followers, your servants,  your  staff
or your workers and so forth—when you are bad-tempered and  get  angry  with
them, they will forget  all  that  positive  treatment  in  terms  of  being
showered with material gifts. Instead they will  get  upset  and  sometimes,
they may even retaliate. They may harm  you,  their  boss  and  master,  and
sometimes they may even kill you.

These things happen primarily because  of  anger.  Under  the  influence  of
anger, people usually engage in harsh speech. Also their physical  demeanour
will be unpleasant. Seeing  this,  their  friends  and  relatives  will  get
disheartened and they may also leave them.

You may try to bring people into  your  fold  or  under  your  influence  by
showering them with all kinds of material gifts without any  sense  of  loss
from your own side, i.e., you give generously without  any  hesitation.  But
if you are an angry person with a short temper  and  no  patience,  then  no
matter how much you can give materially,  these  people  will  never  submit
100% to you. There will always be a mental distance between  them  and  you.
They may still need to rely on you, they may still do  things  for  you  but
they will not do so happily from the heart.

Next is the summary of the faults of anger.

             c.  A presentation of the disadvantages in brief
      Verse 6.5 c, d
      In brief there is nobody
      Who dwells comfortably with anger.


      Verse 6.6 a, b
      The enemy, anger,
      Creates sufferings such as those.

In short, there will not be any person  who  can  say,  “I’m  happy,”  while
there is anger burning in the heart because  anger  has  all  these  faults.
Therefore the text is telling us that we should strive to abandon anger.

As I mentioned earlier, anger destroys the roots  of  virtue  that  one  has
accumulated  in  the  past  and  prevents  one  from  experiencing  positive
fruitional effects and happiness that one would have experienced  otherwise.
Not only that, anger causes one to create negative  karma  that  will  throw
one into the lower realms such as the hells.  In  short,  anger  causes  one
problems in this life and will cause suffering and problems in one’s  future
lives. Therefore it says, “The enemy, anger,/  Creates  sufferings  such  as
those.”
In short, the enemy, anger is the fully-fledged cause of  all  the  problems
of this life and the future lives.

Next are the benefits of patience.

        2. Reflecting on the benefits of patience
      Verse 6.6 c, d
      But whoever assiduously overcomes it
      Creates happiness in this and other lives.

“It” refers to anger. On the other hand, if someone was to  subdue  his  own
mind, control his anger and  is  able  to  destroy  it,  then  he  will  not
experience all those problems  of  anger  mentioned  earlier.  Instead  that
person will have happiness in this life and also  have  great  happiness  in
all future lives.

Destroying anger is the cause for achieving happiness in this life  and  all
future lives. Therefore the text is saying that we should strive to  abandon
anger and to cultivate patience.  The  text  is  also  saying  that  if  one
meditates on patience, there are only benefits and happiness.  It  will  not
bring about any problems. Instead it will only bring about benefits in  this
life and in all future lives.

Gyaltsab Je in his commentary mentioned that meditating on patience  is  the
cause of happiness. It brings only happiness. Therefore, one  should  strive
in cultivating it.  But if one were to get angry, then one  will  experience
only problems. There  is  no  benefit  whatsoever,  only  problems.  Through
meditating on the faults and the disadvantages of anger that  was  explained
earlier, then one can strive in cultivating its antidote, patience.

Next is engaging the mind in  the  methods  for  accomplishing  patience  of
which there are two points:
1. arresting the causes of anger
2. the benefits of cultivating patience.

In arresting the causes of anger, there are four points:
1. The nature of the cause along with its disadvantages
2. Instructions on making effort in the methods for overcoming anger
3. The actual method for overcoming that
4. Having examined in details the causes that give  rise  to  anger,  making
   effort to abandon them

First, we look at the nature of the cause of anger; what is  the  nature  of
the very cause of anger including its shortcomings.

B.    Engaging the mind in the methods for accomplishing patience

   1. Arresting the causes of anger
      A.  The nature of the cause along with its disadvantages
      Verse 6.7
      Having found its fuel of mental unhappiness
      In the doing of what I do not wish for
      And in the hindering of what I wish for,
      Hatred develops and then destroys me.

What is the cause of anger? What makes somebody  upset?  We  get  upset  and
unhappy if somebody prevents us or our loved ones  from  achieving  what  we
want or  if  somebody  causes  problems  to  us  or  our  loved  ones.  This
unhappiness builds up, becoming stronger and stronger, and eventually  leads
us to become angry.

Mental unhappiness is like the food eaten by a  physically  weak  person  in
order to regain his strength. A weak person needs to  take  nutritious  food
to build up his strength over time and to regain his strength to  the  point
where he can actually overcome or defeat his enemy.

Mental unhappiness is like the  food  for  anger.  When  mental  unhappiness
builds up, it gives strength  to  the  anger.  Then  over  time,  the  anger
becomes powerful. When it arises,  anger  actually  destroys  our  roots  of
virtue in the way we saw earlier.
Here the text is saying that when we notice that we  are  really  upset,  we
should arrest that feeling there and then. We  should  prevent  this  mental
unhappiness from  continuing  because  if  we  let  it  continue,  it  would
manifest in very strong anger or hatred that will then destroy our roots  of
virtue.

Mental unhappiness is the condition for the arising of anger. If we  do  not
stop our mental unhappiness and let it grow, it will lead to the arising  of
very strong hatred. When strong hatred or anger develops,  it  will  destroy
us, “Hatred develops and then destroys me.” “Destroys me”  means  destroying
our happiness of this life and also destroying the happiness of  our  future
lives.


Interpreted by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme; transcribed by Phuah  Soon  Ek,  Patricia
Lee, Julia Koh & Pang Mui Cheng; edited by Cecilia Tsong.



