Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Engaging in the Deeds of a Bodhisattva/BP2 M5 L38 final.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:52:12.890767
================================================================================


Transcript of the teachings by Khen Rinpoche Geshe  Chonyi  on  Engaging  in
the Bodhisattva Deeds, 2014

Root text: Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds by  Shantideva,  translated  by
Toh Sze Gee. Copyright: Toh Sze Gee, 2006; Revised edition, 2014.

Lesson                                                                    38
    1 July   2014


Chapter Six: Verses 6.84 - 6.95.
       C.    Arresting fury towards those who do well by one’s enemies
              3.  Abandoning impatience with the accomplishment of material
       gain (V. 6.84 – V.   6.83)
3.   Arresting fury towards that which hinders one’s desires
   A. It is unreasonable to be impatient with that which  hinders  the  harm
      destined for one’s   enemies (V. 6. 87 – V. 89)
   B. It is unreasonable to be impatient with that which hinders the benefit
      directed  towards oneself and one’s interests
              1.  It is unreasonable to be furious with that  which  hinders
        mundane interests (V. 6. 90 – V. 95)


Last week we looked at how we should  be  happy  when  our  enemies  or  the
persons that we don’t like are happy when they are praised or  receive  some
material gain. We talked about how we should tolerate seeing our enemies  or
the people that we don’t like doing well, when they  are  happy  or  have  a
good reputation. We should not be intolerant of this and feel unhappy  about
it.

In particular, if we are someone who  has  taken  the  oath  and  pledge  to
achieve the state of full enlightenment in order to accomplish  the  welfare
of sentient beings, yet at the same time, we cannot be happy when our  enemy
achieves a little bit  of  happiness  for  himself,  then  there  is  a  big
internal contradiction. It is said that a person who is unable to  be  happy
with the small happiness that  the  enemy  is  experiencing  would  have  no
chance of generating bodhicitta.

It is inappropriate to be jealous of our enemies  or  the  people  we  don’t
like when they achieve some material gain.

C.  ARRESTING FURY TOWARDS THOSE WHO DO WELL BY ONE’S ENEMIES (cont’d)

       3.   Abandoning the impatience with the  accomplishment  of  material
gain
             B.  Reflecting on how there is nothing to want in that
                    1.    It  is  unreasonable  to  feel  jealousy  for  the
material gain of others
      Verse 6.84
      Whether he obtains it from him
      Or whether it remains in the benefactor’s house,
      In either case you shall get nothing.
      What is the use whether he is given something or not?
Imagine a situation when you are with your enemy  or  the  person  that  you
don’t like.   Someone comes along and gives a gift to  your  enemy  but  you
don’t get anything. How would you react? In such a situation, when you  find
yourself getting upset with the  enemy  for  receiving  something  that  you
didn’t get and you are also getting upset at  the  giver,  how  are  you  to
think? The advice is given in verse 6.84.

It doesn’t matter what the giver gives to your enemy. It can be gold,  money
or some other object. Does that mean you will not  be  angry  if  the  giver
doesn’t give it to the enemy? But whether the giver  gives  that  object  to
your enemy or whether the giver keeps it at home, at the  end  of  the  day,
you are not getting anything anyway. In reality there is no real  difference
whether your enemy receives something from the giver or  not.  You  are  not
going to get anything but you get angry when  the  giver  gives  it  to  the
enemy.

The point is that at the end of the  day,  it  doesn’t  matter  whether  the
giver gives the gift to the enemy or not,  you  are  not  getting  anything.
Therefore logically speaking, there is no reason for you to be upset at  the
enemy for receiving the object from the giver and there is  also  no  reason
for you to be upset at the giver because in both cases, you will  still  not
get anything. In that  situation,  wouldn’t  it  be  better  to  stay  calm,
relaxed and undisturbed?

                   2. It is unreasonable to discard one’s own qualities
      Verse 6.85
      So why do I throw away my good qualities,
      Merit and faith?
      Tell me, why am I not angry
      For not holding what will be gain?

You get upset with the enemy for receiving something from the giver and  you
also get upset with the giver. What is the source of  that  unhappiness?  If
you check, you will find that you are upset in that  situation  because  you
want that object. It is only because you did not get that  object  that  you
become upset.

You are upset when your enemy or the people  that  you  don’t  like  receive
gifts. It boils down to you having the desire to gain that  material  object
or possession. Because you have that desire, when you  don’t  get  what  you
desire, then of course you get upset. If what you  want  is  material  gain,
getting upset and angry with your enemy  for  receiving  the  gift  and  the
giver for giving your enemy the gift is not the way to achieve your desire.

If you get angry with the giver and the enemy for  receiving  the  gift,  in
the process you are destroying your merit. In fact it  becomes  an  obstacle
to getting what you want, in this case material gain. When  you  get  upset,
you look bad and you behave in a way that causes others to dislike you.  You
also destroy your merit. These  are  all  obstacles  if  what  you  want  is
material gain.

If you want material  gain,  then  you  have  to  work  at  the  causes  for
receiving material gain such as increasing your stock of merit, engaging  in
acceptable behaviour that would lead  you  to  receive  gifts  from  others,
living an ethical life and so forth. If material  gain  is  what  you  want,
then these are the causes for you to receive material gain.

But this is not to say that you should behave well, live life ethically  and
increase your merit for the purpose of getting material gain. Here you  have
to understand that this is not advice encouraging you to look  for  material
gain. That is not the point. The main point  here  relates  to  you  getting
upset because you don’t get the gift that the enemy receives. This verse  is
telling you that that is not the way to get the material gain.

This verse is pointing out that  ultimately  you  are  responsible  for  not
getting what you want because when you see  others  doing  well,  especially
the enemy getting something and you not getting anything at all, your  usual
response is to be upset. You get upset and angry with the enemy and also  at
the giver. In  so  doing,  you  destroy  your  merit  and  externally,  your
behaviour also becomes unacceptable  to  others.  Your  behaviour  and  your
destruction of your own merit are the causes of you not getting anything  in
the end.

So rather than getting angry at the giver and at  the  enemy  for  receiving
gifts, if you really want to get upset, you  should  be  upset  at  yourself
because you are at fault.  That is the point. It is not  about  you  wanting
material gain and then to achieve that you put on  a  good  show  of  living
ethically and so forth.

                   3.  While it is  right  to  feel  sorrow  for  one’s  own
          negativities, it is not right to be jealous of others’ virtues
      Verse 6.86
      Not only do you not have any sorrow
      For having committed negativities,
      Do you wish to compete with others
      Who have created merit?

Having said this, when you get upset  when  the  enemy  or  the  person  you
dislike get something but you don’t get what they get, you  may  think,  “If
he gets something and I don’t get anything, I will be upset  and  angry.  So
it will be really good if he doesn’t get anything  as  well  because  if  he
doesn’t get anything, then I will be OK. I won't be upset with the enemy  as
long as he doesn’t get anything. If I don’t get anything, then he  shouldn’t
get anything as well. I have no issues with that. I am OK with that.”

If you think like that, you should understand that you not getting  anything
is the result of your own doing. It is because  you  do  not  know  what  to
cultivate and what to abandon. You did not create and have  not  accumulated
the causes and the merit to receive material gain.  Instead  you  get  upset
and engage in all kinds of negativities.   That  is  actually  quite  a  sad
situation. We should be sad at our own situation of not having  created  the
causes but creating negativities instead.

Why is the other person receiving material  gain?  This  is  due  to  having
practised ethical discipline and accumulated the causes. This  is  why  this
person is receiving something now because she  has  created  the  cause  for
receiving it.

Instead of being sad with  our  own  limited  situation,  we  don’t  examine
ourselves.  At the same time we want to compete with others, those who  have
created the causes and have the merit to receive such material gain. Why  do
we do that?

The text is telling us to  ask  ourselves  why  we  are  competing  in  this
negative way with those who have merit. If we really want  to  compete  with
such people, we should compete  in  terms  of  being  wise  and  skilled  in
knowing what to cultivate and what  to  abandon.   We  should  be  wise  and
skilled in guarding our ethical discipline and in accumulating merit.

In the past few lessons, we talked about the twelve  desirable  objects  and
the  twelve  undesirable  objects.  We  have  finished   with   the   twelve
undesirable objects in relation to oneself and in  relation  to  the  people
who matter to us, our relatives, loved ones, friends and so forth.

Now we are going to start with the twelve desirable  objects.  If  there  is
anything that  hinders  us  or  our  loved  ones  from  getting  the  twelve
desirable objects, we get angry and upset. What are we going to do in  those
situations? How do we practise patience then?

If we talk about the twelve desirable objects in relation to our  enemy,  we
want our enemy to suffer and to have bad things  happen  to  them.  We  want
them to have bad reputation, to be unhappy, poor,  deprived  and  so  forth.
That is what we want. If there is anything that interferes with  that,  then
we get upset. If there is anything that stops  or  hinders  our  enemy  from
being harmed in any way, we don’t like it.

3.  ARRESTING FURY TOWARDS THAT WHICH HINDERS ONE’S DESIRES[1]

   A.  It is unreasonable to be impatient with that which hinders  the  harm
      destined for one’s enemies
      1.  Disliking enemies is of no benefit to oneself
      Verse 6.87 a, b
      Even if your enemy is not joyful,
      What is there for you to be joyful about?

If our enemy receives any of  these  four  things—good  reputation,  praise,
material gains or happiness—we don’t like it. We like  it  when  they  don’t
have these four things. So if anybody is to come along and  stop  them  from
having material gain, we like it. We want them  to  suffer  and  if  anybody
comes along and stops them from suffering, we don’t like it. But  the  verse
is asking us, “If the enemy suffers, what is  there  for  you  to  be  happy
about?”

When we see the people we  dislike  getting  into  trouble,  big  or  small,
perish or experience something bad  and  they  suffer,  we  feel  that  they
deserve it, that those things should have happened to  them.  We  feel  good
and happy. That is completely distorted rejoicing.

Here the teaching  is  asking  us,  “What  real  benefit  do  you  get  from
generating that kind of distorted rejoicing?” It says here that not only  is
there no benefit; in fact there is only harm. We receive harm.

In reality, our malice or ill-will towards the  enemy  would  not  harm  the
enemy.

      2.  Enemies are not harmed by your developing ill will
      Verse 6.87 c, d
      Your mind merely wishing
      Did not cause him to be harmed.

There are times when we really feel like that. This happens. When we  really
don’t like someone or when we hate someone, we mentally wish  for  something
bad to befall that person. We wish that he will die, be hurt  or  suffer  in
some way. Sometimes we even verbalise our wish,  saying  things  like,  “You
just go and die.”

The teaching is saying  that  just  verbalising  or  having  such  malicious
thoughts does not do the damage you intend  for  the  enemy.  We  have  such
thoughts and we say such things but at the end of the day, they  do  nothing
whatsoever to the enemy. We don’t harm the enemy  but  we  actually  end  up
harming ourselves.

It is inappropriate to be happy when our enemy or the people that  we  don’t
like are suffering.

      3. It harms oneself
        A.  It is unreasonable to enjoy the harm that befalls your enemy
      Verse 6.88 a, b
      Even if his suffering is established due to your wish,
      What is there for you to be joyful about?

We may think, “May this person die. May he suffer. May something bad  befall
him.”  Sometimes  we  even  verbalise  these  thoughts.  This  is  called  a
perverted wish or prayer. In reality however  such  actions  only  harm  us.
They cannot do anything to the enemy or really harm the enemy in any way.

Even if, say, our bad intentions or malicious words  can  actually  have  an
effect on the enemy, even if our enemy were to be harmed as  a  result,  the
text is saying, “What is there for you to be joyful about  even  if  you  do
achieve your wish?”

If we actually hold on to this kind  of  happiness—feeling  happy  when  our
enemy suffers—it will only be the cause for us to suffer in the future.

        B. If one holds onto that joy, it will  become  a  cause  of  great
           suffering for oneself
      Verse 6.88 c, d
      OPINION: I shall be satisfied.
      RESPONSE: How could there be anything more ravaging than that?


      Verse 6.89
      Having been held by this unbearable and sharp hook
      Cast by the fisherman of the afflictions,
      It is certain that I shall be cooked
      In the pots of sentient beings’ hell by the hell guardians.

We may object to the argument that there is no benefit  for  us  if  we  are
happy when the enemy suffers. To us, there is benefit as we think,  “I  feel
good. Before I die, he must suffer. When he suffers, I feel good. Because  I
feel good, that is the benefit I get.”

Then this verse asks, “If you happen to think like that, what is the  answer
to thinking in this way?”

If  you  think  like  that,  you  have  to  understand  that  this  way   of
thinking—feeling satisfied because your enemy is suffering—will  only  cause
you to suffer in this life and your  future  lives.  That  is  the  greatest
loss.

As we saw in the previous verse, wishing the enemy to suffer will not  cause
him to suffer. In fact, we are causing ourselves to suffer in this life  and
in future lives. In reality, the enemy does not suffer.

If you happen to be someone  who  has  taken  the  bodhisattva  vows,  as  a
practitioner of bodhicitta who is entertaining these thoughts, it will  lead
you to commit the bodhisattva root downfalls. When you die, you will  go  to
the lower realms. In fact you will go to the hell realms. When  you  end  up
in the hell realms, you will have to experience great suffering.

If you have such negative thoughts, you  are  like  a  fish  caught  by  the
fisherman. With  the  hook  in  your  mouth,  you  suffer  unbearable  pain.
Likewise when you are caught by the fisherman of anger, that  anger  induces
the malice that causes you to accumulate very  strong  negative  karma  that
will throw you into the hell realms where you will be cooked in the  boiling
cauldrons of hell.

When motivated by anger, we entertain ill-will or malice,  wishing  to  harm
the other person. Remember our discussion in the previous  lesson  regarding
covetousness? Here we can apply that  discussion  to  ill-will.  There  will
also be the motivation, performance and completion.

Let us look at the development of ill-will:
 • First, there arises the thought, “I want to harm that person” or “I  wish
   that person harm.” That is the motivational phase.
 • When that thought becomes stronger, you enter the performance phase.
 • You feel good about wanting that person to suffer, “How wonderful if this
   person suffers. May everything that is bad happen to him.” You feel  that
   sense of satisfaction. Perhaps we can posit this mental  satisfaction  to
   be the completion of malice.

If you have the  motivation,  performance  and  completion,  then  karma  is
accumulated. The fruitional effect of that karma would  be  rebirth  in  the
lower realms such as the hells.  You  should  know  that  a  karma  that  is
accumulated is a karma whose result you will definitely experience. That  is
something you should know. In this example, the fruitional  effect  of  such
karma is rebirth in the hells.

From this discussion, we can see  that  if  you  have  ill-will  towards  an
enemy, even if you feel good about it, in reality your goal is not  achieved
because the enemy is not harmed. Wishing him harm does not harm him  in  any
way. Rather we ourselves will be harmed in  a  terrible  way  by  having  to
suffer in the hells. So actually we suffer the greatest loss.

As such, verses 6.88 c, d and 6.89 come under the  outline,  “If  one  holds
onto that joy, it will become a cause of great suffering for oneself.”   You
have to understand that this is so. You have to think  about  it  until  you
develop an ascertainment  of  it.  Based  on  that,  you  have  to  restrain
yourself from this way of thinking.

The next section is about why  it  is  inappropriate  to  be  intolerant  or
impatient when obstacles arise to obstruct us or the people  who  matter  to
us from receiving good things such as praise, material gain and so forth.

We embrace the eight worldly dharmas. We want the eight worldly dharmas.  We
want them for ourselves and we also want them for the people who  matter  to
us. When something or somebody comes along to obstruct us,  our  loved  ones
or the people who matter to us from embracing,  receiving  and  experiencing
these eight worldly dharmas, we  get  upset.  We  will  be  upset  with  the
situation or the person who interferes with that.

We want praise and good reputation. When anything or anybody comes along  to
interfere with that, we get upset. In that situation,  how  should  we  deal
with it?  First, there is no need for praise and reputation.

  B. It is unreasonable to be impatient with that which hinders the benefit
    directed towards oneself and one’s interests
        1.  It is unreasonable  to  be  furious  with  that  which  hinders
    mundane interests
              A.  It is unreasonable to be furious with that which  hinders
          one’s own praise and   renown
                    1.  There is no need for just praise and renown
      Verse 6.90
      The honor of praise and fame
      Will turn into neither merit nor life;
      It will turn into neither strength nor freedom from sickness for me,
      And also will not transform into physical happiness.


      Verse 6.91 a, b
      If I were to understand my welfare,
      What is there in them that is my welfare?

We like  praise.  We  want  to  be  well-known.  We  want  to  have  a  good
reputation. But praise, fame and having  a  good  reputation  cannot  become
causes for our happiness in future lives.

Even in this life, words of praise and having a  good  reputation  will  not
make us live longer as they can never act as causes for our longevity.  Also
they will not confer on us physical strength nor can they  protect  us  from
sickness. They cannot confer on us bodily pleasure.

When we partake of food and drink, at least  we  get  some  kind  of  bodily
pleasure and a pleasant feeling. Food and drink can also sustain  our  body.
At least we get some pleasure from them. But  we  cannot  obtain  even  this
small pleasure from words of praise and a good reputation. So those who  are
really wise and expert in accomplishing their own goals and  happiness  know
that praise and reputation have no bearing on these things whatsoever.  They
do us no good. There is no benefit at all.

We hear these words but inside us, we still object to  this,  don’t  we?  We
may accept this, “Yes, yes, there is no benefit in our future  lives.  There
is no benefit in that they do  not  strengthen  my  body,  protect  me  from
sickness, give me any  physical  pleasure  or  pleasant  feeling.  But  this
doesn’t mean that there is no benefit at all.”

We feel there are benefits. Why? Because we feel good and that is  all  that
matters. This is how we think, “All that matters is that when I  am  praised
and I have a good reputation, I feel good. So how can you tell me  there  is
no benefit?  There is benefit. If anybody were to stop or obstruct  me  from
being praised or cause me not to have a good reputation, those  are  reasons
for me to get upset because she is stopping me from feeling good.”

In Gyaltsab  Je’s  commentary,  the  answer  to  this  way  of  thinking  is
classified under the outline that says, “It is unreasonable to  seek  merely
mental joy,” and that goes with the last two lines of verse 6.91.

                    2.  It is unreasonable to seek merely mental joy
      Verse 6.91c, d
      If I desire just mental happiness,
      Then I should devote  myself  to  gambling  and  so  forth,  and  also
      drinking.


“If I desire just mental happiness,” then the  answer  is,  “Then  I  should
devote myself to gambling and so forth, and also drinking.”

We see the reasons that we come up with to counter  the  argument  that  was
thrown at us with respect to praise and good reputation.  We  say,  “Yes.  I
accept that there is no benefit in our future lives. They  do  not  make  me
stronger physically and so forth.” Yet we still argue,  “But  they  make  me
feel good. That is all that matters. I am happy and I want that.”

Now Shantideva is taking the reason we have given, i.e., “I  feel  good  and
that is all that matters.” Shantideva says, “If your  only  reason  is  that
feeling good is all that matters and  it  can  justify  anything,  then  why
don’t you gamble? Why don’t you drink?”

Normally  most  people  would  find  that  drinking  and  gambling  are  not
beneficial, don’t they? Drinking and gambling are harmful. But if  going  by
our reasoning—“I want  to  feel  good  by  being  praised.  So  if  somebody
obstructs that, I will be angry. That is  justified  because  I  feel  happy
when I am praised.”—then by extension, we should also  feel  happy  when  we
drink and gamble.

The essential point is this: Our  reason  for  wanting  to  be  praised  and
having a good reputation is because we feel good. That is the  only  reason.
Basically we are also saying that  feeling  good  can  justify  doing  those
things that are usually considered not good to do, those things are  usually
not permissible to do.

Next verse is under the outline which says,  “There  is  no  need  for  mere
praise and reputation.”

                    3.  Grasping for merely that is erroneous
                          A.  There is no need for just praise and renown
      Verse 6.92
      If for the sake of fame
      I lose my wealth or get myself killed,
      What can mere words do then?
      Once I am dead, to whom will they give pleasure?

There are some people who practise generosity but they are actually  looking
for good reputation. They want it to be known to everybody that they are  so
generous. So there are people who really give but they are motivated by  the
desire wanting to be known for their generosity.

Then there are also people who want to be famous, to be  known  as  a  hero.
They go off fighting and waging wars. Of course when they  fight,  they  may
lose their lives.

When that happens, who or what does it benefit—all  these  words  of  praise
and good reputation? They do not bring any benefit to the  body.  They  also
do not bring any real benefit to the mind.

                          B.  To dislike the loss of praise and  renown  is
          childish
      Verse 6.93
      When their sandcastles collapse,
      Children howl in despair;
      Likewise when my praise and reputation decline
      My mind becomes like a child.

Here it says that if we really sit down and think deeply, we  can  see  that
we are like  children.  The  example  here  is  of  children  building  sand
castles. When children build sand castles, they put  in  a  lot  of  effort.
After they have built the rough structure of  the  castle,  they  feel  very
happy. If then for whatever reason that sand castle collapses, the  children
will experience great distress. They will just cry and cry.

The teachings are saying that we are like that. We want to  be  praised.  We
want affirmation and recognition from others. But when there  is  a  decline
in our reputation, we are like children because we get  very  disturbed.  It
doesn’t take much praise to make us  feel  elated.  Just  a  little  bit  of
praise will make us feel very happy. But when there is a slight  decline  in
the affirmation or recognition we receive from others or  a  slight  decline
in our reputation, we feel terrible. We feel so bad and lose  our  sense  of
self-worth. As such, we are likened to children  who  cry  when  their  sand
castle collapses.

Khen Rinpoche: So don’t cry when the sand castle collapses.

                    4.   The reasons it is erroneous
                           A.  It is unreasonable to be attached to the joy
                one feels for praise of oneself
      Verse 6.94
      Since short-lived sounds are without mind,
      They cannot possibly think of praising me.
      It makes others happy,
      That fame is counted as a cause of joy.


      Verse 6.95
      Whether this praise is directed at myself or someone else
      How shall I be benefited by others’ joy?
      Since that joy is theirs alone
      I shall not obtain even a part of it.

We like people who praise us. Whoever praises us to make us  happy,  we  not
only like that person but we also cling to him, “Oh,  this  person  is  very
good.”

Here we are asked to look at ourselves and our mind to  check  what  we  are
attached to:
 • Are we attached to the words of praise?
 • Are we attached to the person’s mind that feels happy when he is praising
   us because when the person is praising us, it  seems  that  he  is  happy
   doing so?

Look at the words of praise. The words are essentially the sounds  we  hear.
Since the words are sounds as such, the words are non-sentient  and  do  not
have a mind. So the words do not have any intention or the thought  to  make
us happy. So we are not attached to the sounds.  We may concede, “Fine.  I’m
not attached to the sound of the words of praise.”

Then let’s assume that the person who is praising us is happy doing  so.  Is
there a possibility of us being attached to the  fact  that  the  person  is
happy praising us?  Assuming we are attached to the happiness of the  person
who is praising, then the response to that is this,  “The  person  is  happy
praising you but what has his happiness got to do with you? It  is  none  of
your business!  Will his happiness make you happy?”

If that person is really  happy  praising  us,  that  is  his  business.  He
experiences that happiness but there is  no  way  we  can  partake  of  that
happiness ourselves. There is no way he can even share  a  portion  of  that
happiness in the sense of that person giving some of it to us.

You have to remember that here there are these  two  lines  of  argument  to
substantiate the fact that there is no reason  for  us  to  be  attached  to
praise and reputation.

We are attached to fame and reputation and we like to hear  good  words  and
pleasant words. The question is this, “What  are  we  attached  to?  Are  we
attached to the sound? Is there something good there?  What  is  good  about
it?” So it is not the sound.

Then the next question is  this,  “Are  we  clinging  on  to  the  happiness
experienced in the mind of that person when he is praising  us?”  That  also
cannot be the case because that person feeling happy has nothing to do  with
us as his happiness cannot be transferred to us.

Khen Rinpoche: Is this correct or not? I myself also don’t know.

What do you think of verses 6.94 and 6.95?

Here we are trying to prove that there is no reason whatsoever for us to  be
attached to praise and having a good reputation.

But we are attached to  them  so  here  the  question  that  we  should  ask
ourselves is this, “What exactly  are  we  attached  to?”  We  know  we  are
attached to these two things. Or perhaps we are not very sure  what  exactly
we are attached to.  So  we  are  listing  out  the  possibilities.  Are  we
attached to the words? If it is not the words, then it has to  be  something
else. In this case, that something else is the happiness in the mind of  the
person who is praising us, i.e., the  mind  that  feels  happy  when  he  is
praising us.

Now do you see the logic?

Obviously we know we are attached. We don’t have to analyse  that.  What  we
are analysing is what we are attached to:
 • There are the words of praise that come from the person who  is  praising
   you. The words are essentially sounds. So are we attached to the sound of
   the words of praise?
 • Or are we attached to the person who is praising us? If we  say  that  we
   are attached to the person, there must be something  within  that  person
   that we are attached to. Can it be the mind of the  person  who  has  the
   intention to praise us, the happiness  felt  by  that  mind  when  he  is
   praising us? Is that what we are attached to?

The point is that we are not attached to  the  sound  because  there  is  no
reason to  be  attached  to  the  sound  of  the  words  of  praise.  It  is
inappropriate to be attached to those sounds.

Neither is it appropriate to be attached to the mind of the  person  who  is
praising us. Even if the person is happy praising us, we cannot  partake  of
that person’s happiness because that person cannot share his happiness  with
us. As such, there  is  no  benefit  to  be  attached  to  praise  and  good
reputation.

Student: It could be referring to  our  attachment  to  the  other  person’s
approval and affirmation of us. When he approves of us, he has a happy  mind
so we care about his approval.

(Ven. Gyurme puts forth the position that when one is praised, one does  not
care whether the person praising us is happy or not. We only care about  the
fact that we are being praised).

(Another student responds but response is inaudible).

Khen Rinpoche: He likes you so that is why you like him, isn’t it? When  the
person praises you, of course you think that person is good.  His  heart  is
good.

Ven Gyurme: But when the enemy praises me, I don’t think the enemy  is  good
but I like the praise.

Khen Rinpoche: In the first place, the enemy won’t  praise  you.  The  enemy
only criticises you.

Ven Gyurme: Sometimes they do. They do it out  of  a  bad  motivation.  They
want something from you.

Khen Rinpoche: When you know that, the praise doesn’t become praise to  you.
That praising becomes ‘un-praising’.

The problem is when you heard that ‘praise’ from the enemy, you  don’t  like
it. That doesn’t mean you don’t like  being  praised.  But  when  the  enemy
praises you, you already know it is not really praise  so  you  are  already
unhappy about it. You know the person is  criticising  you  indirectly.  You
don’t think, “He is praising me.”

Ven Gyurme: But we still like that because if the enemy praises me in  front
of other people, I look good. I know what he  is  doing  but  I  still  look
good. Other people don’t know what is really  going  on.  That  is  what  we
think.

Khen Rinpoche: I don’t think so. If you don’t know  whether  the  person  is
really praising you or not then maybe you may feel happy.

But if your mind is already thinking, “That person is  not  really  praising
me from his heart, only with his mouth,” then I don’t think  you  will  feel
happy. You will think, “What you are saying is not true, i.e., not  sincere,
so why are you doing that?”

Interpreted by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme; transcribed by Phuah  Soon  Ek,  Patricia
Lee & Julia Koh; edited by Cecilia Tsong.


-----------------------
[1] 1.  A general presentation of the divisions of anger  in  terms  of  the
   objects that give rise to anger (V.    6.11)
   2.  Arresting fury towards that which brings unwanted things (V.  6.12  –
V. 6. 86)
   3.  Arresting fury towards that which hinders one’s desires  (V.  6.87  –
V. 6.126)

