Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Engaging in the Deeds of a Bodhisattva/BP2 M5 L45 final.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:52:18.122763
================================================================================


Transcript of the teachings by Khen Rinpoche Geshe  Chonyi  on  Engaging  in
the Bodhisattva Deeds, 2014

Root text: Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds by  Shantideva,  translated  by
Toh Sze Gee. Copyright: Toh Sze Gee, 2006; Revised edition, 2014.

Lesson  45                                                                19
August 2014


Chapter seven: Verses 7. 40–7. 51
Increasing the strength of joyous effort—the antidote
        A. Increasing the strength of the conditions  conducive  to  joyous
           effort
         2.  Extensive explanation
              A.  The power of esteem (V. 7.40 c, d – V.46 a, b)
              B.   The power of stability (V. 46 c, d – V. 7.51)


INCREASING THE STRENGTH OF JOYOUS EFFORT —THE ANTIDOTE (cont’d)

We  had  started  with  the  outline  on  increasing  the  strength  of  the
conditions  conducive  to  joyous  effort  (or   joyous   perseverance)   or
increasing the favorable conditions for the  generation  of  joyous  effort.
Under that outline, the four powers are discussed. They are:
1. the power of aspiration (or the power of esteem)
2. the power of steadfastness (or the power of stability)
3. the power of joy
4. the power of relinquishment (or the power of suspension)
Of the four, we have started on the power of aspiration.

What is joyous effort? Joyous effort is the  enthusiasm  for  virtue.  There
are four powers related to developing joyous effort. The first is the  power
of aspiration. In this context,  the  power  of  aspiration  refers  to  the
yearning for Dharma practice and the yearning for virtue.  In  order  to  be
able to cultivate any practice  or  virtue,  one  must  have  this  yearning
wanting such practice or virtue.

If that is the case, then how does one develop this yearning or  aspiration?
As mentioned in the root text, the  root  of  such  aspiration  is  constant
meditation on the fruitional effects of karma (V. 7.40  c,  d).  This  means
that if we  want  to  develop  a  yearning  for  the  teachings  and  Dharma
practice, we have to  reflect  on  and  come  to  an  understanding  of  the
presentation of karma and its effects. In particular, we have to reflect  on
the effects of our actions. We need to think of the  various  effects  of  a
single karma in terms of its fruitional effect, causally  concordant  effect
and environmental effect.

In essence, the text is saying that to be able to practise the  Dharma,  you
need to have a very strong yearning and aspiration for it and you must  want
to practice the Dharma from your own side. That  in  turn  is  dependent  on
your faith of conviction in karma. Your interest for the  practice  will  be
commensurate with your  faith  of  conviction  in  karma.  Therefore  it  is
mentioned in the stages  of  the  path  literature  that  the  root  of  all
happiness is this faith of conviction in karma and its effects.

Expanding on this discussion of karma and  its  effects  are  the  next  few
verses, which deal with reflecting on the effects of virtue, the effects  of
non-virtue and the effects of mixed karma.

      A.  Increasing the strength of  the  conditions  conducive  to  joyous
      effort
            2.  Extensive explanation
                  A.  The power of esteem
                        3.   The cause for esteem
                                     B.  Extensive explanation
                                           1.   Reflecting  on  mixed  karma
and its effects
      Verse 7.41
      Suffering, mental unhappiness,
      The various kinds of fear,
      As well as separation from what is desired
      Will arise from negative deeds.


      Verse 7.42
      By performing virtues intended in the mind,
      Wherever I go, due to those merits,
      There I shall be honoured with
      The excellences that are their results.


      Verse 7.43
      Although one who commits misdeeds wishes for happiness,
      Wherever he goes,
      There those misdeeds
      Will completely destroy him with the weapons of suffering.

We experience many kinds of problems and suffering. On the bodily level,  we
experience sicknesses or the discomforts of heat and cold. Likewise we  also
suffer mental unhappiness. So  in  life,  we  experience  suffering,  mental
unhappiness, various kinds of fears as  well  as  separation  from  what  we
desire and coming into contact with the things that we do not  desire.  This
is how samsara is.

Basically Verse 7.41 is saying that all undesirable experiences and  results
do not come into being without a  cause.  They  do  not  arise  without  any
causes and conditions. Rather these are said to be  the  fruitional  effects
of the non-virtue that we have  accumulated.  This  verse  is  actually  the
presentation of cause and effect, karma.

We have the aspiration or yearning for virtue that comes from our  faith  of
conviction in karma  and  its  effects.  Based  on  that  yearning  for  the
practice, the Dharma and virtue, if we accumulate the  virtue  that  is  the
cause of happiness, then wherever we go, due to the power of  the  merit  or
virtue that we have accumulated, we will experience the  fruitional  effects
of those virtues, i.e., happiness.

If we only accumulate non-virtue and at the same time, we want  success  and
happiness, will we achieve the result, happiness? The answer is no! Even  if
we want only success and happiness, if we commit misdeeds or accumulate non-
virtue, those misdeeds will accompany us wherever we  go.  When  those  non-
virtues ripen, they will bring about only suffering.

The outline that goes with these three verses is reflecting on  mixed  karma
and its effects. When we talk about mixed karma, we are  not  talking  about
white  karma  (or  virtue)  and  black  karma  (or   non-virtue).   In   the
presentation of karma, there is a classification of karma into:
 • projecting karma that propels or throws one into a future rebirth
 • completing karma that literally completes that life

For example, being born in a higher realm is a  good  rebirth  that  is  the
result of virtuous projecting karma. Let’s say in that life,  one  has  good
health, a long life, wealth, prosperity and all kinds of  happinesses.  That
life is completed with virtuous completing karma.

Let’s take rebirth as a sentient being in the lower realms as an example.  A
rebirth in the lower realms is the result of non-virtuous  projecting  karma
and that life is  filled  with  suffering.  In  that  sense,  that  life  is
completed also with non-virtuous completing karma.

Even with a good rebirth that is the result of  virtuous  projecting  karma,
in that life, a  person  may  experience  a  short  life,  many  sicknesses,
poverty and destitution. His life is like that and it ends  with  all  those
problems and sufferings. Although that person has a  good  rebirth  that  is
the result of virtuous projecting karma, his life  is  completed  with  non-
virtuous completing karma.

Let’s take the example of a dog that is kept by a rich family.  The  rebirth
of that dog is the result of non-virtuous projecting karma. But generally  a
dog that is kept by a well-to-do family will live in a big  house  and  have
people looking after it. It gets what it wants, all kinds  of  food  and  so
forth. Although rebirth as a dog is the result  of  non-virtuous  projecting
karma, its life is filled with all these enjoyments. As  such,  this  is  an
example of a life that is completed by virtuous completing karma.

There are different classifications of the hells. There is  what  we  called
the occasional hells. Rebirth in an occasional hell is the  result  of  non-
virtuous projecting karma. But in some of  these  occasional  hells,  it  is
said that at different times of  the  day—for  example,  during  the  entire
night—the beings  that  are  born  there  experience  a  lot  of  happiness,
pleasure and all kinds  of  enjoyments.  That  is  the  result  of  virtuous
completing karma. Then when  daytime  comes  and  the  sun  rises,  whatever
happiness and pleasures they experienced at night cease and are replaced  by
unimaginable  pain  and  suffering.  That  is  the  result  of  non-virtuous
completing karma. In  the  case  of  these  beings  who  are  born  in  such
occasional hells, their lives  are  completed  by  both  virtuous  and  non-
virtuous completing karmas.

It was mentioned in the teachings that there was a butcher  who  slaughtered
animals during the day. As a result of having that kind  of  livelihood,  he
was not able to abandon killing during the day but he was  able  to  abandon
killing during the night. So he took on the vow not to  kill  at  night.  He
was born in one of these occasional hells. As the result of being a  butcher
who slaughtered animals in the day, he  experienced  unimaginable  suffering
and pain in the day but when night came, his experience completely  changed.
Whenever it was  nighttime,  he  would  experience  unimaginable  pleasures,
comforts and enjoyments, which are the results of having taken  the  vow  of
not killing at night.

There is also an account of a woman  who  was  only  able  to  avoid  sexual
misconduct in the day but was not able to avoid sexual misconduct at  night.
So during daytime, she kept the vow of not  engaging  in  sexual  misconduct
but she was not able to do so at night. As a result, after she  was  reborn,
her experience was opposite to that of the butcher in that during  the  day,
she experienced happiness and comfort. Then  when  night  came,  because  of
having engaged in sexual misconduct at night in the  past,  she  experienced
problems and sufferings at night.

What is the moral of these accounts? The moral is  that  we  should  try  as
much as possible to abandon non-virtue and to  keep  to  whatever  vows  and
trainings we have taken on. Even if we cannot do this for a  long  time,  we
should try to adhere to such vows and training for whatever period  of  time
that we are able to manage. We should not underestimate the ripening  result
of keeping vows for even a short period of time. We should think about  this
and not look down on the importance of keeping our vows. We should not  have
this idea: “What is the point of taking on these vows as I cannot keep  them
anyway,” and so forth.

There are some people who are born as  humans  as  the  result  of  virtuous
projecting karma. In the earlier part of their lives,  things  go  well  and
they have a lot of success and enjoyments. That is the  result  of  virtuous
completing karma. But  in  the  later  part  of  their  lives,  their  lives
suddenly change. They have no success and they meet with a lot  of  problems
and sufferings. Their lives end like that. Of course, that is the result  of
non-virtuous completing karma.  This  is  an  example  of  a  life  that  is
completed by both virtuous and non-virtuous completing karmas.

The lesson from these accounts is that whatever happiness or  suffering  you
may experience in a good rebirth,  say,  as  a  human  being,  you  have  to
understand that it is the result  of  virtuous  completing  karma.  Whatever
problems you experience are the result  of  non-virtuous  completing  karma.
Likewise when we see how animal and beings in the  lower  realms  experience
life, whatever suffering  they  experience  is  the  result  of  their  non-
virtuous completing karma. Whatever happiness they experience is the  result
of their virtuous completing karma. We have to understand this  and  develop
certainty and conviction that this is so.

In the section on karma in the stages of the path  literature,  one  of  the
general characteristics of karma is  that  karma  is  definite.  This  means
that:
 • if we accumulate virtue, that virtue is certain to bring about happiness,
   i.e., the result of virtue can only be happiness.
 • non-virtue is certain to bring about suffering, i.e., the result of  non-
   virtue can only be suffering.

                                 2.  Reflecting on solely  white  karma  and
its effects
      Verse 7.44
      As a result of virtue, I will become a spiritual child of the  Sugatas
        dwelling in the hearts of vast, fragrant, and cool lotuses,
      The food of the Victors’ pleasant speech will cause  my  splendour  to
        grow,
      My supreme body will emerge from a lotus that will unfold due  to  the
        light of the Munis and
      I will abide in the presence of the Victors.

If one is able accumulate virtue well, one can be reborn in  the  pure  land
of the buddhas such as the pure land of Amitabha  Buddha  called  Sukhavati.
This pure land is very vast, expansive and beautiful. It is said  that  when
one is reborn in a lotus  in  Sukhavati,  one  grows  up  listening  to  and
hearing the speech of the buddhas, which sustains one’s growth in  the  pure
land. So hearing the buddhas’ speech will cause one’s  “splendor  to  grow.”
I guess this is what the verse is talking about.

When a normal human being is conceived in the womb, the development  of  the
baby is sustained by the nutrients from the  mother’s  body.  Likewise  when
one is reborn in a lotus in Sukhavati, one will develop physically and  grow
within the lotus. One’s sustenance is the buddhas’  speech,  which  is  like
the nutrients that the baby gets from its mother in the womb.

There will come a time when  the  light  from  the  exalted  bodies  of  the
buddhas causes the lotus to fully bloom. It is said that one’s supreme  body
will then emerge from the lotus, adorned with characteristics  such  as  the
different marks and signs. After one emerges from the  lotus—in  this  case,
we are talking about Sukhavati, the pure land of Amitabha  Buddha—one  comes
before the presence of Amitabha Buddha. One’s life is   then  lived  hearing
teachings from Amitabha Buddha. All these experiences  are  the  results  of
white or wholesome karma.

                                 3.   Reflecting  on  black  karma  and  its
effects
      Verse 7.45
      As a result of many non-virtues, I will be very wretched due to all my
        skin without exception being ripped off by the henchmen of Yama,
      Molten copper melted by tremendous heat will be poured into my body,
      Pierced by flaming swords and daggers,  my  flesh  will  be  cut  into
        hundreds of pieces,
      And I shall plummet upon the fiercely blazing iron ground.

These are said to be the experiences of those who accumulate non-virtue.

                  4.  Conclusion
      Verse 7.46 ab
      Therefore, I should be interested in virtue
      And with great respect acquaint myself with it.[1]
This is the concluding summary to the discussion on karma.

Prior to this was the discussion on the need to have a yearning for  virtue,
practice and the Dharma. The root of that yearning is having  the  faith  of
conviction in karma. As such, there is some explanation on  the  results  of
virtue and the results of non-virtue. The conclusion here  is  that  as  the
result of those reflections, one should have the yearning  to  abandon  non-
virtue and the yearning to cultivate virtue.

With that, I think we have finished the first power, the power of esteem  or
the power of aspiration. Next must be the power of stability  or  the  power
of steadfastness.

Whenever you are going to engage in practice or virtue,  first,  you  should
investigate right from the beginning whether  that  practice  or  virtue  is
appropriate  and  whether  you  have  the  ability  to  do  it.  After  such
investigation, then from the time you engage in that  chosen  activity,  you
should see things through and make sure  that  you  complete  that  task  or
practice. This is what is meant by the power of stability or steadfastness.

            B.  The power of stability
                   1.  Stable perseverance
                         A.  Examining it well and undertaking it
      Verse 7.46 c, d
      Having undertaken through the procedure of Vajradhvaja, [2]
      I should cultivate pride.


      Verse 7.47
      At the beginning having examined the endowments,
      I should either undertake it or not undertake it.
      It is best not to undertake it,
      But once I have undertaken it I should not withdraw.

When the sun rises, the sun from its own side can illuminate  everything  on
this planet. But there are certain locations—due to the terrain  or  factors
such as underground caves and so on—that  the  sunlight  cannot  reach.  But
that is not the fault  of  the  sun  as  the  sun  from  its  own  side  can
illuminate everything. If factors such as uneven terrain  and  so  forth  do
not exist, then the light of the sun will be able to shine everywhere.

It is said that the real bodhisattvas who work day and  night  for  sentient
beings have the capacity to do  so.  From  their  own  side,  they  are  not
biased, i.e. thinking of working for some and not  for  others.  From  their
own side, they want to work for all sentient beings. But  if  some  sentient
beings have wrong views, then they will not  benefit from the work of  those
bodhisattvas. That is not the fault of the bodhisattvas  as  they  have  the
wish and the capacity to benefit them. If the sentient beings are not  ready
to be benefited, that is not the fault  of  the  bodhisattvas.  The  problem
lies with the sentient beings.  If  the  sentient  beings  in  question  are
mature, with their minds suitable to be ripened, then the bodhisattvas  will
be able to help them.

This is advice for cultivating pride but not pride in  the  negative  sense.
Rather it is  a  can-do  attitude,  “I  can  do  this  myself.”  It  is  for
generating courage. Based on the example of the bodhisattvas who give  their
bodies away, the bodhisattvas are able to work for others regardless of  how
sentient beings are. From their  own  side,  they  only  want  to  work  for
others.

That is the example we can look up to during those  times  when—even  if  we
want to do something positive to help others—we feel that we are  unable  to
do so in relation to some people. We think, “How is  this  possible?  It  is
impossible for me to do this for the benefit of this  group  of  people  (or
this specific person).” We feel disheartened. When we feel that way then  we
should remember how the bodhisattvas behave. The point here is  to  generate
courage with a can-do attitude: “From my own side,  I  can  engage  in  that
practice and that virtue.” As it says in  the  verse,  “I  should  cultivate
pride.”

We  are  advised  to  think  carefully  before  we  decide  to  undertake  a
particular task. In general, this is how  it  should  be  but  here  we  are
discussing this in the context of starting  a  practice  or  engaging  in  a
particular virtue. So regardless of the virtue or practice in  question,  in
the beginning before  doing  it,  we  should  think  about  and  analyse  it
carefully,  checking  whether  we  can  do  it   or   not.   After   careful
consideration, if we think we should do it and we can do it, we should  make
a promise to ourselves to do the task at hand.

Here the teachings say that if  we  find  that  we  are  unable  to  do  the
practice or virtue  for whatever reason after  careful  consideration,  then
for the time being, it is better to decide not to do it. As  it  says  here,
“It is best not to undertake it.”

On the other hand, upon  careful  consideration,  if  we  feel  that  it  is
something that we should do and we  are  able  to  do  it,  then  we  should
generate the determination to engage in it.  Once  we  have  generated  that
determination and pledge to do it, we must make sure we  follow  through  by
completing that task without turning back. The text says, “But once  I  have
undertaken it, I should not withdraw.”

Khen Rinpoche: So don’t withdraw. Don’t withdraw from the Basic Program.

What is the problem if we were to give up  halfway?  We  may  decide  to  do
something but we surrender or give up halfway. What is wrong with that?

                         B.  The disadvantages of discarding  it  after  one
has undertaken it
      Verse 7.48
      I will familiarize with that in other rebirths
      And negativities and suffering will increase.
      Also others and the time of the result
      Will be inferior and will not be accomplished

It doesn’t matter what we do. It  could  be  studying,  doing  a  particular
practice or doing a retreat.  Whatever practice or virtue it may  be,  after
we have started it and if halfway we were to just give  up,  not  seeing  it
through and completing the task, then it will set up a  very  bad  habit  of
not finishing or completing tasks. That bad habit doesn’t end in this  life.
Because of this bad  habit,  we  will  experience  the  causally  concordant
behavioral effect in future lives. This means that again  in  future  lives,
we will also not be able to complete whatever we have set out to do  due  to
this bad habit that was formed in this life.

If we do not complete whatever task we have set out  to  do,  we  form  this
very bad habit of not completing things. Then as a result,  it  will  affect
us in this life  and  in  future  lives.  If  we  were  to  do  things  like
that—whatever things we do, we start but we never finish, then we  start  on
something else and never finish that and we repeat  this  pattern  over  and
over again—then whatever we  do  will  have  no  power.  There  will  be  no
strength to our practice and virtue.

Next is the explanation of the three types of pride, which are:
1. the pride of karma or the pride of action
2. being proud of one’s capacity or the pride about ability
3. being proud of the afflictions or the pride about afflictions

                   2. Having  undertaken  joyous  perseverance,  stabilizing
its engagement
                        A.  Brief presentation
      Verse 7.49 a, b
      Apply pride to the three:
      Actions, afflictions, and ability.


                        B.  Explaining each individually
                              1.  Pride of karma
                                  A. Identifying the pride of karma
      Verse 7.49 c, d
      Thinking, “I alone shall do it,”
      Is the pride of action.

This pride of action (or the pride of karma) is the courage that thinks,  “I
can do this by myself alone.” This is similar to the  whole-hearted  resolve
that is part of the seven-fold cause and  effect  instructions  that  starts
from:
1. recognising all sentient beings as one’s mother
2. remembering their kindness
3. generating the wish to repay their kindness
4. generating love
5. generating compassion
6. generating the whole-hearted resolve
7. generating bodhicitta
This whole-hearted resolve is generated in the context of thinking, “I  will
achieve omniscience or full enlightenment myself in order  to  liberate  all
sentient beings.”  On the basis of that comes  the  mind  of  enlightenment,
bodhicitta.

The pride of action is similar, i.e., it is  the  attitude  that  thinks  “I
myself alone will achieve this.”

                                  B.  The reasons why one acts in that way
      Verse 7.50
      Afflicted, powerless beings in this world
      Are unable to accomplish their own welfare.
      Migrating beings are not able like me,
      Therefore I shall do this.

Usually when we come across unruly sentient beings, we  think,  “How  is  it
possible for me to liberate that sentient being (or sentient beings)?”  That
is the usual attitude.

But here in the context of someone who is a  practitioner  of  the  mind  of
enlightenment, bodhicitta, striving to achieve  enlightenment  for  sentient
beings, she would take on the responsibility  on  herself  to  do  this  for
others. When such a practitioner looks at sentient beings,  she  understands
that these sentient beings cannot even  achieve  their  own  happiness.  How
then is it possible for them to work for others? Here  the  practitioner  of
the mind of enlightenment generates the determination,  confidence  and  the
positive pride, thinking, “They cannot do it but I can do it. I will  do  it
for them.”

                                  C.  Being proud of assuming the burden  of
others of inferior karma
      Verse 7.51
      If others are doing inferior work,
      Why do I sit around?
      I do not perform it out of pride;
      It would be best for me to have no pride.

Here one can consider “inferior work” to mean anything that is  not  Dharma.
Anything that doesn’t become Dharma is  inferior  work.  Starting  with  the
affairs of this life, one is completely preoccupied with  them  and  one  is
only interested in and attached to the happiness of this life. As a  result,
one works so hard to defeat the enemies  and  to  sustain  one’s  circle  of
friends and relatives. As such, one spends  one’s  whole  life  doing  that.
These are example of inferior work.

From one’s own side, one does not lead life like that. One does  not  follow
or keep company with people who engage  in  such  activities.  Rather  one’s
emphasis is on training one’s mind, the basis of bodhicitta. One’s  goal  is
to be able to practise the six perfections.

Here if you were to interpret  “inferior  work”  to  literally  mean  moving
things around —such  as  people  carrying  goods,  shifting  things  and  so
forth—when we see people burdened with  such  work,  suffering  and  needing
help, then instead of just sitting around  and  looking  on,  we  should  do
something provided that our help  does  not  become  a  cause  for  negative
karma.  For instance, one may have done what one can  to  help  but  at  the
same time, one feels very conceited and proud in a negative  way,  boasting,
“I did this and that for him. I did this  big  job  ….”  Then  as  the  text
points out, this is wrong.
Here the advice is: “I do not perform it out of pride;/  It  would  be  best
for me to have no pride,” so as to be able  to  engage  in  the  bodhisattva
practices of benefiting others.  All these are done for others  and  without
any conceit.

                                 ~~~~~~~~~~

Question: In the process of striving in virtue, from beginning  to  end,  we
have the various types of joyous perseverance as well as  the  four  powers.
How does one relate them to each other? How does one integrate them in  this
whole process of striving in virtue? For example,  how  does  one  integrate
these  two:  the  armour-like  joyous  perseverance  with   the   power   of
aspiration, for example?

Khen Rinpoche: Maybe I will explain this in the next lesson.

We will look at this next time. From your side, you have to  know  what  the
four types of joyous perseverance and the four powers are. Basically  it  is
a question about the relationship between these two sets. I am  not  exactly
sure whether there is any correlation so it is something that  you  have  to
analyse.

                                 ~~~~~~~~~~~

DISCUSSION QUESTIONS FOR SUNDAY, 24 AUGUST, 2014
1. What are the three types of laziness and their respective antidotes?
2. It is said that the hardships that achieving enlightenment entail do  not
   constitute even a fraction of the sufferings in the lower realms? Why  is
   that so?
3. What are the reasons that the bodhisattva  superiors  do  not  experience
   physical and mental suffering when they are giving away their bodies?  Is
   it really possible for anyone to achieve such a feat? Why?
4. What is the best way of bringing about a yearning for the Dharma?

NOTE:
There will be no classes on Thursday, 21 August and the coming  Tuesday,  26
August.



Interpreted by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme; transcribed by Phuah  Soon  Ek,  Patricia
Lee & Rachel Tan; edited by Cecilia Tsong.





-----------------------
[1] Ven. Gyurme  interpreted  these  two  lines  as:  “Therefore,  I  should
practise to have belief in virtue, /
And with great respect meditate on it.”
[2] Vajradhvaja means vajra victory banner.

