Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Engaging in the Deeds of a Bodhisattva/BP2 M5 L32 final.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:52:18.173280
================================================================================


Transcript of the teachings by Khen Rinpoche Geshe  Chonyi  on  Engaging  in
the Bodhisattva Deeds, 2014

Root text: Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds by  Shantideva,  translated  by
Toh Sze Gee. Copyright: Toh Sze Gee, 2006; Revised edition, 2014.

Lesson                                                                    32
 10 June 2014


Chapter Six: Verses 6.13 - 6.21.
A. Cultivating the patience that accepts suffering.
      2.  Reflecting on the benefits of meditating on suffering (V. 6.13)
      3.  Reflecting on the fact that, if one is familiar with such
    attitudes, they are not difficult to implement (V. 6.14 – V. 6.19 a, b)
      4.  The benefits of making effort in abandoning the afflictions (V.
    6.19 c, d – V. 6. 20)
      5.  An extensive explanation of the benefits of meditating on
    suffering (V. 6.21)


Just to reiterate the measure of the destruction of the roots of virtue:
 • When a non-bodhisattva is angry with a bodhisattva, he destroys the merit
   accumulated over a thousand great eons.
 • When a higher-level bodhisattva is angry with a lower-level  bodhisattva,
   he destroys the roots of merit accumulated over a hundred great eons.
 •  When  a  lower-level  bodhisattva  gets  angry   with   a   higher-level
   bodhisattva, that bodhisattva has to meditate on the path all over again.
   What does this mean? It is mentioned in the text that  he  has  to  train
   again for eons. It doesn’t say how many eons  but  the  text  says,  “for
   eons,” i.e., many eons.

Khen Rinpoche: So it can be for 200, 300 or 500 eons. I am not sure.
|A non-bodhisattva gets angry at |Destruction of merit equal to making|
|another non-bodhisattva         |a full prostration to a stupa (The  |
|                                |sutras say that the number of atoms |
|                                |covered by the body during such a   |
|                                |prostration is equal to the number  |
|                                |of times one will be reborn as a    |
|                                |wheel-turning king).                |
|A non-bodhisattva gets angry at |Destruction of merit accumulated    |
|a bodhisattva.                  |over a thousand great eons          |
|A lower-level bodhisattva gets  |His achievement of the next path is |
|angry at a higher-level         |delayed. E.g., a bodhisattva on the |
|bodhisattva                     |great Mahayana path of accumulation |
|E.g., a bodhisattva who has not |who is due to enter the Mahayana    |
|received a prediction of his    |path of preparation gets angry at   |
|enlightenment gets angry at a   |another bodhisattva who is already  |
|bodhisattva who has received a  |on the path of preparation. Instead |
|prediction of his enlightenment |of entering the path of preparation,|
|                                |his realisation is delayed for one  |
|                                |great eon and he has to retrain for |
|                                |this path all over again.           |
|A higher-level bodhisattva gets |Destruction of merit accumulated    |
|angry at a lower-level          |over a hundred great eons           |
|bodhisattva.                    |                                    |

                                 ~~~~~~~~~~~
We have  started  looking  at  the  patience  of  accepting  suffering.  The
teachings tell us that when we experience suffering,  we  should  accept  it
voluntarily. One of the reasons for doing so is because  we  are  in  cyclic
existence or samsara. The nature  of  samsara  is  such  that  it  does  not
transcend suffering and life in samsara will  be  beset  with  problems  and
suffering. Remembering this, we come to accept  problems  and  suffering  as
part of our existence.

Another way of putting up with and accepting suffering is to reflect on  the
benefits and the advantages of suffering, i.e., to look at suffering from  a
positive angle. For someone who seeks the permanent happiness of  liberation
from samsara—a true practitioner  of  the  Buddhadharma  in  other  words—in
order  to  develop  such  an  aspiration  and  wish,  problems,  first,  are
necessary.

The  existence  of  suffering  is  an  essential  condition  for  developing
disenchantment and disillusionment with samsara. This  spurs  an  individual
to seek once and for all the  total  freedom  of  liberation  from  samsara.
Without suffering as a condition, there is no way to develop  disenchantment
with samsara and there will be no real wish for such freedom  from  samsara.
But for a person who is intent on achieving  liberation,  it  is  better  to
have suffering. Suffering is a good thing.

We saw in the last lesson that suffering acts as a condition for someone  to
develop disenchantment with samsara. Therefore based on that,  one  develops
an attitude of definite emergence or renunciation.

For someone who does not see the faults of  contaminated  existence—existing
in a state made up of the contaminated body and mind—and holds the  view  of
samsara to be as pleasurable as a beautiful  garden,  there  is  no  end  to
samsara for this person. When you do not see a  problem  with  samsara,  you
will not develop the wish to get out of it.

But because there is suffering, when you recognise that it is  an  essential
condition for the development of disenchantment  with  such  a  contaminated
existence, that will spur you on to develop the wish or intent  to  get  out
of such an existence. Come the day  when  you  develop  disenchantment  with
samsara, this is like the door through which  you  enter  into  renunciation
and develop the thought  of  definite  emergence.  So  having  problems  and
suffering actually makes you  think  about  doing  beneficial  and  virtuous
activities.

You should also realise that whatever problems or suffering  you  experience
is the result of the non-virtuous karma that you  have  accumulated  in  the
past. So when you are experiencing suffering, it is  the  ripening  of  your
non-virtuous karma. As such you can look at suffering as  a  broom  sweeping
away all the dirt, i.e., the negativities that you have accumulated  in  the
past. In that sense, it is beneficial and a  positive  thing  to  experience
suffering.

When you are able to  look  at  the  problems  or  suffering  that  you  are
experiencing from this perspective, then it will help  you  to  be  able  to
voluntarily  accept  the  problems  or  suffering.  When  you  are  able  to
voluntarily accept the problems or suffering through realising the  benefits
of  suffering,  looking  at  the  difficult  situation   from   a   positive
perspective, it will make a huge difference. You will not be as  unhappy  as
before. Your mind is able  to  remain  calm  and  relaxed  without  becoming
overly disturbed.

When you experience problems or when you are suffering  and  you  refuse  to
accept that situation, then what happens? The only result is that  you  will
be very unhappy inside. When you are unhappy inside, your mind is  disturbed
and this mental unhappiness will build up and become  anger.  When  you  are
angry, you look at yourself and everything around  you  through  that  view.
Everything appears to be unpleasant. You even see everybody as  bad,  as  an
enemy or as a problem. The problem may be very small but this  is  what  can
happen when you refuse to put up with it, when you make the  choice  of  not
wanting to accept it voluntarily. You react unhappily and this is  what  you
get.

So when a problem arises or when you experience discomfort  or  unhappiness,
you should remind yourself that this is the nature of contaminated life.  As
long as you are in samsara, it will always be like that. Since that  is  the
case, then what is the point of begrudging the nature of  samsara?  That  is
life and there is nothing you can do about it.

You should also  remind  yourself  that  whatever  problem,  unhappiness  or
suffering that you are experiencing is  the  ripening  result  of  the  non-
virtue that you yourself created in the past.

By reminding yourself of these points, when  the  problem  arises,  it  will
make it easier for you to accept the problem voluntarily  and  put  up  with
it. In doing so, you will be able to stop yourself from  becoming  unhappier
and unhappier. You will be able to protect your mind and not  be  disturbed.
This is very important in stopping anger from arising.

D. Having examined in detail the causes that give rise to anger, making
  effort to   abandon them

      2.  Arresting fury towards that which brings unwanted things.
           A.   Arresting fury towards those who wrong you.
                  1.   Being patient with those who would create suffering
for you.
                        A.   Cultivating the patience that accepts
suffering.
                                2.     Reflecting   on   the   benefits   of
meditating on suffering
    . Verse 6.13  
      If the followers of Durga and the people of Karnata
      Endure the feelings of burns, cuts, and the like meaninglessly,
      Then for the sake of liberation,
      Why have I no courage?

It is said that the faithful followers of the Indian goddess, Uma, would  do
things like burn their bodies and so forth in order  to  please  her.  There
are also followers of certain religious  beliefs  who  jump  into  fires  or
pierce their bodies with all kinds of weapons and so forth.

In this world of ours, there are people who undergo many physical  hardships
and who endure all kinds of physical austerities like piercing  and  cutting
their bodies in  order  to  achieve  what  they  believe  is  the  state  of
celestial beings such as Brahma. If these people can put  up  with  so  much
hardship in order to achieve their goals, shouldn’t those who say they  want
to achieve liberation also put up with hardships  and  difficulties  in  the
process of working for that goal?

The point is that there are so many people in this world who put up with  so
much hardship in order to achieve  goals  that  are  not  as  meaningful  as
achieving liberation from cyclic existence. That being the  case,  then  for
those who are intent on achieving liberation, all the more they  should  put
up with even more difficulties and hardships since achieving  liberation  is
a much more meaningful and higher goal.  What this verse is  driving  at  is
that it is appropriate and important for us to put up with suffering.

If there is a need to tolerate and put up with difficulties and  sufferings,
then the question is: “Is it possible to do such a thing?”  The  answer  is:
“Yes it is possible.” The reason is in the next verse.

                        3.  Reflecting on the fact that, if one is  familiar
                with such attitudes, they are not difficult to implement
                                     A.   Extensive explanation
                                           1.  Establishing that if one  has
                     familiarised oneself  with  such  attitudes  they  are
                     easily applied
 . Verse 6.14  
 . There is nothing whatsoever
 . That is not made easier through acquaintance.
 . So through becoming acquainted with small harms,
 . I will become patient with great harms.

This verse is just stating the reality. Whatever  the  object  or  situation
may be, once we are accustomed  to  it,  whatever  it  may  be,  it  becomes
easier. We could be talking about a bad habit or fault or we may be  talking
about a good quality. Whatever it may be, good or bad, once we are  used  to
it, it becomes easier as we become  more  familiar  with  it.  Therefore  we
should start to acquaint ourselves  with  tolerating  small  discomforts  or
problems and become accustomed to putting up with them.  Then  gradually  we
will be tolerant of and patient with bigger problems.

In the Compendium of Trainings, it says that  we  ordinary  sentient  beings
find samsara so wonderful. Although the nature of samsara  is  problems  and
suffering, we like it so much. We don’t think of it as suffering.  We  think
it is wonderful.

Although that is not the reality, why do we find samsara  so  wonderful  and
appealing?  It is a matter of  familiarity.  We  have  been  accustomed  and
habituated to viewing samsara in this mistaken way. Although the reality  is
that our existence is contaminated  and  in  the  nature  of  suffering—that
samsara is in the nature of suffering—we view it in a  completely  distorted
way, thinking it is pleasurable and that it is happiness.  This  is  through
familiarisation but nevertheless it is a bad habit.
Conversely when we are able to put up with and accept suffering through  our
familiarity with it and not be disturbed by it, then it is also possible  to
familiarise the mind  to  the  extent  that  we  see  everything,  including
suffering, as pleasant and in a positive light. We are able to develop  this
kind of concentration. It is matter of familiarisation.

For  example,  it  is  said  that  the  great  bodhisattvas  on  the   first
bodhisattva ground, because of having achieved the exalted practice  of  the
perfection of generosity, are able to give away their bodies  happily.  Even
if they have to  cut  off  parts  of  their  body,  piece  by  piece,  every
additional piece they cut off and give away brings them more  and  more  joy
and happiness. Why does this happen for them? It happens to them because  of
their familiarity with such a practice.

In short, in the context here of cultivating  the  patience  of  voluntarily
accepting difficult  situations  and  suffering,  it  is  all  a  matter  of
familiarisation. So when you are  acquainted  with  such  a  practice,  over
time, you too will be able to tolerate problems  and  difficulties  so  that
they no longer disturb your mind. It is even  possible  to  familiarise  the
mind to the extent that suffering is seen as positive  and  as  a  cause  of
happiness. It is all a matter of habituation.

                                          2.   Establishing  that  by  means
            of an analogy
 . Verse 6.15  
 . Who has not seen this to be so with meaningless sufferings,
 . Such as the feelings of
 . [Harms from] snakes, insects, hunger, and thirst
 . And of rashes?

Verse 6.15 illustrates what was said in the earlier  verse,  that  with  the
familiarity or the habituation of putting up with  and  tolerating  problems
and suffering without letting them disturb our mind, we will be able to  see
problems  as  the  condition  for  happiness.  It  is  all   a   matter   of
familiarisation.  But if we do not put up with  problems  and  difficulties,
then even a small problem can disturb us a lot.

Verse 6.15 gives some examples such as insect  bites,  feeling  hot,  hungry
and thirsty. It is plainly obvious to everyone that when we are able to  put
up with these things, over time, these things would not bother  us  as  much
as  they  would  have  if  we   had   refused   to   put   up   with   them.


                                          3.   The object towards which  one
            is patient
 . Verse 6.16  
 . I should not be impatient
 . With heat and cold, wind and rain, and so forth, and
 . Sickness, bondage, beatings, and so forth;
 . For if I am, the harm will increase.


The examples given here are putting up with hot weather in the summer,  cold
weather in the winter, putting up with other changes in the weather such  as
wind,  rain and so forth and experiencing all kinds of sicknesses. The  text
is saying that we should put up with such situations. If we do  not  put  up
with them, they will cause us  more  problems,  more  unhappiness  and  more
suffering.

The verse here is saying, “Do not be intolerant of these small problems  and
discomforts for if  you  are,  then  they  will  cause  you  more  harm  and
problems.”

Khen Rinpoche: I don’t know whether I have told you  this  before.  I’m  not
sure.

For some people, when somebody teases them a little  bit,  they  get  upset.
Some people have this kind of character. You cannot tease them about even  a
small thing. A little bit of teasing, the person gets upset.  But  for  this
kind of people, I noticed that many people tease them continually.

It is also like that in the monastery. I noticed there was one monk  in  the
monastery. During debate, there are small pebbles  lying  around  everywhere
outside. Sometimes a pebble would hit him. He would get so upset.  He  would
look around. He didn’t know who threw it.  Because  he  reacted  like  that,
another person would throw a pebble at him again.

Because he couldn’t take it, he had more problems. Even when  you  say  some
nasty words or some small thing to him, he would get  upset.  In  this  way,
people made fun of him. Everybody teased him.

For some other people, when the pebble hit them, they won’t care,  “This  is
a small pebble. Never mind.” For these people, they had less pebbles  thrown
at them. Also when someone teased them, they would just smile  and  take  it
easy. I noticed these people had less problems. Fewer  people  teased  them.
Fewer people disturbed them. I saw that.

I think the verse is saying something like that. When small  problem  comes,
you must accept it. Somebody say nasty words to  you,  you  just  smile  and
accept it. Then next time, this person won’t say bad words anymore  to  you.
If you don’t accept it and you get upset, they will come back again.

Here you must know what you want.  If  you  don’t  want  more  nasty  things
happening to you, then you smile and accept them. If  you  want  more  nasty
things, then you react. I think the verse is saying something like that.

The good thing is I saw my friend  becoming  a  more  patient  person  after
everybody teased him. So many pebbles had been thrown at  him.  He  couldn’t
take it. But after that, it’s OK. He  became  more  tolerant  and  had  less
problems.

Anyway this verse is saying something like that.

                                         4.  An example of how the  strength
                    of patience arises if one familiarises oneself with it
      Verse 6.17
 . Some when they see their own blood
 . Become especially brave and steady,
 . But some when they see the blood of others
 . Become unconscious and faint.
 .
 . Verse 6.18 a, b
 . These come from the states of the mind
 . Being either steady or timid.

There are those who feel more courageous  when  they  see  their  own  blood
being shed. When they are  injured  in  a  fight  and  they  have  cuts  and
bruises, then they start to bleed. The shedding of  blood  gives  them  more
courage to fight on, while there are others who are discouraged, lose  heart
or become very timid when they see the blood of others.  What  accounts  for
this difference in reaction? It has nothing to do with  the  object,  blood.
It has to do more with the strength of their minds; in this case,  we  could
say courage or the lack of it.

This analogy here is to help us understand the meaning. When you  apply  the
analogy to the meaning, instead of blood, we are focusing more  on  problems
and suffering. When we encounter  problems  and  difficulties,  rather  than
becoming discouraged or defeated by the problems,  the  ideal  thing  is  to
have more determination and more courage to deal  with  the  problems.  This
is, of course, if you are a real practitioner.

It is mentioned in one of the sutras that our mind  should  not  be  like  a
leaf fluttering in the wind especially in the context here  of  transforming
our minds and practising the Dharma. Whatever practice  we  do,  right  from
the beginning, we need to be very determined, firm and stable. We  must  put
up with difficulties and problems. We must have  that  mind-set  right  from
the  beginning.  It  is  a  matter  of  having  determination,  courage  and
stability.  The  teachings  tell  us  that  our   firmness   of   mind   and
determination should be so strong that we can use the problems we  encounter
in our practice instead of letting them become obstacles for us.

In order to transform our mind and practise the Dharma, we need to  be  very
determined and courageous. Our determination and courage have  to  be  firm.
With that, then in the course of our practice, we can deal with any  problem
that may come along the way. We  can  even  transform  difficult  situations
into something that is beneficial for our practice.

Right  from  the  beginning  of  our  mental  transformation,  when  we  are
practising the Dharma, if we do not have strong  determination  and  courage
or there is no stability in our determination—“Whatever comes along, let  it
come. I am going to take it”— then even if we meet with a small problem,  it
becomes a huge problem. We did not  have  the  determination  in  the  first
place. Therefore we did not want to put up with it. Then  it  is  difficult.
Even a small problem can become  a  huge  obstacle  that  prevents  us  from
continuing and doing the practice. Without  this  strong  determination  and
courage, even a small problem can become a great hindrance.

This is the meaning of the analogy given in  the  sutras  that  tell  us  we
should not be like a leaf fluttering in the wind. Rather  we  should  be  as
firm and stable as the trunk of a  tree.  If  you  are  like  a  leaf,  then
wherever the wind blows, even just a slight breeze, the  leaf  will  flutter
here, there and everywhere. Our mind should not be like that.  Just  because
of a small problem, we change in a negative way.

                                    B.  Synopsis
       Verse 6.18 c, d
 . Therefore I should disregard harms
 . And be unaffected by suffering.
 .
 . Verse 6.19 a, b
 . Even when those who are skilled are suffering,
 . Their minds remain very lucid and undefiled.

In the course of achieving something that is greatly meaningful,  we  should
patiently and voluntarily put up with hardships along the way. This  becomes
very important for us in the course of our  mental  transformation.  In  the
practice of the Dharma, we should try not to let our minds  be  affected  or
disturbed by various problems and difficulties.

“Those who are skilled” refers  to  those  who  are  really  meditators  and
practitioners of the Mahayana  intent  on  developing  bodhicitta  with  the
thought of benefiting others. In particular, for  such  practitioners,  they
would not let their minds be disturbed  and  affected  by  difficulties  and
problems.

In  summarising  this  section,  when  we  are  talking  about   voluntarily
accepting problems and sufferings and developing that kind of patience,  the
point here is not to  allow  ourselves  to  be  disturbed.  Yes,  there  are
problems and difficult situations. But the point here is not  to  let  these
difficult situations, problems or suffering increase  or  cause  any  mental
unhappiness that will lead us to generating anger.  On  top  of  putting  up
with and voluntarily accepting problems and suffering, we should see how  we
can  use  the  experience  of  problems  or  difficulties  to  increase  our
determination and courage.

                                4.    The  benefits  of  making  effort   in
abandoning the afflictions
    . Verse 6.19 c, d
    . When war is waged against the afflictions
    . Much harm is caused at the time of battle.
    .
    . Verse 6.20
    . The victorious heroes are those
    . Who, having disregarded all suffering,
    . Vanquish the foes of hatred and so forth;
    . The rest slay corpses.

In this world when countries go to war, the people who go to war  know  that
they will experience a lot of problems, i.e. during war time, there will  be
many difficulties and problems. Whatever the reason for  going  to  war  may
be, the thing is that once they have decided to go to  war,  they  disregard
whatever problems they may meet. They know there will be problems  but  they
disregard them. They are intent on waging war and defeating the enemies.

Here  we  are  talking  about  ordinary  people  going   to   war.    Dharma
practitioners are also  like  soldiers  going  to  war.  But  who  are  they
fighting when they go to war? When real  Dharma  practitioners  go  to  war,
they are waging war against and fighting their afflictions.  They  know  all
the problems that will come with that. They know  how  difficult  this  will
be. They know the difficulties  they  will  experience  and  they  know  the
problems that will come along  the  way  when  they  start  to  fight  their
afflictions. They know all this but nevertheless they do it.

In this particular section, we are specifically  talking  about  vanquishing
the foe of anger through the practice of patience.

Here for a practitioner who is intent on cultivating patience, in  order  to
vanquish the enemy of anger, she knows the  enemy,  anger,  very  well.  She
knows the damage that anger can do. She knows how anger  can  counter-attack
when  she  fights  it.  She  knows  the  difficulties.   This   practitioner
understands all the problems  but  is  willing  to  disregard  them  all  in
fighting anger.

The real heroes are those who wage war against their  own  afflictions  such
as anger  with  the  strong  intent  and  determination  to  vanquish  these
afflictions. These people are the real heroes and the best of all heroes.

So the real hero is the person who wages war  against  his  own  afflictions
and vanquishes them unlike what the conventional world consider  as  heroes,
i.e., those who defeat their  outer  enemies.  These  conventional  ordinary
heroes go to war to defeat their outer enemies. They  are  not  real  heroes
because what they are doing is essentially fast  forwarding  the  deaths  of
the enemies when they kill them. Even if they  didn’t  kill  these  enemies,
sooner or later, the enemies will die of their own accord.

The ordinary worldly heroes are not  really  heroes.  What  they  do  is  no
different from killing  corpses  because  whether  they  actually  kill  the
external enemies or not, sooner or later, those enemies will  die  one  day.
Since that is the case, killing them is like fast forwarding  their  deaths.
It is not a big deal. There is nothing heroic about it. Therefore  the  real
heroes are those who conquer their own afflictions.

I think I have mentioned this before. For those who  are  really  practising
correctly,  this  means  their  practice  has  hit  the  mark.  We  have  to
understand that such people may experience a lot of suffering due  to  their
very  pure  and  correct  practice.  A  lot  of  the  non-virtue  they   had
accumulated in the past will ripen in this life and as a result,  they  will
experience problems and suffering. You have to understand that  such  things
do happen. But for such people, it becomes even more important  to  them  to
realise and put up with suffering.

A pure practitioner is someone who is  practising  correctly.  Her  practice
really hits the mark basically like ordinary soldiers  going  to  war.  When
ordinary soldiers go to war, they understand the  problems  or  difficulties
they will face but their  intent  is  vanquishing  their  external  enemies.
Therefore they disregard all the problems and difficulties when they  go  to
war. They put up with all these difficulties because they  want  to  achieve
their goal.

Likewise a pure practitioner who is really practising correctly  is  someone
who is intent on destroying his own afflictions. He knows how  difficult  it
is  and  that  definitely  there  will  be  problems.   Pure   practitioners
understand, recognise and are prepared for this. They have to be  even  more
determined not to give up. It is through not giving up  that  they  will  be
able to complete and achieve their goal of vanquishing their afflictions.

There are many people who are afraid to practise  the  Dharma  because  they
really think, “When I practise the Dharma, I will get problems. Therefore  I
don’t want to practise Dharma.” Many people are like that.

Khen Rinpoche: I heard this, “When I read the Diamond Cutter Sutra,  then  I
get a headache. That is why I don’t want to read it.  When I read it, I  get
this problem. So I don’t want to read it.” I heard many people saying this.

If you don’t know the reality, you don’t know how to think, i.e., you  don’t
know what is right and what is wrong, then you will really  have  a  lot  of
misunderstanding like what I mentioned in the last lesson.

There are many people who tell me, “When  I  do  this  practice  or  when  I
recite this text, I get so many problems.” They tell  me,  “I  get  so  many
problems because I recited this text or I did that practice.”

As I have told you, please don’t tell me these things  because  none  of  us
are actual practitioners. None of us are real Dharma practitioners!

When you experience problems, it is not due  to  you  having  practised  the
Dharma because you don’t practise the Dharma. When you experience  problems,
just acknowledge them and tell yourself, “This is a result of  my  own  non-
virtue that I had accumulated in the past ripening.” That’s it. Don’t  blame
it on the Dharma because we don’t even practise  the  Dharma  correctly  and
purely.

Of course it is a different matter if you are a real  practitioner.  But  if
you are a real practitioner, in the first place, you won’t  be  complaining.
You wouldn’t even mention things like that if you are a  real  practitioner.
When  real  and  pure  practitioners  experience  problems,  they  will  not
complain. They  will  also  not  attribute  the  problems  to  their  Dharma
practice because immediately they know these are the results  of  their  own
non-virtue accumulated in the past.

Actually those people who complain are those people who don’t  practise  the
Dharma. These people who attribute  whatever  problems  they  experience  in
life to be results of their Dharma practice—this is a clear sign  that  they
are not practitioners. It is a clear sign that they do not know what  Dharma
practice is. It is a clear sign that they do not practise the Dharma.

How can the Dharma bring about suffering?

Therefore the real practitioners are the  real  heroes  because  they  fight
their own afflictions, which are the real enemies. They understand that  and
they know exactly what this means. They know all the problems,  difficulties
and challenges, yet they do  it  with  the  intent  to  vanquish  their  own
afflictions. They are the real heroes.

                                5.   An   extensive   explanation   of   the
meditations on suffering
 . Verse 6.21
 . Furthermore, suffering has good qualities:
 . Through being disheartened with it, arrogance is dispelled,
 . Compassion arises for those in cyclic existence,
 . Negativities are shunned, and joy is found in virtue.

When we think of our own problems and our own sufferings, first we  can  use
that experience to develop disenchantment and disillusionment with  samsara.
When we suffer or when we have problems, through  the  personal  experiences
of those  problems,  we  develop  disenchantment  and  disillusionment  with
samsara. We realise we have  problems.  That  realisation  of  problems  and
suffering weakens our arrogance and our pride.

Because of that personal understanding of suffering, we  can  also  come  to
understand how others are in a  similar  situation  in  that  everybody  has
problems and everybody is suffering. That understanding can help us to  have
compassion for others.

It is said in the teachings that through meditating on  our  own  suffering,
we develop definite emergence, the thought of renunciation.  When  we  think
of the suffering of others, we develop compassion for others. When we  think
of how others are suffering, we then develop a wish for them to be  free  of
suffering. That is compassion.

When we suffer, there is this thought  that  dislikes  suffering.  We  don’t
like suffering so we want to be parted from suffering. Because of that  wish
not wanting to experience suffering, if we investigate  what  the  cause  of
suffering is, through that investigation, we understand  it  is  non-virtue.
Because we don’t want suffering,  then  we  would  restrain  ourselves  from
committing non-virtue.

Since we don’t want suffering, that means  we  want  happiness.  Because  we
want happiness, if we come to understand that  the  cause  of  happiness  is
virtue, we will then engage in virtue and accumulate virtue.

These are the benefits of going through and experiencing suffering. When  we
have problems and because we don’t  want  suffering—we  want  happiness—that
may spur us to really think more deeply about what the  cause  of  happiness
really is and what the cause of suffering really is. If we can  think  about
this in terms of karma and its  effects,  that  will  then  spur  us  on  to
abandon non-virtue and to cultivate virtue.

With this, we have finished the section on  cultivating  the  patience  that
accepts suffering. The next section will  be  on  cultivating  the  patience
that is intent on Dharma.


                                 ~~~~~~~~~~


One-year analytical meditation program

For those of you  who  are  part  of  the  one  year  analytical  meditation
program, you can switch to the next topic this coming Friday, 13 June  2014.
Let’s assume that you have now realised guru devotion!

The next topics are the human life of freedoms and endowments and death  and
impermanence. Let us do those topics for three months. You meditate on  that
for the next three months. Approximately two months after  this  Friday,  we
will come  together  again  and  you  will  have  a  chance  to  share  your
experience.

ABC Choir

Khen Rinpoche: I think probably most of you have  received  the  email  from
ABC about the choir, the vocal group for chanting and singing songs.

Of course if you don’t have a good voice, then  nothing  can  be  done.  You
just relax. You don’t have to join. But if  you  have  a  good  voice,  then
please join this group if possible. The whole  idea  is  not  so  much  like
people singing outside. This singing  group  is  mainly  to  attract  people
especially the young ones. By listening to the chanting, they  are  able  to
have some kind of feeling in their heart.

We can change our tune a little bit. Not  like  a  very  old  tune.  We  can
change our tune to a modern tune so that people like it. That is  our  plan.
We need people who have good voices. So please join.

If I had a good voice, I will do everything but I don’t have  a  good  voice
for singing. I don’t have that.

Those who have a good voice  that  is  very  good.  This  is  part  of  your
practice. You are offering something to other people so this  is  important.
It is just a different method to bring people to the  Dharma.  That  is  the
goal.

Questions from Khen Rinpoche

This can be your exercise. At my Chinese class for seniors[1], a senior  ask
me a question: How can you persuade  somebody,  say  your  friend,  to  take
refuge in the Buddha, Dharma and Sangha? If the Buddha,  Dharma  and  Sangha
are so wonderful, how you  persuade  that  person  to  take  refuge  in  the
Buddha, Dharma and Sangha?

You can write this down. You can think of what is the most  skilful  way  of
doing this.  You can take two or three months to do this. It is up  to  you.
So write it down.

I thought it was a really good question.

Last Sunday, this same senior asked me this question, “What is the  quickest
way to achieve liberation?” This one, we really need to think.

The previous Sunday she asked me how to persuade someone to take refuge.  We
say that the Buddha is good, the Dharma is good, the Sangha is good but  how
to convince people? It is not easy. Think about it.

You tell your friend, “Buddha, Dharma and Sangha are good. You  should  take
refuge.” What is your skill in doing this? Maybe you can write this down.

I thought it was good she asked me these questions. She asked two  questions
and they were very good. I thought they were not easy questions.

Maybe you can think about them.  You can take  two  months’  time  to  write
down what are the best answers to these questions.


Interpreted by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme; transcribed by Phuah  Soon  Ek,  Patricia
Lee & Julia Koh; edited by Cecilia Tsong.






-----------------------
[1] Khen Rinpoche conducts a monthly class  called  Dharma  for  Seniors  to
cater to older Chinese-speaking members as well as a weekly Chinese  lam-rim
class. Both these classes are interpreted in Mandarin.

