Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Engaging in the Deeds of a Bodhisattva/BP2 M5 L12 final.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:52:14.693554
================================================================================


Transcript of the teachings by Khen Rinpoche Geshe  Chonyi  on  Engaging  in
the Bodhisattva Deeds, 2014

Root text: Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds by  Shantideva,  translated  by
Toh Sze Gee. Copyright: Toh Sze Gee, 2006; Revised edition, 2014.

Lesson                                                                    12
18 March 2014


Chapter Three: Verses 3.1- 3.9. Rejoicing in virtue. Requesting the teacher
to turn the wheel of Dharma. Requesting him not to pass into nirvana.
Dedicating virtue.


Chapter Three: Thoroughly Embracing Bodhicitta

The seven-limb practice or the  seven-branched  worship  is  a  practice  to
accumulate merit and to purify the mind of obscurations.

In Chapter Two, the chapter on confessing negativities,  we  looked  at  the
limbs of (1) homage, (2) offerings and (3) confession.

Here in Chapter Three on thoroughly embracing (or adopting)  bodhicitta,  we
will cover the remaining limbs of (4) rejoicing, (5) requesting the  teacher
to turn the wheel of Dharma, (6)  requesting  him  not  to  pass  away  into
nirvana and (7) dedication.

Rejoicing in virtue

For the limb of rejoicing, there are:
• rejoicing in the virtue of the causes for and effects of higher rebirths
• rejoicing in the virtue of the causes for and effects of  mere  liberation


• rejoicing in the virtue of the causes for  and  effects  of  unsurpassable
  enlightenment

Rejoicing in the virtue of the causes for and effects of higher rebirths
      Verse 3.1
      With joy I rejoice
      In the virtue that relieves the suffering of unfortunate rebirths
      Of all sentient beings
      And in the abiding in happiness of those subject to suffering.

One brings to mind everyone who is accumulating the virtue that will  result
in the attainment of higher rebirth (or  high  status)  either  as  a  human
being or as a god. Here we are rejoicing in the virtue  that  will  lead  to
such high status that is not conjoined with renunciation, bodhicitta or  the
correct view. Even though this virtue is not  conjoined  with  renunciation,
bodhicitta or the correct view, nevertheless  it  is  a  cause  for  a  good
rebirth. One brings to mind such virtue and rejoice.


One should also rejoice in those sentient  beings  who  have  achieved  good
rebirths with excellent bodies, wealth, power, prestige, fame and so  forth.
When others are enjoying such attributes, rather  than  feeling  jealous  or
generating a negative sense of competitiveness, one should feel  happy  that
these sentient beings are enjoying such attributes.  This  is  because  they
are enjoying the fruits of the virtuous karma that they have accumulated  in
the past.

When we see sentient beings accumulating virtue, no  matter  how  small  the
virtue may be, nevertheless it  will  result  in  high  status  and  a  good
rebirth for them. Rather than feeling jealous, we should  rejoice  and  feel
happy for them. Similarly when we see  sentient  beings  enjoying  the  good
things in life, such as having a good body, prestige,  power,  fame,  wealth
and so forth, we should also feel happy for them.  We should rejoice  rather
than feel jealous  as  rejoicing  helps  to  counteract  jealousy.  When  we
rejoice, we also accumulate a vast amount of merit and our mind will not  be
disturbed.

The point is that we should not feel disturbed when we  see  something  good
happening to others. Instead, we should rejoice and feel happy. When we  are
able to feel happy for others, it will be of great  benefit  for  ourselves.
We have to bear in mind that our  discussion  here  is  in  the  context  of
developing bodhicitta, i.e., the spirit of wanting  to  benefit  others.  In
light of that, the practice of rejoicing  is  a  preliminary  to  generating
bodhicitta.

Rejoicing in the virtues of the causes for and effects of mere liberation
      Verse 3.2
      I rejoice in that accumulation of virtue
      That is the cause for enlightenment,
      I rejoice in the definite liberation of embodied creatures
      From the suffering of cyclic existence.

We rejoice in all the virtue that was done for the sake of achieving  either
the hearers’ enlightenment  or  the  solitary  realisers’  enlightenment.[1]
Here we rejoice in the virtue that is conjoined with  the  determination  to
be free, i.e., renunciation, and the correct view.

We also rejoice in  the  virtue  of  the  effects,  i.e.,  the  attainments,
related to mere liberation. We  rejoice  in  those  who  have  achieved  the
temporary  attainments  of  the  hearer’s  enlightenment  or  the   solitary
realiser’s  enlightenment.   The  temporary   attainments   refer   to   the
attainments of:
• hearers who are stream enterers
• hearers who are once-returners
• hearers who are non-returners[2]
• hearers  who  have  achieved  the  actual  hearers’  enlightenment,  i.e.,
  arhatship and who have liberated themselves from cyclic existence.

Rejoicing in the causes for and effect of unsurpassable enlightenment
      Verse 3.3
      I rejoice in the enlightenment of the Protectors
      And also in the grounds of their children.


      Verse 3.4
      With joy I rejoice
      In the ocean of virtue of generating the mind of enlightenment
      That causes all sentient beings happiness,
      As well as in the deeds that benefit sentient beings.

We  rejoice  here  focusing  on  those  who  have  actualised  the  complete
abandonments and realisations  as  well  as  in  the  effects  of  temporary
enlightenment, i.e., we bring to mind  the  qualities  of  abandonments  and
realisations of  those  abiding  on  the  grounds,  from  the  first  ground
onwards.

We have gone through the paths and grounds  a  little  bit.  When  you  know
something about  them,  for  example,  the  qualities  of  abandonments  and
realisations that are achieved on the various grounds, then you will have  a
lot of material to work with in terms of rejoicing. There is  so  much  that
you can bring to mind.

In Chapter One, we looked at the benefits of both aspirational  and  engaged
bodhicitta.  There  are  innumerable  benefits  to  generating  aspirational
bodhicitta alone. On that  basis,  for  those  who  then  practise  the  six
perfections, the merit that they accumulate is even more powerful.  You  can
also bring to mind the benefits that  are  accumulated  by  those  who  have
developed the thought of achieving omniscience  or  full  enlightenment  for
all sentient beings.

In the King of Prayers, five types of persons are mentioned  as  objects  of
rejoicing: (1-2) buddhas and  bodhisattvas  in  the  ten  directions,  (3-4)
solitary realisers, hearers still training and  those  beyond  and  (5)  all
ordinary beings.

We should also rejoice in the paths of the three kinds  of  persons  of  the
small, middling and great capacities mentioned in the lam-rim.

It is said in the teachings:
• When we rejoice in the virtue of those whose level of mind is  lower  than
  our own, we accumulate more merit than those persons.
• When we rejoice in the virtue of our peers, i.e., those  who  are  of  the
  same level of mind as ourselves, we accumulate the same amount of merit.
• When we rejoice in the virtue of those whose level of mind is higher  than
  our own, we get a portion of their merit.

When we see others doing good things, accumulating virtue and  so  forth  or
things are going well for them, we are told to rejoice and  feel  happy  for
them. When we do not do this, in its place, there  is  very  often  jealousy
instead. Then we want to compete with this person in  a  negative  way.  Our
mind becomes disturbed and there  is  no  peace.  This  is  very  clear  and
evident from our own experience. Rather than feeling jealous,  when  we  can
feel genuinely  happy  and  rejoice  for  others,  our  mind  does  not  get
disturbed. Furthermore, there is  peace  in  the  heart  and  we  accumulate
merit.

It is difficult to measure the amount of merit that we can  accumulate  from
rejoicing. It is not possible to express this in a definite way. But  it  is
very obvious that when we rejoice, we will experience peace in our heart.

It seems that it is easier to rejoice in  the  virtue  of  the  buddhas  and
bodhisattvas. Of course it is really difficult to rejoice in the virtue  and
good things that are happening to our enemies. Unless we are  able  to  feel
happy for and rejoice in the virtue and good things that  are  happening  to
our enemies,  any  other  kind  of  rejoicing  we  may  engage  in  will  be
superficial.

It is the same when it comes to generating  or  thinking  about  bodhicitta.
You may have the feeling, “It is very nice.  I  will  achieve  enlightenment
for sentient beings.” You feel good. But if you think about it, most of  the
time, somehow, the enemy is excluded from  the  sentient  beings.  As  such,
talking about bodhicitta is just that, mere talk.

Going back to rejoicing in the good things that happen to  our  enemies  and
rejoicing in their qualities. Even if we are currently unable  to  entertain
thoughts of benefiting them, we have to at least start from  being  able  to
feel happy for them when they  experience  good  things  or  when  they  are
engaging in virtue. We should not hold on to grudges.

The point I am trying to make is that it is very important for us  to  learn
and to train in being able to rejoice in the good things that are  happening
to those people we dislike, i.e., our so-called enemies. We should  be  able
to feel happy that good things are happening to them and rejoice  when  they
are engaging in virtue. Most of us are unable to do this. When  we  see  our
enemies, we cannot feel happy about the virtue  they  are  accumulating.  We
should train our mind to think that it is pointless to  be  jealous  letting
our mind remaining disturbed. Rather we should  think  of  the  benefits  of
rejoicing. There will then be peace in  our  heart  and  we  can  accumulate
merit.

Khen Rinpoche: I saw the news this  morning.  A  very  famous  designer  had
committed suicide in her New York luxury apartment.  She  was  considered  a
very, very famous designer. I think she was 49 years old, not that old.

You can see in the news all these famous actors dying by committing  suicide
at a young age.

Sometimes I think about this, “Why do they commit suicide?”

I can’t see why they do this because  they  have  everything.  They  are  so
famous. Everybody knows them. If they want  to  change  their  boyfriend  or
girlfriend, they can have 10, 20 partners if they wish. They have plenty  of
money, plenty of everything but they always end up committing suicide.

This means that something is missing. They feel so unhappy. Their minds  are
so unhappy..

Maybe this is the point. Maybe they do not know  how  to  rejoice.  I  think
most of them faced so much  competition.  When  they  are  so  famous,  when
someone else  becomes  more  famous  than  them,  they  become  jealous  and
unhappy. If something bad suddenly happens to them, causing them to  have  a
bad reputation, then they feel extremely miserable.

If all these famous  people  knew  how  to  rejoice,  if  they  didn’t  have
jealousy, then maybe I don’t think they would die at such an early age  like
what I saw in the news this morning. I don’t  know  the  name  of  the  very
famous lady designer. Anyway maybe jealousy disturbed her mind.[3]

Jealousy causes great disturbance to  the  mind.  As  such  we  need  to  do
something to counteract jealousy  and  the  best  antidote  to  jealousy  is
rejoicing. We  should  strive  in  the  practice  of  rejoicing  and  become
habituated to rejoicing. In essence, the mind of rejoicing is the mind  that
feels happy.

We have the accumulation of merit and the purification of  negativities.  Of
these two categories, the practice of rejoicing falls into the  category  of
accumulating merit. Various  texts  have  explained  the  many  benefits  of
rejoicing. By rejoicing, one subdues pride. When we practise  rejoicing,  we
will see there are many practical benefits. When we rejoice in  the  virtue,
possessions, qualities and practices of others,  it  serves  to  weaken  our
negative emotions such as jealousy, pride and competitiveness.

Requesting [the teacher] to turn the wheel of Dharma


      Verse 3.5
      With folded hands I beseech
      The Buddhas of all directions
      To shine the lamp of Dharma
      For all bewildered in the darkness of suffering.

After the Buddha manifested the deed of  achieving  full  enlightenment,  he
did not teach the Dharma for 49 days. After 49  days,  the  gods  Indra  and
Brahma requested the Buddha to start teaching the Dharma.  Indra  offered  a
white right-turning conch shell and Brahma offered a thousand-spoked  golden
Dharma wheel to request the Buddha to teach the Dharma. It was  due  to  the
requests of the gods Indra and Brahma that the Buddha then turned the  wheel
of Dharma.

When one requests a teacher to turn the wheel of Dharma,  it  is  said  that
one should make the request with one’s palms folded in respect. This  is  an
outer expression of one’s inner desire for the Dharma and one’s strong  wish
to hear the teachings.

This is how it should be. One must want the Dharma.  From  one’s  own  side,
one must really want to hear the teachings. When  one  hears  the  teachings
with this  intense  heartfelt  desire  for  the  Dharma,  then  hearing  the
teachings will be very effective and beneficial for the mind. Therefore,  as
mentioned in the  lam-rim  teachings,  according  to  the  code  of  ethical
conduct for the ordained, the vinaya, one should  not  teach  without  being
requested to do so.

Look at some of the accounts in the Jataka Tales  that  described  the  past
lives of the Buddha when he was in samsara. There is an account  of  one  of
his past lives where the Buddha planted a thousand wicks  on  his  body  and
used his body as a light offering to receive a single verse of  the  Dharma.
The life story of the great Tibetan yogi,  Milarepa,  also  shows  how  much
hardship he had to endure before he received teachings.  All  these  stories
point to the need to have the intense desire for the Dharma and the  ability
to be able to bear hardship for the Dharma. When you have  these  qualities,
receiving and hearing the teachings will be beneficial for your mind.

From your own side, you must want the Dharma very much and have  an  intense
heartfelt desire for the Dharma. You see why you need it. You  see  that  if
you do not have it, it is not right. Likewise, you should  see  that  it  is
the same for others. So when you request for teachings, it is not  just  for
yourself but  you  must  also  understand  that  others  are  in  a  similar
predicament, i.e., they need  and  they  must  have  the  Dharma.  You  then
request the buddhas of the three times to turn the wheel of Dharma. You  can
visualise offering a thousand-spoked golden Dharma wheel to  accompany  your
request. You should think that the buddhas accept your request.

For those of you who are doing guru yoga  practices,  you  should  visualise
your guru to be inseparable from the merit field,  from  the  buddhas.  Then
you request them to turn the wheel of Dharma and you accompany that  request
with an offering of a thousand-spoked golden dharma wheel. Think  that  your
request is accepted. This is how you should practise.

When you are able to do this practice of requesting the buddhas to turn  the
wheel of Dharma, it is said that in future lives, you will not be  a  holder
of wrong views and you will be able to  continually  hear  and  receive  the
teachings.

Holding wrong views is  the  greatest  obstacle  to  practising  the  Dharma
because when you have wrong views, there is no basis  for  practice.  It  is
very important to be free from wrong views because if you have wrong  views,
say, with regard to the workings of cause and effect,  there  is  no  mental
space for Dharma practice. Therefore it will be beneficial if, from life  to
life, you do not end up as someone who holds wrong views.  This practice  of
imploring the buddhas to turn the wheel of Dharma will help.

 Requesting him not to pass into nirvana


      Verse 3.6
      With folded hands I beseech
      The Victors who wish to enter nirvana
      Not to leave migrating beings in blindness
      And to remain for countless aeons.

When the Buddha was about to pass away into nirvana, a  householder  by  the
name of Chunda requested the Buddha not to pass away. As a  result  of  that
request, the Buddha delayed his nirvana by three months.

There is a verse in the Golden Light Sutra that says  that  the  buddhas  do
not pass away into nirvana and there will not be a time when the  Dharma  is
not heard or taught. The Buddha showed the deed of passing into  nirvana  in
order to ripen the minds of sentient beings. Buddhas do  not  die  for  they
are completely free of birth, aging, sickness and  death.  But  the  buddhas
show these various aspects including passing away  in  order  to  ripen  the
minds of sentient beings. It is a way  of  moving  the  hearts  of  sentient
beings and persuading them to practise the Dharma.

The buddhas show themselves in various aspects to benefit  sentient  beings.
The supreme emanation body (the nirmanakhaya) manifests the deed of  passing
away into nirvana but the  complete  enjoyment  body  (sambhogakhaya)  never
demonstrates passing away into nirvana.  So when the  buddhas  manifest  the
deed of passing into nirvana, the buddhas do not really die but rather  they
are showing that aspect of passing away in  order  to  ripen  the  minds  of
sentient beings.

So you bring to your mind all  the  buddhas  and  your  own  guru  and  with
respect, you request the  buddhas  and  the  guru  not  to  pass  away  into
nirvana. You request the buddhas and the guru to  abide  for  a  long  time,
i.e., to remain for eons, in order to eliminate the  darkness  of  ignorance
not just for yourself but also for sentient beings, especially  those  whose
minds are to be tamed or subdued  by  them.  Think  that  they  accept  your
request.

Requesting all the buddhas not to pass away into nirvana is  the  cause  for
our own life obstacles to be pacified and a cause for one’s own long life.

Dedicating virtue

Next is dedicating the virtue that was accumulated.  There is:
• dedicating in general
• dedication for the sake of the ill
• dedicating in order to alleviate hunger and thirst
• dedicating so that virtue acts as the cause to fulfil one’s wishes

Dedicating in general
      Verse 3.7
      Thus by the virtue accumulated
      Through all that I have done,
      May all the suffering of all sentient beings
      Be dispelled.

The dedication of merit means dedicating  one’s  virtue  and  merit  to  the
achievement of full and complete enlightenment but here,  in  this  context,
we are dedicating our merit to be able to actualise bodhicitta.

The development of bodhicitta has its roots in the  compassion  that  wishes
sentient beings to be free of suffering.  When  we  dedicate  our  merit  by
using Verse 3.7, we are dedicating our merit for all sentient beings  to  be
free of suffering; so in a way it is a  condition  for  thinking  about  and
generating compassion.

We dedicate the virtue we  accumulated  in  the  past,  present  and  future
towards the elimination of the suffering of all sentient beings. Whether  it
is generating a motivation or dedicating the virtue, these are actions  that
move the mind in a certain direction.  In  this  context,  we  generate  the
motivation to eliminate the suffering of others and we  dedicate  our  merit
for all sentient beings to be free of suffering.   These  actions  move  our
mind towards compassion and as such, they have to come  from  our  heart  in
order for our mind to move in the desired direction.

In this context, dedicating our virtue for the elimination of the  suffering
of sentient being has to come from the heart. When it comes from the  heart,
our mind will move in that direction. Dedication therefore is  not  so  much
about reciting the dedication prayers alone  but  recitation  that  must  be
accompanied by the thought behind it.

Dedicating for the sake of the ill
      Verse 3.8
      May I be the doctor and the medicine
      And may I be the nurse
      For all sick migrating beings in the world
      Until their sicknesses are healed.

As mentioned in the verse, we dedicate the merit accumulated  in  the  three
times for the benefit of the sick. We become the doctor,  the  medicine  and
the nurse for them. As I said earlier, this is an exercise to move the  mind
towards compassion. When you dedicate your merit, you should dedicate it  in
this way. On a practical level, when you encounter those who  are  sick,  as
much as possible, you should also take care of them by  attending  to  them,
helping them, giving them medicine and so forth.

There is an account of the Buddha personally attending to a  fully  ordained
monk who was sick and who had soiled himself. The Buddha  personally  washed
him. The Buddha then said that monks should do this, i.e., they should  also
attend to the sick.

Dedicating in order to alleviate hunger and thirst
      Verse 3.9
      May a rain of food and drink descend
      To clear away the suffering of thirst and hunger,
      And during the eon of famine
      May I myself turn into food and drink.

We dedicate our merit to be a cause for a rain of food and drink to  descend
in order to clear away the suffering of hunger and thirst.

~ The eons of famine, sickness and weapons
The eon of famine is when sentient beings will have to endure  long  periods
of time without food and drink. We dedicate our merit  to  be  a  cause  for
food and drink to appear during such times. The Buddha told Ananda that  any
sentient being who offers even a little  bit  of  food  to  the  Sangha,  in
dependence upon those roots of virtue, that person will not be  born  during
this eon of famine.

 There is also the eon of sickness. During this time, it is said  that  many
sentient beings will suffer from  all  kinds  of  sicknesses.  Therefore  we
dedicate the merit we have accumulated  that  during  such  a  time  may  we
become the doctor, medicine and nurse for sentient beings. The  Buddha  told
Ananda that anyone who  offers  an  arura  fruit,  i.e.,  medicine,  to  the
Sangha, in dependence on the roots of virtue generated  by  this  act,  this
person will not be born during the eon of sickness.

Then there is the eon  of  weapons.  During  this  time,  it  is  said  that
sentient beings will attack one another with weapons. We dedicate the  merit
we have accumulated that, during the eon of weapons,  all  weapons  will  be
transformed into flowers. In one sutra, the Buddha said to Ananda  that  any
sentient being who abandons killing for just one day and  night,  the  roots
of virtue accumulated will cause that sentient being not to be  born  during
the eon of weapons.

(Khen Rinpoche went on to explain what an  eon  is.  As  he  continued  this
explanation in Lesson 13, what has been  presented  in  Lesson  12  will  be
consolidated with the explanation in Lesson 13).


Interpreted by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme; transcribed by Phuah  Soon  Ek,  Patricia
Lee, Julia Koh; edited by Cecilia Tsong.





















-----------------------
[1] Hearers and solitary realiszers are  Hinayanists,  but  they  differ  in
their motivation, behaviour,  merit,  and  wisdom.  Solitary  realisers  are
superior to hearers in all these respects. A hearer strives for  nirvana  on
the basis of listening  to  teachings  from  a  teacher,  while  a  solitary
realiser strives for nirvana in solitude,  without  relying  on  a  teacher.
(First Basic Program, Module 5, Lesson 15, page 5).
[2]A non-returner will never return to the desire realm again. (First  Basic
Program, Module 5, Lesson 15, page 5).

[3] Khen Rinpoche was referring to the suicide of L’Wren Scott.


