Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Engaging in the Deeds of a Bodhisattva/BP2 M5 L49final.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:52:21.913946
================================================================================


Transcript of the teachings by Khen Rinpoche Geshe  Chonyi  on  Engaging  in
the Bodhisattva Deeds, 2014

Root text: Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds by  Shantideva,  translated  by
Toh Sze Gee. Copyright: Toh Sze Gee, 2006; Revised edition, 2014.

Lesson     49                                                              9
September 2014


Chapter seven: Verses 7.67 –7. 76
Increasing the strength of joyous effort—the antidote
        A. Increasing the strength of the conditions  conducive  to  joyous
           effort
      2.  Extensive explanation
           D.   The power of suspension (V. 7.67)
B.   Devoting oneself to the practice of  the  conduct  by  mindfulness  and
   introspection (V. 7.68 –    V. 7.74)
C.    Accomplishing the conduct is within your power (V. 7.75 – V. 7.76)
The chapter’s name


Khen Rinpoche: Last time you all did the homework assignment.  I  chose  one
to be read out in class. She (student) will read and you will just listen.

(A student reads the chosen assignment).

Khen Rinpoche: She read it very quickly so we didn’t get the time  to  think
about it. Anyway I am not sure whether  everybody  did  (the  homework)  but
most people did.   There is no marking for your homework. What  you  did  is
already good enough. So don’t look  for  marks.  Just  now,  she  read  very
quickly so we didn’t really get into that. Anyway there are  just  too  many
to read and we don’t have time. Later when you  take  back  (the  homework),
read what you have written.

Anyway it is good that you did the homework.
                                ~~~~~~~~~~~~
INCREASING THE STRENGTH OF JOYOUS EFFORT —THE ANTIDOTE (cont’d)

For the power of suspension (or relinquishment) there are:
1. Periodic suspension (or temporary relinquishment)
2. Total suspension (or complete relinquishment)

A.  Increasing the strength of the conditions conducive to joyous effort
      2.  Extensive explanation
            D.  The power of suspension
                   1.  Periodic suspension
      Verse 7.67 a, b
      When my strength is related to degeneration,
      I should leave whatever I am doing in order to return to it.

In the process of engaging in a particular virtue, sometimes one gets  tired
and exhausted physically or mentally. Also at times, one’s  physical  health
or strength may deteriorate. At those times, one  should  take  a  break  in
order to restore one’s vitality or one’s health if one is sick. That  period
of time when one is resting in order to restore one’s  physical  and  mental
energies is called periodic suspension.
Therefore periodic suspension is to prepare oneself to  be  able  to  engage
again in that particular virtue after one has rested.

                   2.  Total suspension
      Verse 7.67 c, d
      If something is finished well, I should put it aside
      With the wish for more and more later.

When it comes to engaging in virtue, there are so many  different  types  of
virtue that one can engage in. Whatever it may be, once  one  has  completed
that practice well, then one stops doing it. One’s mind  should  then  focus
on the next virtue that one is going to engage in.

Here total suspension means relinquishing the earlier virtue  that  one  has
already completed well. One puts that aside and move on to  another  virtue.
Since one has already completed the  earlier  virtue,  for  the  purpose  of
engaging in another virtue that is more exalted than the one  that  one  has
just completed, in that sense, it  is  called  a  total  suspension  of  the
virtue that one has completed.

There is then a  discussion  on  the  need  to  rely  on  conscientiousness,
mindfulness and vigilance.

B.  Devoting oneself to the practice of the conduct by means of  mindfulness
   and   introspection
        1.  Devoting oneself to conscientiousness
      Verse 7.68
      Just as a seasoned soldier engages
      In a fencing battle with the enemy,
      So shall I avoid the weapons of the afflictions
      And attack the enemies that are the afflictions.

Due to their training and habituation of seasoned fighters, they are  always
prepared to defend themselves against  being  attacked  by  their  opponents
during battle. They have various ways and means to prevent  themselves  from
being hit by their opponents.  They  also  have  ways  and  means  at  their
disposal to strike at their opponents. These are the  characteristics  of  a
seasoned fighter. Likewise we should be conscientious and careful not to  be
harmed by the weapon of our own afflictions. At the  same  time,  we  should
also seek to vanquish and attack our afflictions, the enemy.

        2.  Devoting oneself to mindfulness and introspection
      Verse 7.69
      If someone dropped his sword during a battle,
      He would quickly pick it up out of fear.
      Likewise if I lose the weapon of mindfulness,
      Afraid of hell, I should quickly retrieve it.

When people go to war and fight with swords, for whatever reason,  they  may
drop their sword on the ground. Out of fear of  being  killed  in  the  next
moment, immediately they will retrieve their sword. Likewise  our  mind  may
become distracted and we lose our mindfulness of  the  virtuous  object.  At
that time, remembering how we would end up in the lower realms such  as  the
hells due to our accumulation of non-virtue while under the control  of  our
afflictions, motivated by that fear, we should immediately hook  our  mental
attention with mindfulness and vigilance to the virtuous object  and  firmly
place our mind on it.

Next is not giving an opportunity  for  the  faults  of  degenerating  one’s
mindfulness and introspection to arise.

        3.  Not distinguishing a time  of  wrongdoing  for  mindfulness  and
introspection
      Verse 7.70
      Just as poison spreads throughout the body
      In dependence upon the blood,
      Likewise if it finds an opportunity
      Misdeeds will permeate my mind.


      Verse 7.71
      Just as a man carrying a jar full of mustard oil
      In the presence of someone wielding a sword
      Who is being threatened that he will be killed if he spills it will be
      frightened,
      Likewise, those who have the modes of conduct should be attentive.

The example here is of somebody who  is  being  poisoned.  When  the  poison
enters a person’s bloodstream, it will soon permeate the entire body.  As  a
result, the person may die. Likewise if we let our  mind  be  distracted  by
any kind of object, afflictions will arise and start to  take  hold  of  us.
Then gradually the afflictions become stronger and  stronger  to  the  point
that they will take away our chances of a higher  rebirth.   The  mind  here
refers to both our sense consciousnesses and our thought consciousness.

When poison enters the bloodstream, initially it affects only a  small  area
of the body but over time, it starts to permeate the entire body. When  that
happens, then one’s life is in great danger  as  one  may  even  lose  one’s
life.

Some  poisons  act  gradually.  Our  afflictions  are  like  that.  Once  an
affliction arises in the mind, it may seem small at that  time.  However  if
we don’t do anything about it, it gradually  takes  hold  in  our  mind  and
becomes very strong. That is when  very  strong  non-virtue  is  accumulated
that will result in us going to the lower realms. Therefore the verses  here
are talking about the problems that come with letting  our  mindfulness  and
introspection degenerate.

The next few verses talk about the methods to tighten one’s mindfulness.
Imagine if you are forced to carry a jar filled with water or  oil  on  your
head and walk along a very slippery road. Somebody is watching you.  If  you
were to spill even a drop of that water or oil, you will be killed.  Fearful
of that, you will be very mindful as you walk carrying that jar of water  or
oil.

Khen Rinpoche: The jar that is full of water or oil is not covered  and  its
big mouth is open. You can imagine that.

So whoever is put in that situation would definitely walk with the  greatest
care. If one claims to be a practitioner of Dharma,  has  adopted  vows  and
precepts and already taken on the promise  to  train  in  the  bodhisattvas’
deeds, i.e., the bodhisattva vows, then motivated by the fear of  having  to
go to the lower realms, such as the hell realms and motivated  by  the  fear
of having to continually circle in the three  realms  of  cyclic  existence,
then one has to be mindful and conscientious about the  behaviour  of  one’s
body, speech and mind in every single moment. In reality,  that  is  how  it
should be.

Therefore through remembering one’s fear of suffering in  the  lower  realms
such as the hell realms and one’s  fear  of  cyclic  existence,  this  would
drive  one  to  be  conscientious  and  mindful  so  as  to  not  let  one’s
afflictions take hold of one.

        4.  One should overcome wrongdoing as soon as it arises
      Verse 7.72
      Therefore, just as I would hastily stand up
      If a snake came into my lap,
      Likewise if any sleep or indolence occur
      I shall quickly turn them back.


If, for whatever reason, your head catches fire, you are not going to  wait.
Instead you will try to put out  the  fire  immediately  by  whatever  means
available. If you are someone who is  afraid  of  snakes  and  for  whatever
reason a snake lands on your lap, without  any  delay,  you  will  stand  up
immediately. You will be so frightened.

Khen Rinpoche: When I was young and I was in Kopan monastery,  the  door  of
our room couldn’t close completely. The  wall  also  had  a  lot  of  holes.
Sometimes a real snake  would  come  into  the  room  and  sleep  under  the
blankets. When we go to bed and lift up our blankets,  the  snake  would  be
there. We would be very frightened.

When I was studying in south India, there was a monk who was  so  scared  of
snakes. Before class, we would gather outside. Everybody knew  that  he  was
scared of snakes. One day, another monk who was  in  the  same  class  found
some snakeskin. Normally a snake sheds its skin every  year.  I  don’t  know
how it changes its skin. I guess the snake throws away its skin so the  skin
is dead. So this monk brought the snakeskin and  held  it  behind  him  (the
monk who was afraid of snakes) and put the snakeskin on his  neck.   He  was
so frightened. He got so angry and went after that monk.

For me, I’m so scared of frogs. I mean I’m not scared that  they  will  bite
me but somehow, I find them very  unpleasant.  In  the  monastery,  when  we
debated, there were so many frogs at the debate ground  and  sometimes  they
would jump on one’s lap. When they did that, I would stand up.

The example here is not saying that when you are about to fall  asleep,  you
should suddenly just jump out of bed and not sleep. That is not  the  point.
The point is that there is a right time for sleeping.

Here we are talking about a person who is practising virtue. In the case  of
a person who is practising virtue, the entire day can be  divided  into  the
meditation session and the post-meditative session.  The meditation  session
is when one is engaging in the formal session.  Any  time  outside  of  that
would be the post-meditative session. Therefore the whole  day  consists  of
that.

So when it comes to engaging in virtue, we  can  divide  the  day  into  the
morning, afternoon and nighttime. There is a time for rest because sleep  is
necessary to restore the elements of one’s body. Then the rest of  the  time
should be used for something  productive  and  beneficial  in  the  form  of
engaging in virtue. So besides  the  proper  time  for  sleeping,  the  time
remaining is meant for practice, which is almost the entire day.

During the time that is meant for practice, there may be times when one  may
feel lazy and feel like sleeping when it is not the time for sleep  and  one
doesn’t feel like engaging in virtue when it is the time to  do  so.  So  at
those times, one should immediately snap out of that  situation  and  remind
oneself to wake up when one has the desire to sleep.

However being able to do this is not an easy feat. Why? Because you have  to
be someone who can feel a sense of  loss  for  not  having  used  your  time
productively and meaningfully by engaging in virtue. You  also  have  to  be
someone who is constantly aware of your potential to be reborn in the  lower
realms in your next life. You have to have that fear. Until you are  someone
who is able to have a feeling for these things, then being able to react  in
such a way is probably not possible.

So whenever you feel lazy or sleepy  during  the  times  when  you  are  not
supposed to sleep or you  don’t  feel  like  engaging  in  the  practice  of
virtue, then you have to remember the suffering of  the  lower  realms,  the
suffering that you will experience in the future and you also have to  bring
to mind the faults of being in samsara. With those thoughts,  you  can  then
turn your mind towards virtue. You make a very strong resolution not  to  be
lazy or to fall asleep unnecessarily.

Here is an account of  how  a  great  translator,  Lotsawa  Rinchen  Sangpo,
practised in one of his particularly long retreat  of  seven  years.  During
the retreat, he established a boundary by setting  up  boundary  markers  to
delineate the boundary that he will  not  transgress,  i.e.,  not  to  cross
over. He made three concentric circles of three layers of boundaries.

He generated the outermost boundary marker  that  delineated  the  outermost
boundary with dakas, dakinis and Dharma protectors.  He  made  offerings  to
them and entreated them, “May you punish  me  if  any  afflictions  were  to
arise in the course of my retreat.”
He generated the intermediate boundary marker  with  Dharma  protectors  and
entreated them, “May you annihilate me if I were  to  allow  even  a  single
moment of selfish thought to arise in the course of my retreat.”

He then generated the innermost boundary markers  with  dakas,  dakinis  and
Dharma protectors, made torma offerings to them  and  entreated  them,  “May
you destroy me if any thought  apprehending  signs  were  to  arise  in  the
course of my retreat.”

On the basis of making these oaths and promises, he  lived  in  retreat  for
seven years.

The point is that one has to make a resolution  from  the  depths  of  one’s
heart and to rely on mindfulness and introspection to engage in  virtue  and
not let the mind come under the influence or control of the afflictions.

It is helpful to make such a resolution for a certain period of  time,  such
as for a particular day. For example, you resolve, “Today I am not going  to
let my mind come under the control of afflictions. I am going  to  place  my
mind firmly on virtue.”

Khen Rinpoche: You can make your promise like this: “If that happened, I  am
not going to eat for three days.” Or, “If I fall  asleep  during  the  class
…,” you can decide on your punishment.  Just to give you some idea.

So what should we do when we do commit misdeeds?


      Verse 7.73
      Each time a misdeed occurs
      I should deride myself,
      And then contemplate for a long time
      “No matter what, I shall not let this happen in the future.”

Although we may have made such a resolution, at times when  we  fall  short,
misdeeds do arise and we make mistakes. So then how should we  think?   When
that happens, we should deride ourselves, making a critical  self-evaluation
and remembering, “How I have endured so many problems and so much  suffering
due to not controlling my mind and  allowing  my  mind  to  come  under  the
control of my afflictions. If I were to  continue  like  this,  then  things
will be change. Again I will have to face the same  problems  and  the  same
suffering.”

So  here  is  the  critical  self-evaluation.  Literally  we  are   deriding
ourselves by telling ourselves, “I  should  not  have  done  that.  That  is
really not good. I must not do that again.” We have to think about this  for
a long time and after getting used to that way of  thinking,  we  then  make
the resolution, “I must not do this again.”

We also need to  purify  the  negativities  that  were  accumulated  through
committing misdeeds. So we have to strive at purifying our  negativities  as
well. As said here, whenever  any  misdeed  occurs,  we  should  confess  it
immediately and purify it through applying the four opponent powers.


        5. One should make effort in reasonable activities
      Verse 7.74
      “Likewise in all situations
      I shall acquaint myself with mindfulness.”
      With this cause I shall wish for
      Encounters or appropriate actions.

This is the advice to rely on mindfulness in order not to  let  any  misdeed
arise in the first place or in order to eliminate those  that  have  already
arisen.

With this kind of motivation as set out in Verse 7.74 at the back  of  one’s
mind and by relying on  conscientiousness,  mindfulness  and  introspection,
then one goes about doing  whatever  is  appropriate  such  as  engaging  in
practice, be it a retreat, recitations, prostrations, circumambulations  and
so forth. The point is that with the intention to rely  on  mindfulness  and
introspection and with the aim of not letting faults  arise  or  eliminating
those faults that have already arisen, one then engages in  activities  such
as receiving instructions and teachings, relying on  the  Mahayana  virtuous
friends and so forth.

In  this  section,  conscientiousness,  mindfulness  and  introspection  are
always being emphasised. It is  said  that  they  are  very  important.  One
should sincerely and actively generate  conscientiousness,  mindfulness  and
introspection. On that basis, one then engages in whatever actions that  are
appropriate.

C.  Accomplishing the conduct is within your power
      1.  Through pliancy of body and mind, one should even arise in virtue
      Verse 7.75
      In order to have strength for all
      I should recall before undertaking any action
      The advice on conscientiousness thus,
      And then rise with lightness.

      2.   Applying the analogy to the meaning
      Verse 7.76
      Just as the wind blowing back and forth
      Controls a piece of cotton,
      So shall I be mastered by enthusiasm,
      And in this way I will accomplish all.

Prior to engaging in virtue, we should prepare mentally to have the  ability
and capacity for doing so. In order to be able  to  engage  in  that  virtue
with strength and vigour, we have  to  remember  all  the  instructions  for
cultivating conscientiousness.

There is so much advice on how to be conscientious. There  are  instructions
pertaining to:
 • how to be conscientious in abandoning non-virtue
 • how to be conscientious in engaging in virtue
 • how to be conscientious in abandoning or dealing with afflictions
We should be mindful of these instructions on generating conscientiousness.

For those who  are  able  to  be  conscientious  in  abandoning  non-virtue,
cultivating virtue and in working with their afflictions, then with  respect
to whatever appropriate practice they may be engaged in,  it  is  said  that
they will be able to do those practices very easily.  That  is  the  meaning
when we say, “rise with lightness.” They are able to do their practice  with
ease because they do it enthusiastically  and  very  happily.  There  is  no
impediment whatsoever to their practice.

Likewise if we have strong enthusiasm and joy for virtue, then we can  bring
our  own  body  and  speech  under  that  positive  influence.  If  we   are
enthusiastic about and happy  doing  something  virtuous,  it  will  not  be
difficult to employ our body and speech in that endeavour. Because  mentally
we are so happy engaging in that virtue, with this kind  of  enthusiasm  and
joy, we would be able to complete that virtue.

In Gyaltsab Je’s commentary, his final closing statement to this chapter  is
that we should strive in generating the  joyous  effort  that  can  overcome
laziness. In order to do that, we  have  to  eliminate  all  the  discordant
classes, i.e., those things that hinder  joyous  effort.  We  also  have  to
generate the favourable conditions, i.e., the four  powers,  for  developing
joyous effort.

Gyaltsab Je said that in order to  cultivate  joyous  effort,  you  have  to
eliminate its opposing factors. What are those opposing factors?  There  are
two:
1. not engaging in virtue while one  is  clearly  aware  that  one  has  the
   ability to do so,  i.e., knowing that one can do it but  one  doesn’t  do
   it.
2. thinking, “I can’t do this. How can I ever do this?”

The first one—not engaging in virtue although one knows that one is  capable
of doing so—happens primarily due to procrastination because one thinks,  “I
still  have  time”  or  one  is  completely  overwhelmed  by  attachment  to
unwholesome (or ignoble and bad) activities.

How are we going to deal with the laziness of procrastination? The  antidote
is to reflect on and contemplate the fact that we  are  not  going  to  live
forever and we will die soon. After death,  we  will  fall  into  the  lower
realms.  We also have to remember that attaining this rebirth with  all  the
conditions for practice and the freedom  to  do  so  is  very  difficult  to
achieve again.

How are we going to deal with the  laziness  of  attachment  to  unwholesome
activities, i.e., attachment to the affairs of this life?  The  antidote  is
to reflect on how the precious Dharma is the origin  of  infinite  happiness
in this and in all future lives. That is one antidote.  The  other  antidote
is to reflect on how all these meaningless things that we  do  in  life  are
just distractions. They harm us even in this life  and  they  are  also  the
origin or source of many problems in our future lives.

How are we going to deal with being disheartened about virtue, thinking,  “I
can’t do this”?  In  the  first  place,  such  a  sense  of  despondency  or
discouragement comes in different kinds of thoughts:
 • “I  can’t  attain  all  these  infinite  qualities  of  enlightenment  or
   buddhahood.”
 • “I can’t do all these difficult bodhisattva practices such as  giving  up
   my body and sacrificing this and  that.  They  are  too  challenging  and
   difficult. How is it possible for me to do them?”
 • “How can I put up with all the difficulties of samsara? I  have  to  deal
   with so many challenges in the process of becoming a buddha. In order  to
   achieve all the qualities of the buddha, I still have to  be  in  samsara
   with its challenges and difficulties.  How  can  I  bear  something  like
   that?”

We have gone over all these points already.  So what is the antidote to  the
thought, “I cannot become a buddha” or “How is it possible for me  to  be  a
buddha?” The antidote is to understand that those who  are  already  buddhas
were not buddhas from the beginning. In  the  beginning,  before  they  were
buddhas, they didn’t have all the qualities.  They  had  not  abandoned  all
their faults. But they practised gradually and over  time,  through  bearing
hardships, they were able to  become  enlightened.  So  if  we  were  to  do
likewise and are willing to bear hardships, we will also become a buddha.

As for the  discouragement  that  comes  from  thinking,  “I  am  unable  to
practise all those difficult bodhisattva deeds such as giving my head,  arms
and legs,” the antidote is that there is no need to  worry  at  all  because
these practices are not meant for beginners like us. When we are  beginners,
these practices are difficult. Since we are  beginners,  we  don’t  have  to
worry about doing them. But when we are bodhisattva superiors, at that  time
when we do these practices, it will not be a problem for us at all. At  that
time, giving our body away will be  as  easy  as  giving  away  a  plate  of
vegetable to someone. So why get depressed for no reason?

As for the third form  of  discouragement  thinking,  “I  have  to  stay  in
samsara for such a long time while doing all these practices.  That  is  too
much. It is too difficult.”   The  answer  to  that  is  this:  “It  is  not
difficult at all because if you know how to do it, you will be  filled  with
joy.  Over time, even while in samsara, you  will  experience  physical  and
mental joy in doing these practices. Once you  do  these  practices  with  a
happy mind, even while you are in samsara, you will not be bothered  and  it
will not affect you. So again what is there to worry about?”

THE CHAPTER’S NAME

The name of the chapter is Teaching Joyous Effort.

                                 ~~~~~~~~~~

Exam date and time: Sunday, 12 October, 2014 at 10am at ABC

I do understand that it will be difficult for most of you to read all  seven
chapters in its entirety as a preparation  for  the  exam.  I  have  thought
about this.

I am going to give you a set of sample questions.

You prepare for the exam on the basis of this set of questions. 80%  to  90%
of the questions in the exam will be somewhat connected or related to  these
sample questions.
In the sample questions, there is a section  that  requires  you  to  answer
whether the statements given are true or false. How are you going  to  study
based on these sample questions?
 • The point is not to merely have a minor discussion on the true and  false
   questions and being happy with that. That is wrong and is not the way  to
   do it.
 • You should think, “Why is it true? Why it is false?” You must be able  to
   give reasons for that.
 • On top of this, related to the statement, you should be able to come  out
   with another example, for  instance,  by  changing  the  subject  of  the
   statement. Then you think about it and arrive at an answer.
This is how you should prepare for the exam.

Do you understand the instructions?

For example, the first question is: Our body is  an  object  of  abandonment
because it arises from the  ignorance  belonging  to  the  twelve  links  of
dependent origination.

It is not enough merely to ask someone whether this is  true  or  false  and
leave  it  at  that.  If  you  think  that  this  is  sufficient  for   your
preparation, you will not be able to pass the exam.

In this question, the subject of inquiry  is  "our  body."  After  you  have
answered true or false, with the reasons for your answer,  you  should  then
substitute the subject by thinking, for example, our mind is  an  object  of
abandonment because it arose from the  ignorance  belonging  to  the  twelve
links of dependent origination. Since the  subject  has  changed,  does  the
answer remain the same or not?

I am just giving an example on how to change the subject of  the  statement.
I am not saying that in the actual exam question, the “mind” instead of  the
“body” will be the subject for the first question.  I am  just  highlighting
how you should think and learn.

What I wish from you is that you should know the  purpose  of  having  these
sample questions. The point is for you to learn,  think,  analyse  and  then
discuss. Of course, you still have to take the exam  but  it  is  not  about
passing or failing. This is about educating yourself. It is about  learning.


Having said that, it is also not right to do away with the exam  because  if
we don't have the exam, then most people will  merely  close  the  text  and
that's it. They are not going to look at the text again.  So,  there  is  no
choice. We have to have the exams.

Khen Rinpoche: Do you get the idea?

When I say that 80% to 90% of the questions in the exam will revolve  around
these sample questions, I am not saying that you will get exactly  the  same
statements that you find here, that I am just going to  change  the  subject
of the statement with the rest of the statement unchanged.  Please  keep  in
mind that this is not the case. If you misunderstand what I am saying  here,
then there is the danger that I may end up  receiving  a  lot  of  complains
after the exam!

It is entirely possible that perhaps there are maybe about 10% of  the  exam
questions  that  are  not  connected  to  what  you  find  in  these  sample
questions.

Khen Rinpoche: It is a possibility but I am not sure. I have not decided  on
the questions so no idea yet.

So those who want to take the exam, you can take  the  questions  and  study
them. The whole point is that you can study more.

I don’t think there will be any  more  classes  in  September.  In  October,
perhaps we will have another two more sessions. I  have  not  fully  decided
what I will be talking about in those two sessions. For now, I  am  thinking
to do a simple introduction to tantra. But I have not decided  yet.  As  for
now, that could be one of the topics.


Interpreted by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme; transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek, Aki  Yeo  &
Rachel Tan; edited by Cecilia Tsong.
















