Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Engaging in the Deeds of a Bodhisattva/BP2 M5 L48 final.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:52:18.182096
================================================================================


Transcript of the teachings by Khen Rinpoche Geshe  Chonyi  on  Engaging  in
the Bodhisattva Deeds, 2014

Root text: Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds by  Shantideva,  translated  by
Toh Sze Gee. Copyright: Toh Sze Gee, 2006; Revised edition, 2014.

Lesson     48                                                              4
September 2014


Chapter seven: Verses 7.60 –7. 66
Increasing the strength of joyous effort—the antidote
        A. Increasing the strength of the conditions  conducive  to  joyous
           effort
      2.  Extensive explanation
           B.   The power of stability
                   3. Being proud of the afflictions (V. 7. 60 – 7. 62)
            C.   The power of joy (V. 7.63 – V.7.66)


The 12 links of dependent origination is an explanation of how  one  circles
in samsara, in cyclic existence. As such, if it is any one of the  12  links
of dependent origination, then it is necessarily  included  within  samsara.
Anything that is not included in samsara will not be part of  the  12  links
of dependent origination which is an  explanation  of  how  one  circles  in
samsara.

Having said that, can we be absolutely sure about  this?  Can  we  say  with
decisive confidence, “Yes, this is the case!”? Somebody  may  ask  you  this
simple question: “In the continuum of a superior, how many of the  12  links
of dependent origination are there?”  What are you going to say?

Khen Rinpoche: Are you able to answer that? You  can  say  any  number.  How
many?

Some say 10, some say 11. OK. You think about it. We will answer  this  next
time. You need to think about this question. Next time,  give  your  answer,
“It has this link. But this other link, it does not have.” Then you have  to
give me the reason for  your  answer.  Don’t  have  because  of  this.  Have
because of this. There must be reasons.

The arhats, the foe  destroyers,  do  not  have  any  of  the  12  links  of
dependent origination because they are liberated from samsara.  Because  any
of the 12 links must  necessarily  be  included  within  samsara  or  it  is
necessarily in samsara, as such, in the continuum of a foe destroyer,  there
are none of the 12 links of dependent origination as  he  has  already  been
liberated from cyclic existence.

Then if you were asked the question, “In the case of a  superior,  how  many
of the 12 links of dependent origination are there in  his  continuum?,”  in
the first place, are there any links there or not?  If  not,  what  are  the
reasons for saying no? If there are, then how many? One or  more?  What  are
your reasons for saying this?

                                 ~~~~~~~~~~

In the discussion on the power of stability, there  is  the  cultivation  of
the three types of pride:
1. the pride about action (or karma)
2. the pride about ability (or being proud of one’s capacity)
3. The pride about the afflictions (or being proud of the afflictions)
 • The pride of action is a mind that doesn’t expect any help or involvement
   from others, that doesn’t rely on others when it comes to accomplishing a
   particular practice or virtue. It is a mind thinking, “I  shall  do  this
   alone.”
 • The pride about one’s capacity is the confidence,  thinking,  “I  can  do
   this,”  “this”  referring  to  either  vanquishing  the  afflictions   or
   accomplishing the welfare of others.
 • The pride about afflictions is a very strong  determination  and  courage
   and is a mind that is determined not to let the afflictions take hold  in
   one’s mind and to never give in to the afflictions. It  is  a  mind  that
   thinks, “I will vanquish you. I will destroy you.”
This is how you should understand these three types of pride.

Of the three types of pride, now we are at the third  one,  being  proud  of
the afflictions.

INCREASING THE STRENGTH OF JOYOUS EFFORT —THE ANTIDOTE (cont’d)

A.  Increasing the strength of the conditions conducive to joyous effort
      2.  Extensive explanation
            B.  The power of stability
                   2.  Having  undertaken  joyous  effort,  stabilizing  its
engagement
                       B.  Explaining each individually
                              3.  Being proud of the afflictions
                                    A.  One should develop the  strength  of
the antidotes to the afflictions
      Verse 7.60
      When amidst a class of afflictions,
      I shall be persistent with them in a thousand ways;
      Like a lion among foxes and the like,
      I will not be injured by the host of afflictions.

The outline  here  says  that  one  should  generate  the  strength  of  the
antidotes against the afflictions. It  is  said  that  in  situations  where
there are many objects of attachment or anger around—such as in the case  of
a man meeting with women or in the case of a woman meeting with men or  when
meeting with objects such as harm-doers and so forth—then  one  must  really
focus and discipline the mind. In those situations, one  must  generate  the
force of the antidotes and not let the afflictions take hold in one’s  mind.


It is said that the lion being a very strong animal can never be  harmed  or
disturbed by other animals such as foxes and so forth. Likewise  you  should
act in such a way that whatever situations or  circumstances  you  may  find
yourself in, you should not let the afflictions take hold of you.
There are so many methods or antidotes that are prescribed for dealing  with
the afflictions. There are so much  advice  pertaining  to  how  you  should
react when you meet with objects of desire or objects of hatred  and  anger.
There are even techniques for transforming  adverse  external  circumstances
into favourable conditions for furthering the path in one’s mind.

It is said that at the very least,  especially  for  beginners,  one  should
physically distance oneself from those situations. That  is  why  there  are
such practices as going into isolation, in particular for those  who  really
want to develop meditative stabilisation and some level of concentration.

When you go into physical isolation, at least  you  are  isolating  yourself
from many of the external conditions or circumstances that may  provoke  the
arising of the afflictions in your mind.  When  you  take  yourself  out  of
those situations, the chances or opportunities for you  to  come  under  the
influence of your afflictions are lessened. Of course it  is  not  the  case
that when you  go  into  isolation,  you  are  totally  free  from  all  the
afflictions, but the  chances  or  opportunities  for  following  after  the
afflictions are very much reduced.

The reality is that you have to go into isolation to cut yourself  off  from
all  these  external  circumstances  or  situations  that  may  provoke  the
afflictions arising. But going into isolation is not just for  that  purpose
alone. With much fewer opportunities to get upset, attached  and  so  forth,
one then applies the antidotes to gain stability and  to  subdue  the  mind.
Until one has gained such stability and  one’s  mind  is  somewhat  subdued,
only then will one’s working for others  or  accomplishing  the  welfare  of
others become truly beneficial. Such activities will also be  done  properly
and correctly.

If one is able to go into isolation, do  retreat  in  order  to  subdue  the
mind, become stable and then work to benefit others, only then  will  others
benefit. One  will  also  benefit.  Otherwise  in  the  name  of  benefiting
others—you say you do this  and  that  and  the  other  wanting  to  benefit
others—but nothing much comes out of your efforts. In the  name  of  helping
others, when you do not have the experience or achieve any realisations,  in
that process, you only disturb others and your own mind gets disturbed.

Khen Rinpoche: I think I mentioned this before.  There  was  one  Geshe  who
went to a centre in New Zealand. He mentioned his difficulties when  he  was
there. People complained and were not happy. Whatever he said,  people  just
talked back. He gave  so  much  advice  but  in  the  end,  people  kept  on
complaining about this and that.

He told me, “These people are driving me  crazy!”  I  forgot  what  he  said
exactly. Then I said to him, “You are there to help these crazy people.”  He
said, “That was the idea. It is my job to  help  these  people  but  somehow
they are making me crazy.” I forgot what he said exactly  but  it  was  like
that for him.

It is always emphasised how important it is to  cultivate  the  remedies  or
antidotes to the afflictions in order to deal with them. If  not,  when  one
is under the control or influence of the afflictions, benefiting  others  is
difficult. It is said that we should not allow ourselves to fall under  even
the slightest influence of the afflictions.

                                     B.  One should act so as  not  to  fall
                  under their power even in the slightest
      Verse 7.61
      Just as men will guard their eyes
      In the occurrence of great danger,
      Likewise I shall not come under the power of the afflictions,
      Even when danger occurs.

It is said that when we human beings meet with a situation  where  there  is
the danger  of  being  harmed  physically,  instinctively  we  will  protect
ourselves. We especially cherish our sight, our ability to see. As such,  we
take great care not to let our eyes be harmed. Likewise we should also  take
care not to let ourselves fall under the control of our afflictions.

In some commentaries, an alternative analogy is given: “Just  like  how  the
eyes cannot see taste.”  Literally  it  means  the  eyes  cannot  experience
taste.

The point is that regardless of what the  external  situation  is—no  matter
what kind of  unpleasant  experience  we  may  be  going  through,  whatever
discomfort, suffering or pain we have to endure—we should not let  the  mind
come under the control of the afflictions. Rather  we  should  always  focus
our mind on virtue, the antidote to the afflictions, instead of letting  our
mind fixate  on  whatever  experience  we  may  be  going  through  such  as
discomfort, pain or suffering.

The eye sense power is needed to produce the eye consciousness. But  because
of depending on  the  eye  sense  power,  the  eye  consciousness  can  only
perceive visual form. The eye  sense  consciousness  cannot  perceive  other
things  through  smell,  taste,  sound  and  so  forth.  Just  as  the   eye
consciousness can only perceive visual form and not anything  else  such  as
taste and so forth, likewise if you  apply  the  meaning  of  that  analogy,
whatever  circumstances  you  may  be  in,  whatever  experience  of   pain,
suffering or discomfort you may be encountering  at  that  time,  focus  the
mind only on virtue, i.e., the class of antidotes and not the afflictions.

This analogy is mentioned in some Indian texts as echoed in  the  first  two
lines, “Just as men will guard  their  eyes/  In  the  occurrence  of  great
danger.”

Next the outline says that one should develop the extraordinary  or  special
intention to generate a stable antidote to the afflictions.

                                      C.   One  should  develop  a   special
                  intention to stabilize the antidotes
      Verse 7.62
      It would be better for me to be burned,
      To be killed, or to have my head cut off,
      Rather than bowing down
      To the enemy of afflictions.
      Likewise in all situations
      I should do nothing other than what is fit.
The outline says to generate a  special  intention.  What  is  this  special
intention? Here the text says that it is easy and no great  matter  to  lose
one’s life but letting ourselves come under the control of  the  afflictions
is not so simple because it has consequences.
Here there is this advice that from the very onset  we  should  project  the
intention  never to succumb to the afflictions.

Likewise in the Vinaya Sutra, the Buddha  advised  the  gelongs,  the  fully
ordained monks, “To lose one’s life is easy and is not such a big  deal  but
to die with degenerated ethical disciplines is a big  deal  and  is  not  so
simple.” Why is this so? Because to lose your life simply  means  that  your
life has to come to an end. But to die with corrupted ethics means you  will
have to experience the fruitional effects of suffering for many hundreds  of
thousands of eons.

The import of the statement made by  the  Buddha  in  the  Vinaya  Sutra  is
similar to what Verse 7.62 is saying, i.e., to lose one’s life is  not  such
a big deal  but  to  come  under  the  control  of  or  to  succumb  to  our
afflictions is a much more serious matter.

“Likewise all situations/ I should do nothing other than what is fit”  means
that one should only cultivate virtuous intentions  or  virtuous  karma  and
never cultivate non-virtue at all.

With that we finished with the power of stability.  Next  is  the  power  of
joy.

INCREASING THE STRENGTH OF JOYOUS EFFORT —THE ANTIDOTE (cont’d)

A.  Increasing the strength of the conditions conducive to joyous effort
      2.  Extensive explanation
            C.  The power of joy
                   1.  Making  effort  in  virtue  without  considering  the
fully ripened effect
      Verse 7.63
      Just like those who desire the pleasurable result of play,
      This [bodhisattva] adheres
      To whatever task he may do.
      He is not satiated by it; it makes him happy.

The outline says that one should strive in  virtue  without  expectation  of
the result.

When people play games, they may just play for the fun of it  and  they  are
not necessarily looking for  reward  or  with  the  expectation  of  getting
something in return. There are many games that people  play  for  the  sheer
joy of playing them.

Likewise when  the  bodhisattvas  work  for  sentient  beings  or  when  the
bodhisattvas engage in the bodhisattva’s deeds such as the six  perfections,
they do it happily with great enjoyment. When  the  bodhisattvas  engage  in
the practice of the perfections and the bodhisattva’s deeds  of  benefitting
others, they are happy. They thoroughly enjoy it. They never think  that  it
is enough. They just want to do more. Just  like  when  people  play  games,
they enjoy it so much and they just don’t want to stop.

What kind of lesson can we draw for ourselves from this? I guess the  lesson
is this:  whatever virtue we are engaging in, whatever things we  are  doing
in order to help others, forget about the results of how people  will  react
and whether people will have benefited or not. The point is  just  to  enjoy
the very fact that we are engaging in virtue and  to  enjoy  the  very  fact
that we are doing something to benefit others, regardless  of  whether  they
have benefited or not.

Isn’t this what happens to us? While we may be  doing  something  that  will
actually benefit others, at the back of our mind, we  are  actually  looking
for some acknowledgement, whether the recipient of our  good  deed  actually
acknowledges it, thanks or smiles at us. When those things  do  not  happen,
we are disturbed.

If we give something to a beggar who is blind, I  think  that  most  of  the
time we would not expect anything in return. We  do  not  expect  the  blind
beggar to see us  and  say  “Thank  you.”  We  just  give  happily  with  no
expectation. This is very obvious from our own experience. We can tell  that
there is a huge  difference  between  our  engagement  in  virtue  or  doing
something  to  benefit  others  without  any  expectation  and  when  we  do
something to benefit others with great hopes and  expectations.  Emotionally
there is a big difference.

                     2.   Accomplishing  virtue  by  mentally  engaging  the
effect
      Verse 7.64
      Although people work in order to be happy,
      It is uncertain whether or not they will be happy;
      But how can those whose work itself is happiness
      Find happiness without doing the work?


      Verse 7.65
      If I am not satiated by desirable objects,
      Which are like honey smeared upon a razor’s edge,
      Then why am I satiated by merit
      Which is ripening and pacification in happiness?

This outline says we should accomplish  virtue  by  keeping  the  result  in
mind.

In this world, everyone works  so  hard  for  the  sake  of  something,  for
instance, money. We work so hard at our jobs or in doing  business.  At  the
end of the day, we are looking for something, perhaps  money.  Everybody  is
looking for happiness.  That is what drives people at their  work,  “I  want
to strive in my career for myself.  I am going to do  business.  When  I  do
well in my job or in my business, when I have a  lot  of  money  that  would
bring me happiness.”  So that is the goal. But  many  a  time,  despite  the
best of intentions and no matter how hard we try, somehow we  don’t  achieve
our aim.

The point here is that everybody works with the  hope  that  they  will  get
something in return, for instance, money. Everybody works  so  hard  in  all
kinds of ways in order  to  achieve  this  bliss,  pleasure  and  happiness.
Having said that, no matter what  one  does,  still  there  is  no  absolute
guarantee that one will achieve those goals.

When the bodhisattvas work for sentient beings, they are so happy to do  so.
They practise the  bodhisattvas’  deeds  such  as  generosity,  guard  their
ethics and so forth. They work very hard in doing so and  whatever  they  do
is guaranteed to bring about happiness. As such, what is the point and  what
is the use of following after non-virtue?

The point is that all of us look for happiness. But why  are  we  trying  so
hard doing things that are not guaranteed to bring us happiness? Why are  we
not doing those things that are guaranteed to bring  us  happiness?  Putting
our effort into activities that do not guarantee happiness  and  success  is
like tasting honey that is “smeared upon a razor’s edge.” That  is  what  we
do—trying something tasty that is on the edge of  a  sharp  knife.  When  we
taste honey in this way, yes, we do  get  some  pleasure  but  the  harm  is
greater than the pleasure we may experience. That is why some people end  up
cutting their tongue.

For us, when we meet with attractive sense objects such as beautiful  forms,
pleasant sounds,  nice  smells,  delicious  tastes  and  attractive  tactile
objects, for a short moment, we do experience some pleasure.  This  is  what
we call  worldly  pleasure,  samsaric  pleasure  or  contaminated  pleasure.
Immediately we feel good. We cling on to and become emotionally attached  to
that pleasurable experience, not wanting to let it go. Not only can  we  not
let go, we want to repeat those experiences over and over again.  We  cannot
stop ourselves and  we  cannot  satisfy  ourselves.  As  we  are  not  fully
satisfied, we want more of such objects. That is how we  react  and  behave,
instinctively and emotionally.

It is the nature of such pleasures that they do not last. Those  pleasurable
experiences don’t last forever nor do they increase indefinitely.  Basically
the law of diminishing returns applies here. Over  time,  those  experiences
become less and less satisfying. When that feeling  sets  in,  then  we  get
bored.

Our mind then turns its attention to some other object to give us  pleasure.
Again we have the same pleasurable experience. It lasts for a while  but  it
doesn’t increase forever. Then we get bored again and we move on to  another
object. That is what we called  worldly  happiness,  samsaric  happiness  or
contaminated happiness.

Despite the fact that the nature of  all  the  pleasure  we  experience  are
contaminated—it doesn’t last and it also cannot  increase  indefinitely—when
we get bored, we turn our attention to something else.  We  are  never  ever
satisfied.  In  the  end,  those  experiences   in   fact   transform   into
dissatisfaction and suffering. That is the nature of all the  pleasure  that
we experience.

Despite this, we still want it and we still work for  it  continuously,  day
in and day out. We only aim for this. So if that is  the  case,  if  we  are
striving continuously just to get this kind of pleasure, then why do we  not
strive in the same way with regard to virtuous  activities,  in  the  causes
and the practices that will definitely bring about happiness, good  rebirth,
liberation, and enlightenment in the long run?  In a similar  way,  why  are
we  not  engaging  continuously   in   the   bodhisattvas’   practices   and
accumulating the collection of merit and wisdom?

                    3. The way to apply oneself with the power of joy
      Verse 7.66
      Thus in order to complete this task,
      I shall engage in it
      Just as an elephant tormented at midday
      Enters into a lake.

Next is the way of relating this to the power of joy.

Here the context is the practices of the bodhisattvas;  how  they  act  when
they engage in virtue and when they benefit sentient beings. They  are  just
like elephants that happily and enthusiastically charge into a pond or  lake
on a very hot day. It is said that is similar to the kind  of  attitude  the
bodhisattvas have when they engage in virtue to benefit sentient beings.

The point is that whatever virtue or practice we engage in, if we  know  the
essential point of why we are doing it and what is in it for  us,  i.e.,  we
are convinced and we have that understanding of its benefits, then  when  we
do the practice, we will be so happy doing  it.  Because  we  are  happy  in
doing the practice, we will then be able to complete the practice.

This applies to everything that we do in life. Whatever we do, we  can  only
complete the task if we are happy. If we are happy doing it,  then  whatever
the task may be, we will  probably  finish  it.  That  is  why  it  is  very
important to do things with a very happy mind.

Verse 7.63 comes  under  the  outline,  “Making  effort  in  virtue  without
considering the fully ripened effect.” The next two verses, Verse  7.64  and
7.65 come under the outline, “Accomplishing virtue by mentally engaging  the
effect.”  Is there an internal contradiction there? You think about that.

We will probably finish Chapter Seven on Tuesday.

                                 ~~~~~~~~~~~

We are going to do tsog offering today because  it  is  tsog  day.  It  also
happens to be the third anniversary of the passing of Khensur Rinpoche  Lama
Lhundrup. I guess many people here have some connection with  him.  You  can
use the opportunity to pray for his reincarnation to be found quickly.


Interpreted by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme; transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek,  Vivien  Ng
& Julia Koh; edited by Cecilia Tsong.




