Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Engaging in the Deeds of a Bodhisattva/BP2 M5 L22 final .doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:52:18.113752
================================================================================


Transcript of the teachings by Khen Rinpoche Geshe  Chonyi  on  Engaging  in
the Bodhisattva Deeds, 2014

Root text: Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds by  Shantideva,  translated  by
Toh Sze Gee. Copyright: Toh Sze Gee, 2006; Revised edition, 2014.

Lesson                                                                    22
24 April 2014


Projections of the Mind. Chapter Five: Verses 5.17-5.25. 1. The  method  for
guarding the  trainings:  guarding  the  mind.   B.  The  reasons  for  that
(cont’d). C. Making effort  in  guarding  the  mind.   2.   The  method  for
guarding the mind: guarding mindfulness and introspection


PROJECTIONS OF THE MIND

This is   a verse from the Seventh Dalai Lama, Kelsang Gyatso which says:

      All the pphenomena of both samsara and nirvana  are  the  fabrication/
      creation/ projections  of  the  conceptual  thought.  By  apprehending
      phenomena to exist ultimately,  we  are  deceived.  As  such,  do  not
      apprehend phenomena to be as truly existent ing but rather seelook  at
      them as empty.

This verse What the verse is saying is that everything  in  samsara—  -  all
the harms, all the problems— and everything about nirvana or /lliberation  -
 are the creations/projections (or creations,  fabrications)  of  the  mind,
i.e., they are  in that they are all merely posited by thought.

So far what we have seen in the text are the descriptions of about  all  the
sufferings and problems of this life and all the suffering and  problems  of
, and all the  sufferings  and  problems  of  the  future  lives  asare  the
creations/ projections of the mind. They all arise from the mind. These  are
the problems of samsara.
This e verse is saying that all sufferings and problems of samsara  are  the
projections of the mind, i.e., .  Tthey come into to existence as  something
that is merely posited by thought.

Essentially, Lliberation (or /nirvana)  is also a quality that is  dependent
on the mind and is achieved through  the  mind.  When  we  talk  about  non-
abiding nirvana, it also comes from the mind.

In the last lesson, we saw how the six perfections are  all  qualities  that
are dependent on the mind. This  which includes the  wisdom  perceiving  the
ultimate nature of reality, - tthe wisdom of realiszing  selflessness.  This
It is also a quality that is dependent on the mind and is  achieved  through
the mind.

The verse that I quoted have cited earlier  is  saying  that  everything  in
samsara and nirvana is the creation/ projection of the mind  and  is  merely
posited by  the  conceptual  thought.  This  at  is  the  reality  of  every
phenomenon in both samsara  and  nirvana,  i.e.,  they  .  Every  phenomenon
included in samara and nirvana eexist s as something that merely  designated
or imputed / imputed by thought.

Although this at is the reality, when everything that is  included  in  both
samara and nirvana appears back to us, it does not they don’t appear  to  us
to be as something that is  the  creation  of  the  mind  or  designated  or
imputed by the mind. . They don’t appear back to us  as  something  that  is
imputed/ designated by the mind. But Rrather, it they appears back to us  as
something that is existing from the  side  of  the  object,  existing  right
there under its own power, and i.e., existing  s  inherently  from  its  own
side. All phenomena in samara and nirvana appear back to us in that way  and
we believe and accept that appearance. This  is  how  we  are  deceived  and
cheated.

Just as in the example of the truly existent enemy we discussed  before,  in
reality, our enemies are the projections and  creations  of  our  own  mind.
There is an enemy out there only because  of  our  own  anger  so  it  is  a
creation of our own mind.  When  there  is  no  anger  from  our  side,  the
enemy—the person who harms us or bothers us— does not exist. But because  we
have anger, the enemy exists causing us pain  and  problems.  There  is  the
appearance of an enemy only from the perspective of our own anger.  We  then
believe that the enemy exists.

Imagine a situation when you have no anger at all. Then no matter  how  that
person harms you, it does not matter. As long as anger  does  not  exist  in
your mind, the label, “enemy,” does not exist. It  only  exists  when  anger
arises. It is clear from this example that the  enemy  is  the  creation  of
your own mind.

Furthermore, when the mind understands that the label, “enemy,”  is  a  mere
designation and is a projection of the mind, then there  is  no  real  enemy
existing from the side of the  object.  The  anger  becomes  very  weak  and
powerless because there is no basis for you to be so upset.

But for you, there is the appearance of the enemy from its own  side,  which
has nothing to do with your mind, i.e., the issue does not lie with you  but
lies completely with the object. All the problems exist  from  the  side  of
the object so there is a real enemy existing right there. This  is  how  the
enemy appears back to your mind. The mind  assents  to  the  appearance  and
then believes in it. This is how strong anger arises.  Therefore  the  verse
says:

      All the phenomena of both samsara and nirvana are the  projections  of
      conceptual thought. By apprehending phenomena to exist ultimately,  we
      are deceived.

When we are deceived in such a way, we experience suffering.

The verse ends with:

      As such, do not apprehend phenomena to be as truly existent ing but
      rather seelook at them as empty.

So do not believe in and assent  to  the  mistaken  appearance  of  inherent
existence.

Do not assent to  or  believe  in  the  mistaken  appearance  of  the  enemy
existing from its own side but rather see it as a  mere  projection  of  the
mind, looking instead at that appearance to be empty. Understand  that  that
mistaken appearance is not reality and that it does not exist in the way  it
appears. Therefore it is empty.

Verses like the one that I  just  cited  are  quite  useful.  When  you  can
memorise them and reflect  on  them,  it  would  be  very  useful  for  you.
Likewise in the last class I mentioned it would be very useful  for  you  to
memorise and think about verse 5.17.

B.   THE REASONS FOR THAT (cont’d)

2.   Qualities depend upon the mind
   F.  Wisdom relies upon the mind
      Verse 5.17
      Even those who wish to obtain happiness and overcome suffering
      Will wander with no aim
      If they do not comprehend the secret of the mind –
      The principal Dharma

The “secret of the mind” is “the principal Dharma.” Here the “secret of  the
mind” is the ultimate nature of the mind which is also the  ultimate  nature
of all phenomena.  The mind and all phenomena do not exist  from  their  own
side and they do not exist inherently, i.e.,  they  are  empty  of  existing
inherently.  This is the ultimate nature of  the  mind  and  all  phenomena.
Without understanding this, no matter what you do, you will always run  into
problems.

C.   MAKING EFFORT IN GUARDING THE MIND

       1.  Brief presentation
      Verse 5.18
      This being so,
      I shall hold and guard my mind well.
      Except for the mode of conduct of guarding the mind,
      What use are many other modes of conduct?

As we had seen in the earlier sections of this chapter, all  the  suffering,
problems and fears of this life and all the suffering,  problems  and  fears
that we will experience in future  lives  are  the  products  of  the  mind.
Likewise all the happiness and bliss of this life and all the happiness  and
bliss that we will experience in future lives are also the products  of  the
mind. Therefore there is nothing that is more important  than  guarding  the
mind.

In order to guard the mind, we have  to  be  mindful  of  what  we  need  to
cultivate and practise. We also need to  be  mindful  of  what  we  need  to
abandon and discard. Being mindful means not  forgetting  what  we  need  to
cultivate and not forgetting what we need to abandon.

Every now and then, we should apply introspection  or  vigilance  and  check
what the mind is up to. This is how we guard our mind.

This verse says that we have to continually guard our mind  without  letting
our mindfulness and  introspection  degenerate.  There  are  many  modes  of
conduct, behaviour and practice that we can  undertake  with  our  body  and
speech. But when we engage in such behaviour and  practices  with  our  body
and speech while, at the same time, neglecting to guard the  mind,  what  is
the use of engaging in such conduct when  they  will  not  bring  about  any
great purpose?

We should understand from the very beginning that all  the  different  modes
of conduct, behaviour and practice that we  engage  in  with  our  body  and
speech are methods for subduing the mind. We need to remember this from  the
very  beginning.  We  should  then  ensure  that  ultimately  our   conduct,
behaviour and practice have to benefit the mind and contribute  towards  the
protection of the mind.

This verse is pointing out that when we neglect to  guard  and  protect  our
mind, no matter how much effort we put in and no matter  how  much  physical
or verbal hardship we are enduring, we will not achieve  any  great  purpose
or experience any great benefit from our activities.

There are  many  people  who  mistakenly  think,  “There  is  no  use  doing
practices such as prostrations,  circumambulations  and  daily  recitations.
What is the point  of  doing  them  when  they  do  not  contribute  to  the
betterment of the mind?” With that as the reason, they give up  engaging  in
these activities. At the same time they are not doing  anything  with  their
mind, i.e., they are not working on  guarding  and  protecting  their  mind.
This is a huge mistake because they end up with nothing.

If you are not doing any of these practices with your body  and  speech  but
in  reality  you  are  really  guarding  and  protecting  your   mind   with
mindfulness and introspection, perhaps something can be said for  that.  But
most people end up with nothing. It is important not to end up like that.

It is important not to misinterpret the meaning of these verses, using  them
as  reasons  not  to  engage   in   any   of   these   practices   such   as
circumambulations or prostrations. You may say,  “Shantideva  said,  ‘Except
for the mode of conduct of guarding the  mind,/  What  use  are  many  other
modes of conduct?,’ so what is the point of doing them?”

Alternatively, people may quote verse 5.16 and say,  “You  can  recite  your
prayers, engage in all sort of hardships for long periods of time  but  when
you are doing all that with a distracted mind, what is the point?” When  you
use that reason to substantiate your wrong position, i.e.,  believing  there
is no point doing any of these activities anyway, you are wrong.

The intent of the Buddha behind these statements is that when you engage  in
these practices with a distracted mind,  you  will  not  achieve  any  great
purpose. He did not say that you will not achieve  anything  at  all.  There
are still some benefit.  It  is  just  that  such  activities  done  with  a
distracted mind will not yield their complete actual benefit but it  is  not
as if you end up with nothing.

The point behind these verses is that there is a need to protect  and  guard
our mind and to change our mind for the better. Such a  positive  change  of
the mind, such mental transformation, comes from within and depends  on  the
mind. Therefore it is important to guard the mind.


       2.  Extensive explanation
            A.  The way to guard the mind
      Verse 5.19
      Just as I would be attentive and conscientious of a wound
      When amidst an unruly, freed crowd,
      So I should always guard the wounds of my mind
      When dwelling among negative people.

Imagine you are going to a place that is full of people  who  you  know  are
quite careless and not conscientious. They do not have much mindfulness  nor
are they vigilant. If you have an injury  or  an  open  wound  and  have  no
choice but to go among such people, you would be very careful and be on  the
constant lookout to make sure that they would not hurt your wound. You  will
do everything you can to protect yourself.

Likewise, this verse is saying that when you have to go  into  a  crowd  and
mix with people, there will always be people who will  agitate  you  or  who
may stir up your attachment. In those situations, you  have  to  be  careful
and rely constantly on mindfulness  and  introspection  to  guard  the  mind
against anger and attachment.

You have to apply introspection and check, “Am I  developing  anger  because
there are such people around?”  or  “Is  my  desire  or  attachment  arising
because of all these objects of attachment around me?”

When you are not mindful and you do not apply  introspection  when  you  are
mixing with people, then when you come  into  contact  with  an  undesirable
object, you will get upset and angry. When you  come  into  contact  with  a
desirable or pleasant object, there is  the  danger  that  you  may  develop
strong desire and  attachment.  Of  course,  when  you  are  upset  or  your
attachment arises, you suffer so much pain.  Therefore  you  have  to  guard
your mind.

The teachings say that ideally beginners should dwell in isolation,  staying
far away from objects of anger and staying far away from objects of  desire.
This is especially so in the beginning  when  one  is  training  one’s  mind
because the mind is still weak. When one meets with the object, the mind  is
affected and changes immediately.  In order to make the initial  training  a
little easier and more stable,  beginners  should  live  in  hermitages,  in
isolation or live alone to give oneself some space to work  with  the  mind.
The reason of course is that one needs to protect and guard the mind.

For beginners, the mind is so easily affected by the  external  environment.
When one meets with an object of anger or attachment, the mind  is  affected
immediately and becomes angry or attached. So if one really  wants  to  tame
and  subdue  one’s  mind—  one  will  always  see   this   advice   in   the
teachings—ideally, one should live in isolation or go on  retreat  in  order
to tame the mind.

When we look at the advice for those who want to develop  calm  abiding,  in
order to develop calm abiding,  one’s  mind  needs  to  be  free  of  mental
chatter and discursive  thoughts.  One  needs  to  have  as  few  discursive
thoughts as possible so that one can develop  calm  abiding.  Therefore  one
needs to develop calm abiding in isolation, by isolating  oneself  from  the
hustle and bustle of a busy life.

            B.  The reasons it is necessary to guard it
Why is it necessary to guard the mind in such a way?

      Verse 5.20
      If I am conscientious of a wound
      Through fear of the small suffering of a wound,
      Then why do I not guard the wounds of my mind
      Through fear of being crushed by the mountains of Mass Destruction?

The verse starts with a worldly analogy. When you happen to have  an  injury
or an open wound, if something bad comes into contact with  the  wound,  you
will suffer tremendously with a lot of pain. Therefore you are usually  very
careful when you have an open wound and you will do everything  you  can  to
protect it. You will be very mindful and you  will  apply  introspection  in
protecting your wound.

You are so conscientious with regard to protecting your wound. But  you  are
not mindful and you do not apply introspection when  it  comes  to  guarding
your mind.   Instead you end  up  following  after  the  negative  mind  and
accumulating negativities that will result in so much  suffering  in  future
lives such as the sufferings in  the  lower  realms.  Therefore  you  should
place greater attention into guarding the wound of your mind.

Recalling Verse 5.7,

      Who intentionally created
      The weapons of hell beings?
      Who created the burning iron ground?
      From what did all those hosts of women ensue?

All these unbelievable sufferings of the lower realms and  the  hell  realms
are the results of and come from the untamed negative  mind.  Since  you  do
not want these sufferings, you have to stop the negative  mind  by  guarding
the mind.

            C.  The benefits of guarding it
      Verse 5.21
      Should I behave in such a way,
      Then whether among negative people
      Or even in the midst of women,
      The steady effort of restraint will not decline.

People who are constantly mindful and vigilant are able  to  maintain  their
trainings in any situation and will not be affected by them. They  are  also
very stable in those situations. So when  you  are  constantly  mindful  and
vigilant, it does not matter what kind of situation you are in.


You can be in a situation where there are  many  negative  people  or  where
there are many objects of desire and attachment such as women and so  forth.
But when you are constantly mindful and vigilant, it does  not  matter  what
the situation may be.  It will not affect your practice  of  restraining  or
taming your mind.

The verse here says, “… even in the midst of women.” Shantideva was  a  monk
and a man. From the male perspective, generally speaking, women are  objects
of attachment or desire. But it is not  just  about  women.  If  you  are  a
female, then you have to apply, “... even in the midst of men.”

This is the benefit. The verse is saying  that  when  you  are  able  to  be
mindful and vigilant continuously, then it does not  matter  what  situation
you are in. You will be able to keep your trainings and keep your vows.

            D.  Devoting oneself to mindfulness in order to guard the mind

      Verse 5.22
      It is better to be without gain,
      Honor, body, and sustenance,
      And it is better to let other virtues degenerate,
      Rather than ever to let the mind degenerate.

According to Gyaltsab Je’s commentary, it is a small matter not to have  any
gain, honour or respect from people and  not  to  have  any  possessions  or
sources of sustenance. Even if you hardly engage in virtuous actions of  the
body and speech and even if those  practices  should  degenerate,  it  is  a
small matter.

But it is a serious matter if you were to allow  your  mind  to  degenerate.
Here degenerating the  mind  means  that  you  let  your  good  heart,  your
bodhicitta, degenerate. That should never degenerate  because  you  have  to
remember that in the context of our discussion here, we  are  talking  about
protecting and guarding the mind and the context of the  bigger  picture  of
cultivating the altruistic intention,  bodhicitta.  Allowing  your  mind  to
degenerate will result in a great loss.

Verses 5.18 – 5.22 show us why we need to strive in guarding the mind.

2. The method for guarding the mind: guarding mindfulness and  introspection



    A.   Brief presentation
    Verse 5:23
    To you who wish to guard your minds,
    I thus fold my hands [and urge you],
    “At the cost of your life, guard
    Mindfulness and introspection!”

Prior to this verse, there was already an explanation of  all  the  problems
that come from not guarding the mind and the reasons why it is important  to
do so. We have completed that section.

Now Shantideva  is  imploring  and  urging  his  followers  to  guard  their
mindfulness and introspection even at the cost of their lives. He is  asking
those who believe in him and who  wish  to  follow  him  not  to  let  their
mindfulness  of  virtue  degenerate  and  not  to  let  their  introspection
degenerate.

Likewise  with  folded  hands,  Shantideva  is  urging  us  to   guard   our
mindfulness and introspection. He is not showing his respect  for  or  faith
in us with his folded hands but rather  it  is  a  gesture  of  showing  his
understanding  of  the  importance  of  guarding   one’s   mindfulness   and
introspection. He is emphasising how important they are.

    B.  Extensive explanation
The extensive explanation has two points:
1. the disadvantages of lacking introspection
2. guarding mindfulness as a method of guarding introspection

The disadvantages of lacking introspection have five points:
1. If one is separated from mindfulness and introspection, any action one
   performs has little force
2. Wisdom will not become pure
3. Ethics will not become pure
4. Virtues accumulated in the past will be destroyed
5. The accomplishment of virtues not previously performed will be hindered

     1.  The disadvantages of lacking introspection
        A.  If one is separated from mindfulness and introspection, any
           action one performs has little force
      Verse 5.24
      People who are disturbed by sickness
      Lack strength in all actions.
      Likewise, the minds disturbed by confusion
      Lack strength in all actions.

Those who are sick find it difficult to go to work and even if  they  do  go
to work, probably they will not be able to  do  a  good  job.  Likewise  the
virtuous  actions  of  those  whose  minds  are  confused  or  disturbed  by
ignorance will have little power.

The functions of mindfulness and introspection are different:
 • The function of mindfulness is non-forgetfulness, i.e., to allow  us  not
   to forget what we are supposed to do and not to forget  what  virtue  and
   non-virtue are.
 • The function  of  introspection  is  to  enable  us  to  know  whether  a
   particular action that we are going to do or that we are engaging  in  is
   correct or incorrect.

When we engage in an action without applying introspection, we will  not  be
able to tell whether the action is good or bad. Then obviously  that  action
will have little power. The verse here is  saying  that  when  there  is  no
introspection, the virtuous action one  is  engaging  in  will  have  little
power or efficacy.

        B. Wisdom will not become pure
      Verse 5.25
      Whatever has been heard, contemplated, and meditated
      By those whose minds lack introspection,
      Just like water in a leaking vase,
      Will not remain in mindfulness.

When one lacks introspection, one will not generate pure wisdom.  The  verse
is saying that in the absence of  introspection,  whatever  wisdom  one  may
develop will slowly degenerate or disappear as the mind tends to wander  and
be easily distracted.

When one is not vigilant, even when one  manages  to  develop  some  wisdom,
such as the wisdoms arising from hearing, reflection and perhaps  even  from
meditation, these different wisdoms will slowly degenerate and disappear.

The analogy of a leaking vase is used in this verse. This  is  to  highlight
the fact that when a vase has holes or cracks in its bottom, no  matter  how
much water one pours in, slowly the water will just trickle away.

The  verse  is  also  telling  us  that  having  mindfulness  alone  is  not
sufficient. One needs  to  have  introspection  and  be  vigilant.  In  this
context, without introspection, even the wisdom  one  develops  will  slowly
degenerate and disappear.

QUESTION POSED BY KHEN RINPOCHE

Think about this. Remember actualising karma  from  the  twelve  links?  The
teachings mention that  this  actualising  karma  has  to  be  nourished  by
craving and grasping.

So where do  you  draw  the  line  between  an  actualising  karma  that  is
nourished by craving and grasping and  an  actualising  karma  that  is  not
nourished by craving and grasping? Where is the boundary between these two?

The point is this: the actualising karma has to be nourished by craving  and
grasping before death comes. So does it happen one month before we die,  one
week before we die, on the day we die or one minute before we actually die?

Khen Rinpoche: You all know the twelve links. Haven’t all of  you  graduated
from the twelve links? I think you are  clear  about  the  question,  aren’t
you?

No? I think I will have to teach the twelve links again!

In other words, when is the actualising karma activated?  Being  born  as  a
human being is a rebirth in the desire realms and is  activated  by  craving
and grasping. So to be born as a human being, when is that  karma  nourished
by craving and grasping?

Is the craving and grasping that activate the karma to be born  as  a  human
being virtue or non-virtue? Is  the  desire  or  attachment  of  the  desire
realms virtue or non-virtue?

Khen Rinpoche:  Is it non-virtue or virtue? Attachment  is  virtue  or  non-
virtue? No doubt it is non-virtue. You  have  to  accept  that  it  is  non-
virtue. It cannot be virtue.
It follows then that it is actually a non-virtue, which activates the  karma
that causes us to be reborn as a human being, i.e., it is  a  good  rebirth.
So non-virtue plays  a  very  important  part  as  it  brings  together  the
conditions for us to born as a human being.

It seems then that a non-virtuous mind has brought  about  a  good  rebirth.
How is that so? If that is the case, then at the time of death, you  do  not
have to worry about dying with non-virtuous thoughts and you do not need  to
put in so much effort to die with virtuous thoughts.

Khen Rinpoche: Are you getting my question? You must get the  question  that
I am asking you.

The question is that the karma to be born as a human  being  is  necessarily
nourished or activated by craving and grasping.  But  craving  and  grasping
are afflictions and are non-virtues. Are we then saying that a good  rebirth
can be the result of and be brought about by non-virtue?


Interpreted by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme; transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek,  Vivien  Ng
& Aki Yeo; edited by Cecilia Tsong.


