Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Engaging in the Deeds of a Bodhisattva/BP2 M5 L05 final .doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:52:21.837460
================================================================================


Transcript of the teachings by Khen Rinpoche Geshe  Chonyi  on  Engaging  in
the Bodhisattva Deeds, 2014

Root text: Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds by  Shantideva,  translated  by
Toh Sze Gee. Copyright: Toh Sze Gee, 2006; Revised edition, 2014.

Lesson    5                                                               20
February 2014


Reflecting  on  impermanence,  suffering  and  selflessness.   Chapter  One,
verses 1.21-1.25: Reasons for benefits of bodhicitta  and  establishing  the
benefits by means of logic and reasoning.


REFLECTING ON IMPERMANENCE, SUFFERING AND SELFLESSNESS

Returning  to  our  discussion  on  impermanence,  the   real   meaning   of
impermanence is momentary disintegration. Because compounded  (or  composed)
phenomena undergo change in  each  and  every  moment,  therefore  they  are
impermanent. We should apply this understanding of impermanence to our  body
and mind, understanding how they also undergo momentary  disintegration.  By
looking at how we ourselves, our body and  mind  are  undergoing  change  in
every  single  moment,   because  of  that,  we,  our  body  and  mind   are
impermanent.

      Because it is impermanent, it is suffering

Going back to what I brought up in the first lesson on the above  statement.
  We,  our  body  and   mind   are   impermanent   and   undergo   momentary
disintegration. We, our  body  and  mind  undergo  momentary  disintegration
without a choice, i.e., being the products of our karma and afflictions;  we
helplessly and powerlessly undergo momentary disintegration. Because of  our
karma  and  afflictions,  we,  our   body   and   mind   undergo   momentary
disintegration. Because we ourselves, our body and  mind  undergo  momentary
disintegration due to the power of  our  karma  and  afflictions,  therefore
they are in the nature of suffering.

• We ourselves and our body and mind complex, i.e., our aggregates,  undergo
  momentary change. Therefore they are impermanent.
• They  undergo  momentary  change  due  to  the  power  of  our  karma  and
  afflictions. As such, they are in the nature of suffering.

What is the link between this and selflessness for it is said:

      Because it is suffering, it is selfless.

There are a few ways  of  interpreting  the  meaning  and  the  relationship
between these two. One interpretation is  this:  Earlier  we  said  that  we
ourselves and our aggregates, our body  and  mind,  are  in  the  nature  of
suffering because we are under the control of  our  karma  and  afflictions,
i.e., we are under  the  control  and  influence  of  something  other  than
ourselves. Because of this, we can say that we ourselves, our body and  mind
are empty of an independent self,  i.e.,  there  cannot  be  an  independent
self.
This is a reason to establish that our body and mind  are  selfless  and  to
establish that the self does not exist independently.

This present discussion and its related discussions in the past  are  mainly
for the older students, especially  those  who  have  studied  some  of  the
previous modules such as tenets and so forth.  It  is  very  important  that
they think about these statements:

      Because it is impermanent, it is suffering.
      Because it is suffering, it is selfless.

This gives you an idea of how to contemplate when you see  these  two  basic
statements and to try to find the relationship between them. It  also  helps
you to establish how the former statement is  the  reason  for  establishing
the latter statement.

All composed phenomena such as our body and  mind  are  impermanent  because
they undergo momentary change. We are in the nature  of  suffering  and  our
body and mind are in the nature of suffering  because  they  are  under  the
control of our karma and afflictions. As such, it is not reasonable to  have
very strong grasping and attachment to our body and mind  because  they  are
in the nature of suffering. This is another way  of  explaining  how  it  is
selfless because it is in the nature of suffering.

I have given you two interpretations, i.e.,  two  ways  of  looking  at  the
relationship between the nature of suffering and selflessness so  keep  them
in mind. Thinking, “Because it is impermanent, it is suffering.  Because  it
is  suffering, it is selfless,” is taking a first step in working to  reduce
our anger and attachment.
• By thinking of the  impermanence  of  our  own  body  and  mind,  when  we
  understand this well, naturally our afflictions will subside.
• In addition when we can contemplate how we, our body and mind are  in  the
  nature of suffering, of course that will also help very much  in  reducing
  our afflictions.
• When we can reflect well on the meaning of selflessness,  our  afflictions
  will also naturally decline.
We will experience  more  peace  and  happiness  when  our  afflictions  are
weaker.

When we can remember and reflect on  these  two  statements—“Because  it  is
impermanent, it is suffering. Because it is suffering,  it  is  selfless”—it
will be helpful especially at those times when our minds are  distracted  or
disturbed. This is a method of working with our afflictions.

Afflictions can also arise when things are going well,  when  we  have  this
idea, “Everything is going well. Everything is fine.” This is the  situation
for strong attachment to arise, especially the complete  preoccupation  with
the happiness of this life alone. In order to  counteract  this  attachment,
we  can  reflect  on  these  three  things  (impermanence,   suffering   and
selflessness).  Likewise,  when  we  are  disturbed  or  when  the  mind  is
depressed and unhappy, we could also think about these three things.

The best antidote to the afflictions  is  to  meditate  on  selflessness  or
emptiness. But this is quite impossible and out of reach for  us.  There  is
also the meditation  on  bodhicitta  but  that  is  also  really  difficult.
However what is within our reach and what is highly possible is  for  us  to
think about how we ourselves, our body and mind are  by  nature  impermanent
and in the nature of suffering. This is highly  accessible  and  within  our
reach, something that we can understand much more easily, making it   easier
for us to put into practice. So this is the first step  that  we  must  take
rather than thinking about emptiness or bodhicitta.

It is mentioned in the stages of the path to enlightenment  literature  that
amongst all the ideas, the  idea  of  impermanence  is  the  most  powerful.
Whether the reflection on impermanence  will  really  help  you  or  not  is
something that you have to discover for yourself. You have  to  think  about
it. Try it out  especially  during  those  times  when  you  are  completely
absorbed and preoccupied with the happiness of this life, i.e., when  things
are going well, or when  you  are  feeling  down  and  disturbed.  When  you
reflect and meditate on the impermanence of things and events in  life,  see
whether it helps or not. You have to discover this for yourself.

The correct reflection and meditation  on  impermanence  will  not  lead  to
further  depression  or  further  unhappiness.  The  correct  reflection  on
impermanence is very helpful  for  the  mind.  It  really  calms  the  mind.
Furthermore  the  correct  reflection  of  impermanence  gives  courage  and
determination. It can also lead to strengthening one’s love for  others  and
so forth.

For example, when you understand that you may die tomorrow, i.e.,  you  have
this strong idea, “I’m going to die tomorrow,” then suddenly, you find  that
there is no reason to be upset anymore. What is the point of  getting  angry
when you know for sure that you will die tomorrow?

When you understand that you are going to die tomorrow, you are able to  let
go of your possessions easily. When you know you are going to die,  you  see
that there is no point clinging to them. When you really know how  to  think
about impermanence, this will be the experience. With that kind of  mindset,
I think that with whatever remaining lifespan you may have, you will use  it
in a more meaningful way.

When one understands that life is short, what is the point of living  it  in
a miserable way? What is the point of being unhappy all the  time?  What  is
the point of accumulating non-virtue? It  is  pointless.  So  such  thoughts
arise due to reflecting on impermanence. One may also  develop  thoughts  of
engaging in virtue and activities that will make one calm and  peaceful  and
be of help to others.

                                 ~~~~~~~~~~

There are some corrections[1] to be made  to  the  boundaries  of  the  four
types of mind generation as explained in the last lesson.

We divided mind generation in terms of their boundaries of which  there  are
four.
|Boundarie|Ordinary bodhisattva on the Mahayana path of accumulation  |
|s        |and path of preparation – mind generation of aspiring      |
|         |conduct (or the bodhicitta that comes from belief)         |
|         |Superior bodhisattva on the 1st to 7th grounds – mind      |
|         |generation of pure noble intention (or pure superior intent|
|         |mind generation)                                           |
|         |Superior bodhisattva on the 8th, 9th and 10th grounds –    |
|         |mind generation of full maturation (or fully ripened mind  |
|         |generation)                                                |
|         |Buddha superior on the buddha ground - mind generation free|
|         |from all obscurations (or obscuration abandoning mind      |
|         |generation)                                                |

Another point to note is these two words, bodhicitta  and  mind  generation.
They often mean the same thing and are used interchangeably but there  is  a
difference between these two terms:
• Bodhicitta exists from the Mahayana path of accumulation up to  the  tenth
  ground in the continuum of a bodhisattva.
•  The  Mahayana  mind  generation  exists  from  the   Mahayana   path   of
  accumulation up to full enlightenment.

We have finished the section on the benefits of  both the  aspirational  and
engaged mind generation.

THE REASONS FOR SUCH BENEFITS

 Establishing the benefits by quoting scripture
In the last lesson, I said verse 1.20 might be  a  source  for  stating  the
benefits of aspirational bodhicitta. But in the commentary  it  seems  clear
that verse 1.20 is related to the benefits of engaged bodhicitta, i.e.,  the
Buddha himself stated the  benefits  of  engaged  bodhicitta  in  the  Sutra
Requested by Subahu.[2] It is said in this  sutra  that  the  Buddha  talked
about the immeasurable benefits of bodhicitta for the sake of those who  are
of indefinite Hinayana lineage.

 Establishing the benefits by means of logic and reasoning
Next is establishing that aspirational bodhicitta and engaged bodhicitta  do
have those benefits as stated. First Verses 1.21  and  1.22  establish  with
reasoning that aspirational bodhicitta do indeed have those benefits.

      Verse 1.21
      If even the thought to relieve
      Sentient beings of merely a headache
      Possesses the attitude to benefit
      And possesses boundless merit,


      Verse 1.22
      Then what need is there to mention
      The desire to dispel the boundless unhappiness of each sentient being
      And to accomplish boundless good qualities
      Of every single one of them?

Once there was this householder, a layperson,  who  wanted  to  explore  the
oceans for treasure. His mother heard about this and pleaded  with  him  not
to go because it was very dangerous. The  mother  cried  and  clung  to  his
legs, not allowing him to go. The son  got  upset  and  scolded  his  mother
saying, “All this talk of yours, holding on  to  me  and  crying  is  really
inauspicious.” He then kicked his mother in the head.

He then travelled to the ocean to look for treasure.  Somehow  the  ship  he
was in split into half and began to sink. He was able to  hold  on  to  some
planks that were remnants of the ship and he floated along in the  sea.  One
day he managed to find dry land. He  came  upon  an  island  that  initially
looked very attractive and pleasant.

Then he saw a spinning iron wheel. Immediately upon  seeing  the  wheel,  it
descended on his head and started cutting up  his  head.  He  felt  so  much
pain. There and then he realised that this  was  the  ripening  of  his  own
karma of kicking his mother in the head. He knew and  understood  that  this
was definitely the case.

He then generated the thought, “May my experience of this immense  pain  and
headache be a substitute for the  suffering  of  others  who  will  have  to
experience something similar. May my experience of this intense pain  purify
the negative karma of others who have created a similar karma.”

Immediately upon having that pure virtuous thought, he passed away  and  was
reborn in the celestial realms.

This is the story behind Verse 1. 21.

Our parents are immeasurably kind to us and  therefore,  for  us,  they  are
very powerful objects because of that immense kindness. The lesson  that  we
can draw from this story is that we have to take good care  of  our  parents
and be respectful of them.

Khen Rinpoche: When I was reading this story, I  remembered  my  mother  was
telling me a story. It was three, four years ago. One day, in my  room,  she
told me this story about my childhood.

I think she said I was about two and a half years old at that  time.  I  was
very young. My mother and father had already planned to  go  to  India  from
Nepal. At that time, when they go to India, they would have to  walk  for  a
week to reach the border and then take a bus from there.  They  had  already
planned to go to India for business or something like that.

They left me behind with my grandmother and  grandfather.  My  grandparents’
house was quite a distance away, maybe two to three hours  walking  distance
from my home. I think she said she put me there.

One or two days after she brought me to  my  grandparents’  house,  she  was
supposed to leave for India. Then my mother had a dream. She dreamt  that  I
said to her, “Mother, don’t go” and that I was holding on to  her  leg.  She
dreamt that I was really crying  very  hard  and  holding  on  to  her  leg,
“Please don’t go. Please don’t go.” She had this dream.

The next morning she was supposed to leave for  India  as  planned.  Somehow
she didn’t feel comfortable so she didn’t go to India. Instead she  came  to
the grandparents’ house to pick me up. She decided not to go for her trip.

Of course I don’t remember anything. Did I cry or hold on to  her?  I  don’t
know.

My mother cancelled her trip. My mother said that after one week  I  was  so
sick that I almost died. She mentioned that had she left for India, I  would
have been dead.

She  told me this story. At that time, I felt that she was  really  kind  to
have sacrificed her entire trip. Because of her  dream,  she  cancelled  her
trip. So I feel quite touched when my mother told me this  story.  I  didn’t
cry but I felt really touched.

I mean for a mother it is just a simple thing. But what she did, she  really
sacrificed herself.  I think for everyone it is the same. Somehow they  help
us a lot. They sacrifice their lives for us. So  when  I  was  reading  this
story of the mother holding on to her son’s leg, I remembered my mother.

Our parents are immeasurably kind to us so as much as possible  we  have  to
take care of them.

Back  to  this  householder  who  merely  generated  the  thought  that  his
experience of the pain to be a substitute for all  those  who  have  similar
karma. It is as simple a thought as  that.  But  due  to  that  thought,  he
passed away from that life and was freed from that pain. He was reborn as  a
worldly god in the celestial realm.

If a mere thought has so much benefit, it goes without  saying  that  having
the intention to free all  sentient  beings  from  their  suffering  and  to
establish them in the highest happiness would have boundless benefits.

Often people wonder and some even ask, “What benefit can there  be  just  by
having a thought? It is a good thought  but  how  can  it  be  of  any  real
benefit?” But you should be able to see  that  when  we  are  talking  about
actual bodhicitta, when one is  able  to  generate  the  uncontrived,  fully
qualified, actual realisation of bodhicitta,  even  though  this  bodhicitta
may not be directly conjoined with any of the bodhisattva deeds,  that  pure
actual bodhicitta itself will bring about boundless benefits.

Next we continue with the benefits of aspirational bodhicitta.


      Verse 1.23
      Who has such an altruistic intention as this?
      Do even fathers and mothers have it?
      Do the gods and sages?
      Does even Brahma have it?

In general, fathers and mothers are usually considered to  be  authority  in
one’s life and as good and kind people. They have  good  thoughts  and  good
intentions for their children. What do they wish for? Generally,  they  wish
for their children to have long lives,  good  health,  to  have  wealth  and
prosperity and to have power. This is about it. They do not wish  for  their
children  to  achieve  enlightenment.  They   do   not   have   aspirational
bodhicitta. They do not have such an intention. You could say  that  parents
do not think about bodhicitta because they do not know  that  such  a  thing
exists and they do not know how to generate such a thought.

How about the gods and sages who are said  to  possess  supernatural  powers
such as clairvoyance and so forth? Even they do not  have  bodhicitta.  Most
of the gods, the celestial beings and the worldly gods including nagas  have
super-human abilities and supernatural abilities and powers. Some  can  read
the minds of others, some can look into the past but  nevertheless  they  do
not have  bodhicitta.  They  do  not  have  the  thought,  “I  must  achieve
omniscience in order to accomplish the welfare of others.” They do not  even
have aspirational bodhicitta. You could say that these  gods  and  sages  do
not have bodhicitta because they do  not  have  the  thought  of  benefiting
others.

What about Brahma? In order to be born as Brahma, one must  have  cultivated
the  practice  of  the  four   immeasurables,   i.e.,   immeasurable   love,
compassion, joy and equanimity. But  even  Brahma  who  has  cultivated  the
practice of the four immeasurables does not have  bodhicitta.  He  does  not
have the thought, “I will achieve full enlightenment in order to  accomplish
the welfares of others.”

• Immeasurable love is the thought wanting others to have happiness.  It  is
  an antidote to malice or ill will.
• Immeasurable compassion is the thought wishing  others  to  be  free  from
  suffering.  It is an antidote to belligerence, which is  a  derivative  of
  anger.
• Immeasurable joy is the thought of not  wanting  others  to  be  separated
  from happiness and is the antidote to dislike.
• Immeasurable equanimity is the thought wanting sentient beings to be  free
  of afflictions and is an antidote to the afflictions  such  as  anger  and
  attachment.

|Four immeasurables                                                   |
|Immeasurab|Thought wanting others to have      |Antidote to malice or|
|le love   |happiness                           |ill will             |
|Immeasurab|Thought wishing others to be freed  |Antidote to          |
|le        |from suffering                      |belligerence         |
|compassion|                                    |                     |
|Immeasurab|Thought not wanting others to be    |Antidote to dislike  |
|le joy    |separated from happiness            |                     |
|Immeasurab|Thought wanting sentient beings to  |Antidote to          |
|le        |be free of afflictions              |afflictions such as  |
|equanimity|                                    |anger and attachment |

In order to  be  able  to  meditate  on  bodhicitta,  first  one  must  have
meditated on and cultivated compassion. In order to have a  good  meditation
and  cultivation  of  compassion,  this  must  be  preceded  by   the   good
cultivation of love. In relation to all sentient beings—even if we  are  not
able to practise exactly as it is taught  in  the  stages  of  the  path  to
enlightenment, the lam-rim—if we can have the thought from  our  heart  that
wants everyone to be happy and to be freed from suffering, for us,  that  is
love and compassion. Then we can also have the feeling from our heart,  “May
everyone not be parted from happiness and may everyone  be  freed  of  their
afflictions.”

When we can think about these four immeasurables—love, compassion,  joy  and
equanimity—a  good  reflection  can  bring  about  some  thought  of   love,
compassion, joy and equanimity. Just the mere arising of these thoughts  can
lessen whatever malice and anger that we may have. With  these  reflections,
we can reduce our anger and attachment. Only when we have reduced our  anger
and attachment can the thought of wanting to  help  and  to  benefit  others
arise.

Sometimes people do wonder, “Is there  any  real  benefit  to  just  sitting
there and generating some good intentions, for example, hoping, ‘May  others
be happy’?”  When  you  think  about  this,  there  is  really  some  actual
benefit. The mind does  change.  When  all  the  afflictions  decrease,  the
thought of wanting to do something to benefit others can then arise.   Isn’t
that is a benefit?

People do wonder at all these instructions for developing bodhicitta and  so
forth. There is so much to do and they are so difficult to do.  At  the  end
of the day, what should one do? At our level, this  is  something  practical
and within our reach. It is not as if we are not able to think of  love  and
compassion. It is possible for us to do that, isn’t it? We just have to  sit
down and try to think  along  those  lines,  “Wanting  others  to  be  happy
whoever they may be, including the enemies; wanting others to be  free  from
suffering, including  the  enemies.”   When  it  gets  down  to  the  actual
practice and the actual work of  generating  bodhicitta,  of  course  it  is
challenging. At this level, we are not required to  actually  do  something.
We just have to sit down and first change our way of thinking.

Khen Rinpoche: This is easy. You just sit down and think. That is  all.  You
don’t need to do much. You only need your nice comfortable cushion, you  sit
down and you just think.  It is as simple as that. Can or not?

As I said earlier, whether you are talking about  love  or  compassion,  the
strongest  thought  to   have   in   the   beginning   is   thinking   about
impermanence—how we ourselves are impermanent  and  disintegrating  in  each
and every moment, how our loved ones and the  people  that  we  dislike  are
also changing and  disintegrating  in  each  and  every  moment.  With  this
thought of impermanence as the basis, it will  be  much  easier  for  us  to
contemplate on love and compassion. This is something that  everyone  of  us
has to do for ourselves. We have  to  put  aside  time  to  sit  down,  turn
inwards and reflect. When we do not think  about  it,  we  do  not  sit  and
contemplate, of course, nothing will happen. There will  be  no  change.  We
have to try this for ourselves by putting aside some  time,  not  less  than
five minutes, and see whether we experience any change or not.
      Verse 1.24
      If those beings have not
      Even dreamt before of such an attitude
      For their own welfare in their dreams,
      How can they generate it for the welfare of others?

Even sentient beings such as our parents,  the  gods,  the  sages  and  even
Brahma have never  ever  wanted  enlightenment  for  their  own  sake.  This
thought has not even arisen in their dreams. Then how  is  it  possible  for
them to have actual bodhicitta? How  would  they  even  think  of  achieving
omniscience to accomplish the welfare of others?

      Verse 1.25
      Such a mind of welfare of sentient beings
      Does not arise even for their own sake;
      An outstanding jewel of the mind,
      An unprecedented wonder is born.

The commentary says that this precious  superior  mind  of  the  bodhisattva
that wishes to attain enlightenment in order to place  all  sentient  beings
in happiness and for all sentient beings to abandon all of  their  suffering
has not been generated, even for a moment,  by  other  sentient  beings  for
themselves. So other sentient beings should also regard  the  generation  of
this  exalted  mind  that  has  not  arisen   for   themselves   before   as
praiseworthy. They should strive to attain it.

Bodhicitta is an exalted and very special mind. When it exists  in  anyone’s
mind, it would be such  a  wonder.  It  will  really  be  praiseworthy.  The
arising of actual bodhicitta has to arise due to  relying  on  the  Mahayana
virtuous friend.

It is said that there are wish-granting trees in the  celestial  realm.  You
can liken the generation of bodhicitta to finding and having  such  a  wish-
granting tree on this planet.  When  you  look  at  the  commentary  on  the
practice of offering the mandala, it is  explained  that  the  wish-granting
tree is made up of  precious  jewels.  The  roots  are  made  of  gold,  the
branches are made of lapis lazuli, the fruits are made of  diamonds  and  so
forth. It is wish-granting in that  whatever  you  desire  and  ask  of  it,
wealth and so forth, the tree can bestow them. Such trees are said to  exist
in the celestial realm. Bodhicitta is likened to such a  wish-granting  tree
in that when it arises, it can fulfil all one’s hopes.

Khen Rinpoche: Talking about the wish-granting tree.  A  long  time  ago,  I
went to Sai Baba’s place. Sai Baba, the Hindu master. In 1980 I  went  there
for a holiday because it was very cheap to do so. All the food was free  and
the rooms were only six rupees per day. Something like that. I  spent  three
days there.

There was a tree on a hill. People said that this tree will  grant  whatever
you wished. It was said that the tree was manifested by Sai Baba.  You  want
a banana, the tree will give you a banana. You want an apple, you  will  get
an apple. There was this tree near his cave. It was mentioned that it was  a
wish-granting tree. I am not saying that is the real wish-granting tree.
There are different kinds of  super-knowledges  or  super  human  abilities.
When we talk about magical powers, the best kind of  magical  powers  arises
from having certain levels of  concentration.  One  can  also  have  magical
powers by reciting mantras or by   depending  on  external  substances.  The
magical powers that arise from meditating on concentration are  said  to  be
real and very powerful.

Next is establishing the validity of the benefits of engaged bodhicitta.  We
will stop here for today. In the next lesson, we will  finish  the  rest  of
chapter one.

                                 ~~~~~~~~~~
Question: I refer to the earlier verses starting from Verse 1.9 and the  few
verses that follow before the divisions of the  bodhicitta  were  explained.
The bodhicitta that is referred to as the  mind  of  enlightenment,  are  we
talking about aspirational bodhicitta or engaged bodhicitta?

Answer: It is bodhicitta in general.

Question: Is there an order in the generation of the two bodhicittas,  i.e.,
aspirational bodhicitta must  precede  engaged  bodhicitta?  Must  you  have
engaged bodhicitta to enter the Mahayana Path?

Answer: Whether it is  an  aspirational  mind  generation  or  engaged  mind
generation,  both  are  fully  qualified  mind  generations.   Whoever   has
generated such a mind, that person is a Mahayanist. It is certain that  such
mind generations do not exist in the continua of those who have not  entered
the path.

As to whether the generation of aspirational  bodhicitta  must  precede  the
generation of engaged bodhicitta, this is a very big question. It is not  so
straightforward and it is not clear in the text.

I remembered seeing something like this:  The  first  mind  generation  that
arises is the aspirational bodhicitta. But I don’t  remember  exactly  which
text states this. What this statement means is another matter.

It is clear in the text that the mind  generation  in  the  continuum  of  a
bodhisattva  superior  who  is  in  meditative  equipoise  is   aspirational
bodhicitta.

These are a few things to think about. I  said  that  I  remembered  reading
this text  that  says  the  initial  mind  generation  that  arises  is  the
aspirational mind generation or aspirational  bodhicitta.  But  it  is  also
said that one enters  the  Mahayana  path  with  the  realisation  of  calm-
abiding. Having said that, the question then arises: Is bodhicitta  achieved
while one is in meditative equipoise? If so, does that not make the  initial
bodhicitta aspirational?

Khen Rinpoche: I am not making any conclusions here. I am just  throwing  up
the idea. I am not saying this is right. It is open  for  you  to  find  out
more.

Interpreted by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme; transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek,  Vivien  Ng
and Aki Yeo; edited by Cecilia Tsong.
-----------------------
[1] The corrections have already been made in lesson 4.
[2]   The  quotation  from  the  Subahupariprccha  Sutra  reads:   “If   one
perseveres for the sake of bringing happiness and  benefit  to  an  infinite
number of beings, then the infinite roots of virtue from this  infinite  aim
that bears in mind the happiness and benefit of all  sentient  beings  shall
increase, expand and reach towards fulfilment every moment, day  and  night,
regardless of whether one is unconscientious or even asleep.”  (A  Guide  to
the Bodhisattva’s Way of Life, translated by Stephen  Batchelor,  Copyright:
Library of Tibetan Works and Archives, Dharamsala, 1979, page 170).




