Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Engaging in the Deeds of a Bodhisattva/BP2 M5 L18 final.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:52:15.986798
================================================================================


Transcript of the teachings by Khen Rinpoche Geshe  Chonyi  on  Engaging  in
the Bodhisattva Deeds, 2014

Root text: Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds by  Shantideva,  translated  by
Toh Sze Gee. Copyright: Toh Sze Gee, 2006; Revised edition, 2014.

Lesson                                                                    18
   8 April 2014


Review. Chapter Four: Verses 4.25–4. 36-4.47. Being conscientious about
cultivating virtue (cont’d). Being conscientious about abandoning
afflictions: A. Reflecting on the disadvantages of the afflictions.
(cont’d). B. It is inappropriate to feel weary of the hardships involved in
abandoning the afflictions. C. Cultivating joy that it is possible to
abandon the afflictions, if effort is made.


Student 1Question: Brahma and Indra were supposed to  be  Hindu  gods.   How
come they had the wisdom to request the Buddha to  teach?  The  Buddha  then
taught and we get the benefits. In the first  place,  how  come  Brahma  and
Indra were known as  Hindu  gods?  Since  they  kneow  how  to  request  for
teachings from the Buddha, they should be Buddhists! There seem to  be  some
contradiction here.

Khen Rinpoche: Someone body come to in the front of  the  mikec  and  answer
thise question.  Who would like to volunteer  to  answer?  Any  suggestions?
Why?

(Khen Rinpoche then asked one student to answer the question)

Student 2:
Student 2:  Bodhgaya  is  being  a  Buddhist  holy  place  but  it  is  also
supposedly a holy place for Hindus as well. They also seee the  Buddha as  a
holy being. I heard that he is supposed to be related to one  of  the  Hindu
gods, maybe Shiva. Perhaps that  is  why  Brahma  and  Indra  requested  the
Buddha to teach even though they didn’t realisze he is the  Buddha.  They  ,
but probably realiszedd that the  Buddha wasis a very special holy being.

Another possibility version iis that they may be the manifestations of  some
other bodhisattvas that we don’t know about.

Another possibility version could be that this is is to just  to  show  that
the  teachings  of  the  Buddha’s  areteachings  were  for  the  benefit  of
everyone. I and it doesn’t idn’t oesn’t matter what religion  one  may  have
before then.

Student 1 mentioned that Brahma and Indra should be  Buddhists.  Before  the
Buddha taught, technically speaking, there wouldn’t be eren’t any  Buddhists
around. Until the Buddha turned the  first  wheel  of  Ddharma,  Brahma  and
Indra could not n’t be Buddhists. At that time, the prevailing religion  was
Hinduism.

Khen Rinpoche: When the Buddha was  born,  these  gods  such  as  Indra  and
Brahma actually went to his the birth place  and  offered  an  ablution  orf
bath to the newborn baby, who later on becaomes the Buddha.

These Ggods such as Indra and Brahma  wereare  worldly  gods  who  and  they
wereare in samsara, whereas our founder and or teacher,  Shakyamuni  Buddha,
waiss free from samsara. As such,  just from the time the Buddha  was  born,
i.e.,  descended into this world, due to and by thatthe  fact  that  he  was
is free from samsara,  his existence outshone that of  all  other  ines  all
samsaric beings.  Due to the fact that the Buddha wasis a bBuddha and  wasis
free of samsara, I guess this is why his very presence  would  automatically
gathered brings together all these worldly beings. As the Buddha  wais  able
to outshine them, he actually gathered them and gained control over them.

 It is would be possible that these powerful worldly beings like  Indra  and
Brahma could recognisze that the  Buddha was a special being who wand  could
benefit the world, and I guess for thisat reason, perhaps this is  why  they
requested the Buddha to turn the wheel of D dharma to benefit others.

Brahma is said to be like the creator of the world and is  regarded  as  the
owner of this world. Isn’t Iin the teachings it is mentioned that  when  you
are doing the practice of  requesting  the  Buddha  to  turn  the  wheel  of
Ddharma, you can  visualisze  yourself  as  Brahma  making  offerings  of  a
thousand -spoked golden dharma chakras.

 and then request the Buddha to turn the wheel of  dharma?  Because  it  was
these of these powerful gods such as like Brahma,  and Indra  and  so  forth
who rrequesteding the Buddha to turn the wheel of  Ddharma,  this  shows  to
others that the Buddha wasis a very special person and the  Buddha  must  be
someone who wasis more exalted than these powerful gods.  It  is  said  that
the natural splendour of the exalted body of the Buddha’s  exalted body  can
completely outshoneine all these  worldly  gods.  I  guess  maybe  for  that
reason these worldly gods then decided to request the Buddha to teach.

Khen Rinpoche (in English): I don’t know. I have no idea.

                                 ~~~~~~~~~~~

BEING CONSCIENTIOUS ABOUT ABANDONING AFFLICTIONS (cont/’d)

A.   Reflecting on the disadvantages of the afflictions
      3.   Developing strength of mind in order to destroy them
Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds
Next verse talked  about  the  need  to  be  courageous  in  destroying  the
afflictions.
|3 Developing strength of mind in order to destroy them/the negative  |
|emotions.                                                            |


      Verse 4.36
      Therefore as long as this enemy is not overcome with certainty  before
      my very eyes,
      I shall never give up exerting myself against it.
      Self-important people who become angry even at slight short-lived harm
      Will not go to sleep until it is overcome.

Prior to this verse, there was already an explanation of  the  great  faults
and disadvantages of the afflictions. They are very so harmful,  can  induce
great suffering and can throw one into the deepest of hells. They have  been
harming us since our beginnningless lifetimes and if we  do  not  counteract
them, they will continue to harm us in the future as well.

:
 • -  the afflictions are so harmful
 • -  the afflictions induce sufferings
 • -  the afflictions can throw one into the lowest of hells
 •  -   the  afflictions  have  been  harming  us  since  the  beginningless
   lifetimes, and if  we  do  not  counteract  the  afflictions,  they  will
   continue to harm us in the future as well.
Prior to this verse,T there was ere aalso the  explanations  of  why  it  is
wrong to befriend and be patient with the  afflictions.  ,  and  why  it  is
wrong to  be  patient  with  the  afflictions.  The  more  we  befriend  the
afflictions, and the more patient we are patient with them afflictions,  the
more we will be harmed harm we will receive from by them afflictions.

The teachings point out also say that the inner enemy, the  afflictions,  is
much more powerful than the external enemy. The teachings  are   is  telling
us that it is not  sufficient  to  just  suppress  the  afflictions.  ,  but
Rrather we have to strive to work at destroying the afflictions  from  their
root.

The verse hHere the  verse  is  telling  us  that  we  should  generate  the
ccourage in destroying the afflictions from the root  through  applying  the
antidotes. We, and we have to strive at this.

Here the Vverse 4.36 gives is giving an analogy of how a normal  person  who
has been when being criticiszed will may go all out  to  in  destroying  his
critic. the person who criticized him/her. This at is what a  normal  person
would do. does. He/she will holds on to his the resentment and he  will  not
rest until he/she has overcome or has  destroys theat person who  criticised
him or he has , or has dodone something about  the  situation.  When  If  so
much effort is put in to counteracting such a   this  such  a  small  little
harm in this life, then all the more we should have to put in  even  greater
much more effort in destroying the inner enemy, the afflictions.

[BP1 L23] “Therefore as long as this enemy is not  overcome  with  certainty
before my very eyes” means that we want to see, for ourselves, with our  own
eyes, that we have completely uprooted the negative emotions. Until  we  are
able to completely uproot or destroy the negative emotions, for as  long  as
it takes, it is appropriate to  continuously  apply  the  antidotes  to  the
negative emotions.
We are using an analogy to establish  the  appropriateness  of  continuously
applying the antidotes.  In the analogy of getting angry at this person  who
caused us harm, this person is not inherently our enemy all the time,  i.e.,
this person is not by nature our enemy and does not become  our  enemy  from
the minute he/she is born. It is not the very nature of that  person  to  be
our enemy forever. Yet we put in so much effort to  do  something  nasty  to
overcome, kill or to harm the person in return. If we put in so much  effort
for someone who is not by nature our enemy from  the  very  beginning,  then
when it comes to dealing with our real enemy, the negative  emotions,  which
have always been our enemy, we should not put in less effort.
“Self-important people “here refers to people who are  very  proud  and  who
think very highly of their own power and status and so forth. When they  are
harmed in the tiniest way, upon hearing just one or  two  unpleasant  words,
they will immediately  do  something  to  bully  those  who  are  weaker  or
subordinate to them.
With that we have finished with the section that talksed about  the  way  to
reflect on the faults of the afflictions.

The  next  section  talks  about  the  need  to  strive  at  destroying  the
afflictions and is a the discussesion on  how it is incorrect or  unsuitable
to  be  tired  of  the  difficulties  encountered  in  of   abandoning   the
afflictions. This section talks about the need  to  strive  atin  destroying
the afflictions. It talks about why it is incorrect to feel tired  when  the
task of destroying the afflictions becomes difficult.


B.   It is  inappropriate  to  feel  weary  of  the  hardships  involved  in
   abandoning the afflictions
   1.  Taking up arms capable of destroying the afflictions and not feeling
      weary about the hardships that come along with that

|It is inappropriate to feel weary of the hardships involved in       |
|abandoning the afflictions                                           |
|1 Taking up arms capable of destroying the afflictions and not       |
|feeling weary about the hardships that come along with that          |
|2 The benefits of joyous effort in destroying the afflictions        |
|3 It is reasonable to be diligent in the practice of destroying the  |
|afflictions                                                          |

|1 Taking up arms capable of destroying the afflictions and not       |
|feeling weary about the hardships that come along with that          |


      Verse 4.37
      If at the time of a violent battle,
      Vigorously desiring to conquer those afflicted ones who are  naturally
      subject to suffering through death,
      Men, disregarding the pain of being pierced by spears and arrows,
      Do not withdraw until the goal is accomplished,


      Verse 4.38
      Then what need to mention that I should not despair and be indolent,
      Even if I am caused many hundreds of sufferings,
      When now I strive to definitely overcome my natural enemies
      That are the constant cause of all suffering?

Even when if you put in a lot of effort but  you  dodo  not  n’t  manage  to
destroy your external enemy, there it will comes a time when that that  your
enemy will naturally cease to exist naturally, i.e., he will  or ddie.  Here
Tthe teachings here talks  about  how  the  external  enemies,  the  pitiful
sentient beings, are actually the objects of compassion.

When people fight with their enemies, they are very  determined  to  destroy
them and during that  enemies. In the process,  of wanting  to  destroy  the
enemies, they people will put up with many all kinds of  hardships.  E  even
when if they are injured hit bby y the weapons that are wielded  by  in  the
hands of their enemies, . Pthey eople will not stop  the  fight  until  they
win. In reality, howeveractually one actually does not even have to  try  to
defeat the enemy because sooner or later thee external enemy will  die.  But
Nnevertheless, in this e world, people do not  the  world  does  not  behave
live in this such a way. What normally happens  is  that  they  people  will
attack,  and try attempt to destroy the enemy and will . They will  continue
to do so until the enemy is killed.

The moment the afflictions arise, they are harmful. Just  as  the  like  the
nature of fire is  to  generate  heat  and  which  is  hot  and  it  burnns,
afflictions are such that when they arise, they harm and  disturb  us.  This
naturally existent ing inner enemy,  of the afflictions,  will  not  die  on
their own accord, unless we destroy them.

AsLike what was mentioned earlier, recently, the afflictions  harm  everyone
from those at the very top to those  at  the  body;  from  the  top  to  the
bottom, rungs and everyone body in between . The afflictions harm  everybody
in limitless ways. They bring us into the very worst of  the  suffering,   -
the suffering of the Avici Hell.   This  being  so,  As  such,  it  is  only
appropriate and correct to strive in destroying the afflictions. We need  to
strive in destroying this natural enemy, the afflictions.

In the process of destroying the afflictions, we will meet  with  all  kinds
of problems  and  sufferings.  Nevertheless,  we  have  to  accept  thoseese
difficulties that arise in the process  sufferings that  come  along  during
the process of destroying the afflictions, putting . One  needs  to  put  up
with them it, and generating e the determination and  courage  to  carry  on
destroying the afflictionsm.

The teachings tell us that it is incorrect to feel,  “I am  not  capable  of
destroying the afflictions. I am not capable of applying the antidote,”  and
as such remaining s discouraged,  and not doing anything and .  It  is  also
incorrect to hang around not doing anything and not  applying  any  antidote
to destroy the afflictions. Succumbing to laziness Just  remaining  lazy  is
also incorrect.

In essence, these two verses are telling us that when if we can put up  with
all kinds of difficulties and hardships in overcoming the external  enemies,
then all the more we should put in even greater more  effort  in  destroying
the afflictions. We need to be patient and to  put  up  with  the  hardships
that accompany come along with such a task and , nnot be discouraged  and  d
not be lazy.
The discussion continues and is pretty much the same.
[BP1 L23] There are some people who are so bent on defeating  their  enemies
that, in the process of doing so, they will bear  all  kinds  of  hardships,
such as the pain of being pierced by spears and arrows. They will  not  stop
or give up until they have won. If that is the case for an ordinary  person,
then it goes without saying that we  should  apply  joyous  perseverance  in
defeating our real enemy, the negative emotions. This enemy, as soon  as  it
arises in our mind, harms us. This  is  the  very  nature  of  our  negative
emotions. In the process of fighting our negative  emotions,  we  will  meet
all kinds of suffering – hunger  and  thirst  and  the  different  kinds  of
suffering that come along with fighting the  negative  emotions.  We  should
not be slothful, faint-hearted and give up, but continue to try to  overcome
the negative emotions.
   2.  The benefits of joyous effort in destroying the afflictions
        A. It would be reasonable to be patient  with  hardships,  as  such
        efforts are the  cause for the excellences  that  fulfil  one’s  own
        welfare


   |2 The benefits of joyous effort in destroying the afflictions        |
|A It would be reasonable to bear [ie. be patient with] hardships, [as|
|such efforts] which are the cause for the excellences [that fulfil]  |
|one’s own welfare                                                    |
|B It would be reasonable to bear hardships [as such efforts] which   |
|are the cause for the excellences [that fulfill ] the welfare of     |
|others                                                               |
|C The reasons it is necessary to work to bring to completion the     |
|pledges one has made in the past                                     |

|A It would be reasonable to bear [ie. be patient with] hardships, [as|
|such efforts] which are the cause for the excellences [that fulfill] |
|one’s own welfare                                                    |


      Verse 4.39
      If even scars inflicted by meaningless enemies
      Are worn upon the body like ornaments,
      Then why is suffering a cause of harm to me
      Who impeccably strive to fulfil the great purpose?

Normal and common worldly people will fight with one another and  destroying
the enemyies for some small problem. Sometimes when people fight,  they  are
received some woundeds and when the wounds heal, scars are  left  behind  on
the body. There are  people  who  regard  suchthese  scars  as  ornaments  ,
something to be proud off , and something to show off.

Khen Rinpoche (in English): Has anyone here Anybody done  this  before?  No?
Here I don’t know. Sometimes you can see that  in  Nepal.  Not  everyone  is
like that but some  Nepalis  body  but  some  of  them.  wWhen  they  fight,
sometimes they end up with have some scars on their heads. They ,  and  they
will say,  “When I was young, I foughtight.”  They do not see that  n’t  see
it as bad. They think they are a bbrave person, and  they  considered  their
scars as decorations. The example in the text is something like that.
Here maybe people don’t fight. Do  people  fight  iIn  Singapore  do  people
fight? Maybe oOnly the mouths fight!.

Interestingly I observed saw how the Indians fight. They don’t actually  hit
each other. It is , but  always  like  that  (Khen  Rinpoche  showsing   the
gesture of mouths arguing). They don’t really touch the  other  person,  but
they argue so hard so much argument wwith each other.

Tibetans are not like that. They don’t argue much. , but Tthey  just  fight.
Maybe Chinese people are the also the same. , I  don’t  know.  Most  of  the
Himalayan people don’t argue with the mouth. One or two argument  maybe  and
then and that is, the hand then starts ( to movve). But for the  Indians,  I
see they never use put their hands. Only their mouths are , but  only  mouth
fighting. But in Nepal it is not likes that. In some Himalayan places,  they
really just fight.  and Tthe fighting is real fighting.

When If the scars from fighting with the ordinary external  enemies  can  be
regarded as an ornaments by some, then we should regards all  the  hardships
that we meet while practiscing to achieve enlightenment for the  welfare  of
sentient beings as an  ornaments  too.  No  matter  how  much  hardships  or
suffering we may experience, will meet while in  the  process  of  achieving
enlightenment to benefit others, we should consider and look upon  them  all
of that  as  something  that  is  the  most  beneficial  and  meaningful,  .
Therefore we should rregarding  these hardships and suffering as  ornaments.


Since we are putting up with all these hardships and suffering  to  help  us
to accomplish our  own  goals,  our  own  wishes,   and  our  own  purposes,
therefore it is entirely appropriate to put up with all  the  hardships  and
sufferings  that  arise  come  along  in  the  process  of  destroying   the
afflictions.
[BL1 L23] We are talking here about the patience  of  voluntarily  accepting
the different kinds of suffering that come in the course of  our  quest  for
enlightenment that help us to purify our negative  karma  and  obscurations.
The essence here is that, if we treasure the scars  that  are  inflicted  by
our enemies and wear them on our bodies as  ornaments,  then,  likewise,  we
should wear as ornaments the sufferings that come along  in  our  quest  for
enlightenment
      B.  It would be reasonable to bear hardships as such efforts  are  the
        cause for the excellences that fulfil the welfare of others
|B It would be reasonable to bear hardships [as such efforts] are the |
|cause for the excellences [that fulfil ] the welfare of others       |


      Verse 4.40
      If fishermen, outcastes, farmers, and so forth,
      Thinking merely of their own livelihood,
      Endure the harms of heat and cold,
      Why do I not endure them for the sake of the  happiness  of  migrating
      beings?

When If fishermen and farmers can endure all the heat  cold  and  cold  heat
while pursuing their livelihoods  in  order  to  sustaining  themselves,  it
would be appropriate for us to put up with whatever hardships and  suffering
that  may  arise  ere  may  be  while  in  the  process  of  defeating   the
afflictions. Therefore, it is appropriate to bear with all these  sufferings
and the hardships that come along when one is defeating the  afflictions  in
order to accomplish the happiness and the welfare of sentient beings.

      C.   The reasons why it is necessary to work to  bring  to  completion
        the pledges one has made in the past
|C The reasons why it is necessary to work to bring to completion the |
|pledges one has made in the past                                     |


      Verse 4.41
      When I promised to liberate migrating beings
      Dwelling in the ten directions as far as the ends of space
      From their afflictions,
      I myself was not yet freed from the afflictions.


      Verse 4.42ab
      Thus unaware of even my own capacity,
      Was it not somewhat crazy to have spoken like that?

Khen Rinpoche (in English): Is this cCrazy or not?

A  qualm  is  raised  here:  oOne  has  made  the  promise  to  destroy  the
afflictions in  the  continuaum  of  others  but  and  it  is  inappropriate
unsuitable to strive to destroy the  afflictions  in  one’s  own  continuum,
because one would then fall into the  extreme  of  peace.  Therefore  it  is
incorrect for  a  bodhisattva  to  strive  to  destroy  the  afflictions  in
hertheir own continuum.

Although there There is such a qualm, , and of course it , this is wrong.  I
guess it would be all right to say that  at  the  time  when  one  made  the
promise to liberate all sentient beings and to destroy  their   afflictions,
of all sentient beings, one also took the  oath  and  made  the  promise  to
destroy the afflictions in one’s own continuum.

If you remember,  the mind of enlightenment is made up of two aspirations:
1. the An aspiration to accomplish the welfare of others
2. the An aspiration to achieve omnisciencte
The aspiration to accomplish the welfare of others is the main cause. It  is
said that the aspiration to be  omniscient is like an assisting factor,  and
it playing s a complementary role.

In order to accomplish the welfare of others and to destroy the  afflictions
in their continuaum of others, first one must first destroy the  afflictions
in one’s own continuum. Otherwise, one will be powerless, and one  will  not
be able to destroy the afflictions ofin others.

When If one is bound by cyclic existence oneself, one cannot accomplish  the
welfare of others. Therefore, one should strive to abandon  the  afflictions
in one’s continuum. There  is  no  danger  of  the  the  bodhisattvass  will
falling  into the extreme of peace when they are working  to  at  destroying
the afflictions in their own continuaum. In fact,  their   understanding  of
and ,  and ttheir disgust and disenchantment with n  the  faults  of  cyclic
existence areand the disgust  on  the  disenchantment  with  the  faults  of
cyclic existence that the bodhisattvas have is much more  intense  and  much
more powerful than that possessed by the hearers and , maybe  like  tens  or
hundreds of  times  more  powerful  than  what  the  Hearers  and  sSolitary
rRealiszers.  have.

    3.  It is reasonable to be diligent in the practice  of  destroying  the
afflictions
        A.   One should make effort in the antidotes to the afflictions

|It is reasonable to be diligent in the practice of destroying the    |
|afflictions                                                          |
|A One should make effort in the antidotes to the afflictions         |
|B One should make effort so that one does not come under the power of|
|the afflictions at any time                                          |

|A One should make effort in the antidotes to the afflictions         |


      Verse 4.42 c,d
      Since this is the case I should never withdraw
      From vanquishing the afflictions.


      Verse 4.43 a,b
      I shall adhere to this and,
      Resenting them, I shall meet them in battle!

The afflictions are the objects to  be  abandoned.  Therefore,  we  have  to
strive and apply effort in destroying  the  afflictions  at  all  times.  We
should never back down  reverse  from  destroying  the  afflictions  and  we
should always regard them afflictions as the objects to be  abandoned.  With
this thought we should always strive to destroy them.

Another qQualm may arise,:  “When you become “If you are so hard up  and  so
emotionally involved  with  and  attached  to  destroying  the  afflictions,
doesn’t  that  become  a  problem  in  itself?  Doesn’t  that,   become   an
affliction,  in itself? Doesn’t that become an affliction? If When  you  are
so upset with the afflictions and your anger is you  get  angrydirected   at
the afflictions, isn’t that also a itself also a problem,  an   and  thereby
making it an aaffliction? Therefore, you should abandon these attitudes.”

Khen Rinpoche (in English): Correct?
The answers to such a qualm is as follows.


      Verse 4.43 c,d
      But afflictions such as these types
      Destroy afflictions and are not included.

Gyaltsab  Je’s  commentary  states  that  attachment  :  Holding  onto   the
antidotes and anger directed to at that what  has  to  be  abandoned  may  ,
these appear like afflictions but actually they belong to the class  of  the
antidotes that destroys the  afflictions.  They  are  It  is  therefore  not
included in the category of  the abandonments and are not afflictions.  that
to be abandoned.
Having an attachment to  the  antidote  of  afflictions  may  look  like  an
affliction in itself but it is not an affliction.
Essentially, the desire to destroy the afflictions and the desire  to  apply
the antidotes are parts of a itself is basically a strong  aspiration.  With
such  an  that  aspiration,  comes  strong  mindfulness  and   introspection
vigilance when one is you are applying implementing  the  antidotes  to  the
afflictions. So the desire may appear  Essentially,  it  is  a  very  strong
aspiration.
It looks like an attachment to the antidotes when one is very wrapped up   .
It looks like being very hard up and very involved  in  wanting  to  destroy
the afflictions, but it is not. Rather, Essentially, it  is  an  aspiration.
Mindfulness and introspection vigilance comes along with this aspiration  to
destroy the afflictions. In this context, theis attachment,  to  wanting  to
destroy the afflictions, is an aspiration.

The mind that is mindful and  introspective  with  regard  vigilant  aboutto
the  faults  of  the  afflictions  recognise  zing  that  it  is  all  these
afflictions must faults and therefore needs to be abandoned and it is  .  It
is a helpful mind  and is necessary  in  destroying  the  afflictions.  They
form an antidote to the afflictions and they do not become an affliction.

In short, there is a mind that  looks  upon  the  afflictions  as  an  enemy
through seeing the faults of the afflictions. This at mind  understands  the
value,,  the need for cessity and the purpose of the antidotes. There  is  a
mind  that  understands  this  based  on  mindfulness   and   introspection.
vigilance.


This mind may look like an  an attachment to  the  antidotes.  It  may   and
looks like an angry mind that is being upset with the afflictions.  Although
these  minds  y  look  look  like  afflictions,  actually   they   are   not
afflictions., but actually this particular mind is not an  affliction.  They
are It is actually part of the antidotes to the  afflictions.  So  Tthat  is
the meaning of the verse 4.43 c, d.

   B. One should make effort so that one does not come under the  power  of
      the afflictions  at  any  time  [BP1  L24]  Although  such  resentment
      (towards  the  afflictions)  and  obsession  (with   giving   up   the
      afflictions by cultivating the antidotes) appear to be afflictions, in
      fact, they are the factors of antidote for abandoning the afflictions.
   The point here is that the obsession  with  the  antidotes  against  the
      afflictions and the resentment towards the afflictions  appear  to  be
      afflictions but they are not afflictions.
   The  obsession  with  the  antidotes  appears  to  be  a  derivative  of
      attachment but it is not a fully qualified attachment.
   The resentment towards afflictions appears to be a derivative  of  anger
      but it is not a fully qualified resentment.
   According to Gyaltsab Je, these two are not objects of abandonment.
   Gyaltsab Je said, “Resentment here  is  not  an  object  of  abandonment
      because resentment towards the afflictions is basically  a  mind  that
      sees the faults of negative emotions. Since it is a mind that sees the
      faults  of  negative  emotions,  it  is  the  factor  of  antidote  to
      afflictions. Since it is the factor of antidote to the afflictions, it
      is not an object to be abandoned.”
   There are two factors; the factor  of  abandonment  and  the  factor  of
      antidote. This resentment  towards  the  afflictions  belongs  to  the
      factor of antidote.
      Verse 4.44
      I would rather be burned and killed,
      And even have my head cut off,
      Than to ever bow down
      To the enemy that is the afflictions in any way.

The point that Tthis verse is pointing out that  trying to make is  that  we
have to work at destroying the afflictions.  We  have  to  strive,   not  to
lletting   the mind come under their  control.  of the afflictions.

A qualm may arise: If it is so difficult  to  dealing  troublesome  to  deal
with the afflictions, and,  in  the  process  of  trying  to  destroy  them,
afflictions so many  difficulties and problems will arise, isn’t  it  better
just to follow the afflictions?
it?
Khen Rinpoche (in English): No? Is it not like that, that we you should  You
follow the afflictions and m tto  solve  the  problem?  Thisat  is  what  we
think.

Verse 4.44 is the an answer to that qualm.  It  says  that  it  is  a  small
matter to have one’s limbs or one’s head cut off.  or  to  have  one’s  head
chopped off is not too big deal. It is not  really  difficult.  At  most  we
have our limbs hacked off, or somebody chops  off  our  head.  What  is  the
worst thing biggest problem that can happen to us? At  the  very  most,   we
lose our lives. This at is ’s about it. Those  actions,  Hhaving  our  limbs
and heads heads and our limbs chopped off, will only bring  an  end  to  our
lives but it will not send us to the lower realms.  or the hell realms.

But when  if  we  let  ourselves  be  controlled  by  our  afflictions,  our
afflictions will send us intto the lower realms.  or the hell  realms.   and
the hells.  This  will  obstruct  our  achievement  of  full  enlightenment.
Therefore So tthe afflictions are far more dangerous  much  scarier  because
they can bring us the greatest suffering, preventing . They prevent us  from
achieving full enlightenment that which  is  the  the  most  beneficial  and
meaningful accomplishment for us. thing to achieve.

These verses are very useful and beneficial for our  mind.  We  should  read
and think about  them  regularly,  gradually  familiarising  ourselves  with
these verses. . We have to understand the  faults  of  our  afflictions  and
then gradually to become familiarize ourselves with  these  verses.  Because
of these reasons given, we have to strive to work at not  letting  ourselves
come under the control of the afflictions for when this  happens,  .  If  we
do, the afflictions will bring us the  greatest  suffering  and  prevent  us
from achieving that which is the most meaningful.  thing.


This concludes the section that which ttalks about how it  is  inappropriate
to be weary of the hardships involved in abandoning the  afflictions.  tired
of the difficulty of destroying the afflictions.  Up  to  this  point  here,
these verses are telling us to be enthusiastic.

We should take joy in destroying the  afflictions  and  to  be  enthusiastic
about doing so it rather  than  allowing   ourselvesoneself  to  bebecomeing
disenchanted with the task. So next  is  meditating  on  enthusiasm  because
when one makes the effort, one can abandon the afflictions.


C.  Cultivating joy that it  is  possible  to  abandon  the  afflictions  if
effort is made
   1. If the afflictions in your own continuum are completely uprooted,
      there is no  place supportive of them in your mind
   2. As the cause of the afflictions arises from error, if one applies
      diligence, one will be able to abandon them
   3. If they are completely uprooted, there is absolutely no place that
      supports their existence and thus it is reasonable to say that they
      can be abandoned
|Next is meditating on enthusiasm because if one makes an effort, one |
|can abandon the afflictions. Cultivating joy for the very fact that  |
|it is possible [to abandon the afflictions], for, if effort is made, |
|they will be abandoned                                               |
|1 If the afflictions in your own continuum are completely uprooted,  |
|there is no place supportive of them [in your mind]                  |
|2 As the cause [of the afflictions] arises from error, if one applies|
|diligence, one will be able to abandon them                          |
|3 If they are completely uprooted, there is absolutely no place that |
|supports their existence and [thus] it is reasonable [to say] that   |
|they [can be] abandoned                                              |

|1 If the afflictions in your own continuum are completely uprooted,  |
|there is no place supportive of them [in your mind]                  |

   1. If the afflictions in your own continuum are completely uprooted,
      there is no  place supportive of them in your mind
      Verse 4.45
      Ordinary enemies when expelled from one country
      Simply settle down in another and embrace it,
      And when their capability is recovered they then return;
      But the way of this enemy, my afflictions, is different.

It is possible that the external enemy can  recover  and  return   and  come
back and to haunt you even if you have expelled  and kicked him off  out  to
some faraway place. However, the inner enemy of the afflictions is not  like
that. Once the inner enemy of the  afflictions  is  vanquished  through  the
force  of  the  antidotes,  they  can  never  return  again.  They  will  be
destroyed. Once they are destroyed completely from the root, they can  never
return.
Next is that if one makes  an  effort,  the  afflictions  can  be  abandoned
because the afflictions arise from a mistaken cause.

|2 As the cause [of the afflictions] arises from error, if one applies|
|diligence, one will be able to abandon them                          |


   2. As the cause of the afflictions arises from error, if one applies
      diligence, one will be able to abandon them
      Verse 4.46
      Afflictions, afflictions! When abandoned by the eye of wisdom
      And dispelled from my mind, where will you go?
      Where will you dwell and return to harm me?
      Although this is so, weak-minded, I have been  reduced  to  making  no
      effort.

The  words  “Aafflictions,  afflictions,”  is  actually  an  expression   of
expressing how lowly the afflictions are.  When If you think about them  and
analysze them it properly, you will see that they can be vanquished  because
they arise from a  mistaken  cause.  We  need  to  abandon  the  afflictions
through generating the eye of wisdom, i.e., which is the  wisdom  realiszing
emptiness.

Once vanquished and eliminated  by  the  wisdom  realising  emptiness,  tThe
afflictions that which abide in our continuum  will  once  vanquished,  they
have nowhere else to go. Once the afflictions are eliminated by  the  wisdom
realizing emptiness, the afflictions have nowhere else to go.  It is not  as
if they will leave your mind,  and go somewhere else  to  recover  and  then
come back to harmunt you. This at will not happen with the afflictions.

The next verse is about emptiness.

   3. If they are completely uprooted, there is absolutely no place that
      supports their existence and thus it is reasonable to say that they
      can be abandoned

|3 If they are completely uprooted, there is absolutely no place that |
|supports their existence and [thus] it is reasonable [to say] that   |
|they [can be] abandoned                                              |


      Verse 4.47
      If these afflictions do not abide within objects,
      Not in the collection of sense powers, between the two nor elsewhere,
      Then where do they abide and how do they harm all migrating beings?
      They are like an illusion. Thus I should dispel  the  fear  within  my
      heart and strive for the sake of wisdom.
      For no meaning, why am I harmed in hell and so forth?

                                 ~~~~~~~~~~
Q&A

Question: Student 3: Just now It was explained there  was  this  explanation
about that the mind that generates an aversion  towards  afflictions  is  an
aspiration. There can be is another kind of mind.  as Ssometimes  onewe  may
will think, : “After so many years of study and practice, I  one  still  see
there are so many afflictions in the mind.” One may  feel  very  discouraged
and generate one may have a a lot of self-judgment,   thinking:  “Why  am  I
still like that after so many years of study  and  practice?”   Is  this  at
kind of mind an affliction?”

Khen Rinnpoche (in English): “After so many years of practice”? W, what  are
do yyou saying?

Student  3:  Sorry,  noNo  practice,  sorry.  So  many  years  of   external
activities!

Khen Rinpoche (in English): We are supporting  Supporting  the  afflictions,
and not destroying them, isn’t that soit? This at is why there is  still  no
improvement. The answer is there.

In the first place, we we do not n’t put in the effort to  abandon  end  the
afflictions. We nNever do that. Instead we are , but  always  following  the
afflictions. So what can do you hope for? There is noNo hope.

All the advices is  are here. You can recognisze the  disadvantages  of  the
afflictions, and how they afflictions harm  us.  There  is  soSo  much  many
advices here: how the afflictions  - how they control our minds,  howw  much
they harm us. They are not Not like the external enemy.  This  is  what  the
text it is trying to say here.

For example, someone body says some harsh words to you. , Eeven  just  that,
you can’t sleep thinking of how . How much this person ey  hurts  you.?  You
keep thinking of : “wWhat you are going to say in retaliation. I’m going  to
say back, “I am really ’m ggoing to tell him off!.”  Even  with  that,   you
cannot sleep. Just Ssmall words can harm you. You  put  in  so  much  effort
thinking of what to say back, how to reply to this person and to  make  sure
this person would not n’t say it again that next time. We put that  kind  of
effort into a on small thing.

What does Shantideva said talking about hhere about the  afflictions  and  ?
hHow they harm us, ? wWe never think about that at at all. These are  at  is
the real enemiesy but we never think like that. We think they are  our  best
friends, . We never recognising they are our ze that is the worst  enemiesy.
We always consider them to be this is our the best friends.

You always try to follow wWhatever this e enemy, the delusion,  says.   then
you try to follow that, and then And you feel happy  about  doing  so.  like
that. We never recognisze how the delusions deceive us.

All the advices here  are is to recognisze that the delusion is  your  inner
enemy. Don’t fight with the enemy  outside.   enemy,  but  Ffight  with  the
enemy inside.  enemy. I think this is the advice that Shantideva  is  giving
us. talking about.  You do not n’t need to destroy and  you  don’t  need  to
kill the outside enemy. That enemy It wwill  die  anyway.  itself.  But  you
need to kill the inside enemy. You need to destroy it.  Also,  the  delusion
won’t disappear after you die. , Iit will continue. So Tthiast  is  why  you
must put in the effort to and destroy it.

What we have read so far is in very simple languagetalk. With two  to  three
sentences,  we have finished with this Shantideva text. It  is  saying  that
you must have to understand that the delusion is the  real  enemy.  We  must
understand that.

So Wwhenever we are having a atever we have ddifficult  time  fighting  with
the delusion,  it is important to purify. No matter how How  much  difficult
a  time you may  be  having  fito  fighting  the  delusion,   with  whatever
sufferings you may encounter, these  you have with the delusion  become  the
causes to achieve enlightenment, a chance to . Ppurify your negative  karma.


Again The text also it is saysing that the delusion has is no basis.  I  and
it comes from a wrong mind. When If you put in the efforteffort,   you  will
be  are  able  to  destroy  it.  that.  With  the  understanding   orf   the
realiszation of emptiness,  you can destroy the delusions. This is what  the
text is saying. So it is talking like that.


Question: Student 4: Previously, Khen Rinpoche, you  has  talked  about  all
the causes  for  this  precious  human  rebirth—  –  the  practice  of  pure
morality, all the different types of practices which is related to  the  six
perfections like the practice of generosity, patience and so  forth—and  how
on. On the one hand, it is so difficult and rare to  get  a  precious  human
rebirth. I and itt takes so many conditions. , it is so rare and so on.

I have a hard time reconciling the fact that I’m supposed to  have  work  so
hard to have received this precious human rebirth to  meet  the  Dharma  and
the teachers. Yet in this life, the afflictions are so strong. In this  life
it is almost impossible to think that in some past  lives  I  have  actually
practice pure morality and all those other practices  in  order  to  achieve
the precious human rebirth that I enjoy now. My issue has always  been  that
if it took takes so much virtue and  merit  to  generate  a  precious  human
rebirth,  whywhy  is it that during this e time  when  we  are  experiencing
the precious human rebirth,   the  afflictions  seem  as  powerful  as  ever
before. In this life, it is almost impossible to think that,  in  some  past
life, I had actually practised pure morality and those  other  practices  in
order  to  achieve  the  precious  human  rebirth  that  I  enjoy  now.  The
afflictions are very strong. T, the attachment is very strong.  T,  and  the
aversion is very strong. The ignorance is definitely there. Like  what  Khen
Rinpoche has said that all the activities that  we  do,  if  we  are  really
honest with ourselves, is to  pursue  or  follow  the  instructions  of  our
afflictions and our attachment and it is  not  to  overcome  them.  In  this
lifetime, the afflictions seem so strong. I cannot believe  that  somehow  I
actually have practiced.

If I had ’ve practiced so powerfully in the past to  get  a  precious  human
rebirth,  surely those virtuous e imprints should be very powerful  in  this
lifetime as well but it doesn’t seem to be the case.

Khen Rinpoche  (in  English):  I  don’t  think  so  you  have  meditated  on
emptiness in your past lives.

Student 4: Granted!

Khen Rinpoche (in English): It is nNot necessary to have  ,  isn’t  it?  You
have meditated on emptiness  in  your  past  lives  in  order  to  get  your
precious human rebirth, right? If you  have  had  done  some  meditation  on
emptiness in your past lives, then maybe there will  be  less  delusions  in
this life, I think.

Student 4: My basic point is that we practisedce so much virtue in the  past
to get  a  precious  human  rebirth.  That  virtuous  mind  should  be  very
powerful. In terms of percentages, it should  be  like  70%  virtue  and  30
%percent afflictions but actually,  in this life,  my  mind  seems  to  have
99% afflictions and maybe 1% virtue. I’m just seeing that.

It is always like I am ’m  hhaving  a  hard  time  reconciling  how  it  was
possible for me to actually have practisced well enough to  get  a  precious
human rebirth. If I’m enjoying my precious human rebirth now,  why  are  the
afflictions still is so strong?

Khen Rinpoche (in English): I don’t really get what you are saying.
Answer: Generally all rebirths in samsara are due to karma and  afflictions.
Generally speaking, all rebirths in samsara happen without choice and  occur
. They are under the control of karma and afflictions. This applies also  to
 including the human life of freedoms and endowments.

A human life of freedoms and endowments like  the  one  we  have  is  the  a
result of contaminated virtue and . It is a rebirth  that  is  propelled  by
the ignorance that comes up in the twelve links of dependent origination.  A
human  life  of  freedoms  and  endowments  is  the  result  of   ignorance.
Therefore, it is under the control of the afflictions.

Because we did not apply the antidotes  to  the  afflictions  in  the  past,
therefore now our state of existence is  under  the  control  of  karma  and
afflictions.

Did we accumulate strong virtue in the past? Yes. O, otherwise there  is  no
way to get such a human life of freedoms and endowments.

Did we practisce some kind of ethical  discipline?  Yes,   to  some  extent.
dDefinitely there was the practice of ethical discipline to some extent.

Did we apply the antidotes to our the afflictions  and  ?  Did  we  meditate
strongly on themat? That is the question.

It is clearly evident that because we didn’t apply  strongly  the  antidotes
to the afflictions strongly;, therefore now in  this  life  the  afflictions
are still very strong. When If we look at what we do in this life—, we  have
a human life of freedoms and endowments, we  have  met  and  understand  the
teachings, we understand the teachings, we have listened to the teaching  on
the faults of afflictions— but at the end of the day, are  we  applying  the
antidotes to the afflictions?

Are there people who will just spend even  five  minutes  to  sit  down  and
really look at the problems and the faults of the afflictions? Even that  is
rare. It is not athe question of not being able to  do  it.  ,  but  Iit  is
about not doing it at all. The problem lies in  not  doing  it.  It  is  not
about not being able to do so.

When If you look at this whole chapter,  from  the  beginning  to  the  end,
basically it is just imploring us  to  start,  “You  have  a  perfect  human
rebirth. Y, you have this, you have that. N, now it is the  time  to  start.
You should do it now!”. From b Beginning to end, it  is all about that.

(Khen Rinpoche makes a ggesture, indicating,  for us, it is one ear  in  and
one ear out). ing with his hand showing “one ear in, the other ear out”)

Dealing with the afflictions and abandoning them is  no  easy  task  because
they have been  there  since  beginningless  lifetimes.  We  are  thoroughly
familiariszed with the afflictions. , and iIt is  impossible  to  deal  with
the afflictions by applying the antidote just once.  Therefore  there  is  a
verse that says you have to apply the antidotes like the flow of the  river,
i.e.,  continuously. Otherwise it is not possible to overcome them at all.

 As such, there should never ever be a time, at least for now, that  we  can
ask,  “Why is it that my afflictions are not subsiding? Why are they  is  it
not becoming weaker?”  In the first place, we are not doing  anything  about
themit. We shouldn’t even ask this question. If we have  been  applying  the
antidotes continuously, , and really working on the  afflictions  and  after
years of practice, if we still find it difficult, perhaps then we can  maybe
wonder why.

Khen Rinpoche (in English): That is the right time  to  ask  your  question,
“Why is it that I put in so much effort,  it is still like that.  Why?  Why?
Why?” Now is not the time for that no qquestion! about that.


In the next lesson we will finish the remaining verses of this chapter,  and
then we will move on to the next chapter – the fifth chapter on Vigilance.

Interpreted by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme; transcribed by Phuah  Soon  Ek,  Patricia
Lee & Julia Koh; edited by Cecilia Tsong.

