Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Engaging in the Deeds of a Bodhisattva/BP2 M5 L16 final.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:52:18.752110
================================================================================


Transcript of the teachings by Khen Rinpoche Geshe  Chonyi  on  Engaging  in
the Bodhisattva Deeds, 2014

Root text: Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds by  Shantideva,  translated  by
Toh Sze Gee. Copyright: Toh Sze Gee, 2006; Revised edition, 2014.

Lesson                                                                    16
   1 April 2014


Meaning of Calling the Guru from  Afar.  Chapter  Four:  Two:  Verses  4.12-
4.25.23–2.34.  Homage.   Refuge.  Confessing  negativities  with  the   four
powers. Cultivating conscientiousness with regard to the training  (cont’d):
1. Being conscientious about abandoning wrongdoing. 2.  Being  conscientious
about cultivating virtue.


Student:  Referring to the Verse 3.26

Question: When one’s the bodhicitta is degeneratesd, one can avoid going  to
the lower realms by purifying one’s  negativities  with  through  tthe  four
opponent powers. Why can't such this  purification  also  prevent  one  from
being delayed in one’s progress on ing tthe path?

Answer: Khen Rinpoche: Let us ’s say that you are going  to  walking   to  a
particular destination. When If your legs are in good  condition,  you  will
reach your destination easily. When If you  break  your  legs—,  of  course,
your legs can heal and  you can heal it or mmend—nd  it,  but  nevertheless,
having broken your legs is an impediment or an obstacle  to  reaching   your
destination. You would have reached your destination  more  quickly  earlier
or quicker if you did not n’t break your legs.

Khen Rinpoche (in English): You got it or not? It is clear, No?

(Student’s response further question inaudible)

Khen Rinpoche:  (English): Your question is why one’s progress on  the  path
takes possible? Why takes longer? That is your question, isn’t  it?  Prevent
or why take longer? Just Ffrom theat example,  it can give you an  idea  why
it is so. is possible.


It doesn’t mean that you cannot fix your legs. You can go to a  hospital  to
fix them so that they it and then become like normal  again  but  you  would
still  but that take a longer time to reach your the  destination.  No?  IIt
is like that. Therefore  it is mentioned that it  is  better  not  to  break
your vows ffrom the very  beginning  don’t  break  the  vows.  This  is  the
advice. ey advise that. It does not n’t mean that once you once  you  purify
negative karma, and then you cannot accumulate negative karma.  Yes  ah  iit
is possible that you can purify your transgressions but it would  mean  that
the time you reach  your  destination  will  be  but  it  postponeding  your
destination.

                                 ~~~~~~~~~~

The Fourth Chapter: Teaching Conscientiousness
We are now  at  the  chapter  on  cf  conscientiousness.  After  taking  the
bodhisattva vows:
 • - one has to be conscientious of  about the bodhicitta that one has
   already generated, and
 • - one has to be conscientious with regard to about the trainings in the
   perfections that one has promised to undertake.

With rRegards  to  developing  conscientiousness  with  respect  of  to  the
bodhicitta that one has generated, essentially  this  section  of  the  text
talks  about  the  reasons  why  it  is  inappropriate  to  give  up   one’s
bodhicitta, i.e., .
In short there are many disadvantages and faults when if one gives up  one’s
the bodhicitta that one has generated..  Since this is so,
Since there are many great faults and  disadvantages  if  one  abandons  the
bodhicitta that one has already generated, so by reflecting and  keeping  in
mind theose great faults  and  disadvantages  and  faults,  one  strives  in
applying conscientiousness not to   in  not  allowing  one’s  bodhicitta  to
degenerate.

We have finished with the section on  being  conscientious  in  not  letting
one’s bodhicitta degenerate.
Next  is  the  cultivation  of  conscientiousness  with  regard  to  in  the
trainings.

CULTIVATING CONSCIENTIOUSNESS WITH REGARD TO THE TRAINING


1. 1 Being conscientious about abandoning wrongdoing
2. 2 Being conscientious about cultivating virtue
3. 3 Being conscientious about abandoning afflictions



|Cultivating conscientiousness with regards to the training         |
|1 Being conscientious about abandoning wrongdoing                  |
|2 Being conscientious about cultivating virtue                     |
|3 Being conscientious about abandoning afflictions                 |

|1  Being conscientious about abandoning wrongdoing                 |
|A If negativities and downfalls are not abandoned, one must        |
|continue [to take rebirth] in the lower realms                     |
|B The Buddhas and their children act with equanimity               |
|C The difficulty of obtaining the leisures and endowments          |
|D There is no opportunity to practise virtue if one has taken      |
|rebirth in the lower realms                                        |
|E The reason it is difficult to obtain the leisures and endowments |

|A If negativities and downfalls are not abandoned, one must        |
|continue [to take rebirth] in the lower realms                     |

1.  Being conscientious about abandoning wrongdoing
    A.  If negativities and downfalls are not abandoned, one  must  continue
    [to take                           rebirth] in the lower realms


    Verse 4.12
    Therefore just as I have promised
    I shall respectfully accomplish it.
    If from now on I do not strive
    I shall descend from lower to lower states

At the time of taking the bodhisattva vows, one promises to abandon  the  18
roots downfalls and the 46 faults. Here one should  contemplate  and  think,
“I am now going to practisce in accordance with the promises I have made  at
the time of taking the bodhisattva vows.”.

The verse is saying that one should practisce respectfully,  g  to  guarding
against committing the downfalls and the faults by remembering the  benefits
of keeping to the training and the great disadvantages of going against  the
trainings..  It is said in one sutra[1] that during these :
“In this degenerates times, the benefit of keeping one precept for  one  day
and night exceeds the merits that  one  accumulates  from  making  countless
offerings of umbrellas, victory banners, light and ornaments of jewels to  a
hundred billion buddhas for eons equal to the number of sand grains  in  the
River Ganges.

tens of millions of offerings such as foods and drinks and so forth  to  the
buddhas equal in number to the grains of sand in the Ganges river”.
We should read about and understand the  benefits  we  can  derive  from  of
keeping to the trainings, and the great benefits that  we  can  derive  from
doing so. We should understand the benefits from keeping to  the  trainings.
We should not engage keep to in the trainings whilst and feeling  that  they
are burdensome it is like an obligations.  or a burden. But Rrather,  if  we
understanding  their  benefits, we engage in them  and what  is  in  it  for
us, then we would do it happily.

The verse says, “respectfully accomplish” ourthe  promisepromise,  i.e.,   -
to respectfully keeps to the trainingss. This at means  to  be  able  to  do
them it happily, to strive and to joyously persevere in the  trainings.  The
meaning of joyous effort perseverance  is  the  mind  that  is  enthusiastic
about virtues.

One should reflect on the benefits of keeping the  vows  and  the  trainings
that one has promised to undertake. On the other hand,  When  if  one  takes
on these vows and commitments but do not put  in  any  effort  into  keeping
them, allowing oneself to , and if one gets be stained by all the  downfalls
and faults, the negativities that come from committing these  downfalls  and
faults will cause one to stay in the lower realms for a long time.

If Oone may think, s “It is all right.  that Eeven if I do notn’t strive  in
keeping my vows and abiding in the trainings as I had that  I  have  already
promised to do so, and because the numberless buddhas and  bodhisattvas  are
so powerful,  and , so kind and so compassionate, they will definitely  stop
me from going to the lower realms. They will continue to  place  me  on  the
path to higher rebirths and enlightenment.”.   If  one  were  ever  to  ever
tthinks like that, then one must has to understand that tthis is a  mistake.
So Tthinking in such a way is a mistake. The answer to that way of  thinking
comes in verse 4.13.

   B. The Buddhas and their children act with equanimity

      Verse 4.13
      Although countless buddhas have passed by
      To benefit all sentient beings,
      Yet I was not an object of their care
      Because of my own misdeeds.

Numberless  buddhas  including  Shakyamuni  Buddha  worked   only  for   the
happiness and welfare  of  sentient  beings.  Numberless  of  these  buddhas
including Shakyamuni Buddha has already passed i.e. is already in  the  past
tense.
Although numberless buddhas including Shakyamuni Buddha have come  to  pass,
however  we were not saved by them due to the faults  of  our  own  misdeeds
and negativities. We are like a patient who that cannot be saved by  even  a
very good doctor. When If the patient does not  follow  the  advice  of  the
doctordoctor’s advice, there is nothing the doctor  can  do.  For  the  same
reason, Similarly, we were not protected or saved by the numberless  buddhas
and bodhisattvas in the past because of our own misdeeds.

When If you have a burnt seed, , and even if all the cooperative  conditions
such as water, fertiliszer and so forth are present, there,  the  seed  will
not sprout. In order for the seed  to  to  get  it  sprout,  there  must  be
something coming from the side of the seed, i.e.,  the seed  must  have  the
potential to transform into a the sprout. But when if the seed is burnt,  no
matter how much fertiliszer and water there may beare, you are not going  to
get any sprout. Likewise, all the numberless buddhas  and  bodhisattvas  may
possess inconceivable power and compassion, but because of due to the  power
of our non-virtues, we were not protected and saved protected by them.

Then you may think, If you think “Even if the buddhas  and  bodhisattvas  do
not n’t protect and saverescue me in this life, they will definitely  do  so
in my next life.”,  This is it is aalso wrong as shown in Vverse 4.14.

      Verse 4.14
      If I still act like this,
      Again and again I will likewise experience
      Bad migrations, sickness, bondage,
      Mutilation, and laceration.

When If one does not put any  effort  into  guarding  or  keeping  the  vows
asthat  one  hads  promised  promised  to  do  so,  and  one  is  constantly
committing  keep  getting  stained  by  the  downfalls   and   faults,   the
negativityies that  one  accumulates  from  such  actions  committing  these
downfalls and faults will throw one not just once but  repeatedly  into  the
lower realms but will throw one into the lower realms for many lifetimes  to
come.

Even  when  if  one  is  reborn  as  a  human  again,  but  because  of  the
negativities accumulated from transgressing the trainings, then it  is  said
that one will have to experience sickness, lack of freedom,  and ,  bondage,
and one may also experience physical harms  such  as  being  beaten  and  so
forth.

The point is that it is  difficult  to  be  protected  by  the  buddhas  and
bodhisattvas in the future lives when if one is not  careful  in  this  life
and if one does not put effort into  keeping  the  vows  and  the  trainings
asthat one has promised to do so. Because of what we have just seen, by  not
keeping the vows and we keep getting stained by these downfalls and  faults,
these downfalls and faults would cause us to be born  in  the  lower  realms
for many lifetimes.


So it is wrong to think, “It is okay if I don’t keep my vows in  this  life.
I will be protected in my future lives.”.
How will are you going to be protected in  future  lives  when  if  you  are
going to be in the lower realms for many lifetimes to come?

The teachings say that even when if you become a human  being  again,  as  a
result of having committed these downfalls and faults, you  will  have  will
have to experience the causally concordant effects such as sickness  and  so
forth. So by thinking about these things, Oone should  be  conscientious  in
keeping one’s vows by thinking about these points. .

It is possible that there are are people who may think,  “I didn’t  do  that
well this time round. , but Iin my next life,  when I get a  human  life  of
freedoms and endowments again, I will try harder then.” Thinking  like  this
Having such a thought is a mistake. Why? The answer is in the next verse.

C. The difficulty of obtaining a human life of leisures and endowments
 1.   If bodhicitta deteriorates, it becomes difficult to  obtain  leisures
   and endowments   that  possess  the  four  wheels[2]—  conditions  [that
   facilitate practice]
[BP 1 L20] If we talk about the seed from  the  perspective  of  our  buddha
nature, of course, all sentient beings have  buddha  nature.  When  we  talk
about the degeneration of the seed, it refers to  our  buddha  nature  being
bound by our negativities. We have to remove these faults ourselves.
Sometimes, we go to the other extreme: “If I possess all the  potential  and
power to become a buddha, then I do not need the buddhas.  What  do  I  need
the buddhas for?” If we are thinking like that, we  are  implying  that  our
buddha nature is solid and inherently existent because it does not  need  to
rely on any other factors. The hearers  and  the  solitary  realizers  arise
from the buddhas and the buddhas arise from bodhicitta.  Whatever  goals  we
may have, be it to achieve the level  of  a  hearer,  solitary  realizer  or
buddha, we all need to rely on the  teachings  of  the  Buddha.  We  achieve
enlightenment by depending on the teachings or scriptures of the Buddha.  We
will not be able to achieve enlightenment without depending  on  the  advice
and the teachings of the Buddha. We need all these conditions before we  can
achieve enlightenment. We will not be able to achieve enlightenment  on  our
own, without depending on these other factors.
Using again the analogy  of  the  seed,  even  if  the  seed  possessed  the
potential to transform into a plant, the seed alone would not be able to  do
this without depending on other  conditions  such  as  fertilisers,  warmth,
water and so forth. In the same way, although we may have the buddha  nature
or the potential to become a buddha, that alone will not help us to  achieve
enlightenment.
|C The difficulty of obtaining a human life of leisures and endowments|
|1 If bodhicitta deteriorates, it becomes difficult to obtain leisures|
|and endowments that possess the four wheels - conditions [that       |
|facilitate practice]                                                 |
|2 Even though they have been obtained, one should make effort because|
|they quickly perish                                                  |

|1 If bodhicitta deteriorates, it becomes difficult to obtain leisures|
|and endowments that possess the four wheels - conditions [that       |
|facilitate practice]                                                 |


      Verse 4.15
      If the arising of a tathagata,
      Faith, the attainment of a human body,
      And my being fit to cultivate virtue are rare,
      When will they be obtained again?

It is said in the teachings that the coming of the Buddha is as rare as  the
udumbbara flower*.[3] The appearance of a Buddha  in  any  particular  world
system is a very rare phenomenon indeed.
*(Extract from Wikipedia) The flowers of the udumbara  are  enclosed  within
its fruit, as in all figs. Because the flower is hidden inside the fruit,  a
legend developed to explain the absence (and supposed rarity) of the  visual
flower. In Buddhist mythology, the flower was said to bloom only once  every
3,000 years, and thus came to symbolize events of rare occurrence.

In general, fIf you remember our earlier discussion on what a great  eon  is
in terms of time, and before we go into that again, if you think  about  the
time spend that is  generally  needed  Ffor  any  particular  individual  to
achieve omniscience and full enlightenment, , in general, it  is  said  that
one needs to accumulate the collections of merits and wisdom over  a  period
of for  tthree  great  countless  great  eons.  in  order  to  achieve  full
enlightenment.
One great eon is made up on 80 intermediate eons. In  order  to  finish  the
accumulation of merits and wisdom one needs three great  eons  in  order  to
achieve full enlightenment.

After having achieving ed enlightenment, the bBuddhas then turns  the  wheel
of Ddharma in order to accomplish the welfare of sentient beings.

Within one great eon, s If you look at the time  spent  Sstarting  from  the
beginning  of  the  formation  of  a  particular  world  system  until   its
destruction, , within  one  great  eon,  in  one  great  eon  there  are  80
intermediate eons. During these intermediate eons, m, most of the  time  the
bBuddhas does not descend, i.e., there is just the eon of  dar.kness.   Most
of the time, there are just the eon of darkness.
The bBuddhas will only descend during the eons of  abiding,  and  there  are
only 20 intermediate eons within the eon of of abiding.

Furthermore,  tThe  bBuddhas  does  not  descend  during   the   entire   20
intermediate eons of the eon of abiding. They will  only  descend  when  the
average lifespan of the human beings is decliningon the descent. So among
Of the 20 intermediate eons of the eon  of   abiding,  for  half  the  time,
i.e., for 10 intermediate eons, the bBuddhas does not descend.

Now So we you have only have 10 intermediate eons left. Of  these  remaining
10 intermediate eons that are left, again the bBuddhas does not descend  all
the time. They only descend It is only at certain time or  intervals.   does
the Buddha descend during those 10 intermediate eons.

When  you  put  all  this  ese  together,   then  you  begin  to  have  some
understanding of the rarity of the appearance of a bthe Buddha in any  world
system.

We talked about the human life of freedoms and  endowments.  So  tThere  are
the  ten  endowments,  five  pertaining  s  to  others  oneself,  and   five
pertaining s tto oneselfthers.

When we talk about the five endowments that pertain  to  others,  there  are
four endowments that are related to the descent of the BBuddha,  the  Buddha
’s descent and having taught the Ddharma, and the  Ddharma  abiding  and  so
forth.

There are also the five endowments that  pertain  to  oneself,   .  Oone  of
which is having faith in the Buddhist teachings. That is also very  rare  as
it It is very rare to have an appreciation of the teachings of the  Buddha’s
teachings.

It is very rare tTo be able to achieve a human life  that  is  endowed  with
the eight freedoms and ten endowments.  is very rare.  So it  is  a  mistake
to think that one will get such an opportunity again  in  the  future,  that
for one will to have another human life of freedoms and endowments  again.is
very rare.

While we still have the opportunity,  we  can  engage  do  in  any  kind  of
vvirtue we wish and we can do so like,  and  we  can  just  start  doing  it
immediately. as As we are free of all the obstacles.  of doing  so  and  wWe
have all the necessary conditions, so we should start right now.

So the point here is that Tthe teachings are telling us here that  while  we
have all the favourable conditions and as we are free of all the  obstacles,
this is the time to work hard.  and to strive. While  Iit  is  incorrect  to
think, “I will practice later on in life. Now everything is  going  well.  I
have good health, and I will continue to have good health. I  will  just  do
it later in my life.” The teaching is telling us that  thinking  in  such  a
way is also incorrect.
The ten endowments
The five endowments that relate to others:
1. Being born when the Buddha has appeared
2. The Buddha gives Dharma teachings
3. The Dharma remains
4. There are followers of the Dharma
5. There are people supports the Dharma practice
The five endowments that relate to oneself:
1. Being born as a human being
2. Being born in a central land
3. Being born with complete sense organs
4. Not created the five extreme negative karmas.
5. Having faith in the teachings.
The eight freedoms:
The four situations of being free from the non-human states (which  are  not
conducive to dharma practice)
1. Freedom from birth in the hells
2. Freedom from birth in the hungry ghost realms
3. Freedom from birth in the animal realms
4. Freedom from birth as a long-life god
The four situations of a human rebirth free from  the  restrictions  to  the
Dharma practice
1. Freedom from being born in a remote and irreligious land
2. Freedom from being born when the Buddha has not come
3. Freedom from being born mentally deficient or mute
4. Freedom from holding wrong views


We may also think in this way, “I  will  practise  later  on  in  life.  Now
everything is going well. I have good health and I  will  continue  to  have
good health.” The teachings are telling us that thinking in such  a  way  is
also incorrect.

   2. Even though they have been obtained, one should  make  effort  because
   they         quickly perish
 [BP1 L20] As in  the  outline:  If  bodhicitta  deteriorates,  it  becomes
 difficult to obtain leisures and endowments that possess the four wheels -
 conditions that facilitate practice.
 The four wheels referred to here are:
 1. to be born in a  conducive  environment  with  harmonious  friends  who
 assist us in the practice of virtue;
 2. to be able to rely on holy beings with specific reference to  the  fact
 that we have the opportunity to meet and rely on Mahayana gurus;
 3. as a result of virtuous prayers made in the past, to engage  in  virtue
 enthusiastically with one’s body, speech and mind ;
 4. to have good and favourable conditions for the practice of the Mahayana
 teachings. This comes  about  as  the  result  of  having  accumulated  or
 performed virtue in the past.
 These  four  wheels  are  the  four  Mahayana  spheres  mentioned  in  the
 dedication prayer of the Guru Puja practice:
 By the force of this merit in all my lives
 May I never be parted from the Mahayana’s four spheres
 And may I reach the end of my journey along the paths of
 Renunciation, bodhicitta, the pure view, and the two stages
|2 Even though they have been obtained, one should make effort|
|because they quickly perish                                  |


      Verse 4.16
      I am free from sickness like the day,
      Fed and free from harm,
      But life is momentary and deceptive;
      The body is like an object on loan for but a lava[4]*
* A unit of time that lasts 1.6 minutes [Ven Gyurme translated “a  lava”  as
short period of time]

If you lLook at a particular day in your life, when things are  going  well:
, yoyou have a good life, you are not sick, you  have  all  the  conditions,
you do not n’t have people harming you destroying your life, and you do  not
n’t have any obstacles. Although that may be the case for a particular  day,
but it is not certain that the rest of your life will be like that.

Even if you were to assume that the rest of your life will  be  good,  i.e.,
you will be healthy for the rest of your life  and  things  will  always  go
well for you, , even then there , it will come a point in time when  re  iit
will all end. t will end. From now till the end  of  your  days,  all  these
favourable conditions are being depleted day by day,  and moment by  moment.


Our body is just like an object on that is taken as a  loan.  This  precious
human rebirth is obtained just once.  Just  as  a  like  something  precious
object such like gold or something similar that is on  loan  to  you,  there
will definitely comes a time that when that  precious  object  which  is  on
loan to you will be  repossessed  without  any  choice  by  its  the  owner.
Likewise, there will come a time when our life will be  taken  back  by  the
Lord of Death.

Therefore it is incorrect to think,  “I  will  keep  to  my  vows,  my   and
ttrainings and my practice in the future.”.  Y Therefore,  you  have  to  be
conscientious about in keeping to your promise from the outset.

There are times where one people may think that  getting  a  human  life  of
freedoms and endowments is not difficult. It  is  something  that  one  will
just get over and over again. With this assumption, one  then  also  assumes
that it is therefore all right to practisce in  the  future  when  one  gets
such an opportunity again. Of course, this at is incorrect.

D. There is no opportunity to practise virtue if one has  taken  rebirth  in
  the lower realms
     1 There is no opportunity to practise virtue if one is  reborn  in  the
  lower realms
|There is no opportunity to practice virtue if one has taken rebirth  |
|in the lower realms                                                  |
|1 There is no opportunity to practice virtue if one is reborn in the |
|lower realms                                                         |
|2 If one does not make the effort when one has obtained a higher     |
|rebirth, once one is in the lower realms, one will be ignorant with  |
|regards to what is to be abandoned and what is to be cultivated      |
|3 It is extremely difficult to be liberated from the lower realms    |
|[once one has taken rebirth there]                                   |

|1 There is no opportunity to practice virtue if one is reborn in the |
|lower realms                                                         |


      Verse 4.17
      With such behaviour of mine
      I will not obtain even a human body.
      If this human form is not attained,
      There will be solely negativity and no virtue.

We must remember the context of our discussion here. The We  are  discussing
in the context is that oof someone who has  generated  bodhicitta,  aadopted
bodhicitta through a ritual, having generated bodhicitta, and  having  taken
the bodhisattva vows, i.e., ; which is basically an oath  to  practisce  the
perfections. When If this person does not strive to keep to  the  oath  that
was he/she has taken, but instead carelessly being  careless  and  keeps  on
accumulating  non-virtues,  and  keeps  committing  the  downfalls  and  the
faults, then what will happen to such a person? As said in verse 4.17,  such
a person will not even obtain a human  rebirth.  As  such,  only  the  lower
realms are opened to this person.

OOf course , once you find yourself in the lower realms, you will  not  have
any opportunity to engage in anything that is beneficial or virtuous.

The teachings are telling youus that when  if you do seriously look at  your
own actions and behaviour, you will come  to  understand  that  it  will  be
difficult for you to obtain such an opportunity again in  the  future.  Even
just to obtaining n a human rebirth will be difficult. Of course,  you  will
end up in the lower realms.

When If you do end up in the lower realms, and if you  think  about  thatit,
it is crystal clear that there will be no room or opportunity  for  engaging
in virtue. Instead you will be only  be   engaging  in  non-virtue  all  the
time. Once you find  yourself  in  the  lower  realms  Wwhen  non-virtue  is
continually being accumulated,  then getting out of the  lower  realms  that
situation and getting another human rebirth will be extremely difficult.

While you may not not be able to directly perceive the hell realms  and  the
preta realms, but yyou can observe the life of the animals. There  are  many
kinds of animals that have to live by killing others.  They  cannot  survive
without killing others. There are many kinds of animal  that  have  to  live
like that.

Imagine you are born as an  animal.  ,  and  Yyou  Pput  yourself  in  their
situation. If you Tthink about it.,  Your  entire  life  is  spent  for  the
whole life one is continually killing just to  survive.  Then  Iit  is  then
very clear that you will be one is constantly accumulating non-virtue.  When
If tthat is the case, how is it really possible for one  to  obtain  a  good
rebirth thereafterhenceforth?

    2.  If one does not make the effort  when  one  has  obtained  a  higher
   rebirth, once one    is in the lower realms, one will be  ignorant  with
   regards to what is to be abandoned and what is to be cultivated


   Verse 4.18
   If, even when I have the good fortune of virtuous conduct,
   I do not create virtue,
   Then what shall I do when all confused
   By the suffering of the unfortunate rebirths?

When If you do not employ your body, speech and mind  in  virtue  while  you
have thise  human life of eight freedoms and ten endowments, then oonce  you
are in the lower realms you  would  not  be  able  to  even  to  distinguish
between what is  right  and  what  is  wrong.  You  would  not  be  able  to
distinguish what is it that you need to abandon  discard  and  what  exactly
that you need to cultivate./adopt.

When If you do not even employ your  body,  speech  and  mind  in  even  the
smallest of virtues while you have all the  opportunities  to  do  so,  then
when if you do end up in the lower realms such as the hell realms, you  will
be completely overwhelmed by  by  the  suffering.  You  will  be  completely
confused as to what to abandon adopt and  what  to  cultivate.  By  thinking
about this, you apply conscientiousness in keeping to your  one’s  trainings
and to engage in virtue.

   3. It is extremely difficult to be liberated from the lower realms  [once
   one has taken    rebirth there]
      Verse 4.19
      If I do not create virtues
      But readily amass negativities,
      Then for hundreds of millions of eons
      I shall not even hear the term “good migration.”
[Ven Gyurme translated “good migration” as good rebirth]
Here the verse is saying that while you have the opportunity and and if  you
do not n’t even cultivate even  a  small  virtue  but  you  only  accumulate
negativities, t. , tThen you will be reborn in  the  lower  realms  and  you
will have to stay there for a very long periods of time. ,  and  tThe  verse
is says,ing  “for hundreds of millions of eons.” Once you are in  the  lower
realms, it is very difficult to get out. You can  fForget  about  getting  a
good rebirth as , even to  hearing   the  words,   “good  migration,rebirth”
will ould be extremely difficult.

E. The reason why it is difficult to obtain the leisures and endowments

      Verse 4.20
      For this very reason, the Bhagavan said
      That just as in the case of a turtle inserting its neck
      Into a yoke adrift upon the vast ocean,
      It is very hard to attain the human state.

In the sutras, tThe Buddha  taught  in  the  sutras  of  the  difficulty  of
obtaining a human life  of  freedoms  and  endowments  through  an  analogy.
Imagine that there is a very vast  ocean.   and  Tthere  is  a  golden  yoke
floating on the surface of the ocean. It  and is  constantly  moving  about.
AThen at the bottom of the ocean,  there  is  a  blind  turtle.  This  blind
turtle will only surfaces once in in every one hundred  years.  The  chances
of that blind turtle surfacing and poking utting its  neck  right  into  the
hole of that golden yoke will be is very small.  Likewise,  the  chances  of
getting a human life of freedoms and endowments  areis  similarly  extremely
difficult.

In short, this section talks about how you have to  be  conscientious  about
in  abandoning  negativities  and  non-virtue.  When  For  if  you  are  not
conscientious  in  abandoning  non-virtue,  i.e.,  and  if   you   keep   on
accumulating non-virtue and being stained by the downfalls and faults,  then
the results of all those negativities e karma will ould be  rebirth  in  the
lower realms. Y and you will ould have to stay in the  lower  realms  for  a
very long time. ItIt is  would also be very difficult  to  get  out  of  the
lower realms once you are therein it. By  Kkeeping  these  points  in  mind,
then yyou apply  conscientiousness  in  keeping  to  the  vows  and  to  the
trainings as that you hadve promised to do so.

This is similar to wwhat you can find in the lam-rim Stages of the  Path  to
Enlightenment literature.

In short, when we have the opportunity and the ability to  employ  ourselves
in virtue, we do have the ability to do so, and we can  do  it.  Wwe  should
start right away. It will would be a mistake to postpone one’s  practice  to
the future.

These verses here from the  Engaging  in  the  Bodhisattva  Deeds  are  very
powerful.  You  can  ould  reflect  on  use  tthese  verses  for  reflection
especially at times when you feel that it is  difficult  to  keep  your  the
vows and keep to the training. By reading and  contemplating  these  verses,
and contemplating them, you should be able to generate find the  willingness
and the joy to keep to your the practice.

If you do love and cherish yourself, then you have to keep to the  trainings
and keep to your the practice. If you do not love yourself, then  then  that
is a completely different matter.

When we talk about loving ourselves, we are not just  talking  about  loving
ourselves for just one lifetime.  We  are  talking  about  real  long-  term
happiness. By thinking correctly, Kknowing how to think correctly  and  with
and thinking ina  long-  term  view,  you  will  come  to  regard  your  the
practice and engaging in virtue as an ornament to  be  valued  and  enjoyed,
and not as aa burden. It is something to be enjoyed  rather  than  something
that is like a burden.


There are vows and commitments to be kept  including  commitments  of  daily
recitations to be observed  and so forth. When you If you do  not  n’t  know
how to think, then  sometimes you may will find it difficult to  keep  these
up. When you do not know how to think, you may find them  burdensome.  doing
these things a bit difficult. If you don’t know how to think, you will  find
doing them a burden. It is So at theose times that yoyou  really  must  know
how to think by reflecting on those points as mentioned here. Much  of  this
A lot of it boils down to having the  faith of conviction  in  karma,  which
is so  important.  .  Having  this  faith  of  conviction  in  karma  is  so
important.

Being conscientious about cultivating virtue
A. As negativities accumulated in  the  past  are  limitless,  it  would  be
   reasonable to make effort in abandoning them
B. The reasons the karma [that leads one  to  take  rebirth  in]  the  lower
   realms is not exhausted by merely experiencing  suffering  in  the  lower
   realms one time
C. The reasons it would be reasonable to make effort  in  the  antidotes  to
   negativity
|Being conscientious about cultivating virtue                         |
|A As negativities accumulated in the past are limitless, it would be |
|reasonable to make effort in abandoning them                         |
|B The reasons the karma [that leads one to take rebirth in] the lower|
|realms is not exhausted by merely experiencing suffering in the lower|
|realms one time                                                      |
|C The reasons it would be reasonable to make effort in the antidotes |
|to negativity                                                        |

A. As negativities accumulated in the  past  are  limitless,  it  would  be
   reasonable to make effort in abandoning them
|A As negativities accumulated in the past are limitless, it would be |
|reasonable to make effort in abandoning them                         |


      Verse 4.21
      If even by the negativity committed for an instant
      One will abide in Relentless Torment for eons,
      Then because of the negativities I have accumulated in beginningless
      cyclic    existence,
      What need to mention my not going to a good migration?
[Ven Gyurme translated “Relentless Torment” as the Avici Hell]

The teachings say that when if one has to  be  reborn  in  the  hell  realms
from just by being getting angry at a the bodhisattva  even  for  even  just
one moment, then it goes without saying that one will have to bbe reborn  in
the lower realms for a very long time due to  because  of  the  immeasurable
amount of non-virtue that one  has  accumulated  since  one’s  beginningless
lifetimes.

We  have  accumulated  an  immeasurable  amount  of  non-virtue  since   our
beginningless lifetimes. When  and ithis is nf  not  purified,  we  will  be
they will thrown  us into the lower realms. Therefore,  we  have  to  strive
and wwork really hard in confessing and purifying all the negativities  that
we have accumulated since our beginningless lifetimes.
B.  The reasons the karma [that leads one to take rebirth in] the lower
  realms is not   exhausted by merely experiencing suffering in the lower
  realms one time
      Verse 4.22
      Through experiencing merely that
      I shall not be liberated,
      Because while experiencing that in such a way
      Other negativities will be strongly produced.

The teachings state that between virtue and non-virtue:
 • TBetween virtue and non-virtue, the teachings state that the heavier  of
   the two will ripen first.
 • When both If both virtue and non-virtue are of equal strength, thee  one
   that  one that one is more familiar with will ripen first.
 • When If one is equally familiar with both virtue and non-virtue,  it  is
   said that the one that wasis created earlier first will ripen first.

When we think about this, for us, our the non-virtue is much  more  powerful
than our virtue and w. We are also more familiar with  non-virtue.  When  If
that ripens, then we would have to experience the problems  and  sufferings.
For that reason, we have to confess and purify them.

There may be people who think,  “It is not really necessary  to  purify  the
negativities   because  once  they  ripen,   and  you  would  have  finished
experiencing them. That would be ’s it.”.

Others There may be people who think,  “Once  the  negative  karma  or  non-
virtue ripens, one goes to the lower realms. , and  one  has  to  experience
the sufferings. All those sufferings that one will  experience  there   will
exhaust  all  the  negativities  that  one  has  accumulated.   When   those
negativities are exhausted,  then one  will  be  liberated  from  the  lower
realms and one will get a good rebirth.”.

Of course again, this is another incorrect position. The answer to  that  is
in Vverse 4.22.


      Verse 4.22
      Through experiencing merely that
      I shall not be liberated,
      Because while experiencing that in such a way
      Other negativities will be strongly produced.

Even when if one  finishes  experiencing  the  fruitional  effect  of  being
reborn in the lower realms as a result of the non-virtue accumulated in  the
past, one will not be liberated from the  lower  realms.  Why  is  this  so?
Because when one is in the lower realms, one  is  always  accumulating  non-
virtue. There is always anger. ,  Tthere  is  always  ill-will,.   and  Oone
continuously engages in non-virtue such as killing and so forth.  So  it  is
wrong to think say that one will be liberated from  the  lower  realms  once
after one has finished experiencing the  fruitional  effect  of  non-virtue.
While one is experiencing theat fruitional effect  of  being  in  the  lower
realms, one is continuously accumulating non-virtue. This at  will  prevents
one from being liberated from the lower realms.

Based on a rebirth in the lower realms, With the  basis  of  a  lower  realm
rebirth, one’s ability to engage in virtue is very weak. In  that  state  of
existence, oOne is continuously accumulating non-virtue.  in that  state  of
existence. TTherefore, the commentary says that  we  should  strive  now  to
stop now to stop creating the causes for of  tthe lower realms.  We have  to
strive to purify all the negativities that we have  already  accumulated  in
the past. When If we do not strive in virtue, after having obtained  a  good
rebirth, then  we will be deceiving and cheating ourselves.

C.  The reasons why it would be reasonable to make effort  in  applying  the
  antidotes to negativity
   1. One deceives oneself if one does not make effort in  virtue  once  one
      has obtained leisures and endowments
   2. One will experience suffering in this life
   3. One will be tormented with the suffering of the lower  realms  in  the
      future
   4. The reasons why it would be reasonable  to  abandon  negativities  and
      make effort in virtue



|The reasons why it would be reasonable to make effort in applying the|
|antidotes to negativity                                              |
|1 One deceives oneself if one does not make effort in virtue once one|
|has obtained leisures and endowments                                 |
|2 One will experience suffering in this life                         |
|3 One will be tormented with the suffering of the lower realms in the|
|future                                                               |
|4 The reasons why it would be reasonable to abandon negativities and |
|make effort in virtue                                                |


   1. One deceives oneself if one does not make effort in  virtue  once  one
      has obtained leisures and endowments
 2.
|1 One deceives oneself if one does not make effort in virtue once one|
|has obtained leisures and endowments                                 |


      Verse 4.23
      If, having found such leisure,
      I do not familiarize with virtue,
      There can be no deception other than this;
      There can be no confusion other than this.
[Ven Gyurme translated:
 “There can be no  deception  other  than  this”  as  there  is  no  greater
deception.
 “There can be no  confusion  other  than  this”  as  there  is  no  greater
confusion than this.]

This verse can be particularly effective when if we can commit it to  memory
and use it to constantly remind ourselves of the point it is making.

We have After having obtained such a human life of freedoms  and  endowments
whereen we have all the conditions to practisce. W, we  have  met  with  the
teachings of the Buddha. W, we have  met  with  the  virtuous  friend.,  and
Ffrom our side,  if we do practisce, the best thing that can  happen  to  us
is for us to achieve omniscience,  – full enlightenment. But  even  if  that
does not n’t happen, we can do something to move closer  to  it  by  and  to
generating e bodhicitta. At the very least, minimum, at least we should  not
die with any regrets and i. In order to be able to do this, die without  any
regrets, we have to familiarisze ourselves with virtue.

The teachings are telling us that, at  the very least, we should  is we  can
die without any regrets so that at the time of death,  we are satisfied  and
we can go without any regrets by thinking,  “Due to the  fact  that  I  have
done a fair bit of of having done some practice in this life,  I  have  done
quite a fair bit. I don’t have regrets and I can go.”. So Tthis  at  is  the
minimum.

After having found this human life of freedoms and endowments  where  ,  wwe
have all the opportunities to practisce—. Wwe have  met  the  teachings,  we
understand the teachings—, but if we do not n’t practisce, when we die,   we
will die with regrets.
Despite having met and knowing the teachings, despite knowing the  teachings
but because of not practiscing the teachings  and  ,  instead  spending  our
whole lives letting ourselves to be controlled by our three mental  poisons—
– ignorance, anger and attachment—and  – and living a life filled  with  the
eight worldly dharmas, then at the time of deaths, we will  die  with  great
regrets. When this happens, then If such a thing happens, then there  is  no
greater deception than this. , and  Wwe  would  have  cheated  and  deceived
ourselves. We have deceived ourselves in the greatest way.

This is  about  saying  thinking  to  oneself,   “I  should  practisce  pure
Dharma.”  When If you are not conscientious in practiscing virtue, you  will
experience suffering in this life.

Eight worldly dharmas
1.  Being pleased when receiving wealth
2. Being displeased when losing wealth
3. Being pleased when experiencing pleasure
4. Being displeased when experiencing misery
5. Being pleased at being famous
6. Being displeased at being in disrepute
7. Being pleased when praised
8. Being displeased when denigrated2.   One  will  experience  suffering  in
this life

|2 One will experience suffering in |
|this life                          |


      Verse 4.24
      If, having understood this,
      Out of confusion I am indolent afterwards,
      When it is time to die
      Tremendous grief will rear its head.

Despite having obtained such favourable conditions, but we still  spend  our
lives indulging in the objects of desire, t. The teachings  are  telling  us
that at the time of death, we will experience great regret  because  at  the
time of death we will think,  “I didn’t do it. I  didn’t  practisce.”.    We
Then one will experience great regret and great regret will result in  great
misery – great mental suffering.

Are we not Most of us are in such a situation, isn’t it? Despite having  all
the conditions for practice and , we kknowing that we  can  do  it,  and  we
know how to do it, but we always have our own llong list of reasons  why  we
cannot do it, using these . We will come out with a  long  list  of  reasons
and then we use the list of reasons to postpone our practice. “Not now.  Not
now.”.  Aren’t all of us like that? ll of us are like that, isn’t it?


When  If  you  take  doing  your  daily  commitments  or  daily   recitation
commitments,  and think,  “What is the point of doing  this?.  What  is  the
benefit?” iImmediately already there is already a reason not to not  do  it.
Immediately there is a reason  to  stop  engaging  in  virtue.  Rather  than
coming out with reasons to do something beneficial,  you  will  always  find
reasons to not to  do it,  and  thinking,   “What  is  the  point  of  doing
theseis prayers?.”

Even when if you may want to  do  it  but  sometimes  sometimes  you  think,
“This is not the time” or “I don’t have the time.”. Again there  is  another
reason to cut it off to not to do it.

Or Wwhen it comes to educating ourselves in the teachings  of  the  Buddha’s
teachings, some people think,  “Now Iit is too late in my life. Now I  am  ,
I’m old, I do not n’t have the ability.”. Once again,  iImmediately,,  again
that becomes another reason to not to engage cut off in virtue.

Basically there are these different so many whole lists of reasons  that  we
come up with can bring up and we use all these whole long  list  of  reasons
to stop ourselves from to ppractiscing Dharma, thus cutting the Dharma .  We
cut the Dharma away from our lives. selves, isn’t it?
Actually we know what to do. We know what we have to cultivate and  what  we
have to abandondiscard. We know what we need to practisce, what we  need  to
stop doing and we know that wewe  can do it now. But we do not  n’t  do  it.
Instead wWe come up out with these  whole  long  list  of  reasons  to  stop
ourselves from doing soit.

The teachings are saying that when if we live  and  finish  our  lives  like
that, and finishing our lives like that then at the time of death,  we  will
definitely feel very regretful. This will result in great misery  and  great
suffering. It is quite evident that this such a thing  will  happen.  It  is
similar to like when we fallget sick. T then we remember  those  times  when
we wereare well, : “At that time I didn’t  do  it.  So  wasted.”.   We  feel
regret, isn’t it.

By thinking about these points, then Wwe should apply  ourselves  to  be  in
conscientiousness in cultivating virtue by th.inking about these points  for
when we are  If we are not conscientious  in  cultivating  virtue,  we  will
suffer when we are in the lower realms.

      3. One will be tormented with the suffering of  the  lower  realms  in
the future

      Verse 4.25
      If my body burns for a long time
      In the fires of hell which are difficult to bear,
      Inevitably my mind will be tormented
      By the blazing fires of unbearable remorse.


Interpreted by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme; transcribed by Phuah  Soon  Ek,  Patricia
Lee & Julia Koh; edited by Cecilia Tsong.



-----------------------
[1] King of Concentration Sutra
[2]  The  four  wheels  referred  to  here  are  the  four  conditions  that
facilitate practice:
1. to be born in a conducive environment with harmonious friends who assist
   us in the practice of virtue
2. to be able to rely on holy beings with specific reference to the fact
   that we have the opportunity to meet and rely on Mahayana gurus
3. as a result of virtuous prayers made in the past, to engage in virtue
   enthusiastically with one’s body, speech and mind
4. to have good and favourable conditions for the practice of the Mahayana
   teachings. This comes about as the result of having accumulated or
   performed virtue in the past.
These four wheels are the four Mahayana spheres mentioned in the  dedication
prayer, Verse 117, of the Guru Puja. (First Basic Program, Module 5,  Lesson
20, page7).
[3] The flowers of the udumbara are enclosed within its  fruit,  as  in  all
figs. Because the flower is hidden inside the fruit, a legend  developed  to
explain the absence (and supposed rarity) of the visual flower. In  Buddhist
mythology, the flower was said to bloom only once  every  3,000  years,  and
thus came to symbolize events of rare occurrence. (Source: Wikipedia)

[4] A unit of time that lasts 1.6 minutes.

