Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Engaging in the Deeds of a Bodhisattva/BP2 M5 L1 (final).doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:52:18.644077
================================================================================


Transcript of the teachings by Khen Rinpoche Geshe  Chonyi  on  Engaging  in
the Bodhisattva Deeds, 2014

Root text: Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds by  Shantideva,  translated  by
Toh Sze Gee. Copyright: Toh Sze Gee, 2006; Revised edition, 2014.

Lesson 1                                           6 February 2014


Reflecting on impermanence. Summary of chapters of  root  text.  Explanation
of jang chub sem chhog rin po chhe. Chapter One: Meaning of the title &  the
translator’s homage.


REFLECTING ON IMPERMANENCE

Because  compounded  phenomena  are  impermanent,   based   on   that,   one
establishes that there is suffering. And based on the reason that  there  is
suffering, one goes on to establish that phenomena are selfless.

When the Buddha first  taught  the  Dharma,  he  said  that  all  compounded
phenomena are impermanent. There are different  levels  of  subtlety  behind
the explanation of what impermanence is. There is  coarse  impermanence  and
subtle impermanence. The Buddha was alluding mainly to subtle  impermanence.


Realising what  subtle  impermanence  is  is  a  challenging  task.  However
without realising what  subtle  impermanence  is,  it  is  not  possible  to
understand the suffering of conditionality  (also  translated  as  pervasive
compounded suffering). Among the three types of suffering, the suffering  of
conditionality is the third type. [1]

Whilst it is  said  that  all  compounded  phenomena  are  impermanent,  the
specific example of impermanent phenomenon that we  should  primarily  focus
on is ourselves, i.e., we ourselves  are  in  the  nature  of  impermanence.
Without realising  that  we  are  in  the  nature  of  impermanence,  it  is
difficult for us to see how we  are  actually  suffering.  But  it  is  very
difficult to realise our own impermanence, especially the fact that  we  are
in the nature of subtle impermanence.

From our own experience, when we think of ourselves, there  is  the  ‘I’  or
person who wakes up in the morning and there is the ‘I’  or  person  in  the
later part of the day, say, in the evening. When we look at the ‘I’ of  this
morning and the present ‘I’, we spontaneously and  instinctively  feel  that
it is the same ‘I’, i.e., the ‘I’ or person has not changed at all.  In  the
same way, when we look at our body, we instinctively feel and  believe  that
the body of this morning and the body of the current moment  are  the  same,
that is, our body has not changed. So realising subtle impermanence is  very
difficult.

But is that the reality of the ‘I’? Is that the reality  of  our  body?  No.
Because when we think about it, the reality is that the  ‘I’  and  our  body
have changed. In fact, from  this  morning  up  till  now,  they  have  been
changing in each and every single moment. Up till  now,  they  are  changing
but we do not realise it. We do not see it.

Imagine setting a stick on fire and then twirling it  around  very  quickly.
When you do that, there is  an  appearance  of  a  wheel  of  fire.  But  in
reality, there is no such wheel. Likewise although instinctively we  believe
that the ‘I’ and the body do not change from moment to moment,  the  reality
is that that is a mistake. It is not true. It is  false    because  the  ‘I’
and the body are constantly changing in each and every moment.

In the Great Treatises in the study of logic, the statement  is  phrased  in
this way:

      The subject, sound, is impermanent because it is a product.

By the valid proof of it being a product,  one  establishes  that  sound  is
impermanent. In  this  case  when  we  talk  about  proving  that  sound  is
impermanent by the reason of it being a  product,  impermanence  here  means
disintegration and product here  means  creation,  i.e.,  something  new  is
created. But when you think about the meaning of these two—impermanence  and
product—they are actually one entity with two different isolates.[2]

Khen Rinpoche : I hope you are not confused, not confused on the first day!

When we apply this line of reasoning by changing the subject to the  ‘I’  or
our body, then:

      The subject, ‘I’, is impermanent because it is a product.
      The subject, my body, is impermanent because it is a product.

One’s body is a product because it is produced. With  that  as  the  reason,
one establishes that one’s body is impermanent. What we  have  to  establish
is that we are impermanent and that our body  is  impermanent  because  they
are produced and are in the nature of impermanence. They  are  changing  and
disintegrating moment by moment. Why? Because they are products.

This is why the Buddha said, “Because it is produced,  it  is  a  phenomenon
that undergoes disintegration.”  By  that  very  reason,  anything  that  is
produced has the nature of disintegration. It is impermanent. Because it  is
produced,  that  phenomenon  that  is  produced  is   in   the   nature   of
impermanence, undergoing disintegration in each and every single moment.

Production arises due to a cause. What is the cause then of that  phenomenon
having the nature of impermanence? Is there a cause for that other than  the
cause that led to its production?
In the Buddha’s teachings, it is asserted that the cause of  the  production
of a  phenomenon is itself the very cause of  its  disintegration.  This  is
something that we need to think about and establish for ourselves.

Therefore impermanence and product are essentially one entity.  It  is  just
that they are  different  isolates  but  of  course  this  is  an  extremely
difficult point to realise.

In order to develop a definite understanding and realisation of the  meaning
of subtle impermanence,  one  has  to  realise  that  whatever  is  produced
necessarily undergoes disintegration. This is the  nature  of  impermanence.
Without  understanding  this,   there  is   no   way   to   realise   subtle
impermanence.

When you light a candle, there is a flame. There is light  or  illumination.
When the flame of the candle goes out, the light disappears  as  well.  Does
the cessation of that light happen simultaneously with the cessation of  the
flame of the candle? Or is there an  intervening  period  (i.e.,  first  the
flame goes out, then the light/illumination ceases)?

Khen Rinpoche: Or do they go out at the same time?

One has to understand that an  impermanent  phenomenon  undergoes  momentary
change in each and every single moment.

But while a  particular  impermanent  phenomenon  exists,  it  exists  as  a
continuum. For example, there is a continuum of the  body  that  existed  in
the morning and the body that exists now.  While  the  body  existed  during
that time, it is not that the body does not undergo change.  Although  there
is a continuum of a particular impermanent phenomenon,  in  each  and  every
single moment of that continuum, disintegration is taking place.  Change  is
happening. This is what we have to understand.

Thinking about this, we have to utilise our time in such a  way,  especially
when we have the time and opportunity, so as to not  let  it  go  to  waste.
Instead, we should educate ourselves, learn and reflect on the teachings  of
the Buddha. By continually reflecting on impermanence, this  will  impel  us
to take the opportunity whenever possible and with whatever time we have  to
move our mind in the direction of  virtue,  whether  it  be  doing  prayers,
engaging in practice, learning or studying.

Whatever we learn and study, we should always apply it to our own  mind  and
try our best as much as possible to weaken and to  reduce  our  afflictions,
the  three  mental  poisons.  We  have  to  remind  ourselves  of  our   own
impermanence and tell ourselves to engage in virtue.  Whatever  is  good  to
do, we should seize the opportunity to do it. We should  make  a  pledge  to
ourselves while there  is  such  an  opportunity.  When  all  the  different
conditions are still there, we  must  try  our  best  to  make  use  of  the
opportunity.
                                 ~~~~~~~~~~

ENGAGING IN THE BODHISATTVA DEEDS

With regard to studying this text, ideally there is great benefit if we  can
study the text by following the outlines of the commentary.  The purpose  is
to help us gain a good overview and understanding of the different  sections
and parts of the text. But in our case, I don’t think we will be able to  do
that in such detail.

Rather if we can gain some understanding of some of the verses in the  text,
I think this will suffice for our purpose. For those of you who really  have
the interest and would like to read the root text together with the  outline
of the commentary by Gyaltsab Je, the outline of  Gyaltsab  Je’s  commentary
is available in English.

I hope that I can explain the meaning of the verses as much as  possible.  I
hope to go as quickly as I can.

The study of this text is different from the study  of  other  philosophical
subjects. This text is intellectually not that challenging  and  it  is  not
difficult to understand.

SUMMARY OF THE TEN CHAPTERS

This text, Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds,  has ten chapters.

• The first chapter is an  Explanation  of  the  Benefits  of  the  Mind  of
  Enlightenment (or bodhicitta). This is a  teaching  of  the  Mahayana.  In
  order to  be  a  Mahayanist,  one  must  first  have  the  realisation  of
  bodhicitta. Then one becomes a Mahayanist.

  In order to develop bodhicitta, first one has to develop faith and  belief
  in and enthusiasm  for  developing  bodhicitta.  For  those  reasons,  the
  benefits of bodhicitta are explained in the first chapter. But just having
  faith and belief in and enthusiasm for bodhicitta does not mean  that  you
  will be able to generate bodhicitta.

  In order to generate bodhicitta, one must overcome  the  obstacles,  i.e.,
  the negativities that have to be purified and one has to accumulate  merit
  or virtue, i.e., the favourable conditions. On the basis of confessing and
  purifying one’s negativities and accumulating merit, one adopts bodhicitta
  through a ritual. Therefore there are chapters two and three.


• Chapter two is called Confessing Negativities.

• Chapter three is called Completely Upholding the Mind of Enlightenment.

• When one adopts bodhicitta through a ritual, one  develops  and  generates
  this mind of  enlightenment.  But  it  is  insufficient  to  simply  adopt
  bodhicitta  through  a  ritual.  After  one  has  adopted  and   generated
  bodhicitta through a ritual, it is important  to  not  let  that  mind  of
  enlightenment degenerate. In order to not let one’s commitment degenerate,
  one has to know exactly what to  adopt  and  what  to  abandon.  For  that
  reason, there is chapter four, Teachings on Conscientiousness.

  After adopting bodhicitta through a ritual, it is important to not let  it
  degenerate. Therefore there is the training in the deeds or practices of a
  bodhisattva. With respect to that, there is the general training  and  the
  specific training.
      o The general training is covered in chapter four where there are the
        teachings on conscientiousness, i.e., teachings on what one has  to
        adopt and what one has to abandon with regard to one’s training.
      o The specific training refers to the training in the perfections.

• Chapter five is Guarding Introspection. Once one has  adopted  bodhicitta,
  it is important to maintain one’s ethical discipline. In order to maintain
  one’s ethical discipline, one  needs  mindfulness  and  introspection  (or
  vigilance). For that reason, there is an explanation of  introspection  in
  chapter five.

• Chapter six deals with the perfection of patience, Relying on Patience.

• Chapter seven covers the Teachings on Joyous Effort.

• Chapter eight deals  with  the  perfection  of  meditative  stabilisation,
  Teachings on Concentration.

• Chapter nine is on The Perfection of Wisdom.

• Chapter ten is the chapter on Dedication.

If you were to ask where the practice of the  perfection  of  generosity  is
indicated in the text,  according  to  the  commentary,  the  perfection  of
generosity is indicated  in  the  chapter  of  dedication  because  in  that
chapter, there are verses that refer to dedicating one’s body and  roots  of
virtue and enjoyments to others.

This text, Engaging in the Bodhisattva  Deeds,  is  essentially  a  teaching
showing the whole practice of the Great Vehicle, the Mahayana.

JANG CHUB SEM CHHOG RIN PO CHHE

The dedication prayer that most people are  familiar  with,  jang  chub  sem
chhog rin po chhe—“May the supreme jewel bodhicitta/ That  has  not  arisen,
arise and grow,/ And may that which has arisen not  diminish/  But  increase
more and more”—is the condensed meaning of all  the  ten  chapters  of  this
text. When you expand on the meaning of this  dedication  prayer,  then  you
have these ten chapters. But if you were to condense the subject  matter  or
the meaning of these ten  chapters,  it  can  be  condensed  into  this  one
dedication verse.

“May the supreme jewel bodhicitta/ That has not arisen, arise and grow”
When we talk about bodhicitta or the mind of enlightenment, you can look  at
it in terms of the conventional mind of enlightenment and the ultimate  mind
of enlightenment. When we say, “May the supreme jewel bodhicitta/  That  has
not arisen, arise and  grow,” we  are  talking  about  these  two  minds  of
enlightenment, the conventional mind of enlightenment and the ultimate  mind
of enlightenment.

In order for that which has not arisen to  arise  and  grow,  you  have  the
first three chapters explaining how to make that happen. The  first  chapter
explains the benefits  of  bodhicitta,  chapter  two  refers  to  confessing
negativities and chapter three deals with completely upholding bodhicitta.

“And may that which has arisen not diminish”
It is not sufficient to adopt bodhicitta and then let it degenerate. As  the
dedication prayer goes, “May the supreme  jewel  bodhicitta/  That  has  not
arisen, arise and grow;/ And may that which has arisen not diminish,” it  is
important not to let the bodhicitta that has arisen degenerate.

The methods for stopping the degeneration of the bodhicitta  that  has  been
generated  are  the  practices  of  conscientiousness,   introspection   and
patience that are taught in chapters four, five and six. So  these  chapters
become very important.

“But increase more and more”
Then the dedication prayer ends with “But increase more and  more.”   So  on
top of not letting the bodhicitta that has been  generated  degenerate,  you
must also ensure that it increases. For that, you need  joyous  effort,  you
need to develop meditative stabilisation (or  concentration)  and  you  need
wisdom. Therefore you have chapters seven, eight and nine.

So for the bodhicitta that has not arisen, one must develop it. Once  it  is
developed, one must ensure that it does not  degenerate.  On  the  basis  of
that,  one  strives  then  to  increase  one’s  bodhicitta.  The  result  of
following this process is that one achieves the final fruit of attainment.

The whole purpose of attaining this final fruit of attainment is  solely  to
work for the benefit and  welfare  of  others.  In  that  sense,  the  whole
purpose of cultivating  bodhicitta,  not  letting  it  degenerate  and  then
striving to increase it is  to  achieve  that  goal,  that  final  fruit  of
attainment, which is for the benefit of others. This prayer then is  like  a
wish or  an  aspiration  to  achieve  that  final  fruit  of  attainment  of
benefiting others.

MOTIVATION

It is said  that  the  motivation  for  doing  anything  is  very  important
especially at the beginning when we  are  doing  something  very  important.
Therefore the motivation for learning and studying this  text  becomes  very
important. Each of us has to find our own  motivation  for  doing  this.  We
have to look within ourselves and ask, “Why am I here?  Why  am  I  studying
this? Why am I  learning  about  this?”  We  need  to  find  an  answer  for
ourselves.

So when we set the motivation, we need an answer for ourselves. You have  to
find your own answer and until you find it, you have to  ask  yourself  over
and over again “Why am I doing this? Why am I doing this?”

Khen Rinpoche: Did you find your answer? You haven’t found it?

I will share with you my own experience.

When I was young, around 12 to 15 years  old,  I  had  no  idea  why  I  was
studying Buddhist philosophy. I didn’t have any motivation at all.  Why  was
I studying this? I was just following other people. There  were  classes  in
the morning and night that you had to attend. There was no choice.

Only at the age of 18, when I began to debate  in  Kopan,  there  were  some
geshes who came from Sera (Je Monastic University). These geshes would  give
their answers.  Then we had to debate with them. It was extremely  difficult
debating with them. They were  so  scholarly.  They  knew  everything,  like
enlightened beings! They could answer any questions you asked of them.  When
you ask them about the texts, they could answer that as well.

This is what I felt when I was around 17 or  18  debating  with  them.  This
feeling came from my heart.  I  couldn’t  imagine  how  their  brains  could
remember everything! Those geshes had studied all the subjects about  10  to
15 years before, yet they could still remember everything.

We were young at that time. We didn’t even know what  we  were  studying  at
that time. I was quite surprised by and  just  admired  those  geshes.  Then
some kind of wish arose in my mind, “How wonderful it would be  if  I  could
answer like that.” Only then did some kind of motivation arise within me.  I
think that is called motivation, “How wonderful it would be if I could  know
all the texts. Whatever text I was studying, how wonderful it would be if  I
could understand everything.”

Also at that time, (the late Khensur Rinpoche)  Lama  Lhundup  was  teaching
us. For example, a  sentence such as jang chub sem chhog  rin  po  chhe.  Of
course at that time, I had zero idea. But he  could  explain  so  very  well
those words. I thought, “How  wonderful  it  would  be  if  I  was  able  to
understand the topic.”

That is what made me study and to complete my studies. Not  really  complete
but mere labelling “complete my studies.” This was what happened to me.  For
me, that motivated me to study so long, for about 15 to 20 years.

No matter how many years you study, how many books you  read,  the  learning
is  almost never-ending. The questions are also never-ending and arise  more
and more. You may know more but for some subjects, you find  that  there  is
more that you do not know. So it was quite challenging. For me, it was  like
that. I was always wondering and thinking, “I  want  to  know.  I   want  to
know. I want to know.”

At that time, I didn’t  have  the  motivation  to  teach  others  or  to  do
meditation and so forth. I didn’t have those thoughts in my mind. For me,  I
just wanted to know. I wanted to know everything.  A  little  bit  kiasu,[3]
yah? Somehow having that kind of mind all the time kept  me  going  so  that
pushed me to study more.

At that time you  think  you  have  read  so  many  commentaries.  You  have
received so many teachings. You think  you  know  everything  but  when  the
teacher asked some questions, you realise you don’t know  anything  at  all.
Your understanding was totally wrong!

So at that moment, I found that the  teacher  was  extremely  important.  He
could really clarify the subject for you, making very clear what was  right,
what was wrong. Sometimes  when  you  read  the  text,  it  seems  that  you
understand something but you cannot be right.  You  are  just  getting  some
rough idea and you are not really going deep down.  I  found  it  much  more
beneficial with a teacher. Then you can really have a good understanding  of
the text deep down. At that time, you really  appreciate  that  the  teacher
was there. This was how I felt and how I  motivated  myself.  I  thought  to
just share that with all of you.

Everyone has to ask oneself, “Why am I going to study this?”  Motivation  is
the driving force. It is everything. Of course there are whole varieties  of
motivations. Everyone’s motivation is different. Some people  want  to  know
because they want to learn. Some people really want  to  put  the  teachings
into practice. Some people may really want to know in order to  be  able  to
share, teach and help others.

Whatever it is, the point is that one has to find the driving  force,  i.e.,
the motivation that drives oneself. The reason why people get  stuck  or  do
not really achieve much is because they  are  neither  here  nor  there.  It
boils down to them not being clear in their own  mind  of  what  they  want.
This  is  why  one’s  motivation  is  everything.  It  is  what  drives  and
determines the result.

So whenever one is studying or  learning,  it  is  important  to  check  and
adjust one’s motivation. Based on that, as much as possible,  learn.

Chapter One: Explanation of the Benefits of the Mind of Enlightenment

In the root text, it says,

      In the Indian language: Bodhisattvacharyavatara.

This is how the text starts.

In the  Indian  language  means  in  Sanskrit.  The  name  of  the  text  is
Bodhisattvacharyavatara.

The meaning of the title
~ Meaning of “Bodhi” or jang chub
Bodhi is Sanskrit. Bodhi in Tibetan is made up of two  syllables,  jang  and
chub. When we look at  these  words,  they  are  very  profound  and  it  is
important to understand them.

• Jang  is  to  purify  all  the  obscurations,  specifically  referring  to
  purifying  all  the  obscurations  that  prevent  omniscience   (or   all-
  knowingness).
• Chub is to internalise or actualise, i.e., to gather and to  complete  all
  the good qualities.

There is so much that one can understand from and read into the  meaning  of
jang and chub. All this depends on one’s  level  of  education.  When  one’s
scope of learning is limited, one’s understanding of jang is that it  simply
means to purify or get rid of something. But there is so much  more  to  say
about jang. To purify what? To purify obscurations. Then when one goes  into
more details, what kind of obscurations? There are  afflictive  obscurations
and knowledge obscurations. One can go deeper as to what they are.

Chub means to internalise or actualise all the qualities.  For  example,  we
can talk about all the qualities and realisations  of  the  ten  bodhisattva
grounds which for us are quite inconceivable. It is difficult  for  them  to
fit into our limited mind.

The point is that when one’s scope of learning is narrow, there is  only  so
much that one can understand from these words. When one’s scope of  learning
is more extensive, then when one comes across these words, jang chub,  there
is so much more one can read into them. The clearer one’s  understanding  of
their meaning, then when one thinks of enlightenment,  when  one  thinks  of
the Buddha, one will really feel that the Buddha is someone  who  is  really
extraordinary and very special. That kind of understanding arises.

It is widely believed by most people that there is  no  need  to  engage  in
extensive studies. What is the benefit of learning so  much?  I  always  say
this is not  the  case.  This  is  wrong  because  your  scope  of  learning
determines how much you can  understand,  for  example,  understanding  what
jang chub means. Whether we are saying jang chub, enlightenment, the  Buddha
or the object of refuge, we are talking  about  the  same  thing.  The  more
learning you have, this will translate into your increased understanding  of
what jang chub is, i.e., who you are entrusting yourself  to.  Are  you  not
entrusting yourself to the Buddha?

With more education and more learning, when you come across these  words  or
when you think of the Buddha, the feeling is very different. When you  think
of the Buddha, your faith, your experience and your  feeling  will  be  very
different. When you have a good and  complete  understanding  of  what  jang
chub is, then when you think of your object of refuge, the Buddha, you  will
be able to feel that the Buddha is really extraordinary.

When you can understand what jang chub is—all  the  abandonments,  qualities
and realisations—and why jang chub  is  achieved,  i.e.,  for  the  sake  of
sentient beings, then you understand that your object  of  refuge  whom  you
are entrusting yourself to, is like this. It is really  helpful  for  giving
rise to very strong faith and devotion.

~ Meaning of “sattvacharyavatara”
• Sattva in Sanskrit (as in bodhisattva) here refers to the  courageous  one
  who works for the welfare of others.  So then you have bodhisattva.
• Charya means conduct or deeds.
• Avatara means to engage in.
So that is the title of this text.

The translator’s homage
Then you have the verse of homage made by the lotsawas (or  translators)  of
the past:
      Homage to all the buddhas and bodhisattvas

The Tibetan kings of the past instituted a  system  with  regard  to  paying
homage at the beginning of one’s translated work. For example, here  is  the
“Homage to all the buddhas and the bodhisattvas.”  Sometimes  there  is  the
“Homage to the youthful Manjugosha” and sometimes there is  the  “Homage  to
the Omniscient One (the All-knowing One).”  These three different  kinds  of
homage indicate the scriptural collection under which a particular  text  is
categorised. By looking  at  the  homage,  you  will  be  able  to  identify
immediately and easily the relevant scriptural collection.

In this case, the homage is paid to all the buddhas and  bodhisattvas.  This
is an indication that this text falls under the Sutra Pitaka.

|                             |Text belongs to:                   |
|Homage to youthful Manjugosha|Abhidharma Pitaka or knowledge     |
|                             |collection                         |
|Homage to the Omniscient One |Vinaya Pitaka                      |
|Homage to all the buddhas and|Sutra Pitaka or sutra collection   |
|bodhisattvas                 |                                   |


This text is called Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds. Why do we  give  this
text a name? According to Descent into the Lanka  Sutra  (Lankavatara),  the
Buddha said that one affixes a name to the treatise  or  text  in  order  to
eliminate the confusion of  sentient beings, i.e.,  they  will  be  confused
when you do not name the text.

Khen  Rinpoche : The Buddha said that if there is no name then  people  will
be confused. This is why Buddha has to give the name.
                                 ~~~~~~~~~~
Question: Is great compassion a kind  of  fear  of  sentient  beings  taking
rebirth in samsara?

Answer: This is the kind of compassion we have but I think the actual  great
compassion is not like that.  A fully  qualified  great  compassion  is  not
like that. It is the mind that is unable to  bear  the  fact  that  sentient
beings are suffering. It is a mind of  great  courage,  a  very  strong  and
courageous mind. Although one does not  have  any  solution,  one  has  very
strong and powerful courage and strength of mind.

Because it is such a courageous mind, it can induce  the  next  mind,  i.e.,
the mind of wholehearted resolve with the attitude thinking, “I myself  will
do it alone.”  Such an attitude cannot arise when one does not have  a  very
strong courageous mind.

The kind of compassion that we have is the very ordinary  and  limited  kind
of compassion because our compassion is mixed with attachment. Sometimes  we
have the feeling of compassion arising but it is mixed with  attachment  and
it is not free from bias. When we generate  such  ordinary  compassion,  the
mind also becomes quite tight and narrow.  We  feel  uneasy,  disturbed  and
worried. This is the kind of compassion  that  we  have  and  it  is  called
partial or partisan compassion.
The mind of great compassion is a mind that does not  have  preferences  for
some sentient beings and not others. As such there is no prejudice. I  don’t
think such a pure mind of great compassion comes with worries and fears.  In
fact it is a very courageous mind.

Question: We should develop great compassion in order to become a buddha.  I
always have this mental block: even if you become a buddha,  you  are  still
unable to release all sentient beings from their suffering. So  my  question
is: Why  become  a  buddha?  The  buddhas  are  enlightened  but  still  the
suffering of sentient beings go on and on and on.  We  aspire  to  become  a
buddha but when we become a buddha, can we  really  stop  the  suffering  of
sentient beings?

Khen Rinpoche: It looks like you do not want to be enlightened! You want  to
be enlightened or not? You think you can help somebody? You think  that  you
cannot help anyone? I am talking about now. Can you help someone?

(Student’s answer is inaudible).

Khen Rinpoche: If you are better, can you not help  more  people?  When  you
have a good heart or plenty of money, it is possible, is it  not?  Depending
on your qualities, your good heart, your money, you can help ten people,  20
people, 100 people. When  you are enlightened, you can help many people.  So
quickly get enlightened!

Question: Is it true that you have to develop  single-pointed  concentration
in order to develop bodhicitta? If that is the case, why does  the  practice
of concentration come amongst the deeds of the bodhisattva?

Answer: When you look at the Great  Treatises,  it  is  quite  evident,  for
example, in the commentary to Maitreya’s  Abhisamayalankara  that  you  need
calm abiding in order to actualise bodhicitta.

In the  context  of  the  perfections—where  the  perfection  of  meditative
stabilisation precedes the perfection of wisdom—in  the  discussion  of  the
perfection of meditative stabilisation, when we talk about calm abiding,  we
are not talking about calm abiding in general.  This  is  because  the  calm
abiding in the continuum of a bodhisattva is not necessarily a calm  abiding
that is focussed on emptiness.

The discussion of the generation of calm  abiding  in  the  context  of  the
perfections  is  referring  primarily  to  the  calm  abiding  focusing   on
emptiness. Based on that,  one  develops  the  union  of  calm  abiding  and
special insight.

If you remember our discussion in the  previous  module  on  the  paths  and
grounds, the bodhisattvas achieve calm abiding focusing on emptiness on  the
Mahayana great path of accumulation. It is only when  that  bodhisattva  has
achieved the special insight focusing on emptiness that he enters  the  path
of preparation.  Subsequently,  when  that  bodhisattva  realizes  emptiness
directly, he enters the path of seeing.

Interpreted by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme; transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek,  Vivien  Ng
and Aki Yeo; edited by Cecilia Tsong.
-----------------------
[1] The other two types of suffering are (1) the suffering of suffering  and
(2) the suffering of change.
[2] An impermanent phenomenon is so-called because  it  undergoes  momentary
change, i.e., it undergoes change  in  each  and  every  single  moment.  An
impermanent phenomenon can also be referred to as a product. It is called  a
product because it is  a  created  or  produced  phenomenon.  (Second  Basic
Program, Module 2, Lesson 1, page 6).
[3] Kiasu is local slang for being afraid to lose out.

