Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Engaging in the Deeds of a Bodhisattva/BP2 M5 L41 final.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:52:21.693963
================================================================================


Transcript of the teachings by Khen Rinpoche Geshe  Chonyi  on  Engaging  in
the Bodhisattva Deeds, 2014

Root text: Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds by  Shantideva,  translated  by
Toh Sze Gee. Copyright: Toh Sze Gee, 2006; Revised edition, 2014.

Lesson                                                                    41
5 August 2014


Summary of Chapter Six. Homework assignment.
Chapter seven: Verses 7.1 – 7. 10
 • imploring one to exert joyous effort (V. 7.1)
 • Identifying joyous effort (V.7.2a)
 • Identifying the discordant classes of joyous effort (V. 7.2 b, c, d)
 • Abandoning the laziness that relishes the taste of idleness (V. 7.3 –
   V.7.10)


We have finished with the chapter on  patience.  In  essence,  that  chapter
talks about the three types of patience:
1. The patience of accepting suffering
2. The patience that is intent on Dharma
3. The patience that pays no heed to those who cause harm

These are the three types of  patience  to  meditate  on.  You  have  to  be
familiar with the terminology and the divisions and be able to express  them
properly.

HOMEWORK ASSIGNMENT

As a kind of revision exercise, with respect to the patience  that  pays  no
heed to those who cause harm (or disregarding the  harm  done  to  oneself),
there are many verses that talk about  this  particular  type  of  patience.
Read through all those verses and then think about them. From those  verses,
choose two verses that make sense to you, that  affect  you,  touch  you  or
that you find really beneficial.  Then  in  writing,  explain  briefly  your
reasons for choosing these two verses and how they are helpful to you.

Khen Rinpoche: This is homework.  You  must  write  it  down.  Everyone  who
signed up to study in the BP class must do this and pass it back to  me.  If
you have signed up and you want to study, then you must write this down  and
pass it up.

Likewise do the same for the patience  that  accepts  suffering.  There  are
also many verses that talk about that particular form of patience. Pick  two
verses that you really find beneficial for your mind and also briefly  state
the reasons of how they are beneficial for you.

As for the patience that is intent on Dharma, you choose  one  of  the  many
verses that talk about this particular form of patience.   Likewise  explain
why you chose that verse.
The way to do this homework is to read through  the  chapter.  Choosing  the
verses and justifying your choice have  to  be  the  result  of  you  having
thought about them. Therefore you should think about them before you  choose
and then write about them. Please submit your homework in the first week  of
September.

Khen Rinpoche: Don’t just pick out the verses. This is not what I’m  looking
for. This is a type of homework so it is important that you do it.

SUMMARY

Cultivating the patience that pays no heed to those who cause harm (V.  6.35
– V. 51)
During the discussion on the patience that pays no heed to those  who  cause
harm, there was the discussion on our usual reaction to the enemy, those  we
consider to be the enemy and those we consider to be harm-doers.  The  usual
perspective  is  to  look  at  them  as  someone  who  is  totally  bad  and
undesirable. The mind that has such a perspective is a  mind  that  is  very
disturbed, that is not calm and is very unhappy.

In the context of training our mind in practising the Dharma, having such  a
disturbed mind is said to be a big obstacle. It is said that with this  kind
of anger, our roots of virtue are destroyed. So it is very harmful  for  us.


It has been said in the teachings that the sentient beings whom we  consider
to be the enemy or harm-doer have been our mothers  numberless  times.  With
their kindness, they have helped to sustain us in the past for a  very  long
time. If this thought is present and we bring that to mind,  then  there  is
no room to be upset with that person.

Cultivating the patience that accepts suffering (V. 6.12 – V. 6.21)
In our discussion on the patience that accepts suffering, in the context  of
accomplishing virtue, doing something beneficial or  during  the  course  of
our  practice,  there  will  be  times  when  we  experience  all  kinds  of
difficulties, physical hardships and so forth. To some  people,  this  could
be an obstacle in that they get discouraged and give up.

The thing to remember then is that as soon as we take on a body, as soon  as
this body comes into being, the causes and  conditions  for  physical  pain,
tiredness and suffering come into being too.

That is the very nature of our existence,  the  very  nature  of  the  body.
There is nothing much we can do about it. Even if  we  were  to  pray,  “May
this not happen,” our prayers cannot help. That being the case, rather  than
focussing on the pain, we should change the way  we  look  at  suffering  by
looking at its benefits and advantages.

By thinking more expansively, use the situation of the  pain  and  suffering
and see how that situation is actually helpful to  achieving  our  long-term
goals and everlasting happiness. So it is important to view suffering  in  a
positive way especially when suffering arises in the course of the  practice
of accomplishing virtue. If not, then there is  a  possibility  or  tendency
for some people to get disheartened, discouraged and lose hope.  Of  course,
that will become an impediment and an obstacle to the continuation of  one’s
practice.

Lacking faith in the Dharma or lacking  stability  in  one’s  faith  in  the
Dharma is  an obstacle to one’s  Dharma  practice.  In  fact,  that  is  the
biggest obstacle—not having the stable  conviction  in  the  Dharma  is  the
biggest obstacle to practice.

In particular, without the faith of  conviction  in  the  Three  Jewels  and
karma and its effects, it is  quite  difficult  to  do  any  real  practice.
Therefore it  is  absolutely  important  to  continuously  think  about  the
presentation of dependent arising in terms  of  causality  with  respect  to
karma and its effects over and over again until one  gains  some  conviction
and ascertainment.

In particular, one has  to  think  about  subtle  dependent  arising,  i.e.,
everything is dependently designated. One has to  think  about  that  deeply
until one gains conviction in this. Without understanding this, there is  no
way to really cut the root of one’s frustrations,  problems  and  suffering.
When one gets some understanding and develops a stable faith and  conviction
in subtle dependent arising, then I would think that the  patience  that  is
intent on Dharma (or certitude about the teachings) will arise.

We took quite a bit of time to  finish  Chapter  Six.  It  is  an  important
chapter. If you were to distil the essence of Chapter Six, it  is  basically
these three types of patience. The teachings tell us  that  we  should  take
the essence of this human life of freedoms  and  endowments  by  cultivating
and meditating on these three types of patience.

                                 ~~~~~~~~~~

CHAPTER SEVEN: TEACHING JOYOUS EFFORT

Chapter Seven is the chapter on joyous effort (or joyous perseverance).
 • In Chapter One, we looked at the benefits of the mind of enlightenment.
 • Chapter Two is the chapter on confessing negativities.
 •  Chapter  Three  is  the  practice  of  the  preliminary   practices   of
   accumulating merit and purifying negativities. One then adopts bodhicitta
   through  a  ritual.  Here  one  is  striving  to  generate  the  mind  of
   enlightenment that was not generated earlier.
 • Then the next three chapters (Chapters Four to Six) are the  chapters  on
   teaching conscientiousness, guarding  introspection  (or  vigilance)  and
   relying on patience.

After generating the bodhicitta that was not generated  earlier,  one  needs
to prevent one’s bodhicitta (or mind of enlightenment)  that  was  generated
earlier from degenerating. Hence one has to rely on  conscientiousness,  the
cultivation of introspection and the meditation on patience.

But it is insufficient  to  prevent  the  mind  of  enlightenment  that  was
generated from degenerating. It is also important to enhance  that  mind  of
enlightenment that was generated. Hence you have the chapters on  developing
joyous  effort,  concentration  (or  meditative   stabilisation)   and   the
perfection of wisdom.

First, we have the verse that is an exhortation to undertake joyous  effort.



      Verse 7.1
      With patience I should undertake joyous perseverance;
      Enlightenment will dwell in those who strive.
      Just as there is no movement without wind,
      So merit does not occur without joyous perseverance.

During our discussion on the stages of the path  to  enlightenment,  in  the
section on the six perfections, it is stated very clearly that the  practice
of the earlier perfections forms the basis for the practice  of  the  latter
ones. The practice of the latter perfections is very much dependent  on  the
practice of the earlier perfections.

We should think about this, “Why is this the case?” and  see  the  rationale
being it. For example, in the practice  of  the  perfection  of  generosity,
when we practise generosity, we have to give without grasping. The  practice
of generosity is an antidote to attachment. In the practice  of  generosity,
in general, we talk about dedicating or  giving  away  our  body,  roots  of
virtue and possessions. Such giving means giving without  holding  back  and
without grasping. This means that when we are practising  giving  correctly,
the element of grasping or attachment is not there.

Without this adherence, grasping  and  attachment  to  the  body,  roots  of
virtue and possessions, do you not think that  it  would  then  be  so  much
easier to practise ethics (or ethical discipline)? It  is  easier  to  guard
our ethics if we do not have very strong attachment to such things.

Then if we are able to guard our ethics  well,  then  we  will  be  able  to
meditate on patience and find it easier to practise patience.

The person who can really strive in generating joyous effort is someone  who
has a stable and good practice of generosity, ethics and patience. It is  on
the basis of these three perfections that we will be really able  to  strive
in joyous effort.

Here in Verse 7.1, why do we need to  strive  to  cultivate  joyous  effort?
Because the goal of highest enlightenment can only be achieved  if  we  have
joyous effort.

Just as there cannot be any movement without wind, we will not  be  able  to
accumulate the collections of merit and wisdom  without  joyous  effort.  In
order  to  achieve  the  highest  enlightenment,  we  need  to  finish   the
accumulation of the  collections  of  merit  and  wisdom.  So  in  order  to
accumulate the collections of merit and wisdom, we need joyous effort.

Essentially Verse 7.1 is an exhortation  imploring  us  to  practise  joyous
effort. Why?  Because  without  it,  the  highest  enlightenment  cannot  be
achieved. So if you want the highest enlightenment,  then  you  need  joyous
effort.

What exactly then is joyous effort? What is its definition and what  exactly
is its entity?
      Verse 7.2 a
      What is enthusiasm? It is enthusiasm about virtue.


Khen Rinpoche: That’s all. Good night! (Laughter).

      Verse 7.2 b, c, d
      Its discordant classes should be explained.
      They are laziness, adherence to what is negative,
      And despising oneself out of despondency.

What are the discordant classes of joyous effort?  Discordant  classes  mean
the opposite so the discordant class of  joyous  perseverance  is  laziness.
There are three types of laziness:
1. the laziness that relishes the taste of idleness
2. the laziness that clings to unwholesome activities
3. the laziness that is disheartened about virtue

The next verse talks about the first kind of laziness.

      Verse 7.3
      Because of relishing the pleasurable taste of indolence
      And craving based on sleep,
      From not being disillusioned with the suffering of cyclic existence,
      Laziness grows very strong.

 • The laziness that relishes the taste of idleness (also translated as  the
   laziness of procrastination) is  the  typical  laziness  of  just  lazing
   around. If one has this kind of laziness, one does not start on  anything
   virtuous as one derives pleasure from just lazing around. One is attached
   to this state of not doing anything and within that state, one  does  not
   do any virtue or anything beneficial.

   This kind of laziness usually arises due  to  being  distracted  by  many
   things. One of the causes  of  this  form  of  laziness  is  distraction.
   Whatever activity or object one is distracted by,  one  engages  in  that
   activity or focuses on that object. One derives pleasure from and  enjoys
   being distracted in this way. One is then  attached  to  that  particular
   pleasure, which causes laziness. That mind will block one  from  thinking
   of or engaging in virtue.


 • Another cause of this form of laziness is attachment to the  pleasure  of
   sleep. If one is very attached to the pleasure of sleep that will lead to
   this kind of laziness. When  attached  to  the  pleasure  of  sleep,  one
   becomes attached to the bed and pillow. Literally one is glued to the bed
   and pillow.

Khen Rinpoche: So you cannot separate yourself from the bed and pillow!

    • Another cause of this first type of laziness is  the  absence  of  any
      disenchantment with samsara. Samsara is in the nature of suffering but
      one doesn’t see that. With respect to samsaric happiness,  instead  of
      seeing that it  is  in  the  nature  of  suffering,  one  sees  it  as
      pleasurable real happiness and develops an emotional attachment to it.
      That leads to this first kind of laziness that then blocks any  virtue
      from being created.

These are the three causes of the first type of laziness. When this form  of
laziness arises, we become attached to  this  kind  of  laziness.  Based  on
that, we tend to procrastinate doing what is virtuous  and  with  regard  to
our  practice,  we  will  think  “I’ll  do   it   later.”    This   is   how
procrastination comes in.

This particular form of laziness affects all of us here  without  exception.
All of us have it because we are attracted to indolence  and  all  kinds  of
distractions. We are also attached to the pleasure of  sleep.  We  are  also
not sick of samsara. As such, we always procrastinate and postpone  whatever
virtue or practice that can be done. We are all guilty of this. We  are  all
affected by it. This is an important point.

Then what is the solution? How  can  we  turn  things  around?  How  can  we
reverse this situation? The antidotes or remedies are mentioned in the  next
few verses.

While it is important to eradicate the  causes  of  laziness  in  order  for
joyous effort to arise, that alone is not sufficient as you  also  need  the
mind that is intent on the Dharma. You really must want the Dharma and  want
it so much.  If you don’t want the Dharma, if you don’t want  the  practice,
then it is very difficult for joyous effort to arise.

If you want to have joyous effort, you must  really  want  the  Dharma  very
much. In order for you to really want the Dharma very much, first  you  must
be convinced of and know what is in it for you, why you should practise  and
what the benefits are. You must be convinced of that point.

Let us use the learning of this particular  text  as  an  example.   If  you
really want to listen, study and learn this particular text well,  then  you
have to see for yourself what is in it for you and what you  stand  to  gain
from doing so. You have to see that for yourself.

As with so many things we do in life, before we set out to seek whatever  we
are looking for, first we must really want that object. It is only  when  we
see the profit versus the loss, then we understand the  benefits  of  having
that thing. Only then will we do something to seek it out.

It is the same with our Dharma practice. Here we are talking  about  looking
at ways to develop that strong desire for the Dharma. It is  only  when  you
have a very strong thirst for the Dharma—when you really want  it  from  the
depths of your heart—that you will have a strong aspiration for the  Dharma.
In this context, the aspiration is the thought, “This is  something  that  I
must really practise.”

You need to have a strong desire  and  thirst  for  the  Dharma.  That  will
propel you to generate the joyous effort that in turn will be the cause  for
you to seek out your goal and work hard for it until you  achieve  it.  That
means to bring that task, job or practice to  completion  based  on  such  a
heartfelt attitude.

But it does not mean that you have to  bulldoze  your  way  through  without
stopping  until  you  achieve  your  goal.  That  is  where  the  power   of
relinquishment comes in. You  must  know  how  to  rest  and  recuperate  in
between.

The power of relinquishment here means taking the appropriate  rest  at  the
appropriate time. It is a method  to  further  enhance  and  increase  one’s
joyous effort. If one doesn’t know how to apply the power of  relinquishment
or one applies it incorrectly, then instead of it becoming a cause  for  the
enhancement of one’s joyous effort, it becomes the cause  for  one’s  joyous
effort to degenerate.

Are all of us not like that? Just take reading a book  as  an  example.  You
pick up a book  and  in  the  beginning,  you  are  very  excited  and  very
interested in it, thinking, “I’m going to read this book.”

Then you get down to reading the book. You  open  the  book  and  you  read.
Later you feel tired and decide to take a rest.  You  close  the  book.  But
that is it. The book is closed forever. You never look  at  it  again.  This
way of learning or this practice will never get you anywhere.  In  fact,  it
doesn’t contribute at all to joyous effort.

One must have that strong desire or aspiration to carry out the chosen  task
to completion. If one has that kind of attitude, that attitude will also  be
there when one is resting. When one is resting, one will never  forget  what
one has set out to do. With that attitude, that rest will  never  become  an
obstacle to the enhancement of one’s joyous effort.

Another crucial factor for one’s practice in the process of applying  joyous
effort is that one must be far-sighted. Being  far-sighted  means  having  a
long-term view. You need to have an idea of what you are  going  to  do  and
how you are going to do it. You should know, “I need to do this first and  I
must finish it before I  go  on  to  the  next  step  because  this  is  the
foundation for the next step,” and so on and so forth.

You need to have an overview and a long-term view of the tasks  at  hand  so
that you will do them one by one. You  cannot  do  everything  at  the  same
time. If you do that, you will not succeed.

1. You need to be far-sighted and have a long-term view of your goals.
2. You need to have an expansive perspective  in  that  you  must  have  the
   desire to acquire every quality and not just think of the  small  things.
   You must have the courage and the mental space that aspires to  achieving
   all the good qualities.
3. You need to keep  a  steady  pace  in  that  you  should  practise  in  a
   sustained and composed way. This means not doing things in a messy manner
   by wanting to do everything at the same time or doing a little bit  here,
   a little bit there, i.e., not in a steady way.  While  keeping  a  steady
   pace, deep down the mind is engaging in the practices in a very calm  and
   composed manner by applying a continuous flow of joyous effort.

Essentially the remedy to the first type of laziness that  is  presented  in
this text here is the meditation on death and  impermanence.  The  next  few
verses talk about that. I would think that you can  condense  all  of  these
verses into the three roots that constitute  the  meditation  on  death  and
impermanence:
1. Death is certain.
2. The time of death is uncertain.
3. At the time of death, nothing can benefit us except the Dharma.


      Verse 7.4
      Enmeshed in the snare of disturbing conceptions,
      You have entered the snare of birth.
      Why are you still not aware
      That you have gone into the mouth of the Lord of Death?

This verse is talking about the certainty of us dying.

      Verse 7.5
      Do you not see
      That he is systematically slaughtering your species?
      Any craving based on sleep
      Is like a buffalo with a butcher.

This verse is also a reflection on the certainty of us having to die.

      Verse 7.6
      While the Lord of Death is looking,
      Having blocked off every route,
      How can you enjoy eating?
      And thus how can you enjoy sleep?

I don’t think you need an explanation of this  verse.  It  is  quite  pretty
straightforward.

If there is anything that you  don’t  understand,  here  it  is  using  some
examples to illustrate how we are all certain to die. We should apply  these
examples to our own lives meaning that we ourselves are  going  to  die.  By
reflecting on the certainty of our death, we tend to stop the first type  of
laziness.

But what I think is that for all of us,  what  makes  us  procrastinate  and
postpone our practice is the thought in our minds believing that we are  not
going to die soon. If we believe deep-down inside  us  that  we  still  have
some time, that we are not  going  to  die  soon,  then  obviously  we  will
postpone our practice. To counteract that, we  should  reflect  on  how  the
time of our death is uncertain.

      Verse 7.7 a, b
      For as long as death is quickly approaching,
      Then I shall accumulate the collections.

Why do we need to accumulate the collections quickly right now? Because  our
death is coming soon. We have no idea and there is no certainty as  to  when
that will happen. Therefore we should  start  accumulating  the  collections
now.


People may understand that they will have to die one day.  But  due  to  not
really thinking about how their time of death  is  uncertain,  often  people
think that they will do the practice when they are near  the  end  of  their
life. They may even think that they will practise at the time of death.


      Verse 7.7 c, d
      Even if I were to abandon laziness then,
      At that improper time what will be the use?

Here it is saying that the time of death  is  the  wrong  time  to  give  up
laziness.

The advice here is that the practice has to be done when one  is  alive  and
healthy and when all the conditions are there.  Dharma  practice  cannot  be
left just to the time of death. If you have not  done  any  practice  before
and you only want to practise on the day when you will die,  at  that  time,
even if you wanted to practise, you will not be able to do so.

      Verse 7.8
      When this has not been done, when this is initiated,
      And when this is only half done,
      Suddenly the Lord of Death will come.
      And the thought will occur, “Oh no, I’m doomed!”

I guess this verse is related to how the time of  our  death  is  uncertain.
This verse is saying that the Lord of Death will strike us at any  time.  We
could die before we actually get down to doing any practice. Or death  could
happen just after we started the practice or  doing  some  project.  Or  the
Lord of Death could visit us when we are halfway  through  our  practice  or
our project. It is not as if he will visit us at a fixed time. No! He  could
strike at any time. Because of that, this is how this verse  is  related  to
the uncertainty of the time of our death.

By reflecting on the certainty of our death and how our impending  death  is
going to happen to us  soon,  by  remembering  these  points,  we  can  then
reverse the first type of laziness.

      Verse 7.9
      Their faces flowing with tears
      And their eyes red and swollen with sorrow,
      My relatives will finally lose hope
      And I shall behold the faces of the messengers of Yama.

      Verse 7.10
      Tormented by the memory of my negativities
      And hearing the sounds of hell,
      In terror I shall clothe my body in excrement.
      What is the use of such a delirious state?

I guess these two verses are talking about the fact that at the time of  our
death, nothing is of any benefit to us except the Dharma.  At  the  time  of
our death, our loved ones are of no use to us. Our body  is  of  no  benefit
and our possessions are also of no benefit whatsoever.  Essentially  nothing
is of any benefit except the Dharma.

If we are unable to practise while we are still  healthy  and  the  mind  is
still clear, then at the time of death, we will  not  be  able  to  practise
because we will be overwhelmed and tormented by worry, fear and suffering.

The point is that by seeing what is going to happen  to  us,  we  should  be
motivated to abandon such laziness.

Language-wise, this is not a difficult text. The words are  easy  and  there
is nothing that we cannot understand. It is quite straightforward. The  only
thing left for us to do is to sit down, think and reflect on  it  and  apply
what is taught to our own mind.

Here we are talking about  laziness.  Laziness  is  something  that  affects
everybody without exception. Laziness blocks us from engaging in virtue  and
what is beneficial. This is an essential point. We have  to  deal  with  our
laziness. We have to start  engaging  in  virtue.  In  order  to  engage  in
virtue, we have to get down to doing it.

We have to stop our laziness. What other way is there than  to  think  about
some of these points? We have to look at whatever  we  have  studied,  think
about it, reflect on it and then apply it to our lives.

When things are going well in our lives, when we have  everything  and  when
we feel good, Dharma practice doesn’t get done. In fact this is the  biggest
obstacle for us. The biggest obstacles are when life is going  well  and  we
are feeling good. Is it not the case that you do not get any  practice  done
because you are satisfied with your life, thinking that your life  is  good?
We are attached to that situation and that is  really  one  of  the  biggest
obstacles.

The time for practice is when we are  still  healthy  and  in  a  reasonable
physical and mental state. That is the time for practice.  If  the  practice
is done when we are in such a good state,  then  the  practice  will  become
good.


Interpreted by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme; transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek, Aki  Yeo  &
Julia Koh; edited by Cecilia Tsong.




