Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Engaging in the Deeds of a Bodhisattva/HHDLSEA 2014.docx
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:52:13.314211
================================================================================

Day ONE 24 Sept 2014 [from 25 min]
I pay homage to the Gautama who out of compassion taught the holy Dharma to release us from the distorted views. 
Annually we have this teaching for the people from South East Asian countries. We have this kind of discourse every year for the Buddhist from these traditional Buddhist countries.
The essence of the teaching of this verse which the Chinese have recited:
May the three poisons be dispelled 
May the light of wisdom shines
May all the obstacles be overcome and
May we engage in the Bodhisattva practices
The first line “May the three poisons be dispelled” shows that the practitioner in the Indian spiritual tradition see the disruptive emotions as obstacles or enemies. Therefore, we have to practice the foundation of which is morality. On the basis of that one cultivates the single-pointed concentration. And on the basis of that determination one drives to overcome the negative emotion or attachment of the desire realm. Even in the non-Buddhist traditions, they cultivate single-pointed concentration which belongs to the higher plane of existence. 
In Buddhism, ignorance is recognized as the root of all the negative emotions or the disruptive emotions. Therefore, when we say “May the three poisons be dispelled” this is the root of the three poisons. 
With regards to the different philosophical traditions of Buddhism, there are different interpretations of what is reality. Accordingly, there are different interpretations of recognizing what ignorance is. 
In other words, ignorance is said to be overcome only by wisdom which sees reality as it is. Therefore, we have this prayer says ‘May the three poisons be dispelled.’, so you have to increase the light of wisdom cognizing reality and eliminate it. 
Then the line of prayer that says, ‘May all the obstacles be overcome’. With regards of this, those of Pali and Sanskrit traditions have the same practice to make this light of wisdom shine forth. We develop the wisdom realizing selflessness. For that we cultivate single-pointed concentration which is done on the basis of cultivating mindfulness and introspection. In order to cultivate these mindfulness and introspection, we practice heedfulness. Then on the basis of which we practice ethical morality.  Generally speaking, the three trainings of morality, concentration and wisdom are common to both Buddhist and non-Buddhist traditions. The difference between these two traditions is the association of atman (self) theory or an anatman (no self) theory. 
With regard to the altruistic intention or bodhicitta which thinks of benefitting all sentient beings across the expanse of space to overcome their suffering and to serve them. In order to be able to do that practically, unless you have the complete knowledge and you have overcome all the delusions and all the defilements completely within your mind, else it is not possible to help others infinitely and effortlessly. Just as a teacher in a school who needs to be fully knowledgeable in the subject that he/she is teaching, otherwise he/she cannot teach.  So we need to develop the path and to reach the state of enlightenment. For that we need to enter the path of bodhisattva, as the prayer say, ‘May we engage in the Bodhisattva practices’. 
Practice in morality and practice in generosity are something common to all. But in order for the practice of morality and practice of giving to become the perfection of morality and perfection of giving, we need to complement our practices with bodhicitta. Along with it, it should be also helped by the understanding of selflessness or emptiness.  In the Bodhisattvacharyāvatāra, Shantideva goes through these six perfections or paramitas and he also explained about emptiness.
Whenever I meet someone or whenever I give some talk or lecture, I always said “First of all, I am a human being, and one of the seven billion human beings on this earth.” So as human beings we are social animals. Many animals are social animals. So each individual is connected to the society, and that we are dependent on the society itself or community. Whether you are rich or educated and wherever you are, we know that we are interconnected. Today the whole world is economically interconnected. Therefore when we talk about global economy, it has to do with the whole world and we are not concern only for the individual. Regards to the climate change due to global warming, it affect the whole world. The climate change due to global warming does not make any discrimination between religious sects, people, races and so forth. Under these climatic conditions, we are all the same - we suffer together with and also we enjoy together. Therefore it is very important for us to think about the whole humanity and others. So thinking about others, caring about others, or altruism has nothing to do with religion. But if you take care of others, you will automatically be benefitted. Many of the problems that we faced in today’s world are due to human creation.  Since this is due to human creation, we need to overcome it. I usually say “As Buddhist we may pray to the Buddha “May all the sufferings be eliminated”. But what we need to know is that we have to work to eliminate sufferings as Buddha himself actually says “You are your own master. The Buddhas do not wash away the sin of sentient beings nor take away the sufferings of sentient beings, nor do the Buddhas transfer their own realization. The Buddhas only help you by showing the truth that lead to liberation or nirvana.” 
We are in the 21st century today. In the 20th century we have man-made problems like wars, battles etc. Then in the beginning of this 21st century we still face with these man-made problems and some of them were being created in the name of religion. These problems which we have created must be solved by ourselves. Of course we do not voluntarily have the wish to have suffering and problems. We didn’t create them. Although we do not want sufferings, due to our way of thinking and short-sightedness, we engage in the wrong methods that created problems. Take yourself as an example. We need to think about helping others. We do not need to talk about the future lives. As Buddhists, we do not need to talk about Buddhahood. We do not need to think about the Buddha or Sangha or the next life or god or Allah. We just need to think about our life. Since we have created more problems, we are not happier. Therefore we can see that all these problems are created by ourselves as humans.
Even sometimes if there are sufferings or problems that are not related to us directly, still we feel anxious. Future lives are something yet to come. Due to our short-sightedness and narrow-mindedness which are due to our extreme self-centered attitude thinking only about of ourselves, we only focus on our own well-being, and we also extend that to our own family, dear ones and so forth. Because of that we discriminate others and distance others. Then there is creation of problems to others. On one hand, due to this extreme self-centered attitude which thinks only of our self and people on our side, we have lots of problem. In order to avoid or to do away with this short-sightedness, we need to have this holistic idea or outlook seeing that things are dependently originated, and there is nothing independently or objectively existent. The more altruistic you are, your self-centered attitude can be reduced. You can think that other also want happiness and do not want suffering. Then you may be able to direct your mind to work for others more than yourself.  However, it may be difficult to have this holistic attitude or outlook. For this, the Buddha’s teaching on dependent origination is very relevant. 
Under many circumstances and many different factors, you called someone as your enemy. There is no one whom you may call your enemy just because of one factor. Ordinarily we may talk about friends and enemies. What happened here is that we become attached to those whom we considered as our friends and the dear ones, and seeing them as objectively existing friends, then we become attached. On the other hand, we considered others as objectively or independently existing enemies, then we have aversions towards them. But if we are able to see that friends and enemies are relative, and they come about because of conditions, then you will not have that kind of strong grasping at so-called enemies or friends. For example, if you have someone that you really loved so much, and then you heard from someone that he/she has killed somebody. You may not really believe it because you have attachment towards that person as being someone who is totally good. Whereas on the other hand, if you hear about your enemy doing something good to another person, that is something unbelievable because you are focusing on some kind of a solid object to that person you have aversion to. Therefore, because of that solidity that you perceived in the friend or enemy then you will have attachment and aversion. 
I have an old American scientist friend named Aaron Beck. He is a psychiatrist. From his own experience for many years, he said that when we become angry with somebody, he/she looks totally negative. In reality, the negativity that we see in that person is ninety percent of our own mental projection. As a scientist, he have studied people emotions and psychology and helped people with psychiatric problems. So is very clear that our problems are created by our own attachment and aversions and also because of our perception of solidity in the object. 
All sentient beings do not want sufferings and want happiness. Therefore we all have the same right to achieve these goals. We need to think about the seven billion people on this earth. Each and every one of us has this responsibility because we live in this society of human beings. If we could think of helping the whole humanity and we need to have more sense of morality in order to be able to make all sentient beings happy. With this kind of attitude religion alone cannot help. Six billion of the seven billion people are said to be religious. Even among them there are people who are full of aversions and attachment. So those who profess to be religious and indulge in these negative actions are at fault because of not having a strong conviction in the practice of morality and the cultivation of principles. Because we are not really sincere with our own religion that we profess to, it follows that we are not able to practice according to this religion. So in order to help those without religion or non-believers as well as the believers equally, we need to promote secular ethics.
In the West, they sometimes take secularism and atheism to be synonymous. But atheism is opposing god or religion whereas secularism doesn’t have that kind of connotation. India, over three hundred thousand years, has been practicing secular ethics or secularism. Even the Indian constitution is based on secularism. Secularism in India means respecting all religions; not only respecting people who are believers but also the non-believers. So secularism means respecting all the seven billion people. This is important, isn’t it? Whether you are believer or non-believer, if you could think of helping all so that all could be happy, then engaging in the practice of secular ethics will beneficial to all. 
Firstly, as a human-being, I promote secular ethics which covered all the seven billion people on this earth. Secondly, as a Buddhist monk, bhikshu, and religious practitioner, as I have said before, we have the practice of the three trainings. Even in the non-Buddhist tradition they have these three practices - the morality, concentration and wisdom. 
With regard to the religious traditions or the spiritual traditions, the religious faith may have evolved in India first, and of course there also evolved some religious traditions in Egypt and China. With regard to India, the first religious tradition maybe Samkhya, then there are the Vedanta, the Mimamsa and the Vaisheshika. Then 2600 years ago, Mahavira came and then Jainism started. Then around thirty or forty years later after Mahavira, Buddha Shakyamuni came. Then Judaism, Christianity, and Islam came in the Arabian region and in the Middle East.  Perhaps Taoism came before Buddhism. In another words, all these major religious traditions teach the message of love and compassion. Then theistic religion describes God to be the infinite love; whether Islam or Christianity or Judaism. Also in Buddhism, love and compassion is emphasized. In the praise to the Buddha or homage to the Buddha, we say “Out of your compassion, you taught the holy Dharma to absolve all distorted views.”  All the different religious traditions are based on love and compassion. Even when we were born we were able to survive because of love. We are all born from our mother, and under our mother care and love, we survived. After our birth for a few years, at least, our mother, our parents and other relatives have taken care of us and showed us love. Their love is absorbed into our lives too. If you are surrounded by people who are full of love and compassion even the body elements are in balance and your blood pressure will be less. If you are within an environment of love then there is less fear and anxiety. 
Whatever good and excellent facilities you may have, if you are lack of love and compassion, then there is anxiety and fear.  However, if you are surrounded by people who are full of love and compassion then you won’t have fear and anxiety. This is the basis of friendship as well, because friendship is based on trust. For that, we need love and compassion. If you have the sense of competition, then there will be jealousy and then you won’t have the love and compassion. Therefore love and compassion is very important. I always think along these lines and also tell others as well.
The main message of all these religious traditions is love and compassion. In order to promote this love and compassion you need to have the faith in the tradition. So the more faith you have in your God in the theistic tradition, the more you will pay attention to the practice of love and compassion. In accordance to the theistic religion, they said everything is created by God, and God is seen as infinite love. Therefore when the God is infinite love and you are his creation then you have a spark of love of God. For example, when we talk about genes, children have the genes of their parents. Similarly, as God is seen as someone full of love and compassion, therefore you also have some seeds of love and compassion as well. The more you are devoted to God, the more you will emphasize the practice of love and compassion, because God is love. So your faith does help in promoting or advancing your practice of love as well. We can see a lot of Christian practitioners serve the poor community. They see that as the service to the God. So this is about the theistic religions.
We can make two divisions among religions – the theistic and the non-theistic. Within the theistic religion, there are those who also believed in the past and future lives. Then there are also those who also said that after this life they will go either to heaven or hell; and not take birth again and again. Regards to non-theistic religion, there are one part of some Samkhya who said that everything evolves from a primal factor (pradhana in Sanskrit).  There is no creator god as such but everything comes from that primal factor. Within this Samkhya school there is also one which is theistic. What I am talking about is the non-theistic Samkhya School. 
Also within the non-theistic school, there are Buddhism and Jainism. Among these three, there are divisions accepting atman or soul and those who do not. Only Buddhism asserts that there is no independent soul as such. The rest of the religious traditions believe in soul. The Indian non-Buddhist traditions believed in atman. The theory of non-soul or anatman is asserted only in Buddhism.  
Philosophically we see these differences among the religious traditions. Despite of different philosophical views the goal of all these traditions is to promote love. If you are really sincere and serious about your own religious tradition then naturally you will be a compassionate and loving person. So in reality these different philosophical views are meant for producing loving and compassionate people. 
Even before the Buddha came into this world there have been many different religious traditions. Even today we have all the different religious traditions.  So it is not possible to have only one religion in the world. That is not practical as well.  
Within Buddhism there are three vehicles and four philosophical schools of thoughts. Even among the followers of the same teacher - the Buddha - in accordance with the different mental dispositions and inclination, there are different philosophical views. The Buddha has not imposed his final view on everyone who followed him. 
Among the six billion believers in this world, there are different mental dispositions. Accordingly, we need different methods to promote love and compassion. For example, if you have one hundred patients, you cannot give the same medicine to all of them. You need to give whichever medicine that is suitable and appropriate to the different patients who got different sicknesses and diseases. Just as you have to see the kind of sickness or disease that the different patients have and also in accordance with the physiological build-up of the different patients, then you give the medicine accordingly. Similarly, the different spiritual traditions are the medicine for our mental problems. Accordingly, we need different medicines for different psychological problems that we have. So the message of these spiritual traditions is mainly to be kind and loving, so it is possible for us to achieve religious harmony.
In our history, we have accounts of fighting and battles in the name of religion. Even today this is happening. For example in Myanmar, some Buddhists terrorized or caused problems to Muslims. This also happens in Sri Lanka today. Just because of different religious traditions, fighting among each other is very unfortunate. Maybe it is understandable if non-believers fight among themselves. Despite of being aware of the religious belief which teaches about love and compassion, it is quite unfortunate and sad when fighting and more problems are created. 
As a Buddhist bhikshu, I always emphasized and work hard to bring religious harmony. So those of you who are here, firstly, we are all same human being, therefore thinks about secular ethics and think about the happiness of the whole humanity. Secondly, as Buddhist, please be friendly with people of other religious traditions. By understanding our different mental dispositions, other people follow other religious traditions and we follow our tradition. Then respect others. 
Buddhism teaches selflessness. This is something unique to Buddhism, and it is not there in other religious traditions. As I said earlier on this verse:
“You are your own master. The Buddhas do not wash away the sin of sentient beings nor take away the sufferings of sentient beings, nor do the Buddhas transfer their own realization. The Buddhas only help us by showing the truth that lead to liberation or nirvana” 
Our sins cannot be washed away by the Buddhas nor can the Buddhas take away our sufferings which come from sins that we have created. In order to overcome or eliminate our suffering and the causes, the Buddhas cannot share or pass their own realizations to us as if giving a gift. 
Our religious tradition, which is a non-theistic religion, teach the law of causality - if you do something good you will have positive effects and if you do something negative then accordingly you will have negative consequences.  If you create karma or action which causes happiness and happiness is something that is desirable to us, therefore the karma that creates happiness is considered to be positive. The karma that creates suffering is something which we do not desire, therefore the karma that creates suffering is considered to be negative. So whether the karma is positive or negative, it is related to the positive or negative effect. As a Buddhist, we do not talk about creator or god. Therefore if you create positive action then the karma you will have is of positive consequences. Similarly that is the case with negative karma. There is neutral karma as well. Therefore, in order to eliminate or overcome sufferings, we need to reduce or overcome the negative karma and to create more positive karma. In this way, the Buddha is able to show us the path to liberation by showing the truth of causality.
With regards to the teaching of the truth or suchness, there are two levels - the law of causality and on the deeper level, the ultimate reality. Of the two truths, we have the ultimate truth.  
Then we have those who assert the selflessness of phenomena. The Vaibashika and the Sautrantika asserts the selflessness of a person. The Chittamatra and the Madhyamika assert also not only the selflessness of a person but also the selflessness of phenomena. 
How do you consider certain school to be more profound than the others?  We need to use lots of reasoning. So even with regard to the words of the Buddha himself we do not resolve only through the scriptural authorities but also the use logic and reasoning.  The Chittamatra and the Madhyamika use a lot of reasoning. They considered reasoning is more important than just resorting to scriptural authorities. Because of that, Dignaga, a student of Vasubandhu and then also the follower of Dignaga, Dharmakirti, have written texts on Buddhist logic or epistemology. Especially in the Sanskrit tradition, since there is so much emphasis on the importance of using logic and reasoning, text written by Master Nagarjuna use reasoning to establish the selflessness of person and the selflessness of phenomena. Dignaga and Dharmakirti have also written text on logic and on epistemology. 
So the Buddha is said to show us the truth or reality that lead us to the path to liberation. With regard to that reality, there is one which is a provisional one, and then there is ultimate reality or truth as well. 
First, hearing this teaching, reflect on the meaning, and then meditate on that. Then we develop the path within ourselves. By first hearing the teaching from others, you develop understanding. Then based on what you have heard, you need to use reasons to reflect on it over and over again. As Je Tsongkhapa says “Use the fold of reasoning to establish the meaning of what you have heard day and night so that you may be able to draw the conclusion such as “If something is this, it has to be that and so forth””. You can also say that if you assert certain views it actually contradicts your own experience and logic. The logical arguments are based on the principle of functionality and relations, and these are in turn based on the nature. So the fact that certain causes and conditions are related to certain effects is the nature. In this way we have to use reasoning and reflect on whatever we have heard. Just remaining on the level of understanding based on hearing or study itself is not so stable because today you may believe in someone’s reason but tomorrow someone else may have another reason to disprove that and then you follow that person’s reasoning. So without doing analysis yourself, you will not have that kind of firm conviction. 
Through one’s analytical and critical analysis, then you come to some conclusion. If you used that in your practice and actually develop some experiences then you will have a strong conviction in it. Then even if someone might comes along and say otherwise you will not be wavered from that belief or conviction. So whatever conviction you have found regard to some points, you need to actually apply that over and over again to become your own experience. For example, even athletes need to train themselves over and over again for weeks, months, or years, and once they are well-trained, they actually become more and more acquainted to the different exercises to build up their body, and become adapted to whatsoever they need to do. Similarly, in the case with our mind, in order to have experience based on meditation you need to have the conviction or some experiences based on your reflection. For that, you need to base on the understanding that is drawn from listening to the teachings. Therefore the Buddha has said, “Oh! Bhikshus and scholars, just as gold is tested by rubbing, cutting and burning, likewise you should examine my teaching, not believing it out of devotion to me.”  
Therefore with regards to the teaching of the Buddha, Master Nagarjuna and the others have actually used logic to establish whether the Buddha’s teachings are definitive or provisional. Those teachings which cannot be taken literally are said to be provisional. When these teachings are tested or examined through logic and reasoning and if they go against the reasoning then they are said to be provisional.  You cannot dictate them to be definitive. 
For example, in the case of the Chittamatra, the Samdhinirmochana Sutra is the definitive teaching of the Buddha whereas, from the point of view of Madhyamika, such sutra is provisional. In Chandrakirti’s Madhyamakavatara, he says that Lankavatara Sutra and so forth are said to be provisional teachings because of using reasoning. 
Although certain philosophical traditions or schools may say that certain teachings or sutras are definitive but if these teachings go against reasoning then we cannot actually assert them as being definitive; they have to be provisional. Master Nagarjuna and others, in the Sanskrit tradition in particular the Madhyamika tradition, use reasoning to establish whether the sutras or teachings of the Buddha are definitive or provisional. For example, different measurements are established by science through their investigation, experiment so forth, and this is something empirical to us. We must accept what is empirical.  Je Tsongkhapa says: “If you accept things which are against reasoning and logic, then you cannot be an authoritative and reliable person.” Master Vasubandhu in his Abidharmakosha mentioned certain Buddhist cosmology, for example, the distance of moon and sun from the earth and also the size of the sun and moon and so forth but cannot be taken literally because they are against our experience. So we should not be too surprised when someone rejecting the teaching that is mentioned in Abidharmakosha. The emphasis is using logic and reasoning and doing analysis in the teachings of the Buddha. So Buddhadharma is about using our logic and reasoning; reflecting on the teachings and going about with the practice. 
In the Vinaya Sutra, there are praises like: “Just as the sun open the state of the lotus, likewise the words of the Buddha illuminates our mind.” The teaching of the Buddha leads us to enlightenment. The words of the Buddha have the ability to open our wisdom. I am not saying that the Buddha’s teaching is amazing or the best teachings. I always say that whichever religious tradition is the most effective for that individual, then that religion is the best. We cannot say one medicine is the best of all. In relation to certain sickness or disease, we may say this medicine is best for this sickness or disease. We cannot just pick up one religion and say “This is the best one.” For the Christian, Christianity is the best religion, and for the Muslim, Islam is the best religion. For the non-Buddhist tradition practitioners, the idea or the concept of atman is the best, but anatman will not work for him/her. In some text it is said that someone who is not spiritually matured cannot benefit from the teaching of selflessness. For such a person, maybe the teaching on self i.e. saying that there is an atman is more appropriate. 
The Buddha himself says “There is a person who is the carrier of the load and the five aggregates are the load.” To some of the disciples of Buddha, he has taught such, and he taught this in accordance with the mental disposition of that disciple. For example, if you have a food which is very hard and a person without teeth or good teeth cannot actually chew it well. However, someone who has very strong teeth may able to take such a hard food. For the other one who has no teeth, you cannot force that person to eat what you like. So whichever is most effective, that religious tradition is the best for that particular person. 
Having studied the different Buddhist philosophical traditions in the Nalanda tradition I can accept the difference in the mental disposition of the different religious traditions followers. I have studied the different philosophical schools given the explanation in Tarkajvala (Blaze of Reasoning) by Bhaviveka. I have studied the philosophical schools which have the view of some kind of an absolute being created and so forth. Therefore those who have the mental disposition to actually follow such tradition, then this kind of ideas is the best for them. 
Traditionally South East Asian countries are Buddhist countries. China today is a communist country but traditionally China is a Buddhist country. As at today, we have four to five hundred millions Buddhist in China. Traditionally people from South East Asian regions are Buddhist. The West traditionally is a Christian area, the Arab region traditionally is the followers of Islam, and Israel and so forth follows Judaism.  There are maybe over less than one hundred thousand followers of Zoroastrian and the Parsi are living in Mumbai. They are able to live in India very peacefully without any fear and are able to follow their own religious tradition. In the west, Christian is more appropriate and suitable for the Westerner. For us, we are traditionally Buddhist and Buddhism is our own cherished heritage.  
The Buddha gave many teachings and was compiled in Pali. Today, countries such as Burma, Thailand, Cambodia, Sri Lanka and so forth are the followers of the Pali tradition. They have very good vinaya; monastic code of discipline and practice.  The Tibetan following the Mulasarvastivada Vinaya tradition also has the same vinaya tradition, except there are minor differences in the number of vows. We have the same vinaya. The sutra is also common. When comes to Abhidharma, there is upper or lower Abhidharma. In the upper Abhidharma tradition, both actually emphasized the teachings of selflessness, anatman theory. In the Sanskrit tradition, we also come across the selflessness of person and selflessness of phenomena. So there are some differences in Abhidharma. Basically we have the common teaching. The teaching on The Four Noble Truths is something that the Buddha taught in public. But when come to the Perfection of Wisdom teaching, they are not taught publicly. As we read in the Heart Sutra, for example, there are mentioned of the asuras, gandharvas, gods and so forth. So among the audiences of the Buddha are not only humans but non-humans. The Heart Sutra is a dialogue between Avalokiteshvara and Shariputra. This was not taught publicly. Therefore some people say that Mahayana teachings like these are not the teachings of the Buddha. Maitreya, Nagarjuna and also Bhaviveka have actually argued that Mahayana is being the teaching of the Buddha himself. In Shantideva’s text he also argued that Mahayana is being the teachings of the Buddha. In the past, there were people say that Mahayana is not the teachings of the Buddha, and even today, we have people who say that Mahayana is not the teachings of the Buddha, particularly, there are people who say the Mahayana Tantra is not the teachings of the Buddha. In the Sanskrit tradition it was quite clear that most of these teachings are not taught publicly. When comes to Tantra, they were not taught in public but have been taught to individual when they are able to have an access to pure vision. In our tradition, we have the extensive lineage and the profound lineage. And then there is the lineage of the profound lineage of blessing.  
When comes to tantra, there are differences also. Tantra, for example, Kalachakra is slightly different from the other tantric teachings. The blessing lineage may have done with tantric practices, and it is not something that is separate from the other two traditions. We cannot say that the extensive practice lineage and the profound view lineage are not related to the blessing lineage at all. So without bodhicitta and the understanding of emptiness you cannot have the practice of the blessing lineage.  So to me, you may have to consider these different traditions of the blessing lineage, the extensive practice lineage and the profound lineage. 
All these traditions have the vinaya, the monastic discipline, and the moral discipline as the basis or the foundation to develop concentration and the wisdom. On top of that, we have the tantric practice where we do deity yoga practice. 
In China, Buddhism spread with the help of Master Hsuan Tsang.  Hsuan Tsang had followed the Silk Road and there were other masters might have taken another route. There is a story that Hsuan Tsang actually was able to meet Nagabodhi. He studied in Nalanda monastic institution and spread Buddhism to China during the Tang Dynasty. Before Buddhism came to Tibet, China already had Buddhism. We have a lot of teachings translated into Chinese such as Master Nagarjuna’s Mulamadhyamakakarika and also Chandrakirti’s Madhyamakavatara and also all the commentaries by Chandrakirti himself.  I don’t know whether Hsuan Tsang had actually met with the Nagabodhi because Nagabodhi was a Madhyamika philosopher. Dhamnapala was also a master from Nalanda and he actually commented on the four hundred verses and he gotten with interpretative to the Chittamatra view. Hsuan Tsang seems to have met with some Chittamatra’s masters, therefore he spread the Chittamatra philosophical tradition in China. From China, it spreads to Vietnam, Korea and Japan. So, all these countries also follow The Perfection of Wisdom Sutra. Then we have the Sanskrit tradition spreading into Tibet, and from there to Mongolia and other areas. So we have owned the completed treatises of the different philosophical traditions of India in Tibet. With the regards to epistemological text, one text of Master Dignaga was translated into Chinese but not others like Dharmakirti’s Seven Treatises on Valid Cognition. And also Dignaga’s Pramana-samuccaya and so forth are not translated in Chinese. We have all these epistemological texts translated to Tibetan.  In the thirteen century, Sakya Pandita wrote his own treatise called The Treasury of Logic and Valid Cognition and Chapa Chokyi Senge  also spread this study of logic and valid cognition and debate.
There may be over a thousand languages in the world but using ascertain logical languages saying “If something were A does not necessarily be B so forth” maybe only found in Tibetan language.  We also have the different philosophical thoughts of the different philosophical schools like Sautrantika so forth. So based on the Indian text, we have the Tibetan master who have actually made distinction among the different philosophical traditions like Vaibashika, Sautrantika and so forth. Ubalosel??? may be one of the earliest person writing the philosophical text called The Different Philosophical Systems or Tenets. Later there were many other texts on tenets.  Those texts are not in Chinese. Perhaps you should translate into your language so that you have broader understanding and the insight of the Buddha’s teachings. So please keep that in mind. 
This is about the teachings of the other religious traditions of the world and also the teachings of the Buddha spread in the world. In Tibet, since the seven century when King Songtsan Gampo of Tibet married the princesses of Nepal and China, perhaps there maybe some influence of Buddhism on the Tibetan King and the Tibetans because they brought different statues of Buddha Shakyamuni to Tibet. 
Then from the eighth century, Master Shantarakshita came to Tibet at the invitation of the Tibetan King, Trisong Detsen. With his help, Samye Monastery was built and then he also took the responsibility of teaching Buddhadharma and translating Buddhadharma into Tibetan. He was a great scholar. You can see his scholarship if you read his book like Madhyamakālamkāra (Ornament of the Middle Way) and also Satyadvayavibhangapanjika??? (The Difficult Points), which are texts from logic and epistemology. Then his own student Kamalashila came to Tibet as well. He was also a great scholar. He can be known from his own writings such as Illumination of the Middle and also his Tattvasamgrahapanjika, commentary to his own teacher Shantarakshita’s Tattvasamgraha. Shantarakshita established this tradition of study the teachings of the Buddha in Tibet. Then Kamalashila was also invited to Tibet around the ninth century. Therefore I always said that the Tibetans Buddhist tradition is in the lineage of Nalanda tradition. Initially in the eighth century, there were a lot of obstacles to establish Buddhism on the Tibetan soil and Master Padmasambhava helped in overcoming them. Therefore in the Tibet history these three personalities are known as Khenlo TriSong - Khenpo mean the abbot or Shantarakshita, Lopen means the Master with reference to Guru Padmasambhava who gave Tantric teachings to the very few selected disciples such as the King and the ministers. 
(After Break)
Regards to Buddhism, we have Pali tradition and Sanskrit tradition. If we make these into two divisions, the common teachings to all the followers of the Buddha is the teaching on the Four Noble Truths. 
Impermanence, suffering, emptiness and selflessness, what it show is that whatever comes to causes disintegrates. Therefore they are impermanent. Maybe this is with reference to the coarser level of impermanence. It is said that whatever has come through causes is impermanent and whatever has come through contaminated causes is in the nature of suffering. All contaminated things are in suffering. Within suffering there is the suffering of suffering; for experiences that we known as painful. Then there is changeable suffering and pervasive experiential condition suffering. 
With regards to emptiness here, we refer to the absence of permanence single self which is asserted by the non-Buddhist tradition. We also understand in term of the absence of person, substantial existence autonomous person or being. When Sautrantika, particularly the Sautrantika Following Reason, Chittamatra and Madhyamaka explain about impermanence, they do so in terms of the subtle impermanence, whereas Vaibashika talk about something arising from causes - there is arisen, abidance and disintegration. Other says that whatever has come through causes and conditions, they are bound to disintegrate.  This disintegration of thing does not need a third factor to cause that but the moment something comes into existence, they also subject to disintegration because of that cause. Since things are brought about through causes and conditions, they are subject to their cause. The physical aggregates that we have are the results of karma and its root is ignorance. Therefore a person is absence of permanent, autonomous, single self or atman.
According to the Madhyamaka tradition of master Nagarjuna, impermanence, suffering and so forth can be understood in term of the grosser and the subtler levels. With regards to cause, things come about through causes and not without cause, and it is not something likes the movement of the mind of creator like Ishvara and so forth. 
With regards to the suffering, for example, the Noble Truth of the suffering, is said to have come through causes. Sufferings also come under the basis of condition. In Asanga’s Abhidharmasamuccaya, it mentioned three conditions: unwavering condition, potential condition and impermanent condition. There may be different interpretation in different text.
With regards to the origin of suffering, it has these four characteristics of cause, condition and so forth. 
With regards to the cessation, it has the four attributes of cessation; which means stopping the cause of suffering through the application of antidotes. Once you have applied the antidotes, the cause of the suffering is completely removed. It is not like the suffering that will not arise because the condition is not right there but the antidote has actually uprooted it. Therefore the cessation is also called peaceful. 
Once you apply the antidotes to the cause of the suffering and once the root cause – ignorance - is removed then you will not have suffering anymore after that. Therefore, cessation is also called the excellent, the renunciation or the definitive emergence. 
With regards to the path, it is called the path; which is also awareness with reference to the understanding or gaining the insight into the truth or suchness. So cessation is brought about through the application of the path, therefore the path is also called the application. It is also being called the factor that leads to the definitive emergence. 
When you actually elaborate on the path, then there are the 37 factors of enlightenment such as the four establishments of mindfulness: the mindfulness of body, mind, feeling and mental phenomena. 
On the basis of these four mindfulnesses you have the cultivation of renunciation, cultivating insight into selflessness, insight into the emptiness and so forth.  Since suffering come through the suffering emotions which are in turn rooted in our ignorance, therefore, we need to eradicate this ignorance. Therefore, once you understand this causal connection between our suffering and ignorance then we have the wish to overcome the suffering and its causes.  
When you see the possibilities of overcoming the suffering by eliminating the cause of suffering –ignorance- through the application of the antidote then you will have the earnest wish or aspiration to apply the teaching within oneself to reach the nirvana. Many of us just take it for granted of what we hear about the teachings. We did not really do much investigation into the teachings. Therefore, we are not able to gain true conviction in the teachings of the Buddha. So it is difficult to develop what it known as the four perfect abandonments or exertions. Once you have developed some sense of conviction of the teachings of the Buddha then you will have this conviction into the four exertions. Then you will put effort into developing the path. As you develop more and more experience, it becomes more and more clear. This clarity is gained through your investigation and analysis. Your ability to do critical analysis, and the critical examination becomes clearer and clearer. Therefore you also develop the wisdom or intelligent which are extensive, clear, profound and swift. When you have gained more and more clarity and more powerful insight then you develop the rest of the 37 practices such as the five forces, five faculties, eightfold noble path and the sevenfold path to liberation. In this way you develop the path progressively as in the mantra of the Heart Sutra:
GATE GATE PARAGATE PARASAMGATE BODHI SVAHA
Once you have developed true renunciation or the first path within your own particular path that you are following then you have the path of accumulation. When you have developed this understanding or vipassana into selflessness, within your path you enter into true meditation, that you have developed the path of preparation. Once you developed the insight into emptiness/selflessness directly you have entered into the path of seeing. You then push yourself further in that insight or the realization of selflessness/emptiness directly and acquaint yourself with this path then you are in the path of meditation. Finally, you attain enlightenment. 
First GATE refers to the path of accumulation. 
Second GATE refers to the path of preparation.
PARAGATE refers to the path of seeing;
PARASAMGATE refers to the path of meditation.
BODHI means enlightenment.
The Tibetan of BODHI is JANGCHUB. 
JANG means purify all negativities, all dissatisfied emotions and their stains.
CHUB means to be full of knowledge of everything. 
To gain that state of Jangchub or enlightenment, we have to see whether this is possibility in general and particularly whether it is possible for an individual to attain that goal. Once you actually see that there is a possibility to attain the goal of enlightenment for yourself then you will have the aspiration to travel on the path. Without actually understanding what enlightenment or Jangchub is, but merely believing that there is something called enlightenment or Buddhahood, you will not have the determination to reach that through understanding and logic. 
We do not want suffering. What we want is happiness. This is related to the coarser causality. The causes of suffering have to be checked whether they are in the intrinsic nature of mind or not. The basic intrinsic nature of the mind is clarity and clear light. The Tathagatagarbha Sutra teaches the subject of the mind that we have is temporary contaminated by the different defilements whereas its intrinsic/innate nature, defilements are not in the nature of the mind. Therefore the Tathgatagarbha Sutra is the main teaching on the clear light of the mind.
In the second turning of the wheel of the Dharma, what the Perfection Wisdom sutra emphasizes is emptiness. When you attain enlightenment, you overcome the stains or defilements that are in your mind. When the defilements are removed completely then you have cessation within yourself. For that, fundamentally what you have to understand also is that the nature of the mind is empty of independently existence. On the basis of this understanding of the empty nature of the mind you also will be able to see that because the nature of the mind is clarity and clear light therefore the negative emotions and so forth can be overcome completely. 
In the teaching of theSamdhinirmocana Sutra, although it is said that the second turning of the wheel of the Dharma, the Prajnaparamita Sutra is said to be interpretable. This is only for the purpose of those that are not able to take this teaching of the Prajnaparamita Sutra literally. The Tathagatagarbha Sutra is based on the Mahayana Uttaratantra written by Maitreya. He goes through the nature of the mind with the nine analogies. The second turning of the wheel of the Dharma seems to emphasize on the empty nature of the mind. Then the third turning of the wheel of the Dharma seems to be emphasizing on the path to enlightenment.
When we go into the subtle degree of the subtlety of the mind itself, we have the teaching of the tantra in which it mentioned the gross and subtle degree of the mind. We can see the progression along the path or this teaching of the sutra and tantra is like the progression along the classes of the schools. Without the foundation of lower classes, we cannot jump to the higher classes. Likewise, without the foundation of the basic teachings in the Sutrayana we cannot enter into the tantric practices as such. In Tibetan society we do find people talking about the practices but without the understanding and experience of the Sutrayana teachings, then it is not possible to have the practices or the experiences taught in tantra. Master  ??? say: “We should not actually wasting the sandalwood by burning it and turning it into coal.” If you look at our society, we do see people actually do some practices in order to have long life, to overcome sickness and so forth but the teaching of the Buddha is not for this trivial kind of achievement. We cannot just pray to have the understanding and the insight of the teachings of the Buddha. I always say that we have to become the 21st century Buddhists. Although the teaching itself is not a teaching for a blind faith but the way we actually carry out the teachings in our life is as if it is for the blind faith. In the Chinese tradition, it has the tradition of saying “Amituofo, Amituofo,” so blind faith is not sufficient. We must engage in the study of the dharma. 
We have been exile for 55 years in India. For many years I have been encouraging people to study the classic philosophical texts. Today, we even have nuns who are now on the verge of becoming geshema (female geshe).  If you could pay more attention to the study of the dharma then you would also have to study the logic and psychology in the teachings of the Buddha. You can even use it for those who are non-believers, and connects this with secular ethics that I have mentioned earlier. 
In the Prajnaparamita Sutra, the Perfection of Wisdom Sutra, we have six perfections. If we add four more perfections, such as the perfection of skillful means and so forth, then we have ten of them and in which we study or learn about the paths and the grounds. At the resultant stage of Buddhahood, the Buddha’s power, the four fearlessnesses and so forth are also studied. This is a broad structure of Buddhism. 
We have the three turning of the wheels of the dharma, beginning with the teachings of the Four Noble Truths, which is a frame work for the teachings of the Buddha. As I mentioned earlier, we have the extensive practice lineage which actually practice the progression along the path as taught in the Prajnaparamita Sutra. Even in the Heart Sutra, which is a very short text, show the paths such as the path of accumulation, path of preparation, path of seeing, path of meditation and so forth. Even in the Heart Sutra, we come across the five aggregates, the source of consciousness, the five elements and so forth and also the paths and the resultant stage of the Buddha such as the powers of the Buddha and so forth. What is taught explicitly in this Perfection of Wisdom teaching is emptiness. The path system is taught implicitly. Based on the understanding of emptiness, what kind of path you develop within yourself and how you progress along the paths is taught in the Prajnaparamita Sutra. So, implicit content in the Prajnaparamita Sutra is brought out explicitly in the extensive lineage of practice. The profound lineage of the path is taught explicitly in the Prajnaparamita Sutra emptiness. Within the practice of the paths we have the equalizing and exchanging self and others; which mainly based on logic and reasoning.  Master Nagarjuna also teaches it in his text. In this, what is being taught is developing the idea of equality of all sentient beings and then develops bodhicitta. 
Then there is the great lineage of the practice of blessing. For this practice of bodhicitta, we have the Bodhisattvacharyāvatāra (A Guide of the Bodhisattva’s Way of Life) and Siksasamuccaya by master Shantideva. He wrote it in the Nalanda Monastery Institution and for some reasons he had left that institution. In the beginning of the text, it is mentioned that you should also study the Siksasamuccaya . Historically, when Shantideva was asked where this text was, Shantideva said that it was on the beam in his room. It is very clear that these two texts - the Bodhisattvacharyāvatāra and Siksasamuccaya -were written by the same master because if you go through these two texts, you will see that what is not covered extensively in one’s text is covered extensively in other and vice versa. In Siksasamuccaya, master Shantideva actually draws quotations from many sutras, and it is very helpful to understand the sutra sources for our practices. I have been able to revive the lineage or the transmission of the two texts which have declined for some times. 
We have gone through the eighth chapter before. I was told that we didn’t have the explanation of the seventh chapter, and they requested me to go through the seventh chapter.
(Reference Text:  A Guide of the Bodhisattva’s Way of Life by Stephen Batchelor)
Verse 7.1
Having patience I should develop enthusiasm;
For Awakening will dwell only in those who exert themselves.
Just as there is no movement without wind,
So merit does not occur without enthusiasm 
This text A Guide of the Bodhisattva’s Way of Life teaches the practices of bodhisattvas. The whole of this text can be summarized into these three – the preliminary practices, the actual path and the resultant effects. 
First we have the benefits of the bodhicitta, then confession, embracing bodhicitta, the practice of patience, conscientiousness and alertness (or vigilance or introspection) which purifies the practice of morality. 
From the Chapter Four onwards, it covers the six perfections. 
Chapter Six is patience, and within which there is a patience of accepting suffering willingly and then also patience on the forbearance of the teachings on suchness. 
What we need is not just the understanding of the teachings but to have some taste of the teachings so that we will actually put effort in cultivating the path. While engaging in the path you may face problem. In such cases you should show forbearance, and also forbearance to those who cause trouble. Then you will develop enthusiasm. Enthusiasm cannot come through imposition, so no one can actually make us oblige to practice the dharma. It has to come on voluntary basis and willingness must be there on our part. 
During our childhood, there may be some force when we are studying in school and we didn’t really have much enthusiasm. As we grow up and able to think more, then we feel like studying. If someone has given you some obligation to study, then it may not be so effective. 
Somebody has told me that when Tsenshab Serkong Rinpoche was reciting text from memory in front of his teacher, and whenever he could not recite from memory and because his eyes were good, he could read the text which was placed on his teacher’s table by his teacher. If you give some thought to the teachings and actually put them into practice then you will be able to put some effort. 
I usually say Chinese people are hardworking. Wherever they are and in whichever countries, they will always setup some Chinatown. Even in this life, we persevere and achieve things in life, similarly, when it comes to attain realization and experiences within our mind, we can achieve it through effort and hard work. However, for us, we leave the responsibilities of developing our realization to the Buddhas, and that won’t work. 
What is enthusiasm? It is finding joy and what is wholesome. Harming other people and causing problem for them is not considered as enthusiasm or joyous effort. All the efforts that we put are not joyous effort. In order for the effort to be joyous effort, we need to know the opposing factors. 
What we need to overcome is laziness. We are so engrossed in material development and material things such as engrossing in watching television or watching some sports.  Also when you take alcohol, you use your sensory perceptions to smell it. There is an also sensual pleasure or sex as well. We are more or less attracted to the sensual objects and sensual experiences. The existing modern education system is not adequate. Irrespective to whether you are believer or non-believer, we should include some sort of education for internal values which is based on faith. For example, there are so many different faiths in India. If modern education is based on faith, then what is faith?  It is difficult in multi-religious country. Furthermore, there is no way to educate the non-believers. The only thing is the secular education - the moral ethics. 
The way we live our life seems to be related to this laziness. Then there is also the laziness where we are attached to the inferior things. Then there is also the laziness where we put ourselves down .i.e. low self-esteem. I usually say that Buddhism is not to scare people away. I usually tell story that had happened in Tibet. For those who are new, maybe this is a new story. In Tibet, there was a monastery. Someone went to the monastery to see the abbot of the monastery. When he arrived at the monastery the abbot was not in. The visitor said that he wanted to see the abbot and asked where the abbot has gone. The person in the monastery said that the abbot has gone to scare people in the town. This is not totally wrong because when many teachers give teaching to the people in the town, they say “You have to make offerings to the lama. If you go against the lama’s words then you will go to hell.” That is not the way that Buddhism should be introduced to frighten people. We actually have to make people feel delighted by talking about enlightenment. Even in term of attaining liberation, when we refer to the four attributes of cessation, it must give delight in our heart. We must not make the practice of Buddhism based on fear. I know of somebody who actually develops some imbalanced rlung energy in the body. I asked him why that has happened. He said because he has meditated on impermanence. Actually that should not be the result. When we introduce Buddhism, we have to introduce the great enlightenment or the omniscience state of Buddhahood. With that understanding of the goal that we have to reach then we lead people to the meditation of impermanence and death and the other teachings on Lamrim. We should have the confidence, willingness and voluntarily to engage in the path. 
So enthusiasm is an opposing factor to these three types of laziness: laziness (of inactivity), attraction to what is harmfulness and despising oneself out of despondency. 
Verse 7.2
What is enthusiasm? It is finding joy in what is wholesome.
Its opposing factors are explained
As laziness, attraction to what is bad
And despising oneself out of despondency
Verse 7.3
Because of attachment to the pleasurable taste of idleness. 
Because of craving for sleep
And because of having no disillusion with the misery of cyclic existence,
Laziness grows very strong.
Verse 7.4 (a)
Enmeshed in the snare of disturbing conceptions,
We have clinging and attachment to the sensual objects such as beautiful forms, interesting sounds and the taste, texture, and so forth. Because of attachment on these different things we become averse to those who seem to hindering our pleasure. Usually when we see people who are full of love and hate emotions, we consider them to be quite successfully and efficient in life. This is how our society seems to be going about with their business.
Verse 7.4
Enmeshed in the snare of disturbing conceptions,
I have entered the snare of birth.
Why am I still not aware
That I live in the mouth of the Lord of Death?
Verse 7.5
Do I not see
That he is systematically slaughtering my species?
Whoever remains soundly asleep
(Surely behaves) like a buffalo with a butcher
When death befalls upon us, we lose our senses. The senses are weakening, and we are not able to function properly. Regarding myself, of course, I have come to an age at the stage of weakening of the senses. But because of my training since childhood I am still quite clear in my mind.
Verse 7.6
When having blocked off every (escape) route
The lord of death is looking (for someone to kill),
How can I enjoy eating?
And likewise how can I enjoy sleep?
When death befalls upon us, we have to leave everything behind whether it is food or works and so forth. As said by Pabongkhapa Rinpoche and Guntang Rinpoche that these worldly things or works have no end. As you do, the number of works increases. Therefore is it not better to leave everything at once?
Verse 7.7
For as long as death is actually approaching
Then I shall accumulate merits
Even if I then put a stop to laziness,
What will be the use? That is not the time!
The end of birth is death. At the most we may live a hundred years, and to live a hundred and twenty and thirty years, it is almost impossible. So death is uncertain as it is inevitable. Many of the causes and factors that help us to live can become causes of death. When you die, nothing will help - not money nor wealth, not the dear one or family, not your name or fame. What will help are whatever virtuous practices that you have done. Everyone knows that this body is left behind, and the body ceases. The more acquaintances you have make on the basis of this gross or coarse state of mind, you will also able to leave some imprints on the subtle mind. Therefore, the subtle mind is the one which goes from one life to the next. So whatever imprints you has left on your mind through studying or hearing the teachings, reflecting and meditation, it will be there in the next life.
We can even see in children how there are certain imprints manifest in their life. We can even see the different happening to the twins at the time of their death. Even people of the same parentage are different. As we grow up, we are influenced by our environment, by people, other circumstances and so forth. It is quite clear and more dormant in the early childhood. There are people in Tibetan society who can remember their past lives when they are at the age of three, four, five, but after that it seems that the memory of the past life diminishes. This shows that the imprints left on our subtle mind has some effects in this life as well. Our dear one, love one, our enemies, name, fame, wealth, honor and so forth will not help at the time of death. The eight worldly conditions - become happy when you gain something, become unhappy when you lose something, become happy when you have honor, become unhappy when you lose them and so forth will not help at the time of death. 
We all know that we are going to die. So when you look from that perspective, all the wealth that you have give you more fear and worries. Also you will be separated from your near and dear one, love one. If you have left some positive imprints on your mind, even if you are separated from this body at the time of death, they will help you.  Sometimes some people have some visions of lower realm at the time of death and they become very unhappy and worry.
Verse 7.10
Tormented by the memory of my evils
And hearing the sounds of hell,
In terror I shall clothe my body in excrement.
What virture can I do in such a delirious state?
Verse 7.13
Much harm befalls those with little forbearance
And those who want results without making any effort.
While clasped by death they shall cry like the gods,
Oh no, I am overcome by misery!”
As said in verse 7.13: Much harm befalls those with little forbearance. I have met people who have survived the Second World War in Japan, and they are really strong people because they have gone through much suffering, whereas the new generations are not that strong. 
We will die.  It is uncertain when death will come. With this kind of human body that we have found in this life, we have a very powerful intelligence and this should be used to go across the ocean of suffering.  Human has this very unique intelligence. Just to survive one’s own body, even the animal is able to do in this life. To be able to search for their own food, the animals use their five senses very well. But if we as human also remain likes the animals using only our sensory faculties and not our intelligence, which are unique, then we do not make ourselves worthwhile for being a human. Even we may not have the different needs in this life, we can still live happily by using our mind. 
Once I was in the monastery in Monsela in Spain, I was told that there was a monk who actually lived up in a hill as a hermit for five years. Then he came to see me. I asked him what he was doing during those five years as a hermit living with very little provisions, and not even having tea but poor quality of food. He said he was meditating on love and compassion. When he said that, there was a very special facial expression and twinkling in the eyes. He gave up everything and all the sensual objects. He did not have proper food. There was no entertainment around, no music and so forth but just meditating on love and compassion. He has a very special glow in his face.
As human beings, using this boat of human body and our intelligence, we should be able to make some difference from the animals. If we live like animals then it will be a great mistake. 
Earlier the text mentions about the laziness of attraction to harmful objects and despising oneself. Here, in order to overcome this disheartened feeling, the text goes through the practice of equaling and exchanging self and others.
Verse 7.16
Without indulging in despondency,
I should gather the supports (for enthusiasm)
And earnestly take control of myself.
(Then by seeing) the equality between self and others
I should practise exchanging self for others.
Verse 7.17
I should never indulge in despondency by entertaining such thoughts as,
How shall I ever awaken?”
How the Tathagatas who speak what is true
Have uttered this truth
It is said in the Sutra that evens an insect can become enlightened if it is to put effort for it.  In our case, we have found this human life, and we are not born in the country or place where there is no Buddhadharma. We have the conducive factors so we have to use it properly.
Verse 7.18
If they develop the strength of their exertion,
Even those who are flies, mosquitoes, bees and insects
Will win the unsurpassable Awakening
Which is so hard to find.”
Verse 7.19
So, if I do not forsake the Bodhisattvas’ way of life.
Why should someone like myself who has been born in the human race
Not attain Awakening, since I am able to recognise
What is beneficial and what is of harm?
In the Mahayana Uttaratantra, it is said that the negative state of mind or defilements in our mind are not intrinsic nature of the mind. Why? Because the intrinsic nature of the mind is cognitive and clarity [clear and knowing]. It has the quality of knowing thing therefore it is called awareness or cognition. The defilements are not the intrinsic nature of the mind. Also our ignorance is not the intrinsic nature of the mind. The opposite of it is the cognition (awareness or knowledge), is the nature of the mind itself. For example, you have the ignorance about alphabets. Once you have gained the knowledge of the alphabets and knowing the alphabets, that knowledge counters ignorance. As long as the ignorance about the alphabets is there, you are not aware of the alphabets. But once you learnt the alphabets then you have that knowledge which counters that ignorance. Therefore, as long as there is ignorance, it has its opposing factor which is knowledge. So, the nature of the mind is mere cognition and clarity, and itself is neither positive nor negative but it is neutral. So when you are full of ignorance then unclarity of knowledge remain there. 
When the mind is accompanied by the afflictive emotions then it is called afflicted. Whereas virtue state of mind such as compassion is developed, then the mind becomes compassionate because it is being accompanied by the mental factor compassion. The mind has that innate potential or the nature of knowing things, so you do not have to put effort for that quality.  The defilements are temporary and adventitious, and we have the basic potential for knowledge and positive qualities. The positive qualities of the Buddha are mostly of the qualities of the mind itself which has the qualities of knowledge. With regards to omniscience, because the mind has the innate cognitive nature, therefore we have the potential for complete knowledge or omniscience.
Verse 7.20 
But nevertheless it frightens me to think
That I may have to give away my arms and legs—
Without discriminating between what is heavy and what is light,
I am reduced to fear through confusion.
We have to accumulate merit and wisdom over three hundreds countless eons. We progress along the path beginning with the merits accumulated in the 1st countless eon. During the 2nd countless eon of merit we progress along the first seven impure grounds of the bodhisattvas, and during the 3rd countless eon of merits we progressed along the last three bodhisattva grounds. It feels like we have a lot works to do but we must not feel discouraged.
Of course the suffering that we experience is there but the powerful antidote to the cause of suffering can be developed in this human life. In the text, Nagabodhi has said that even the purelands, such as Sukhavati Pureland, actually admire the human body of this world. 
We actually have been giving-in to self-cherishing attitude and also grasping at the true existence of self and others. Then what has become of us now is what we have been experiencing. If we do actually overcome the self-cherishing attitude and the grasping at true existence of self through the counter force then we will be able to overcome them.  Nobody in the seven billion people on this earth is spared from suffering, worries and troubles. Of course, there may be difference in the degrees of problems. If you were to ask somebody when they are relax, you will hear all their problems. For somebody who is rather dull may not have much feeling but as human we have this powerful intelligence and the powerful memory thinking about future. If the dogs and cats do not have immediate threat or danger, they will just relax. Whereas we as human, we learned about the past experiences and we can think about our future. Because of memories and anticipations, accordingly we have the attachment and aversion. If we are able to actually accept the suffering and problems and making worth for ourselves to live, then even as we suffer we can feel happy. If we are not peaceful then we will not be able to be at peace. So happiness has to do with the internal mind. Maybe animals draw more happiness, joy, pleasure based on the five senses. We as humans are able to use our mind to apply the antidotes to our problems. We are able to use our mind properly to accept suffering and then turn it into favorable conditions like what is being mentioned in the seven points mind training in text; by turning the problems of these five degenerations into favorable conditions. As said by one master: “I am not happy if I am praised. I am happy when I am suffering”. So pain and pleasure has to do mainly with our experience of mind. That in turn has to do with our own way of thinking. Whether we are able to overwhelm suffering and also able to turn misfortunate into favorable condition, we take them as blessing in disguised, then we will be happy.
Verse 7.21
For over countless myriads of aeons
I have been cut, stabbed, burned,
And flayed alive innumerable times
But I have not awakened.
Verse 7.22
Yet the suffering
Involved in my awakening will have a limit;
It is like the suffering of having an incision made
In order to remove and destroy greater pain. 
Verse 7.23
Even doctors eliminate illness
With unpleasant medical treatments,
So in order to overcome manifold sufferings
I should be able to put up with some discomfort
If there were no true cessation, the Buddha would not have taught about the true suffering. Because there is a cessation and there is a possibility to attain cessation therefore the Buddha actually gave teachings on true suffering. If we are not able to free ourselves from suffering then the Buddha may have not taught about suffering. He may have just said “Just relax.”  Sometimes our doctors do tell their patients. 
Sometimes we use tranquilizer. So you are wise if you are able to tranquilizing the teachings to overcome our suffering. Maybe if we do some surgery and remove the part of the brain that feels the sensation of pain then perhaps we may not have suffering. But that is not the case.
Verse 7.24
But the Supreme Physician does not employ
Common medical treatments such as these,
With an extremely gentle technique
He remedies all the greatest ills.
In certain religious traditions, there are practices of giving a lot of pain to the body such as plucking of hairs and so forth. Among the Jain practitioners, they have the practices of non-violence which is very good and then they also have the practice of plucking their hairs. There are people who pierced their body to offer lamps. The Buddha taught us to practice generosity.  For the practice of generosity, you begin with small offerings. When you have become more and more acquaintance with the practice of giving and reach the point where you can even give your body to others, at such a state there is no sense of loss, then you can give body, but not right away.
Verse 7.25
At the beginning, the Guide of the World encourages
The giving of such things as food.
Later, when accustomed to this,
One may progressively start to give away even one’s flesh
Then there is also teaching where it says that everything is like a dream, a mirage, magical illusion and so forth, and forsaking all transgression there will be no suffering. 
Verse 7.27
Having forsaken all evil there would be no suffering
And due to wisdom there would be no lack of joy;
But now my mind is afflicted by mistaken conceptions
And my body is caused harm by unwholesome deeds 
Verse 7.28
As their bodies are happy due to their merits
And their minds are happy due to their wisdom,
Even if they remained in cyclic existence for the sake of others
Why would the Compassionate Ones ever be upset?
Verse 7.29
Due to the strength of his Awakening Mind,
The Bodhisattva consumes his previous evils
And harvests oceans of merit:
Hence he is said to excel the Shravakas.
When you have this great courage to work for others, however much suffering you may have to endure, such as even making prayers like “As long as space remains, as long as sentient beings remain, may I too live to dispel the suffering of the world”. 
Verse 7:30
So, having mounted the horse of an Awakening Mind
That dispels all discouragement and weariness,
Who, when they know of this mind that proceeds from joy to joy,
Would ever lapse into despondency? 
If you really put some efforts and gained some taste of bodhicitta, then when you only think of helping and working for the benefits of others, you will see the benefits and aspire to develop it further.
Verse 7:31
The supports when working for the sake of living beings
Are aspiration, steadfastness, joy and rest
Aspiration is developed through fear of misery
And by contemplating the benefits of (aspiration) itself.
With regards with the practice, verse 7.31 talks about aspiration that steadfastness, joy and rest. 
Verse 7:32 (a,b)
Thus in order to increase my enthusiasm
I should strive to abandon its opposing forces,
With regards to bodhicitta, those of lesser or duller/inferior faculties would use the method called the seven-fold cause and effect instructions for developing bodhicitta, whereas those of superior faculties would use the means of equaling and exchanging self and others. As said in this text, the intelligent person would feel discouraged and wearied knowing that mounting on the horse of awakening mind will lead to joy.{??}
Verse 7:32 (c,d)
To (amass the supports of) aspiration, self‐confidence, joy and rest,
To practise in earnest and to become strong in self‐control
Verse 7.33
I shall have to overcome
The boundless faults of myself and others,
And (in order to destroy) each of these faults (alone)
(I may have to strive until) an ocean of aeons is exhausted.
Verse 7.34
But if within myself I do not perceive
Even a fraction of the perseverance (required) to exhaust these faults,
Then why do I not have a heart attack?
For now I have become an abode for infinite misery.
Verse 7.35
I shall have to overcome
The boundless faults of myself and others,
And (in order to destroy) each of these faults (alone)
(I may have to strive until) an ocean of aeons is exhausted.
If you are able to cultivate and develop bodhicitta within yourself, and also engage in the bodhisattva’s practices, you will have this delight in your heart to engage in these practices.  “Since the Buddhas and bodhisattva have actually engaged in these practices for eons and eons, how would I expect to attain the goal of enlightenment within the short period of time?” feeling disheartened with the kind of difficulties that I encounter on the path. 
Verse 7.44 shows being delighted in the causes leading to higher plane of existence, the pureland and so forth.
Verse 7.44 
As a resut of virtue I shall dwell in the spacious,
fragrant and cool heart of a lotus flower,
My radiance will be nourished by the food of the Conqueror’s sweet speech,
My glorious form will spring from a lotus unfolded by the Mighty One’s light,
And as a Bodhisatttva I shall abide in the presence of the Conquerors.
Verse 7.46
Therefore I should aspire for virtue
And with great respect acquaint myself with it.
Having undertaken the wholesome in the manner of Vajradhvaja.
I should then proceed to acquaint myself with self‐confidence.
When you go about with the practice of the dharma such as this, you must first check whether something is realistic or not, and achievable or not. Therefore it is said in verse 7.47
Verse 7.47
First of all I should examine well what is to be done
To see whether I can pursue it or cannot undertake it.
(If I am unable) is best to leave it,
But once I have started I must now withdraw.
Firstly, you should examine well what is to be done and when you see that the goal is realistic and can be achieved then you should determine to achieve it. If from the beginning you are not so sure about it and when you actually enter the path, you feel disheartened or discouraged then there is not good. When you find that you can actually achieve that goal, “If I do it, then this habit will continue in other lives”. 
Here, developing self-confidence is also showed. Self-confidence should be applies to wholesome actions “to overcoming the disturbance conception and my ability to do this”. If something is achievable and is worth striving then you have to put effort, thinking “I alone shall do it” is the self-confidence of action.
Verse 7.48
(If I do), then this habit will continue in other lives
And evil and misery will increase,
Also other actions done at the time of its fruition
Will be weak and will not be accomplished.
Verse 7.49
Self‐confidence should be applied to (wholesome) actions,
The (overcoming) of disturbing conceptions and my ability (to do this).
Thinking, “I alone shall do it,”
Is the self‐confidence of action.
Verse 7.50
Powerless, their minds disturbed,
People in this world are unable to benefit themselves.
Therefore I shall do it (for them)
Since unlike me these beings are incapable.
Sometimes we put in so much effort in some trivial things. The output from such a huge amount of effort is very small, which is changeable suffering. “I am working for the liberation or freedom from the existence of suffering, and furthermore, I who am working for omniscience. Because I am working for the lasting happiness therefore it is not going to work for me to feel despondent and discouraged.” Therefore build up your courage and self-confidence must be built.
Verse 7.51
(Even) if others are doing inferior tasks
Why should I sit here (doing nothing)?
I do not do those tasks because of self-importance;
It would be best for me to have no such pride.
With regards to self-confidence, it should not be arrogance. You should have pride that you will be able to achieve your goal, but it should not turn into arrogance where you put others down.
Verse 7.52
When crows encounter a dying snake,
They will act as though they were eagles.
(Likewise) if (my self‐confidence) is weak
I shall be injured by the slightest downfall.
Verse 7.53
How can those who out of faint‐heartedness have given up trying
Find liberation because of this deficiency?
But even the greatest (obstacle) will find it hard to overcome
One with self‐confidence who is developing exertion
Verse 7.54 
Therefore with a steady mind
I shall overcome all falls,
For if I am defeated by a fall
My wish to vanquish the three realms will become a joke.
Here you have to see the disadvantages of the negative emotions and see the advantages of the antidotes which could put the end to them. Therefore, you have to build up your courage. Our self-grasping attitude, the notion of some kinds of grasping at solidarity of things, and also on the basis of our extreme self-centered attitude - because of these two, what we have gone through so far is suffering with all kinds of unwanted experiences. From now on you should think “I will work against these two negative forces by developing the wisdom of selflessness and cherishing others more than oneself”.
Next show you should have courage.
Verse 7.55
I will conquer everything
And nothing at all shall conquer me!
I, a son of the Lion‐like Conqueror,
Should remain self‐confident in this way
The afflicted kind of pride or arrogance will not help us, we actually should go against it. 
Verse 7.56
Whoever has self‐importance is destroyed by it:
He is disturbed and has no self‐confidence.
For those with self‐confidence do not succumb to the power of the enemy,
Whereas the former are under the sway of the enemy of self‐importance.
Verse 7.57
Inflated by the disturbing conception of my self‐importance,
I shall be led by it to the lower realms.
It destroys the joyous festival of being human.
I shall become a slave, eating the food of others,
Verse 7.58
Stupid, ugly, feeble and everywhere disrespected.
Tough people bloated by conceit
Are also counted among the self‐important;
Tell me, what is more pathetic than this?
Verse 7.59
Whoever seizes self‐confidence in order to conquer
the enemy of self‐importance,
He is the self‐confident one, the victorious hero.
And in addition, whoever definitely conquers
the spread of this enemy, self‐importance,
Completely (wins) the fruit of a Conqueror, fulfilling the wishes of the world.
Verse 7.60
If I find myself amidst a crowd of disturbing conceptions
I shall endure them in a thousand ways;
Like a lion among foxes
I will not be affected by this disturbing host.
The moment these negative emotions or disturbing conceptions arise in us, they disturb our peace of mind, whereas love and compassion give us calm and peace of mind. Anger, arrogance, competitive attitude are not beneficial to us, and cannot help others as well. Also your mental peace is disturbed.
Verse 7.61 
Just as men will guard their eyes
When great danger and turmoil occur,
Likewise I shall never be swayed by the disturbances within my mind,
Even at times of great strife.
We can see how much we are ruined by our own negative emotions or disturbing emotions. In this world, we can see that our attachment, anger, and hate attitude actually ruined us.
Verse 7.62 
It would be better for me to be burned,
To have my head cut off and to be killed,
Rather then ever bowing down
To those ever‐present disturbing conceptions.
(So likewise in all situations I should do nothing other than what is fit)
We still strive on to achieve those things which actually bring about great suffering to us. We still engage in them. What we must do is to engage those things which actually bring about lasting peace and happiness
Verse 7.63
Just like those who yearn for the fruits of play,
(A Bodhisattva) is attracted
To whatever task he may do:
He never has enough, it only brings him joy.
Verse 7.64
Although people work in order to be happy,
It is uncertain whether or not they will find it;
But how can those whose work itself is joy
Find happiness unless they do it?
The physical aggregates that we have are a source of suffering because they are the result of karma and our negative emotions. In our practice of dharma, we may feel tired therefore it is necessary to take rest because this body is not perfect.
Verse 7.65
If I feel that I never have enough sensual objects,
Which are like honey smeared upon a razor’s edge,
Then why should I ever feel that I have enough
Merit which ripens in happiness and peace?
We need to understand that these disturbance emotions and our karma actually harm us.
Verse 7.67
When my strength declines, I should leave whatever I am doing
In order to be able to continue with it later.
Having done something well, I should put it aside
With the wish (to accomplish) what will follow.
Verse 7.68
Just as an old warrior approaches
The swords of an enemy upon the battlefront,
So shall I avoid the weapons of the disturbing conceptions
And skillfully bind this enemy
Whatever virtue practice we engage in, we should always be alert in cultivating them. For example, in the process of cultivating single-pointed concentration, we come to a stage of attaining the physical pliancy when we feel physically light and serviceable to do our practice. 
This completes Chapter Seven.
(Day TWO: 25 Sept 2014 [from 25 min])
I pay homage to the Gautama Buddha who out of his compassion taught us the holy dharma to rid us of all distorted views. 
Today we are going to cover Chapter 9 of A Guide to the Bodhisattva’s Way of Life which mainly establishes emptiness. On one hand, we need to refute the objects held by the innate misconception which conceives misconception of true existence. In doing so, we will go through lots of arguments amongst different philosophical schools who have their own presupposition of true existence.
The Buddha helps sentient beings to understand emptiness through the various means such as understanding of the door to liberation which is called signlessness. We need to understand emptiness. All the religious traditions do acknowledge that we are ruined by our negative emotions such as anger or hatred. Therefore there are practices of cultivating compassion, patience, and tolerance. 
In order to counter greed, there is also the practice of contentment. In all religious traditions, there are actions that ensue from the negative emotions in our speech and body. Therefore we need to practice to counterforce this and through the practice of self discipline. With regards to countering our attachment, there are lots of teachings that help us to counter our attachment to essential objects. Different religious traditions have teachings to counter greed and attachment. In Buddhism, because anger is related to attachment, the greater your attachment to something, naturally it also give us anger or hatred. 
There is also deeper level of countering attachment and anger or hatred. How to deal with these in a deeper way? As taught in the Buddhadharma, that is clinging to self or atman. If you see a beautiful item in a shop, you may say “How nice it is.”  There will be some degree of attachment or desire. Because of the desire, you may go ahead to buy it or in the worse scenario, you will even try to steal it. This is due to your desire. Once you have bought that thing, then it becomes your possession and your attachment to it increases even more. 
If this attractive thing in the shop somehow drops on the ground, you may say “Oh, how bad!” But when this attractive thing which already becomes your possession falls onto the ground, then you will feel some loss because of the attachment that comes through the object which being your possession. In relation to yourself, you have become more attached to it. 
So when we talk about something that is beautiful or attractive, it is in relation to you yourself.  You won’t say that is beautiful to everybody else. Because it is beautiful to you, therefore you have the greater sense of “I.” The stronger the sense of “I”, then there is greater attachment to the thing as well. When someone is really attached to something and if that object broke or something bad has happened to it, then the person becomes totally unbearable. 
When something becomes desperate, sometimes people even go to the length of saying “I want to commit suicide because there is no point living in this life”.  The degree of attachment is related to one’s sense of “I”. If your sense of “I” is not that strong, you may still feel the thing belongs to you but the loss in that sense won’t be so much. Do you actually feel like that?  
In relation to the sense of “I” that you have, the greater or lesser degree of it is according to whether your attachment is strong or less. Therefore in Buddhism, grasping at a self is said to be the main cause of attachment to things. Therefore, there is a lot of investigation into this self. We all have this sense of “My body, my mind, my speech”. Whose body, mind and speech are these?  Then you will say “It is mine”. Then you will also talk about “my possessions, my wealth, my honor, my name” and so forth. There is this sense of how precious this “I” or self is to us. If you are asked “Where is this precious self?” From the top of your head, the crown, tongue, to the sole of my feet, you will not be able to pinpoint anything as being you. Some scientists also have said that there is no central authority in our brain which controls it. Within our body, nothing can be pointed to as being the self. 
With regards to consciousness, the five sense consciousnesses cannot be the self because when you are asleep, they are no more there. Therefore, the five sense consciousnesses are not self. Then you may say the self is within the mental consciousness. When you are awake, your mind is rather in a coarser level. During dream time is the subtler. When you become unconscious, it is subtler. When you die, it is at a subtler level. So when somebody dies, the heartbeat stops, the blood circulation also stops, and soon after that there is brain death. The person is said to be clinically death. Although some people maybe clinically dead, the body itself still remains fresh. In India, as in the last 55years as far as we knew, there were 20 to 30 people who even after clinical death the body still remains fresh after 1, 2, 3 or 4 weeks.  There is no sense of perceptions anymore. The consciousness which is dependent on our brain also has stopped.  As the body remains fresh, this indicates there is something. In our tradition, we make distinction between subtle and gross levels of mind. Therefore, after the dissolution of consciousness of the body, the grosser levels of mind and the 80 conceptions. According to Guhyasamaja, when you reach the subtle mind, then you also go through the dissolution of the three visions -whitish appearance, reddish increase and blackish near attainment. After that, it still goes subtler. So there are these different degrees of subtlety within the mind. There are the gross, the subtle and the subtlest. Even after brain death, it indicates that there is a mind or consciousness which is still there within the body and is not related to the brain. As soon as the subtle consciousness leaves the body, the body slumps, i.e. if someone is in a meditative posture, the head will drop. 
My own late senior tutor Kyabje Ling Rinpoche actually stayed in meditation after clinical death for 13days. Then one of the previous Ganden Tripa stayed in meditation after clinical death for about 21days. Recently we started some investigation by putting some electrodes on the body of someone who is clinically dead. We can say that there are different degrees of subtlety of the consciousness. Within the mental consciousness, if you were to point to any of the state of consciousness as being the self, then it will only come to the point of saying that the subtlest consciousness at the time of death i.e. the clear light of death has to be the self. In this way, if you try to analyze the body into the different parts and then down to the subtlest particle, you will not be able to pinpoint anything as being the self.
Apart from Buddhism, other religious traditions assert atman or soul. Those non-Buddhist traditions which assert life after death do assert that this atman that goes from this life to the next life and what has come from the past to the present life. This is what they assert. According to the theistic religious traditions, the person is put in a coffin after death. It is said whether the person has to go to hell or heaven is decided when the final judgment comes. They have this theory of soul as well. 
According to Buddhism, there is no self which is separated from the psycho-physical aggregates. I would like to ask whether there is any difference between the female or male soul. Or can we say the soul is young or old? If you think of soul, maybe you can talk about “I’m old” or “I’m young” because soul is something which is permanent and unchanging. 
Last year when I was in Bangalore I met the head of the Hindu Ashram. The Ashram actually helps to serve food for thousands of students in different schools in Karnataka. They carried the meals in trucks.  I had a discussion with this Hindu Swami. I told him that we have the same common practice of the three trainings - the training of morality, concentration and wisdom – and the practice of single-pointed concentration. I told him that we have these in common. The difference between Hinduism and Buddhism lies in the idea of whether one accepts or rejects atman. I said “There should not make any difference to us. You believe in atman, you can go about your business with that and I believe in non-atman and I can do my practices based on this concept”. I told him that these are the private business. Rejection of self or atman in Buddhism is that there is no self or atman which is separated from the psycho-physical aggregates.  If there is no change in the atman, then we cannot talk about ageing or young atman. 
I knew one Indian from Bihar who practice Buddhism and later on took Bhikshu ordination from me. After his Bhikshu ordination, we talk about self. I said there is no self. When I said there is no self, he was trembling and said “How come there is no self”.  Slowly I calm him down and said “When we talk about selflessness, we are not saying that the self which works and performs actions like eating and so forth is denied. But what we are denying is a permanent and unchanging self or atman which is separate from the psycho-physical aggregates. Sometimes people get such an idea that Buddhism completely rejects self or a person. What we are rejecting is the self which is separate from the psycho-physical aggregates. On the basis of this idea of a permanent, unchanging self separate from the psycho-physical aggregates, it is said that this is not an innate kind of conception but is something which comes through learning of philosophical ideas. Master Chandrakirti also says that there is no such a self which is separate from psycho-physical aggregates. In the Sutra, Buddha says “With regard to self is the notion of a self as a devilish mind”. When you have a very strong sense of “I” as if this “I” has a separate entity, then what happens is that it gives rise to attachment and anger. All the different distorted views are rooted in this way of conception.
The Buddha goes on to say “This compounded aggregate is empty, therefore there is no self”. What this means is that there is no self which is separate from the psycho-physical aggregates. Does it mean that the self is not existent at all? No! The Buddha continues to say “Just as a self is designated on the basis of psycho-physical aggregates, just as a chariot is designated on a basis of its parts that are put together”. When you have all the different parts put together in a set of fashion, then you have a chariot. Likewise, on the basis of the five aggregates then we have a self or a person designated. When you bring apart these different parts of a body and mind then there is no self. We are not denying a conventional self. We have a self or a person who creates karma and who experiences the result of that karma as well. 
When we talk about selflessness, as I said earlier, what we are rejecting is a self that is separate from the psycho-physical aggregates which is unchanging. This is something which is asserted through philosophical ideas. What happens to us innately is that we get a sense of an “I” which is somewhere there. Therefore we say “my body, my mind”. Of course when we say “my body, my mind” it shows that there is a self. When we get a sense of an “I”, a notion that as if this “I” is something self-standing. Therefore we have this sense of an “I” which is like a controller of the body and the mind. Because of this sense of “I”, we sometimes say that we want to chop off a part of our body which is not good. For example, “me” Bhikshu Tenzin Gyatso, I can also feel like that. Someone who is not so knowledgeable but is interested in learning, and when such a person sees someone who is knowledgeable, he or she feels that “If I could also have that kind of knowledge”.
In the Pramanavarttika (Commentary on Compendium of Valid Cognition), it mentioned that if it is possible for one wanting to change the body with the body of a deity, then he/she would do that. So there is this sense of an “I” which is substantially, self sufficiently existent. Within that, there is this sense of self sufficient “I” which has the same kind of characteristics as the aggregates and also another one which doesn’t have the same characteristics. 
We have this sense of an “I” which we think “I was there when I was born, I’m still here and I will be in the future.” But when you think about the body, you will not say “This body that I have now was there at birth”. You think as if this body has aged. When it comes to the sense of the “I”, you don’t have this feeling or the sense of its ageing. We get the sense that the mind and the body can change through conditions but the “I” or the self does not.  We get the notion as if “I” or the self is somewhat different from this psycho-physical aggregate. When you have this sense of an “I” which is self sufficient, substantially existent “I” and actually think that it is something which is separate from the body and the mind then it is similar to the non-Buddhist idea of a permanent single self. On the other hand, when you get this notion of an “I” which seems to have the same kind of characteristics as the body, somewhere within or amongst the body and the mind, then it is slightly different. For example in the case of Chittamatra, they talk about eight consciousnesses.  Why do they have to posit the alayavijnana, the foundation of consciousness? It is because they look for an identity of a person within the aggregate and since they cannot point in relation to the body, then they go into the mind. Then within the mind, they say that alayavijnana is the identity of the person. They have to find something objective within the psycho-physical aggregates which have to be the self. 
Within the Madhyamaka tradition, there are those who posit that the six consciousnesses is the final identity of a person. Master Nagarjuna has said that a person is neither the different elements such as water, fire and so forth. He says that all of these are not the self, which means the combination of these elements is not the self. Then he asked “Apart from this, what else is the self?” He says there is nothing which we can posit as being the “I” within the psycho-physical aggregates and these elements. Is he denying self wholesale? No. Because he says that a person is designated on the basis of these six constituent factors. 
In Chandrakirti’s Madhyamakavatara, he says that through the sevenfold reasoning, although we cannot actually find anything as being the person, an identity of the person as such, but on the basis of the aggregates, we still designate. Therefore, a self is merely designated on the basis of designation which is the five pyscho-physical aggregates. So apart from being merely designated, there is no self. 
Master Nagarjuna says “Because a person is designated or is the combination of these six constituent factors, therefore there is no self.” Form, matter and so forth are the elements. For example, in the case of something is physical, we can actually break it up into its parts. Regarding consciousness, we can actually break it up into the moments. So through this kind of analysis, if we were to pinpoint something as being consciousness, where is consciousness? We can talk about past consciousness, future consciousness and present consciousness. So it is ok to posit consciousness which is merely designated. If that consciousness were to have any object of existence, then we also have to talk about past, present and future century. Regarding the present century, it has a hundred years. So if present century were to have any true objective existent within it, we cannot talk about past and future years and decades. With regards to the decades we can also talk about the three times - past, present and future. In relation to something else, then we can talk about past, present and future mind as well.  Just as a century, we can have a present century, past and future centuries.  If they were to have any objective independent existence, then the whole century has to be present as a whole. But within the century, we have decades and then within decades, we can talk about past, future and present decades. Then we can go to years, months, weeks, days, hours, minutes, and seconds.  If you really do this kind of analysis, we can only have past and future and there is no present. The past and future are also posited in relation to the present.  But if the present itself is not there, then what happens? We think about future a lot; doing this and doing that in the future but where is the future? 
Within the consciousness, we make the distinction between past, future and present. Past is gone, future is yet to come and the present cannot be found except that it is a continuity. Within that continuity, you cannot pinpoint any moment as being the present. Therefore we can see that it is merely designated. 
Master Nagarjuna says “A person is a combination of these six constituent factors and there is no ultimate independent existence of a person. Therefore, when we designate a person, we use a name. There is a name and the object to which this refers to. But when you actually look at it and go to the object itself, you cannot find anything as being that. Of course things exist; we refer to them by different terms and names. Since they cannot be found when you analyze the object itself, what we come down to is that it is merely designated because nothing exists objectively. 
Also things do function. In quantum physics, they analyze into the subatomic particles and then they come to the quarks and so forth. You can go into the smaller and smaller parts in the subatomic levels. When the scientists find that they cannot see anything objectively existing, they find themselves in a dilemma. But in India, Nagarjuna said that things do exist but merely by way of designation and there is nothing which exists objectively. Although nothing exists objectively, they do have existence by way of designation. But what happens is that we do not get that sense of the things being designated but as if they have some kind of objective existence. That is what happens to us. 
The 7th Dalai Lama has said that nothing can be found when we analyze them and therefore, we come to understand this through the final ultimate reality of emptiness. He says “How wonderful!” Of course in the world, we talk about things being bad or good, “I like things which are good” and “I don’t like things that are bad”.  That is why it is very important to understand that things do not have any inherent existence at all. As master Nagarjuna has said that exhaustion of karma and delusion is liberation. There are many statements found in master Nagarjuna’s text. We cannot just say “Just because master Nagarjuna says so, we have to believe it”. We need to really give thought to it.  
Roughly speaking, when you think “I do not want suffering but I want happiness” and this is something nobody needs to prove to you as it is innate feeling. So from this, we can infer that others also same in wanting happiness, not wanting suffering. Therefore, you can also feel how good if others could have happiness and no suffering as well. We can think about the whole sentient beings and particularly the sentient beings in this world; particularly we can also focus on the 7 billion people wanting happiness and not wanting suffering. This kind of compassion can be extended to all but not anger or hatred. You cannot have anger to the whole humanity on this earth unless you are really a fool or a mad person. So compassion doesn’t need others to be known to you or not but anger has to focus on people you know as someone related to you must be an object of your anger. 
As I have mentioned about Aaron Beck, the American psychiatrist, who said that when you are angry at somebody, the person looks negative but 90% of that negativity is your own mental projection.  So anger needs an independent target. Afflictions like attachment needs independent target to focus on. 
We may be able to have compassion to all sentient beings but is it impossible to have attachment to all sentient beings? Maybe we are attached to those whom we are related and not otherwise. Therefore, anger and attachment need independent target. Loving kindness and compassion are said to be non-conceptual, so we do not need to have any kind of independent target for this. The grasping at some kind of an independent existence as a basis is not needed, whereas attachment and anger needs that as a basis. So when you reflect on the view of selflessness, thinking that things do not have any existence the way they appear to you can help to reduce you attachment and anger without having to go through the process of cultivating single-pointed concentration and building up concentration for higher realms of existence. By meditating on emptiness itself, it can help reduce the attachment and anger. What this shows is that attachment and anger rooted in grasping at some kind of a true objective existence and things. 
Master Nagarjuna says that exhaustion of karma and delusion is liberation and karma and delusion comes from our inappropriate actions. They in turn come from some kind of fabrication, and emptiness actually helps to overcome it. We need to reflect on these by relating these quotations to our own experiences and then you will see the effect and the truth in these teachings. 
Master Nagarjuna says that emptiness puts an end to this fabrication or reification.  I have received teachings of the six texts by Nagarjuna from ??? Tsenshab??  Rinpoche.  I received teachings on the Mulamadhyamakakarika (The Fundamental Wisdom of the Middle Way) by Nagarjuna from Kunu Lama Rinpoche and Tenzin Gyaltsen. In the last line of his teaching, he says “emptiness puts an end to this reification.” He said that could be interpreted as an instrumental case. Through the realization of emptiness, this reification is said to dissolve into it. The grasping at true existence of things is said to dissolve into that emptiness. This means that when you realised emptiness directly then all these reifications dissolve into the true nature of the mind itself, which is the empty nature of the mind itself and not just emptiness of anything else. 
By cultivating the antidote, the counterforce to the grasping at true existence, we come to the point where this grasping at true existence dissolves into emptiness. When you think along this line, by applying the antidote you can see the possibility of overcoming all the defilements. Of course bodhicitta and compassion also help but the direct counterforce to the delusions and the defilements is this realisation of emptiness which directly counters to the grasping at true existence. 
As I have quoted there in Sutra, Rashtrapala Sutra, the Buddha led sentient beings through various means to understand emptiness. Therefore we need to go through the stages of progression along this understanding of emptiness.  First have the rough understanding of what selflessness mean, from there go into the subtler ones and then finally the subtlest understanding of emptiness. We have different reasoning that is used to establish emptiness and the reasoning of dependant origination. Do you get something from this? Otherwise, when we talk about emptiness, then you will just think “Oh, there is something called emptiness.” Then nothing really happens. 
Sometimes people may think “These are something that master Nagarjuna himself just made up. He must have written these books about emptiness when he really has much spare time”.  These days we find many professors who write books which are actually come from other’s words. People might also think that this is what master Nagarjuna may have done. But that is not the case.  If you really reflect on the teachings, it really makes sense. 
I have began to think about emptiness since the age of 16 or 17 with the help of one of my debate assistant (Name??? ) Understanding of emptiness is the most profound tool to make some transformation by using our mind and intelligence. Lama Tsongkhapa says that our wisdom have to ride the horse of single-pointed concentration and then analyse how things exist thoroughly and come to the conclusion of how things really are - that they are devoid of any intrinsic existence. But I do not have that single-pointed concentration. If you are able to concentrate on emptiness with the help of single-pointed concentration then, you will be able to see how it helps to reduce your grasping. By merely saying that we have to do so because it is said in the scriptures will not make much change in us. We need to give thought to it as emptiness is very important. The view of emptiness is mentioned in the Heart Sutra also. 
(Root Text based on A Guide to the Bodhisattva’s Way of Life - Chapter 9 – Wisdom translated by Geshe Dorji Damdul)
Verse 9.1 
The Sage propounded all these branches of teachings
 For the sake of wisdom
Therefore, those who wish to pacify suffering 
Should generate wisdom.
Of the ten chapters in this text, beginning with the 1st chapter, The Benefit of bodhicitta, down to the 8th chapter which teaches the method aspect of the practice are meant for increasing the wisdom. Within wisdom, there are the wisdom of understanding the conventional things and wisdom of emptiness (or ultimate reality or the truth). Here we are dealing with the second type of wisdom - the wisdom of the ultimate truth. Not only developing it, in order for this wisdom to become an antidote to even the cognitive obscuration to the complete knowledge. If you do that, then your meditation on emptiness is said to be meditation to fulfil the complete goal. 
When you develop bodhicitta, you also need to develop the wish to overcome the cognitive obscuration. Therefore with the help of bodhicitta, your meditation on emptiness serves the purpose to fulfil the complete goal. Therefore it says “Therefore, those who wish to pacify suffering should generate wisdom”. All the 84,000 teachings of the Buddha are meant to lead all other sentient beings to the state that he has himself reached by developing bodhicitta and the understanding of emptiness. 
All the teachings are meant for that purpose of leading all other sentient beings to the same goal that Buddha himself has reached. Therefore, it says “Therefore, those who wish to pacify suffering should generate wisdom”.  
As I have said that there are these two types of wisdom:
Wisdom of understanding conventional things 
Wisdom of understanding ultimate truth
The conventional subjects are of five different subjects such as medicine, art and also spirituality. Not only understanding these different subjects but also understanding how things really are without believing in the mere appearance. Therefore, we have to talk of two truths - how things are and what appearance it is? Even non-Buddhist traditions also talk about the two truths. In Christianity, although they do not use these terms but basically they have this idea such as the God is ultimate and the creator is conventional. The Lokayatas give five different reasons to prove that there is a primal factor, which is the source for everything. What are they? Is there anybody who remembers them?  They say that one of the reasons is that everything has a limit. They say that without creator or doer, these cannot happen. So by using some logic and reasoning, they say that there must be a doer of everything. For example, if you look at our body, we have all these internal organs. How they work? They are very active and they are working inside us. When we think about these, we may get the sense that if there is no designer, how can that they be here?  So it is easier to say that everything is created by the creator God. Unless we go by the evolutionary theory, then maybe there are things that are being created. Some things come through evolutionary process, how the animals come into being is explained beginning with microbes of single cell and then develops into multi cells and then becoming bigger and bigger and then with legs and heads. Then those who started to walk, and then instead of walking using the four limbs, they just to stand up. There may be this evolutionary process. 
Here there are many lamas and geshes and also many monastic monks and nuns. In one of the sutras, it is said that after the Buddha’s death, it is said that the ocean will gradually subside and diminish and then humans will start living in the land of snows. We cannot take that literally to mean that it refers to the whole land of snows. That is contradicting our own empirical experience. In the 1940s, we started building hydroelectric power station in Shanthap?? nearby Lhasa. During the excavation process of the land, people found slates covering some structure. When the slates were removed very carefully, they found a coffin with corpse. Among the skeleton, there are some belonging of the person which were buried together with it. Through investigation, they found it was 3,000 years old. So it is quite clear from this that there were humans 3,000 years ago in Lhasa Valley. Then in Chamdo area in Kham, the archaeologists found skeletons and different objects which are of 7,000 years old and some are of 10,000 years. In the upper western part of Tibet, these findings are of 10,000 years. In the Kham and Amdo regions, there were also archaeological findings which were like 30,000 years old. So it is quite clear from this that the quotation was a reference not to the whole of the land of snows but perhaps in Lhasa area. 
There used to be a ocean called ?? Lakso??  In that area, some Chinese archaeologists came to the Lhasa area to do some excavation and found some fossils. The scientists later were able to conclude that in the past Lhasa area was used to be under the sea with the trees in the banks of the shores. These trees were buried and then became fossils. So it is quite clear that up to the hills around Lhasa, there was a sea and then diminished. Beings around (Name of places???) areas were perhaps from some kind of a godly race. As said that the Tibetan’s race came from the monkey and the ogress.  We also need to put ourselves in perspective as well. This is just side talk that I am making but there is some point to it. 
Regarding the five different reasons that the non-Buddhists were giving, somebody found some lines that mentioned about the boundary or limit which they follow some kind of laws. Through these reasons, they say things were created by some doer.  We were talking about the two truths earlier. It seems all different traditions talk about the two truths. Buddhism also has the two truths but the interpretations of the two truths are different according to the different philosophical schools. Vaibashika say that when thing can be taken apart and to lose their identity are said to be conventional, and those which do not lose their identity even after some kind of analysis are ultimate. The Svatantrika say that whatever is functional is ultimate and the others are conventional. Then the Madhyamaka say that emptiness is the ultimate truth and the rest of the phenomena are conventional. 
The Buddha taught the Perfection of Wisdom Sutra which comprises of 100,000 verses, 25,000 verses and the shorter version 8,000 verses. There are also 18,000 verses and so forth. There are many different kinds of Perfection of Wisdom Sutra. If we read them, it mention the different objects beginning with form and so forth and then leading to the resultant ultimate goal of enlightenment. At the end of this, it said that all these are merely in name and do not have ultimate existence. In the Heart Sutra, it mentions about the “appearance of the profound”. Profound here refers to emptiness and appearance refers to the conventional things. When it talks about the suchness or the reality of interdependence, what we understand is how to avoid the two extremes of nihilism and eternalism. When we use the term things are dependently originated, for example, the Mulamadhyamakakarika (The Fundamental Wisdom of the Middle Way) says that whatever is dependently originated is said to be empty. That is said to be designated and therefore this is the middle path. So this phrase “the appearance of the profound” refers to both emptiness and the conventional reality. In the Chinese translation, it seems that the term ‘appearance’ is missing. This means that one important element is missing in the Chinese translation. Now they said that this term ‘appearance’ is there in the Chinese translation. So they contradict themselves. 
In the Chinese translation of Heart Sutra, the term ‘even’ in the ‘even the 5 aggregates are empty of inherent existence’ is missing. This term is actually there in the original Sanskrit. There are two significances to it. One is that not only the self is empty of any intrinsic existence but even the aggregates are empty of intrinsic existence. It actually shows that both the emptiness or selflessness of a person and selflessness of phenomena. We not only talk about the selflessness in terms of the absence of some kind of a self sufficiently, substantially existent self. As it says “Even the five aggregates are empty of intrinsic existence”. The second significance maybe that in the first sermon during the teaching of the four noble truths, the Buddha gave his teachings where there is some kind of indication maybe that the different objects have defined characteristics of persons. In the teaching of the twelve links of dependent origination, the Buddha goes through the process of how someone enters samsara though this twelve links of dependent origination. The purpose for him to teach that there is no self.
During the first turning of the wheel of the dharma, there is teaching on selflessness but these aggregates are not said to be selfless. In the second turning of the wheel of the dharma, the Perfection of Wisdom Sutra, the Buddha goes through the teaching of selflessness of all the phenomena that is devoid of any independent existence. 
In the Heart Sutra, it mentions about the four-fold emptiness – “Form is empty, emptiness is form, form is not other than emptiness and emptiness also is not other than form.” We have memorized this text and when we recite it, perhaps it doesn’t give much sense to us. If you were to actually relate this phrase to yourself saying “I am empty, emptiness is me”. When you use the reasoning called “lack of one and many”, you may come to the conclusion of the self being empty of any intrinsic existence but you maybe cannot relate this to this phrase “emptiness is me”. If you understand well that whatever is dependent arisen is said to be empty, then when you check into the form, what you find is that you cannot find any objectivity in it. Because it is dependent, therefore it is devoid of any independent existence. Since it is devoid of any independent existence and is empty, therefore, it is dependence is feasible. Merely because of the designation of ‘I’ exist, then I do not have any intrinsic existence, and therefore you can say “I am empty”. Since I am also empty of any intrinsic existence and because of that, it is feasible for me to exist through dependence. Therefore you can say “Emptiness is me’. 
Also the Heart Sutra says “likewise the other things are empty. Feelings, perceptions and so forth are empty”. 
Since things are dependently designated, therefore it is feasible to say that they are empty of intrinsic existence. 
If they do not depend on any other factor, then we cannot talk about causes and effects having the causal relationship. What happens to us is that things appear in a certain fashion. Because of this appearance, we become attached or averse. When you are told that there is nothing objective in the things that you are attached to or that you feel aversion to and objectively nothing is there, then it helps to reduce attachment and aversion. So there are the negative emotions which arise on the basis of the clinging or grasping at some true existence and things whereas there are others afflictive emotions which are concomitant with this grasping. The subtle attachment and aversion go together with this grasping. These two teachings of the Buddha -teaching on emptiness and bodhicitta which holds others more dearer than oneself - can be proved through reason and not merely basing ourselves on blind faith.
Verse 9.2 
Conventional and Ultimate,
These are accepted as being the two truths.
The Utlimate is not the object of mind;
The mind is spoken of as conventional.
Kunu Lama Rinpoche says that these two terms for mind that come up in this text are one here and the other one comes later when we relate to yogis. So the two terms in Sanskrit are different. 
“The ultimate is not the object of mind” means ultimate is not the object of dualistic mind. This ultimate truth is something that we have to find through investigation into the designated object. What we find is that things do not exist the way they appear to us. Therefore, they do not have any objective, independent existence. 
Emptiness is not the object of a dualistic mind which looks at this appearance only. What exist without us doing any kind of an analysis into things is conventional. What you find through this kind of critical analysis into the nature of things is ultimate.
Verse 9.3 
The world is seen to be of two types: 
Yogis and common people. 
The world of common people 
Is undermined by the world of the yogis.
The world is comprised of the beings and their habitats with regards to beings living in it. On this earth we have 7 billion people and amongst them, there are two types - the yogis and the common people. The term for yogis in Tibetan is rnal byor ba.
Rnal refers to being right and correct. 
Byor means connecting to the right meaning. 
In the world, we have people who do not do any kind of analysis into the matter and things, and then there are those who do this analysis. From this perspective, we can say the scientists are yogis.
Then those who are just satisfied with the way we live and do not do any kind of analysis or checking how things come about and whether there are doers or creators; just like animals. Scientists do not stay only on that level, and in order to know how things exist, they do analysis and then practice in according to what they have found. We can talk about yogis and common people in terms of scientists and those who just common people who do not are doing any kind of analysis. 
Here the yogis are those who are following some kind of philosophical school. Within the yogis, we have this, for example, the Chittamatra who asserts the non-duality of subject and object and also those who assert that things are like illusion. 
When the scientists explain things from their quantum physics point of view, they have different ideas and understandings from the common people. In the 1950s, when we came into exile, this world had 6 billion people and each of these 6 billion people have different perceptions. Not only living at their appearance level, but doing deeper investigation and accordingly explaining things. The yogis are like scientists as it says “the world of   common people is undermined by the world of the yogis”. 
Verse 9.4 
Through differences in their intelligence,   
 Yogis too are undermined by the higher ones.
[A thesis is proved] by examples accepted by both. 
Unanalysed [practitioners train] for the result.
Within the yogis, there are the Madhyamaka and the Chittamatra. The Chittamatra say that things have no dualistic existence but then they posit their minds to be truly existent. The Madhyamaka reject that through reason and through their analysis. Within the higher types of yogis, there are those who have reached the Path of Seeing and then there are those who have reached nirvana. According to the Prasangika Madhyamaka, there are the defilements which have to be overcome through the Path of Meditation and also the defilements which have to be overcome through the Path of Seeing. So these yogis also have difference according to their intelligence and insight.
Here “Yogis too are undermined by the higher ones” has to be understood in terms of these yogis using logic and reasoning to disproof others’ positions and assertions. 
As in the text it says, “A thesis is proved] by examples accepted by both. Unanalysed [practitioners train] for the result”. So things are not posited from the point of view of accepting that there is some objective existence through analysis but that they are merely designated by name and conception. 
Verse 9.5 
The world sees things 
And conceives them to be truly existent; 
Not like an illusion. In this regard 
There is dispute between the yogis and the world
There is disagreement between the yogis and the common people. So it says here “the world sees things and conceived them to be truly existent, not like an illusion. There is dispute between the yogis and the world”.
The yogis are sure of the shortcomings of the worldly people’s views. 
Verse 9.6 a,b
Even direct perceptions of form and so forth 
Only view conventionalities and are not valid cognitions. 
Accepting things in convention means that the conventional existence has to be accepted because of the reason the three criteria:
They are convention and renown 
Other conventional cognition do not undermine them 
The ultimate analysis into the ultimate nature of things do not undermine them
According to Prasangika Madhyamaka, they say that our perceptions are mistaken because there is being the appearance of true existence. Because of this, there is the dispute between the Prasangika Madhyamaka and also the Svatantrika Madhyamaka. As it says here “Even direct perceptions of form and so forth only view conventionalities are not valid cognitions”. 
Verse 9.6 c,d
[Form and so on] are false, like worldly acceptance of that 
What is unclean and so forth as clean and the like.
Although our body is unclean, still because of the appearance and so forth, we have the notion of cleanliness of the body as well. 
We have these four misconceptions of things:
Things that are unclean being clean,
Things which are impermanent being permanent
Things which are empty being not empty 
Things which are selfless as having self
Verse 9.7 a,b
For the sake of letting the world enter [into reality], 
The Guardian taught about things. 
The Buddha has said that everything that is composed is impermanent. Even within that impermanent thing, if you were to analyse you cannot find anything as being that object.
Verse 9.7 c
In the ultimate sense, however, they are not “momentary.”
But that is also contradictory conventionally.
If you check into the moments of these things, you cannot find anything as being this and that.  Within the Madhyamaka there are those who assert some objective existence in things and those who reject objective existence whatsoever. There is also the postulation of correct and incorrect conventional things from the point of view of the worldly perceptions. We say that things that change momentarily are impermanent but we still say these things were there in the past, a century ago and still here. 
Verse 9.8 
The convention of Yogis [has] no fault. 
Otherwise, [their] discernment 
Of the uncleanliness of the other 
Would be undermined by the world. 
Verse 9.9 a,b
From the illusion-like Victorious Ones, 
positive forces [arise], 
How is it possible that if things are illusion-liked we can create merits and also negative actions?
Verse 9.9 c,d,e
Just as [for those believing in] true things. 
“But, if a sentient being were like an illusion, 
Then how could he take rebirth, once having died?” 
This question arises when people believe in some kind of objective independent existence in things. It is quite clear there is an appearance and how things exist as well. If you assert some objective existence in things then that would be undermined by reason and logic. So things can only be posited in terms of how they exist conventionally. Accordingly, we can talk about the good or bad only in convention. 
Verse 9.10
So long as conditions are gathered together, 
The illusion lasts that long. 
And how could a sentient being be truly existent
Merely because his continuum lasts long?
These questions are raised because of thinking that if things were like illusion then how can this happen? 
In master Nagarjuna’s 24th chapter of Mulamadhyamakakarika he went through the realists positions on how the realists object to the Madhyamaka who assert non-intrinsic existence in things.  They say that if things were empty, they do not have any intrinsic existence then the good, bad and the four noble truth and so forth cannot exist.  In response to their critic, master Nagarjuna actually turns the argument around and says “If things were to have any intrinsic existence, then when you are actually criticizing me who are actually before you. This is because you do not understand the meaning of emptiness, you do not know the nature of emptiness and you do not know the purpose of emptiness.”
With regard to these afflictive emotions, as I have already explained, due to our grasping on some kind of true existence/objective existence of things, we tend to have attachment and aversion to things. Until we are able to destroy all objectification of things, we will not be able to overcome all these afflictive emotions at all. As long as there is some objectification left, negative emotions will still arise on that basis. Therefore, the Madhyamaka who posit some objective existence in things say that there is an appearance of things. Just as they appeared they should have that kind of existence. Still for them, there is some objectification left. 
When you say that things appear to you in a certain fashion and they do have that kind of existence as well, you are still left with some objectification. You have to destroy all objectification because even if a subtle objectification is left, there is going to be negative emotions of attachment and anger arising within you. When we talk about destroying all reification and objectification, we are not denying the existence of things as such and we are not being nihilist. Therefore, the Prasangika Madhyamaka is able to say that although things do not have any objective existence and they are merely designated. So the purpose of emptiness is to get rid of this objectification in things because even if a subtle one is left, you still will have attachment and aversion. So when you realize emptiness in your mind, of course the conventional things disappear. 
The seventh Dalai Lama says “All these appearances and experiences dissolve within that realization of emptiness”. So when you come to the conclusion that this self or “I” do not exist inherently, then you have realized emptiness. There is no objectification of the “I”. Therefore, when you think about yourself as the person does not exist in any way objectively then you can say the person is designated. When we start studying logic right from the beginning, we learn about these things being designated/ imputed and substantially existent things. Then we say that a person is a phenomenon which is called non-associated compounded phenomena. If you do not give any thought to these then you will take them for granted. If you are only satisfied with the appearance of things and say that they exist as they appear, then however much you may meditate on emptiness that is concluded according to the Chittamatra and Svatantrika-Madhyamaka’s point of view, you are still left with some objectification in things. We need to destroy all objectification. So when you have realized emptiness and having destroyed objectification, then what is left in your mind in your perception is this mere negation of true existence. 
Master Nagarjuna also says that whatever is dependent arisen is said to be empty and that is said to be designated and that is the middle way. There is nothing which is not dependent; therefore there is nothing which is not empty. So before doing any kind of practice, for example daily yoga practice, you should use these two verses from the Mūlamadhyamaka-kārikā (Fundamental Verses of the Middle Way) and meditate on emptiness. You should be able to focus your mind completely on the meaning of these two verses. Otherwise, without understanding emptiness well, you will not be able to do the daily yoga practices correctly. If you think that “I do not exist just like that”, that is nihilistic view. 
Since sentient beings have been there since beginningless time, and just because of the long duration, if you were to say that they should have some true existence, as it says “so long as conditions are gathered together,  the illusion lasts that long”. 
Verse 9.11 a,b
In murdering and so forth of an illusory person, 
There is no negativity, since it has no mind. 
Because a person that appears in magical illusion does not have any feelings or sensations, therefore killing such an illusory person will not accrue any negative actions. 
Verse 9.11 c,d 
But with someone having an illusory mind, 
Positive and negative forces accrue. 
Because sentient beings have a mind and there are sensations, therefore, positive and negative forces accrue. 
We should also be able to converse with other people who follow other traditions such as Jainism and so forth, not leaving the things just as it is mentioned in our text. Last year, I met one Hindu teacher, a swami, in his ashram in Mathura and he even knows master Nagarjuna’s Mūlamadhyamaka-kārikā. He is a really good scholar and he was able to recite verses from it. 
So horses, cows, elephants and so forth in a magical illusion are inanimate. All those sentient beings are like illusion, they still have mind.
We have perception of visual forms and so forth. We also can see different pictures on television. As we look at the pictures, there is consciousness perceiving those pictures. As the pictures move along, the consciousness of each moment of the picture also changes. So visual consciousness is dependent on visual objects, auditory consciousness is dependent on the mere sound and so forth. As soon as the visual form is not there or cease, the visual consciousness do not arise. Therefore, we can see change is happening in them. 
Why does this change happen? Just as the external matters change momentarily, because of having come from their causes, likewise each moment of consciousness are given rise by the previous moment of consciousness. Therefore they change. So both external things as well as consciousness have substantial cause; which means that that very cause actually transforms into the effect.  For example, to make a pot we need clay, the clay becomes the substantial cause and then the potter’s hands and other instruments are the cooperating factors. 
For example, the particles of our hands were there even at the time of big bang. Even before the big bang, there was empty space. So the substantial cause of the particles of our hand was there even at that time. 
The Four Hundred Verses of Aryadeva says “We cannot posit a beginning to these things”. From that point of view, maybe they can come to an end but there is no beginning. Particular specific things can come about through causes and conditions temporarily and then they can cease. 
For consciousness you need to have immediate preceding condition which cannot be a matter. The consciousness has to come from a compatible cause which has the nature which is not matter. The consciousness cannot be a substantial cause for matter and vice versa. This is the natural law. As soon as someone is conceived in the womb of a mother, that consciousness at the time of conception has to have a substantial cause. 
Certain schools of thought say that there is a soul but not in Buddhism. Even with regard to self, you have to posit the self on the basis of designation, the physical aggregates. You have to see whether the self has a beginning or not by checking whether these factors have a beginning or not. So a self is finally designated on the basis of a continuity of a mind. If you were to check whether this continuity of the mind has a beginning or not, of course it does not. 
Verse 9.12 
Because mantras and so forth ead) lack the ability, 
Cannot produce a mind in an illusion. 
Even illusory ones that arise from varying conditions are of varying kinds, 
[Since] nowhere is there one condition with the ability to [produce] all. 
Verse 9.13
“If ultimately someone is released in nirvana 
And conventionally is circling in samsara; 
Then Buddha as well would be circling in samsara, 
What use would there be for bodhisattva conduct?” 
There are four types of nirvana that are mentioned in the text.  
Emptiness is said to be the natural nirvana which we have related earlier to master Nagarguna’s text which says “the reification and so forth dissolve within emptiness”.  On the basis of emptiness, we can talk about the possibility of overcoming all the delusions; because delusions are adventitious and are not in the nature of the mind.  Therefore it is possible to attain the nirvana through that realization.
V9.14 is in response to the question that is being raised by others in V9.13.
Verse 9.14 a,b
Even an illusion cannot be turned back 
Unless the continuity of its conditions has ceased. 
Delusions can be overcome by applying the antidote -the realization of emptiness. We are not saying that just because things are empty of intrinsic existence, which is said to be natural nirvana, then we are released from samsara. But because of the possibility of overcoming all the delusions through the applications of the antidote – the realization of emptiness –then we say we can attain the release from samsara. 
Verse 9.14 c,d
Yet, when the continuity of those conditions ceases, 
It does not arise even conventionally. 
Next is refuting the Chittamatrin. 
In the Madhyamaka-avatara (Entering the Middle Way), there is this refutation from others and master Chandrakirti refutes that. The Chittamatrin say there is no need to reject that because things do arise from others. Then the Sautrantika say that when our visual consciousness arises, they arise in relation to a visual object. Because of there being the visual object, there is the visual perception as well. Therefore, they must exist objectively. A consciousness arises with an aspect of the image of the object it perceives. Within the Chittamatrin, there are those who assert that the corresponding number of consciousness arise corresponding to the number of objects, for example, a mottle object is seen, whatever number of colors or whatever patterns there are, similar number of consciousness arise. Then there are those who say that although there may be many different patterns, colors and so forth, but the consciousness is only one.  Multi-colored object is seen by a single consciousness which perceives the whole thing. Then there is also assertion of a philosophical school that says that it is half-half, like the Half-Eggist.
In certain Chittamatra text, like the Twenty Verses or Thirty Verses and so forth, even when you get down to the smallest particle there is nothing in which you can say as being partless. When you go still further, there is nothing which can be posited as being partless. Therefore, the Chittamatrin says that because things cannot be partless, the partless particles cannot exist. Therefore there is no external existence at all. Whereas the Madhyamaka say that although things have existence, they still are devoid of any objective independent existence. 
So we have all kinds of perceptions. Accordingly, the different perceptions arise in accordance with the different objects which form their image on the consciousness. These varieties of things gain their existence because of the manifestation of the imprint of them that are left in our mind manifesting as this and that object. For us, some visual form and the visual perception seem to be two different things, but the Chittamatrin say that there are of the same nature. Because of that, their imprint manifesting in the form of those objects and the consciousness.
Verse 9.15 a,b
“When even the deceptive awareness doesn’t exist, 
By what is the illusion perceived?” 
Why do we have this appearance of the external things?
The Chittamatrin says that there is no external thing. But the cognition itself does have true existence - the object and the perception which sees it to which the object seems to have some external existence. Although we get the notion that the thing out there exists as if it is a referent of some terms externally, but the Chittamatrin say that such way of existence is not there. 
That is mere imputation. Therefore, they go through the three natures:
- dependent nature, such as the object which is seen by a visual perception
- the externality in the things is mere imputation, 
- the dependent is devoid of that externality that imputed nature is the ultimate nature. 
Verse 9.15 c,d
For you, if the illusion itself does not exist, 
Then what is being perceived? 
Verse 9.16 
“In actuality, it exists as something else: 
The aspect of which is the very mind itself.”
When mind itself is like an illusion, 
Then what is being seen by what?
The Chittamatrin say that although things do appear to have some external existence, but these things have arisen from one imprint which also gives rise to the perception. Therefore, they are the perception and the perceived object. 
The Madhyamaka say that when mind itself is like an illusion, then what is being seen by what?
So if both the perceived object and the perception arise from the same thing, then how do you make this difference between the perceived and the perception? So the object and the subject of mind cannot be of one. 
Verse 9.17 
The Guardian of the World in fact said, 
“Mind cannot see mind.” 
Just as the edge of a sword cannot cut itself, 
So [it is with] the mind. 
The Chittamatrin reply by saying:
Verse 9.18 a,b
“But it is just like the way a lamp flame 
Perfectly illuminates its own characteristics.” 
The response to this is:
Verse 9.18 c,d
The flame of a lamp is not being illuminated, 
Since darkness does not obscure [darkness].
Verse 9.19 a,b
“For an intrinsic blue to be blue 
It does not depend on something else, as does a crystal. 
For something else to appear as blue it depends on another thing. If something were to be intrinsically blue, without depending on any other factor, then it cannot be dependent. 
Verse 9.19 c,d
[We] see some that depend on others 
And some that do not.” 
Verse 9.20 
There is no self-created blue, 
Which is dependence-void blue. 
Verse 9.21 
If [you] say that “the mind cognizes 
The illumination of the lamp flame,” 
Based upon whose cognition can the statement be made, 
“A mind has an illuminating nature?” 
Verse 9.22
Since [mind] is never been seen by anyone, 
Even if discussed as to whether it is [self]-luminous 
Or not, is meaningless; 
Like the attractive gestures of a barren woman’s daughter. 
This is the question about the self-cognizing awareness. The Prasangika Madhyamaka say that things are merely interdependent i.e. object and subject are mutually dependent; action and actor are mutually dependent. The object acted upon, the actor, the actions are all interrelated. Everything is like that. 
Apart from that, if things were to have any objective existence and if you will to assert the philosophical view, whether it is internal experiences or external things like visual forms and so forth, the reason that they exist is whether there is a valid cognition which sees it. The other philosophical traditions say that things do have some objective existence. They say that something to be existent has to be seen by a valid cognition. Then for the valid cognition itself, when they are  ???129.17 how do we posit that it exists? 
There are philosophical schools which assert self-cognition which is said to see the perception itself. They use the valid cognition in to gives identity to the existence and to other existence. For its own existence of the valid cognition itself they use the reason of self-cognition. They say that there is a self-cognition. The Madhyamaka reject the self-cognizant mind.
When a visual perception sees a visual form, after that you can have the memory of seeing a form. Later on then you say “Oh, I saw a form.”  That same memory also perceives the perception which has seen that form. 
Because of the experience that you have of seeing the form, you will also be able to recall that consciousness or the perception which has seen the form. So there is no need for a third consciousness or a third factor like self-cognizant mind to say that there is a consciousness.  So when you have a memory of something, seeing or experiencing something, that memory also remembers both the object and the subject of mind.
Verse 9.23
“But if a self-cognizing mind does not exist, 
How can a consciousness be recalled?” 
Through a connection with experiencing another,
Recollection happens, like a rat's poison.
Verse 9.24 
“But it can illuminate itself, 
Because, when with other conditions, [one] sees.” 
By means of applying magic eye lotion, 
A vase is seen while the eye lotion is not. 
The Prasangika Madhyamaka says that both the object and the subject of the mind that sees it are mutually dependent. Even animals are aware of how certain effects are dependent on their causes. 
A cause has to be established in relation to what it helps to bring about the effect. Although at the time of the cause itself the effect has not yet arisen but the cause is said to help bring about that effect. In relation to that effect, the cause is said to be its cause. When the effect has arisen, although the cause is no more there at the time of the effect itself, we still can say that the effect was brought about by that cause. If you were to posit some cause without relating to an effect, there is no effect when the cause is there. When the effect arises, the cause is no more there. If there were to have any objective independent existence, then they cannot have the cause and effect relationship. A man cannot be a father without a child. I cannot be a father because I do not have a child. As a child comes, then a man becomes a father. Before the child comes, there is no father, but as soon as the child comes, the father, the producer is not there. So if you really go into details like that then it is complicated. So to posit that things have some independent existence is quite problematic. Therefore, to say that things are interconnected does makes sense. Therefore, things are merely in name. Despite being merely designated, we can also talk about conventionality of things on the basis of saying that they are renowned in convention, and the other conventional cognition cannot undermine them. For example, in the case of scientific findings, when one scientist says something exists in this way or that way, they do not accept right away. Only when the other scientist found the same thing through their own experimental investigation, then they come to a consensus. This is how scientific findings are established through scientific experiment. Similarly, we say something to be existent must fulfill these three criteria:
they are conventionally renowned as conventional existence 
the other conventional cognition cannot undermine it and 
the ultimate analysis cannot undermine them. 
Verse 9.25
Those which are seen, heard, or known 
Are not to be negated. 
Here, the conception of true existence, which is 
the cause of suffering, 
Is to be rejected. 
The Heart Sutra says “There is no form, no sound and so forth, no eye, no ear, no nose and so forth”, and if by saying this, then it would quite daring on our part if we say the eye, ear and so forth do not exist because we do eat meal, drink teas and so forth. We do not deny the existence of ourselves. To say eyes and so forth do not exist even in convention is nihilism. 
The two truths are said to be essentially the same. Therefore, we can say “I am empty, emptiness is me, and emptiness is not other than me, me too not other than emptiness”. These fourfold emptiness can be applied to anything. So there are two truths to be understood. 
On one hand, we have the conventional truth which is left without doing any kind of analysis into them. Everything, each and every phenomenon, holds these natures of two truths. So it is great to say that things are merely designated. 
An Indian friend of mine, Rajaramana, who is a nuclear physicist told me that quantum physics is something new to the modern world whereas this concept was found in India over two thousand years ago. As an Indian, he is proud to say that. 
What this shows is that things cannot be found objectively if you analyze them. If you say that things cannot be found through analysis and say “There is nothing” then people will laugh at you. In that case, you also don’t need to take food when you are hungry. Dromtonpa say “My hand is empty of intrinsic existence, the fire is empty and the action of burning is also empty of intrinsic existence,” but if you put your hand in the fire, it will burn. 
In the Heart Sutra, it says that form is empty, the emptiness is said to be the property of that form itself and not property of everything else. So the emptiness of form and form are essentially of one nature. You can apply this to anything such as happiness is empty, emptiness is happy and so forth. Otherwise it is quite strange when you say there are no eyes, no ears, no nose and so forth without understanding the relative nature of things.
There were two Amdo’s persons, one knew the Heart Sutra by heart and recites it in front of a person who didn’t know it. At the end the second person say “You didn’t have to say no eyes, no ears, no nose and so forth, you could have just said there is no head.”  
When you give some thought to these passages in the Heart Sutra, and later when it mentioned that all the Buddhas of the three times also have become awakened through these Perfections of Wisdom, then it does makes sense. How do you proceed to the enlightenment of Buddhahood?  
The Heart Sutra gives the mantra “Gate gate” which shows the progression along the path. You first enter the Path of Accumulation, then the Path of Preparation, then the Path of Seeing, Path of Meditation and finally “Bodhi”. From our own initial practices and then entering into the path, we will reach that goal of enlightenment. The Heart Sutra shows us the whole range of path leading to Buddhahood.  Otherwise, just reading it without understanding “There are no eyes, no ears and so forth” then there is no way you can make progress. Of course, you may chant with a nice tune “There is no form, no sound and so forth as well as no eye, no ear and so forth” as being said in the Heart Sutra, but what happens to us is that things do appear to us as some kind of true existence and accordingly we become attach and cling to them. In order to get rid of the misconception of true existence, then emptiness is taught, as it says “Here, the conception of true existence, which is the cause of suffering is to be rejected”. 
Verse 9.26
“The illusion is not separate from the mind; 
Despite being inseparable, it is still impermanent.” 
If it were a thing, how could it not be different? 
And if it is not different, it could not be a thing. 
A perception which sees a magical illusion also is like illusion, also the things which we see with our mind are like illusion. 
Verse 9.27 
Although the illusion is not truly existent,  it is still an object of view, 
So it is for the viewer. 
“But samsara must have a thing as its support; 
Otherwise, it would be like space.” 
In the beginning with our study of Collected Views, we talk about a person being imputed and then the aggregates being substantial and so forth. We have to think about these things. Samsara must have a thing as its support meaning that there must be something substantial which can actually be the basis of samsara. Otherwise, it would be like space with nothing. 
Verse 9.28
How could a non-thing, supported by  a truly existent thing, 
Come to have a function? 
The mind you [asserted] would be 
Something existing alone, accompanied by nothing.
In one of the master Lama Tsongkhapa’s text, it says that if things were to have any kind of intrinsic existence, then how could nirvana be possible? 
Verse 9.29 
And if the mind is free of apprehension, 
Then everyone would be a Tathagata
And if that were the case, what benefit would there be 
In analyzing mind-only?
The purpose of meditation on emptiness is to get rid of our misconceptions. If there is only the mind, then that cannot be done. If the mind is free from apprehension, then everyone will be a Tathagata. 
Verse 9.30
“Even upon knowing the illusion-like, 
How do afflictions gotten rid of? 
Since lust for an illusory woman 
Can arise even in the one who conjured her up?” 
By understanding that things are like an illusion, it helps to reduce our apprehension or clinging to the true existence in things. Emptiness itself is said to be devoid of any intrinsic existence or true existence. 
Having said that everything is empty of any intrinsic existence, some people might think that if everything is empty, what about emptiness itself? Can it be truly existent? The Buddha says that emptiness itself is empty. So we talk about emptiness of emptiness. Of the sixteen or twenty different emptinesses propounded in the Perfection of Wisdom Sutra, there are four which actually have to do with emptiness of emptiness itself. 
Verse 9.31 
Heretofore the conjurer has not rid himself 
Of dispositions of afflictions towards phenomena. 
And so when he sees her, [lust arises]; 
His inclination towards emptiness is still weak. 
Verse 9.32
By habituating with the imprint of emptiness, 
The tendencies for things will be removed. 
By habituating with “emptiness” of all, 
Later, he will be rid of that as well. 
Verse 9.33a
Through not finding the object of investigation, 
When you do analysis into the nature of things, you will not be able to pinpoint anything as being this or that i.e. not having any kind of objective existence at all. 
Verse 9.33 b,c,d
The non-existence of that thing is claimed. 
Thus how can the emptiness 
Whose basis is empty, stand in front of the mind? 
For those who are of sharper faculty, they first check what nirvana or enlightenment is through reasons. Having understood emptiness then through their own reasoning they establish enlightenment through that understanding. Then they develop this wish or aspiration to become enlightened for the sake of others. 
As mentioned in the Madhyamakalamkara when you listen to some teachings or study a text, you first check what subject matter it deals with and the purpose or the goal dealing with this subject matter - the temporary goal as well as the ultimate goal. 
Commentary on Abhisamayalankara says that those with sharper faculty would actually check whether there is a subject matter in the Abhisamayalankara itself or not and they will also check whether there is a purpose in this text or not. By using their intelligence they do this kind of critical analysis through reasoning. First by doing analysis into the nature of things and then getting some understanding, and then realizing emptiness, they see that nirvana is possible. They will also think of liberating other sentient beings. With great compassion, they wish to liberate other sentient beings. In order for that to happen they must see the possibility of ending these sufferings. Without which they cannot aspire for liberation for the sake of others.  All these negative emotions, sufferings and so forth are seen to be rooted in the ignorance, grasping at some true existence in things. Not only leaving to just faith and belief but by understanding the possibility of nirvana through the understanding of emptiness, then these practitioners of Mahayana would have the resolutionn and determination to liberate other sentient beings. Then they aspire to become enlightened. On the basis of that they cultivate bodhicitta to the state that they develop the genuine bodhicitta within themselves in which they become bodhisattva. Based on the understanding of emptiness that they already have they would progress along the Path of Preparation.  When they gain the insight into emptiness through the power of meditation meditatively gain this vipassana into emptiness, then they enter the Path of Preparation. When they see the emptiness directly, they enter the Path of Seeing. Then they progress along the Path of Meditation and finally become Buddha. 
When a Buddha is fully enlightened, both the meditative nature and the post-meditative nature of mind merge. Along the mind, there is subtle wind energy. Therefore on the basis of the mind, this subtlest mind and this subtlest energy which is mentioned in tantra are able to serve others effortlessly.
Verse 9.34 
When neither the things, 
Nor the emptiness of the things stand before the mind, 
Having no other aspect, 
There is full pacification in devoid of objects.
Verse 9.35
Just as a wish-fulfilling gem 
And a wish-granting tree fulfill all wishes, 
Likewise, through the power of prayers, 
The enlightened body of a Victor appears to the disciples. 
Verse 9.36
For example, [when a garudika healer], 
Who empowered a healing cairn, has passed away, 
[That cairn] can pacify poison and the like 
Long after [the healer’s] death.
Verse 9.37
Similarly, when a bodhisattva has passed into nirvana, 
After setting up the reliquary of a Victor 
By conforming to the bodhisattva’s conduct, 
He still performs all deeds. 
Verse 9.38 
“How can offerings made to something lacking a mind 
Give rise to results?” 
Whether alive or has passed into nirvana, 
[It] has been proclaimed the same. 
Verse 9.38 
According to scripture, results [accrue] - 
Whether truly or conventionally. 
Similar to the way 
A truly existent Buddha gives results. 
Here comes the argument for Mahayana being the teaching of the Buddha.
Verse 9.40
Liberation occurs through seeing the Truth,
What is the use of seeing Emptiness?” 
Why? Because in scriptures it is proclaimed 
That without this path, there is no Enlightenment.
In order to reach liberation or nirvana itself, one can meditate on the selflessness of persons. By meditating on emptiness and applying the antidote to the grasping at self, you can eliminate that grasping. Not only that, all other phenomena such as our body and so forth must also be realized as being empty of a self. Why? Because it is proclaimed in the scriptures that without this then there is no enlightenment. 
In the Perfection of Wisdom Sutra, it says that one must realize everything as being empty of any intrinsic existence. Even those who are training on the path of the shravakas and pratyekabuddhas and also the Mahayana path must train in this understanding of emptiness. Then another question is: 
Verse 9.40a
“But, Mahayana is not established!” 
Saying that there is no source or no authentication of Mahayana being the teaching of Buddha, 
Verse 9.40b
[Well] how can [your] scriptures be established? 
This could be taken as a Buddhist who accepts the Four Noble Truths. In connection with these Four Noble Truths, the Truth of Cessation cannot be understood only by resorting to scriptural authority.  Since those who reject Mahayana teaching being the teaching of the Buddha do accept some scriptures as being the Buddha’s words. You have to use logic and reasoning and then also the meaning of the scriptures. 
Verse 9.40c
“Because they are established for both parties.” 
When you reflect on the teachings, you can actually make some change within you. The Four Noble Truths and the sixteen attributes, not leaving it only as a teaching, says that it is the teaching of the Buddha but someone who is able to understand that we all want happiness and not suffering could actually use our intelligence to think about this. Within the teachings of the Buddha, there are those teachings which show very sublte selflessness and also that nature of the mind being clear light. 
The salutation verse from Pramanonacharya???? is very profound which says “You have become an authority, you have this wish to benefit others, you are the Saviour, the teacher and Sugata”.  
The Buddha is said to be an authoritative person for teaching the Four Noble Truths. On the basis of which he taught it from his own experience, therefore he become the unexcelled teacher, unexcelled Saviour and Sugata. The Prajnaparamita Sutra which is the Mahayana sutra is beneficial to sentient beings. People and also those who have some intelligence are able to see these as being very profound teachings. Not only that, when they apply these teachings in their life, they see these teachings of having the effect of reducing their negative emotions.  Through this, one can also infer that if one is able to overcome these obvious negative emotions that are within us, then it is also possible to overcome the subtler negative emotions and also the stains left by them as well. 
Verse 9.40 c,d
“Because they are established for both parties.” 
They were not established as valid at the outset. 
Verse 9.42
Any criterion that would give confidence in them 
Would [apply] equally to the Mahayana. 
If acceptance by two different parties make something true, 
Then the Vedas and so forth also would become true. 
Verse 9.43
“But it is because the Mahayana is disputed.” 
Since the scripture is disputed by non-Buddhists,
And some other [sections of the] scripture are disputed 
by yourselves and others, 
They would have to be discarded [too]. 
We have to use reasons to come to the conclusion of these teachings and not merely following some words.
Verse 9.44 a,b
While the Bhikshus are the foundation of the teachings, 
It is hard [to posit the] Bhikshus. 
As long as we are left with some objectification of things, there will still be the negative emotions like attachment and aversion. As I said earlier, without understanding this, you will not be able to reduce the anger and attachment.
By meditating on the selflessness or emptiness as posited by Chittamatrin, it may help us to reduce attachment and aversion in relation to things outside of us but not the negative emotions because there is still the experiences of attachment that are within ourselves. From the Madhyamaka point of view, both external and internal phenomena are devoid of any true existence. However, those Madhyamaka who assert some objectivity in things, they are still left with some objectification in them, so “it is hard to posit the Bhikshus”, 
Verse 9.44 c,d
For those minds with objects, 
It is hard to transcend sorrow. 
Verse 9.45a
“But they are liberated, as they eliminate afflictions.”
By realizing the gross or coarser level of selflessness, we may be able to suppress the active negative emotions but the subtle ones will still not be eliminated. Those who have the coarser level of understanding of selflessness may be able to help themselves with their attachment and so forth which arises through the clinging to substantially self-sufficient self. Although they may not have clinging that arise through the grosser level of self, but still the emotions which arise through the subtler clinging to self would arise in them. Even you may not have the negative emotions which arise on the basis of this coarser level of grasping at self, but you still will have the negative emotions that are dependent on the subtler clinging to self.  On the basis of having the sense of feeling and sensation then there will be this grasping at the experiences. Accordingly, there will also be aversion and attachment.  
Verse 9.45 b,c,d
That [liberation] must occur immediately. 
Despite [their] lacking afflictions, 
They have the karmic potential. 
Verse 9.46
“But it is definite that they do not have 
Craving for obtaining [rebirth].” 
Even if this craving is not afflictive, 
Why is it not like ignorance?
Verse 9.47
Through the force of feeling, there is craving, 
And feelings exist in them as well. 
A mind having object 
Is what some have. 
Verse 9.48
For a mind that is parted from emptiness 
What is subsided will arise again, 
Like the meditative equipoise of non-discrimination. 
Therefore, meditate on emptiness. 
Under the sway of our grasping at true existence, we become attached or averse and then we create karma.
Verse 9.49  
If you accept as spoken by the Buddha 
Any speech that conforms to the sutras, 
Then are the Mahayana not [sutras] which, for the most part, 
Are equivalent to sutras?
Verse 9.50
If because of one exception, 
All would become corrupt; 
Then why, because of one equivalence to the sutras, 
Would not all have been spoken by the Buddha? 
Verse 9.51
And who would consider unacceptable 
Some speech, the depth of which 
Maha-Kasyapa and the like could not fathom, 
Because you cannot understand it? 
When you understand ignorance thoroughly, without any attachment you develop compassion towards those sentient beings who are under the sway of ignorance as mentioned in the Middle Way - “once you see the faults, there is no attachment to samsara”.  Arhats who have attained nirvana fall in the extreme of nirvana. 
Verse 9.52
The fruit of emptiness is this: 
While being freed from the extremes of attachment and fear, 
One is able to remain in samsara 
For the sake of those who suffer due to ignorance. 
Because of compassion, bodhisattvas do not fall in the extreme of nirvana and their compassion in turn is helped by the understanding of emptiness as well. So they have compassion towards sentient beings who are under the sway of karma and delusions.  It is possible to be able to remain in the middle without falling into the extremes of samsara or nirvana because of the understanding of the emptiness of dependent origination. 
Verse 9.53
As this is the case, 
Disputation against emptiness is improper. 
Therefore, without indecision, 
Please meditate on emptiness. 
By seeing the quality then you develop the belief or faith, and that in turn gives rise to the aspiration to engage in the path. You will pursue the path and put in effort. Through that effort you will realize the goal. As it says “Therefore, without indecision, please meditate on emptiness”.
Verse 9.54 a,b
Emptiness is the remedy to the darkness 
Of afflictive and cognitive obscurations; 
The realization of emptiness is the antidote to uproot all the negative emotions and its imprints. Then there is the cognitive obscuration which is the residual stain left by negative emotions. Without overcoming them you cannot attain omniscience - knowing everything as it is.  Of course, you don’t have to go through learning each and everything that is knowable.  As long as there is defilement in your mind which obscures it from knowing everything, you will not know everything, as you will not have omniscience. But once you overcome that, then you will be able to see the two truths simultaneously. Therefore, understanding of emptiness -the wisdom of emptiness- is the only factor which overcomes the negative emotions and the cognitive obscurations. With the goal of attaining enlightenment of Buddhahood or omniscience state, and if you are meditating on emptiness that fulfils the goal, then it complete the purpose. 
Verse 9.54 c,d
How can one wishing to quickly achieve omniscience 
Not meditate on it? 
There are some who say that they fear of emptiness by thinking “If I do not exist, then what else?”  As I quoted the sutra before, this notion of an “I” is devilish mind and it is the source of all other negative emotions. Even if someone may have become an arhat, they still would have some kind of cherishing of themselves but it is not a negative or afflicted kind of cherishing. But for us, when cherishing happens, we have this self-cherishing attitude.  Although arahats have overcome all delusions within themselves, due to lack of holding others dearer than themselves, they remain with have the self-cherishing attitude. 
Verse 9.55 a,b
While fear should be with 
What gives rise to suffering? 
If you fear suffering, then you also need to fear the causes of suffering. The counter-force to that is not love, compassion or bodhicitta but it is this understanding of emptiness. 
Verse 9.55 c,d
Emptiness pacifies suffering, 
Why be fearful about that? 
In order to liberate sentient beings, there are two types of selflessness taught – selflessness of person and selflessness of phenomena.  We have the experience of pain and pleasure - the experiencer and the things which give rise to this pain and pleasure. To establish the emptiness or selflessnesses of these, first there is the establishing of the selflessness of persons.
Verse 9.56 a,b
If there were something called a “self”, 
There would be something to be afraid.
Because of this sense of “I” then we think “Because of this self, I will attain this and that and so forth”. 
Verse 9.56 c,d
But as one finds “self” nowhere, 
Who is there to experience fear?
Verse 9.57
Teeth, hair, and nails are not a “self”. 
Nor is “self” the bones or blood. 
[“Self” is] neither mucous nor phlegm. 
Nor is “self” lymph or pus. 
Verse 9.58 
“Self” is not fat nor sweat. 
Neither is “self” the lungs nor liver. 
 “Self” is not any of the other visceral organs. 
Neither is “self” faeces nor urine. 
Verse 9.59
Flesh and skin are not a “self”; 
Nor is “self” heat or wind. 
In no way is “self” one of the bodily orifices, 
Nor are the six types of consciousness a “self.” 
Self is none of these things, neither consciousness nor the different elements that make us up. 
So if you use reasoning and logic, then you will be able to see this truth. 
These are for meditating or cultivating the antidote to the innate grasping at the self of a person. 
The difference between Buddhists and non-Buddhists traditions is that the Buddhists reject the object of the self-grasping whereas the non-Buddhists actually assert the object of the self-grasping. 
Verse 9.60 a,b
If the mind [perceiving] sound were permanent 
The sound would be cognized at all times. 
Since the self or atman is permanent, that which sees form, sound and so forth is permanent. This knower is said to be unchanging because it is permanent and unchanging. Such a permanent and unchanging self should hear the sound or see the form permanently. When seeing a visual object and when smelling some smell, there is a change between these two transitions from one to the other. Therefore, the self cannot be posited as being permanent because of the change in the object that it perceives. 
Verse 9.60 a,b
But what is cognized when bereft of an object? 
For what reasons could it be called a cognizer? 
Verse 9.61
If [something] could be a cognizer without an object, 
Then absurdly a stick would also be a cognizer. 
Therefore, without being associated with an object, 
It is certain that cognition is non-existent.
Verse 9.62
 “It cognizes a ‘sight’.” 
Why does it also not hear at that time?
“Because the sound is not nearby,” 
Then it is no longer a cognizer of it.  
Verse 9,63 a,b
How can something having the nature of a sound cognizer 
Become the cognizer of sight? 
The self or atman is said to be an ultimate reality. 
Verse 9,63 c,d
By imputation a single person is a ‘father’ and a ‘son’ 
And not [due to] his ‘true nature.’ 
Verse 9.64 Likewise courage, particles and darkness 
Are neither a ‘son’ nor a ‘father’. 
And a [cognizer of a sight] has never been seen 
That has a nature associated with a sound cognizer. 
If you say that they have different guises, but their nature is the same, well then it would be impermanent. 
Verse 9.65  
“Like a dancer, it is still itself, but is seen in another guise.” 
[Well then] it would be impermanent. 
And suppose, “The other guise is the very same”. 
Its oneness is a oneness that did not exist before. 
Verse 9.66
“But its other modes [of perception] are not true.” 
Then please describe its own nature. 
“It is a cognizer.” 
Absurdly it would follow that all people are one. 
Verse 9.67
What has mind and what lacks mind – 
those two would, in fact, become the same thing 
As their existence is the same. 
And if the individual identities were false, 
Then what could be their shared basis? 
Verse 9.68
Furthermore, something lacking mind cannot be a self 
As it has no mind, like a vase and so forth.
“It is cognizant because of its conjunction with a mind.” 
It absurdly follows that [this] non-cognizant has perished. 
Verse 9.69
And if the self were unchanging, 
What could a mind do to it? 
If [the self] were devoid of mind and activities, 
Space could also become a self. 
Verse 9.70 a
 “But, if a self does not exist, 
“But, if a self does not exist” means that if no permanent self then it doesn’t exist.
Verse 9.70 b,c,d
The connection between actions and their effects  could not be maintained. 
Since, actions cease after having been done, 
To whom should the action be ascribed?” 
Verse 9.71
Since it is established for both of us 
That action and result have a different basis, 
And that the self of action is not there 
Is it not pointless to dispute on this? 
How do the Buddhists respond? Just as the aggregates change, likewise the person also changes. 
Verse 9.72
Seeing a causal state with a result 
Is never feasible. 
Through the shared continuum, 
The agent and the experiencer are explained. 
Verse 9.73
The past and the future minds 
Are not the self, since they do not exist. 
And, if the mind arising were the self, 
When it perishes, there would, in fact, be no self!
(Day THREE: 26 Sept 2014)
Today I wish to talk about the whole structure of Buddhism i.e. about the practice of the entire structure of Buddhism. What is the goal of Buddhism? What are the means you can cultivate to achieve that goal?  
As in the Heart Sutra, the mantra “Tayatha Gate Gate”, “Tayatha” means the enlightened states. What is the goal and what are the means to reach the shore or to attain that goal? It is said “It is like this.” 
For animals, of course they only seek immediate relief from their problems, but we as human beings, whatever we do we need to have the directional goals. For a Buddhist, the goal is “Bodhi.” As in the Heart Sutra, it says “Bodhi svaha” which means laying the foundation of the Bodhi - enlightenment. Enlightenment in Tibetan is Jang Chub. We need to understand enlightenment in terms of these two words. What we need to do is progressively in the path, stage by stage, from beginning with the Path of Accumulation, leading to Path of Preparation, then to Path of Seeing, then Path of Meditation and then Bodhi. 
Here when we talk about journey, it is nothing to do with the body, but with the mind. It is the mind stream that we have. Our mind is full of negative/ destructive emotions. We are under their sway of the three poisons. This is not something that we have developed just in this life, but it has been there from life after life. So in order to make inner transformation, we need to use our mind. It is within us, and mainly our intelligence which makes distinction between what is right from wrong. Therefore, it is said that to have the precious human life with leisure and endowments is significant. Without this kind of life, you will not be able to do the practice of this dharma. So we must make this life meaningful, and having found this human body, we must make ourselves worthy. 
Master Nagarjuna says in his The Ratnavarli that within the teachings of the Buddha, there are two means:
To attain a higher rebirth and 
To attain nirvana, the definite goodness. 
We need to create the prerequisite causes for attaining a higher rebirth so that we are able to set on the path to enlightenment. Of course there is a Sutra path, but we also need to cultivate the path which is common to both the Sutra and Tantra. We need to actually practice both the Sutra and Tantra path. As soon as we are able to set ourselves on the path to enlightenment in this life, even we are not able to do that, we should also make efforts so that we would be able to continue with our practices life after life. For that we need to attain the higher rebirth. 
Master Nagarjuna says “Within the happiness or wellbeing, there are a higher rebirth and the ultimate goal of enlightenment.” 
In order to attain the higher rebirth, there are obstacles to it. The opposite of the higher rebirth is lower rebirths. We need to avoid the causes leading to the lower rebirths. Therefore Master Aryadeva, spiritual student of Master Nagarjuna says “First, gets rid of non-meritorious actions which are actions that harm others, which gives suffering and problems to others. As a result of which you would be born in the lower realms of existence.” Once we are in the lower realms of existence, we would not have the kind of great intelligence that we have as humans. Therefore, the first step to take is to avoid the ten non-virtuous actions. With regards to this, all religious traditions teach about love and compassion. Whether they are theistic or non-theistic traditions, they also have the message of practicing to avoid the ten non-virtuous actions. The first nine of these ten non-virtuous actions are basically common to all religious traditions on this earth. But regards to the last one - wrong view -there may be different interpretation according to the different traditions. For example, in Buddhism we do not accept creator god. From the theistic religious point of view, we may become nihilist. Within Buddhism itself, we have the different philosophical schools. From the point of Madhyamika school of thought, the other schools maybe considered to have fallen into the extremes of eternalism or permanence. Since the lower schools of philosophy within Buddhism also assert that things have some true independent existence (objective existence), they are taking the side to grasping at true existence.
In the theistic religious traditions, whether you accept rebirth or not, if you are avoiding the ten non-virtuous actions and cultivate the ten virtuous actions, you are creating the causes for higher rebirths.
The Buddha followed the law of causality. When the Buddha says “One should know suffering”, it is not just the painful experience that we knew as his disciples. Pancen Losang Chogyen has said that even animals wish to be out of the suffering of the painful experiences. This is true, isn’t it?  We know that when we have some physical pains and also anxiety and fear in our mind, we try to avoid it and get out of it there and then. 
The Buddha didn’t teach us to know suffering in order to be free from this kind of suffering. Nor the Buddha has taught us the changeable suffering. Whatever pleasurable experience we may have, as long as they are contaminated or impure that comes from negative emotions and delusions, they are bound to change to suffering. These two are not the focus of Buddha’s teachings when he says “You should know suffering.”
Pancen Losang Chogyen, says “The source of all sufferings, which is the pervasive suffering, is what the Buddha meant when he said no suffering. In turn it is rooted in the negative emotions, and of which the three poisons are in turns rooted in ignorance. In another word, the grasping at some true existence in things is the root of all our sufferings. So we must overcome this kind of root. When you overcome it, then you attain cessation. 
Therefore the Buddha says “Overcome the root of the origin, actualizes the cessation and then cultivates the path.”  As in The Ratnavali, Master Nagarjuna says “First create the causes for higher rebirths and through that attain the nirvana or definite good.”
In Aryadeva’s text, he says “First avoid the non-meritorious actions, in the middle get rid of the grasping at self, and finally get rid of all distorted views.”
Regarding selflessness, we are talking about the selflessness of person.  Finally, “destroy all distorted views” means that as long as we have this mind, there is some feeling or sensation, nobody wants suffering and all wants happiness. Therefore we need to cultivate the attitude of wishing all sentient beings to have happiness and thinking of helping all other sentient beings as best as we can. 
With regards to the Buddha’s miracles, there are miracles that are shown by his body. The main miracle is his teachings. Sometimes we tend to regards that to do some practice of dharma means to have the statue of the Buddha. Of course building the statue of the Buddha is good, but if you were to go to Jetsun Milarepa’s cave, there is no statue and yet he was able to attain Buddhahood, the union of Vajradhara within one lifetime. So doing the practice of Buddhadharma is not about having some external things. Of course they help and remind us to do the practice of dharma. 
Some people say “This is my prayer room in the house.” While you sit in the prayer room, you may be doing some dharma practice, but once you are out of the room, you may not be doing anything that is dharma.  So what happens here is that your mind divert from the real dharma practice. Actually you should make dharma practice for 24 hours. If you are doing dharma practices seriously, then even in dreams you will be seeing yourself doing dharma practice. In this way, after months and years, then you will be able to do the dharma practice well.
One time I was asked to consecrate a huge statue. I told the people “Of course it is really good to have a huge statue like this. This statue may remain here for thousand years, but over that period of time, it will never speak. Whether the climate is cold or hot, it will still be just standing there. Even when the bird shit on it, it will not move. So the most important miracle of the Buddha is the teachings; not the physical miracles or the omniscient mind knowing everything.” 
When we do the seven limb practice, within which there is this request to turn the wheel of dharma i.e. request to give teachings. If the Buddha or the Master Nagarjuna were here with us, they would tell us that they have actually given the teachings but you are not really studying them. We have over 100 volumes of the Kangyur in Tibetan, and over 200 volumes of the Tengyur (the translation of the commentarial treaties). These are the teachings that the Buddha and the great masters of India have given. They would actually blame us for not studying them. So the main miracle of the Buddha and the great masters is their teachings. We need to use our mind to think. For example, if a carpenter has lots of tools, he would be able to do his wood carving much more efficiently. 
In Lhasa, there was one carpenter who has only two tools with him and did not have many different tools to work with. If he were to have more tools, he would be able to do his work faster. For example, to combat against the extreme self-centered attitude, if you have lots of knowledge about how to tackle this, then you will be able to do it more effectively.
Similarly, all negative emotions, as well as suffering ensue from them, are rooted in the grasping at true existence in things. If you know that this is a totally distorted view, then with what you have studied about the grasping at true existence and then checking it with your own experience, you will be able to see how you can actually try to overcome and counter it. Otherwise, you will actually take this grasping at true existence as your friend and not really trying to overcome it. So the way the Buddha helps us is by showing us the path; what is right from wrong. 
I wish to tell a story. In Amdo, a region of Tibet, some people invite a lama who is at a distance from their village. The lama said “I am old and I cannot go there.” The people said “Even if you cannot give teachings, please come and give us blessings with your hands.”  He then accepted the invitation. When he was there, he gave very extensive teachings. Having given the teachings, he said “I am not the one who bestows liberation by putting my hands, which is in the suffering nature of true suffering”.  
By showing the path, what is right from wrong, you also need to know the mental disposition of those people whom you are going to give teachings. In the case of the Buddhas, they have the power to know what the mental dispositions of the different individuals. Not only in that circumstance, but the Buddhas also know what kind of imprints they have from the past. By knowing all these, the Buddhas are able to give teachings according to the mental dispositions of the sentient beings. We also need to have the courage to overcome the cognitive obscuration as well. For that, we should meditate on emptiness by using various means and numerous reasoning. Therefore, we need to meditate on emptiness or selflessness, which fulfils the complete purpose. For that reason, we need to cultivate bodhicitta. Therefore, Master Nagarjuna says “In the end, destroy all distorted views.” This is how we should go about with the practice “Beginning with avoiding the non-virtuous actions, then gaining insight into the selflessness of person and, finally, destroying all distorted views.”
Buddhism has spread to the breath and length of Tibet. Generally speaking, Tibetans are religious people and it is a matter of the degree of their knowledge.  In his The Stages of Meditation” (book one, two and three), Master Kamalashila actually has gone through the criticism of the different paths, and the refutation of those views and answering them. Apart from that, there are the other teachings such as Lamrim teachings, which only deal with how to progress along the path and taking for granted that the audience is Buddhist.  From the time of Atisha, we have The Lamp for the Path to Enlightenment. In the Nyingma tradition, we have the Samgyi Gyatso, in the Kagyu tradition, we have the The Jewel Ornament of Liberation. Within the Kadam tradition, there are three divisions:  Shungpawa (which is the scholastic tradition), Mengapa and Lamrimpa. Of these three, Kadam Shungpawa followed the study the classic texts written by Indian masters, such as the 17 Nalanda masters, of whom I have written praises. According to this tradition, the teachings begin with the teachings on the Two Truths, then going into the Four Noble Truths; and through that understand the Three Jewels. 
Omniscience is not out there somewhere. I was pointing up there in the space, but that is not right. Actually omniscience has to be attained within. At one time, one Tibetan lama was giving a teaching and someone from the audience asked, “You talk about the Three Jewels - Buddha, Dharma and Sangha- where they are?”  This lama pointed his finger up in the space and said “Up there at the space. In the crystal palace, the Three Jewels are there”. So I was almost doing the same, like pointing up in the space when I was talking about omniscience, but that is not right. In Dzogchen terminology, we have a saying, “Not finding Buddha from somewhere else.” So Buddhahood must be attained within ourselves. 
We must finish the text today. Did you get something about how to go about with the practice of the dharma? If you are able to put the entire path together, this is how you should go about it. We have the Kadam Shungpawa (the scholaristic tradition) which follows the teachings of the six texts - Bodhicaryavatara, Shikshasamucchaya, Mahayanasutraalamkara, Bodhisattvabhumi, Jatakamala and Udanavarga 
(Root Text based on A Guide to the Bodhisattva’s Way of Life - Chapter 9 – Wisdom translated by Geshe Dorji Damdul)
Verse 9.73
The past and the future minds 
Are not the self, since they do not exist. 
And, if the mind arising were the self, 
When it perishes, there would, in fact, be no self!
If you analyze the mind within the three times, we can talk about the past, present and future. If you try to search for the mind within these three times, you will not be able to find anything that you can point to as being mind as such. So the past has gone. 
There is this idea of disintegration - once the karma is created, the actual karma itself ceases, but its disintegration remains. Understanding of this is quite significant. 
Although things are merely designated, with our language and conception, still things do affect us. Since the destruction of something comes through causes and conditions, it actually comes from its cause. What takes birth also come from its cause. Therefore, it doesn’t need any third factor to give rise to it. If disintegration (shepa) were to be something permanent, then things would arise again.  If the mind arises is the self, then when it perishes, there would in fact be no self. This shows that there is no independently existing self at all.  
Verse 9.74
For example, when the trunk of a plantain tree 
Is split apart, nothing [is found]. 
Likewise, when sought through investigation, 
A self also cannot be true.
We cannot deny that we have our experience of pain and pleasure as they do exist. But how do they exist? At this stage, sentient beings appear to us as some kind of independent objective existence, but the fact is that they do not have any independent objective existence. Despite that they are conventionally existence; they are being merely designated.
Verse 9.75
“If sentient beings do not exist, 
Towards whom does one generate compassion?” 
It is the [one] imputed by ignorance, 
Which is accepted for the goal.
We should dedicate ourselves to work for the benefit of all sentient beings. Without sentient beings, we cannot have compassion and bodhicitta. By way of convention, there is a sentient being, and by default of what we find through our investigation is that sentient being do exist, and also the Buddha to whom we have faith. 
In the Mulamadhyamakakarika by Nagarjuna, there is an analysis in the relation to the Buddha who is the Tathagata. The Buddha is neither the aggregates nor something different from them. Of course we have faith in the Buddha but when our faith is tainted with the grasping at true existence then it can actually become attachment. With regards to the compassion, when we talk about afflictive faith, it is not the case that this faith is influenced by something which is like disbelief or unfaithfulness. But it is tainted by the negative emotion or the grasping at true existence. So it is one imputed by ignorance which is accepted for the goal. Unless one is able to attain the goal of omniscient state of Buddhahood, you will not be able to merge the meditative and the post meditative states of mind. 
In the Madhyamika tradition, with regards to valid cognition, perhaps it may not assert the same kind of subject position as what we find in the epistemological texts written from the point of views of the lower schools.
Verse 9.76
“Whose fruit is it, if there are no sentient beings?” 
Fair enough. But this is posited through ignorance. 
In order to completely pacify suffering, 
For the result, eliminate not ignorance [associated]. 
Verse 9.77
 Because the arrogance, which is a source of suffering, 
Misconceives the self, [suffering] increases. 
“But, that cannot be undermined.” 
To meditate on selflessness is the supreme.
“Because of it, arrogance, which is the source of suffering” - the arrogance here is the grasping at the independence existence of a self, and it is not any kind of arrogance. It is clinging to the self, and misconceived the self which increases suffering. That cannot be undermined. So to meditate on selflessness is the supreme. This teaches the selflessness of person. 
Next is the Selflessness of Phenomena in relation to Close placement of Mindfulness on the body. There are many different reasoning given. But here, the meditations on this are given on the basis of the four establishment of mindfulness, which can be done in relation to yourself and others. Also the object is the reality as it is.  First, there is the meditation on the mindfulness of the body. 
Verse 9.78
A body is neither the feet nor the calves. 
Nor is a body, the thighs or the hips. 
Neither the belly nor the back is the body. 
Nor is a body the chest or the arms. 
Verse 9.79
 The sides of the torso and the hands are not a body. 
Nor is a body the armpits or the shoulders. 
The visceral organs also are not it. 
Neither is a body the head nor the throat. 
So what then is a body? 
Verse 9.80
 If this body were located 
With a portion in all of these [parts]; 
Then, although the parts are located in its own parts, 
Where are [the sub-parts] in turn located?
Verse 9.81
And if a body itself, in its entirety, 
Were located, in the hands and so forth, 
There would be as many bodies 
As there were hands and so on. 
Verse 9.82
 As the body does not exist outside or inside, 
How could the hands and so forth possess a body? 
It does not exist separately from the hands and so on, 
How could it possibly be existent? 
The whole body is not something separate entity but some kind of self-entity from the parts of the hands, head and so forth. When it comes to talking about the universal and the particular philosophy, sometimes the non-Buddhist traditions posit some kind of a universal which is separate from the instances of the different things. 
Verse 9.83
 Thus, a body is not [truly] existent. 
Because of ignorance, the mind perceiving a body 
in hands, and so forth, arises. 
Like the mind perceiving a man in an effigy, 
Because [it] is moulded in the shape [of a man].
Verse 9.84
For as long as the conditions are assembled, 
The figure is seen as a man. 
Likewise, for as long as there are [conceptions] 
over the hands and so on, 
They are seen as the body. 
Verse 9.85
Similarly, because of its being a composite of fingers, 
Where is the hand? 
[Where is] that [finger], as it is composed of joints. 
Likewise a joint, when breakdown into its own parts; 
Here the analysis is done on the hands and the joints of the fingers. So each joint is not the finger, nor the finger is each of these joints.  If you go down to the smallest particles, nothing can be found as being the finger or the joints. 
Verse 9.86
 A part, as well, through breaking it down into particles; 
Likewise is the particle, for its directional parts; 
The directional parts also, because of lacking parts, 
Like space, they as well do not exist. 
When you break down these particles and so forth into their smaller parts, nothing can be pointed to as being this and that. 
“The directional parts also, because of lacking parts, like space, as well do not exist” - this is similar to what the Quantum Physics assert. When I was in New York last year, somebody asked me, “What is the first step to understanding emptiness?” I told him that it is through the understanding or studying Quantum Physics. This is actually true. 
When we say “This is my body” and when you think about our body and mind, they appear to have objective existence i.e. some kind of solid existence. But its mere appearance is not the truth. 
Verse 9.87
Therefore, what wise would be attached 
To a bodily form that is like a dream?
And since a body does not exist that way, 
Then what is a male and what is a female?
We are attached to a body. If you were to check where and what the body is, then you will not be able to find it. For example, there is someone call Tenzin. Supposed you are angry at this person called Tenzin, and in the heat of anger you will say “I am angry at Tenzin.” If you were asked “Where is Tenzin?” whom you are angry at, you will not be able to find anything when you break the person down into his parts and so forth. 
Earlier on when you were in the heat of anger, you would really want to hit the person. But, what has happened at that time is that you had some kind of notion of that person as being something solid out there. If, somebody were to ask you at that moment “Where is Tenzin? Who is he?” and when you do actually try to analyze the person, you would not be able to find it and you are left with embarrassment.
Next is Close Placement of Mindfulness on Feeling. 
Verse 9.88
If suffering exists absolutely, 
Why does it not undermine extreme joy? 
And if happiness [exist intrinsically], 
Why does a good taste and so forth not delight 
someone tormented by grief and the like. 
If things were to have this kind of solid and independent existence, then your joy or delight would be undermined.
Verse 9.89
“It is not experienced, 
Because it is overridden by something more intense.” 
How can something not in the nature of an experience 
Still be a feeling? 
Verse 9.90
 “Suffering exists in a subtle way.” 
“Doesn’t this [happiness] eliminate [only] the gross? 
This [suffering] is but other form of mere happiness.” 
[There should be no suffering, as] even 
the subtle one is [of happiness nature]. 
You may say that delight or the pleasant experience is there but it was overwhelmed by the suffering. If you say that, how can something not in the nature of experience still be a feeling? Since it is not experienced, it cannot be a feeling.
Even if it may be a very small one and you have some happiness, it is still happiness. So when you are intensely overwhelmed by some suffering, you will not feel happy or pleasure. If you are overcome with pleasure, you will not feel that suffering. So this suffering is other form of mere happiness. 
Verse 9.91
 “But with the arising of discordant conditions, 
There is no arising of suffering.” 
[Well] is it not established that 
A feeling is something imputed by a thought?
An experience which is dependent on causes and conditions cannot have any objective independence.  
Verse 9.92
Because that [feeling is not intrinsic, one] should 
Meditate on this analysis as remedy. 
[The insight] that grows from the field of analysis 
And the meditation are the foods of yogis.
When we have attachment and anger, we would actually do some kind of investigation and analysis into it, and then say that this person has done this wrong to me, my parents and my brother and so forth.  When we are attached with happiness, we find something to be attractive from all kinds of angles whether it is the taste, form, sound and so forth. 
If we do this kind of analysis and seeing these attributes in them, then we become attached. All these negative emotions, attachment, anger and so forth, are rooted in the ignorance – seeing some kind of true existence in things. We all are the same in wanting happiness and not wanting suffering. When you understand that everything is merely in convention by name and so forth, then it makes a difference to us. 
When we have attachment and anger, we need to apply some antidotes which is doing analysis into things. Meditation is the food of the yogis. So through our analysis, we develop some experience and when that experience becomes really firm, then you can have very firm conviction in the teachings. That can also develop further. 
I usually tell the Chinese dharma brothers and sisters “You have the Pureland tradition. Think about the qualities of the Pureland Sukhavati, and then do your meditation. There is the Zen tradition where the people do meditation. I have many very good Japanese dharma friends in Japan and some of them even asked me, “Is it necessary to study to become enlighten? Can we not become enlighten merely through meditation?”  I told them “That is not possible because when we talk about omniscience or the perfection of wisdom, this wisdom cannot just be developed without doing analysis but just by remaining in single-pointedness.” One Tibetan lama named Nyengun Sungrepa(?) has said that in order to develop and increase your wisdom and intelligence, rather than doing one month meditation retreat on Manjushri and reciting his verse, it would be better to study the collected topics where you do a lot of analysis and debate. 
Next is the analysis of what is known as contact which gives rise to feelings - rejecting intrinsic causes.
Verse 9.93
If there is a gap between a source and its object, 
Where would they meet? 
And if there is no gap, would be just one. 
So the meeting would be of what with what? 
For example, the visual perception and the objects it sees. If there is a gap between these two, where would they meet? If there is no gap, they would be just one. So the meeting would be what with what?
Verse 9.94
 A particle cannot conflate with [another] particle: 
[As] there is no instance of [space] and they are uniform. 
When there is no conflation, there is no co-mingling; 
And when there is no co-mingling, there is no meeting. 
Verse 9.95
Moreover, for something that is partless, 
A meeting is not tenable.? 
If a meeting and being partless can be observed, 
Then show it, please! 
Verse 9.96
For a consciousness, which is immaterial, 
A meeting is untenable; 
A collection as well does not truly exist. 
The earlier analysis is also [applicable here
Verse 9.97
Thus when contact does not exist, 
From what does a feeling arise? 
For what reason, is all this painful efforts made? 
For whom and from what can harm occur? 
These are doing analysis into the subtle nature of things in order to destroy our clinging to true existence. 
Verse 9.98
 And when there is no one who feels, 
The feeling, as well, does not exist, 
Then seeing this situation, 
Why is craving not eliminated? 
Verse 9.99
 Those seen or touched 
Have the nature of a dream or an illusion. 
Having arisen simultaneously with the mind, 
The feeling is not perceived by that [mind].
Verse 9.100
[Those] produced before or after 
Can be remembered and not experienced. 
One cannot experience oneself, 
Nor be experienced by others. 
Verse 9.101
 There is no one that feels, 
Feeling cannot truly exist. 
How can these induce harm 
To this collection that lacks a self? 
 “Selflessness of phenomena” in relation to close placement of mindfulness on mind 
Verse 9.102
 A mind does not exist in sources, 
Nor in forms and so forth, nor in between. 
A mind is not inside, nor outside, 
Nor can it be found anywhere else. 
Verse 9.103
That which is not the body nor others, 
Neither co-mingled, nor separate in any way, 
Is not a thing at all. As such 
Sentient beings are released in natural nirvana. 
This is about the mental consciousness. Next is with regards to the sensory consciousness.
Verse 9.104 a,b
If the cognition exists prior to the object, 
Then on what does it focus to arise? 
If there is no visual form, you cannot have a visual perception as well.
Verse 9.104 c,d
And if a cognition and the object are simultaneous, 
On what does it focus to arise?
When some objects appear to a perception and that perception sees it. Once the object ceases, the perception also is no more there. 
Verse 9.105
Yet, if it occurs after the object, 
Then from what does the cognition arise?
“Selflessness of Phenomena” in relation to close placement of mindfulness of phenomena This way arising of any phenomenon cannot be determined.
Rejecting the Objection that the Two Truths are Untenable 
Verse 9.106 a,b
“If conventional truth does not exist, 
How can there be two truths? 
Qualms are raised from the point of views of asserting that there must be something objective. If the sentient beings do not exist objectively, then in relation to whom do we cultivate compassion? 
Verse 9.106 c,d
If conventionalities are [posited by] others, 
How can sentient beings transcend sorrow? 
When we talk about conventionality, things exist conventionally. This conventionality of things is not posited by this distorted view of holding on to some kind of true existence as such. What establishes the existence of things is not this grasping at true existence, but a valid cognition which actually perceives the main object of that cognition. Because of that, we can say things exist. Whereas when we talk about conventional truth, or the obscured truth, although the term conventional is there, they do not have the same meaning. 
Verse 9.107
This [existence is through] other thoughts, 
This is not our mode of conventionality. 
If this is ascertained afterwards, it exists; 
If not, the conventionality does not exist. 
If this is ascertained afterwards, it exists. So what exists must be conventional. If it was not undermined by another conventional cognition of conventional truth, then it should exist. If not the conventionality does not exist. 
Verse 9.108
 Both the thought and the to be thought 
Are mutually dependent. 
And by dependence on acceptance, 
All objects of analysis are expressed. 
Verse 9.109
“If the analytical intelligence is that which 
Examines [the intrinsic nature,] 
The intelligence is also [subject to] examination, 
This leads to an infinite regress. 
Verse 9.110
When the object of analysis is being examined, 
The analysis has no basis. 
Being devoid of a basis, it does not arise; 
That is called [natural] nirvana.
For example, when you take a person, how do you posit a person as being existence? If you try to search for the person within the physical aggregate, you will not be able to find. But the emptiness of that person also cannot be found when you do the same analysis - searching for the emptiness of emptiness. The analysis has no basis as being devoid of the bases, it does not arise. That is called natural nirvana.
Verse 9.111
For them, the two are true. 
But it is extremely hard to maintain. 
If an object is established by the power of a cognition, 
What is the basis for the existence of cognition? 
Verse 9.112
 And if a cognition is established through the object, 
Then what is the basis for existence of the object?
Their existence is by the power of mutual [dependence], 
Which entails that both would be not [truly] existent. 
Nothing can be posited as having independent objective existence. The perceiver and the perceived object are mutually dependent, which entails that both would be not truly existent.
Verse 9.113
 If [a man] without a child is not a father, 
Where does the child come from? 
In the absence of a child, there can be no father. 
Again, the two are not [truly] existent. 
Verse 9.114
 “A sprout grows from a seed, 
And just as the seed is indicated by the [sprout], 
By the arising of a cognition from the object, 
Why cannot its [true] existence be realised?” 
Verse 9.115
If the seed is realised by a cognition 
Different from the sprout 
By what is the existence of the cognition 
Realized which cognizes the object?
So the four mindfulnesses are taught. Next is the different reasoning to establish emptiness. The first is the reasoning from the point of view of cause.
Analyzing the cause is called the diamond splinter reasoning. 
Verse 9.116
By direct perception of the conventional world, 
All causes are seen. 
The multiple parts like a lotus – stalks and so forth - 
Grow by means of multiple causes. 
How do things such as color, smell and lotus come from? They come from their own causes. 
Verse 9.117
“What has produced [those] multiple causes?” 
The previous multiple causes. 
“Why does a cause have the ability to bring an effect?” 
[Well] due to the power of previous causes.
You have to go to the very subtle particles. When you go into the subtle particles, where do these particles come from? They are all the previous continuity. When we have developed these kinds of elements, then maybe we are able to talk about those coming from their own causes. When several of these gross particles grow and come together, they give rise to different shapes, dimension and form. When we have to look at the very very subtle particles -the sub-atomic particles- even further, I don’t know how to talk about this kind of continuity. When it comes to the very subtle particles, there may be no difference between the particles that gives rise to our bodies and the external rocks and so forth. When these different particles came together, some of these become the bases or the support of consciousness. This explains Darwinian Theory of Evolution as well. 
Verse 9.118
If Ishvara were the cause of the world, 
Tell me, what is Ishvara in fact? 
If you say, “The elements,” then so be it, 
But why [all] the fuss over a mere name? 
This argument is against Isharva being the creator of everything. We also assert that things comes the elements, so there is no debate here. 
Verse 9.119
However, earth and the rest have multiple parts, 
Are impermanent, inanimate and not divine; 
Trod on and unclean. 
So these cannot be Ishvara. 
If Ishreva created everything, then these inanimate things would also be objects of our devotion or worship as well. This is rejected.
Verse 9.120
 Ishvara cannot be space, as it does not waver. 
He cannot be the self, since it is refuted earlier. 
“He is the creator which is inconceivable.” 
What is the point of discussing the inconceivable? 
The Samkhya School says that when we realize that everything comes from the source of everything, then Ishreva dissolved into it. That is considered to be attaining liberation.
In our own meditation, we also go through this process of dissolution. Finally, all the different consciousnesses dissolve into the clear light mind. Unless we have the understanding of selflessness also, we might also tend to believe in the Isharva of ideas. 
In the space of emptiness, all varieties of things do appear, but when you do analysis into these varieties of things, they all dissolved into the suchness. If we are not careful about the subtle understanding of these lines, it may appear to be similar to the Isharva’s theories.
Verse 9.121
And what could it be that he wished to create? The self? 
Well, are not [the self], the earth and the rest, 
And Ishvara supposed to be eternal by nature? 
Cognition arises from the object of cognition. 
In our own field, cognition arises from the object of cognition. In earlier verses, V9.116 and 9.117, we didn’t talk about karma as such, but things come from their own causes. So happiness and sufferings are experiences which are parts of our mind. Therefore, the mind must come from its substantial cause which is also mind. Therefore, the talk of karma comes. 
Inanimate things come from their own compatible causes, whereas for the animate or sentient beings, these experiences of happiness and sufferings come from karma. When a world system forms, it is formed because of the karma of all sentient beings who are going to be born into this world system. Of course, the very subtle workings of karma can only be known to the omniscient one - the Buddha. 
Verse 9.122
 Happiness and suffering have arisen since beginninglessly from karma. 
So tell me, what has been created [by Ishvara]? 
And if there is no beginning to the cause, 
How can there be a beginning to the effect? 
Verse 9.123
Why does he not create continually 
Since he does not depend on anything else? 
If nothing exists that was not created by him, 
On what does he depend [in order to create]? 
Verse 9.124
If [the creation] depends [on others], the collection [of the conditions] would be the cause, 
And not Ishvara.
When [the conditions] are gathered, no power can impede the creation. 
And in their absence, [it] has no power to create. 
Verse 9.125
 If Ishvara must create despite lacking a wish, 
He is then under the force of something else. 
If [he creates] when he wants, then he is under the power of “want.” 
How is he “Ishvara” when creations are done that way?
Verse 9.126
Those who assert particles as permanent [creator] 
As well have been disproved earlier. 
Samkhyas assert Permanent Primal Substance 
As the cause of the world.
These are the rejections of the Isharva as being creator. Next is the rejection of the production from permanent primal substance
Verse 9.127
 [For Samkyas] the universal constituents, 
Courage, particles, and darkness, 
When abiding in balance is called Primal Substance; 
[Their] imbalance is said to be the migrators 
Verse 9.128
Illogical is it for a unity to have a threefold nature; 
Therefore, it does not exist. 
Likewise, the qualities cannot be existent, 
Because each of them also has three aspects. 
Verse 9.129
 And in the absence of the qualities, 
The existence of sound and so forth becomes far-fetched. 
Moreover, it is impossible for pleasure and so on 
To exist in non-sentient clothing and the like. 
Verse 9.130
For things having the nature of their causes. 
Have not functional things already been analyzed?
The causes for you are the very pleasure and so forth: 
Cotton clothing and the like do not arise from those. 
Verse 9.131
 Pleasure and so on arise from cotton clothing and the like, 
Since these do not exist, pleasure and so on do not exist. 
Moreover, even the permanence of pleasure and so on 
Has never been seen.
Verse 9.132
If manifest pleasure and so on are existent, 
Why is [their] experience not felt? 
“The [experience] turns into a subtle [state]”, 
How can it be [both] gross and subtle? 
Verse 9.133
 If it becomes subtle after leaving the gross state, 
These gross and subtle states are impermanent. 
So why not accept 
All things as impermanent? 
Verse 9.134
If the grossness is no different from pleasure, 
Then the manifest pleasure is impermanent. 
“But something totally nonexistent 
Could not be produced, because of being non-existent.” 
Verse 9.135
Even if you do not accept the production of an evident phenomenon, 
Still this is actually the case. 
And if an effect exists in its causes, 
Then consuming food would be eating excrement! 
The Samkhya School says that there is unmanifest flower in the seed itself. The seed of the flower has smell, color, shape and everything. 
Verse 9.136
[Why not buy] and wear cotton seed [cheaper than] 
the price of cotton clothing?
“Common people do not see [it], because of ignorance, 
That is the precise position of the Knower of Reality.”
Verse 9.137
 [Well] cognition of that must [also] exist 
In common people, so why do [they] not see it? 
“[Because] common people are not valid cognizers.” 
What they see as manifest [also] is not true. 
Next verse is the question raised towards the Prasangika Madhyamika.
Verse 9.138
 A valid cognizer is not a valid cognizer. 
Wouldn’t what was cognized by it [also] become false, 
Therefore, in actuality, meditation on emptiness 
Becomes untenable?” 
We are not denying things. The Madhyamika says “We are not denying the existence of things as such, but what we say is that things do not have any independent existence as such, but their existence is because of dependence.”
Master Kamalashila says that by understanding the dependence in terms of causality, we create the causes for higher rebirths. By understanding the dependence in terms of designation, we create the causes for liberation. So what we have to understand is that things are designated i.e. dependence by way of designation and there is nothing objective in things. Since things cannot be found when we break them down into their parts, then what you will see is that whatever is dependently arisen cannot have any objective existence at all. 
Through acquainting your mind with these kinds of views: things are designated, they are labeled, and they do not have any existence the way they appear to us, then you will be able to see that although they are empty of any objective existence, yet they are existence by way of dependence.  So these two – dependent and emptiness - can go together and without contradiction. In actuality, without getting the object of analysis, meditation on emptiness becomes untenable. So in realizing emptiness, it is important to understand the object of negation.
Verse 9.139
Without getting the object of analysis, 
The absence of that object cannot be apprehended. 
Therefore, the lack of any false object, 
Is clearly a falsity. 
Verse 9.140
Thus, upon the death of a child in a dream, 
The thought, ‘He does not exist’ 
Is a hindrance to [thinking of] his existence. 
And yet that [‘the child does not exist’] is false. 
Summary 
Verse 9.141
Therefore, when analysed in that way, 
Nothing exists causelessly. 
[Things] do not exist in their conditions, 
Whether individually or collectively. 
Verse 9.142
 [A thing] does not emerge from something else; 
Does not abide nor does it go. 
Any thing viewed as truly existent by ignorance, 
How is it different from an illusion?
This is summarizing what was going on previously.
When we talked about a cause giving rise to its effect, you will not find the cause in their effect if you were to break them down into their different moments. Therefore, they are merely designated.
Reasoning of dependent origination to establish the view of “selflessness” 
Verse 9.143
[For] any thing emanated by a magician, 
Or any thing emanated by causes: 
Examine where it comes from. 
And also where it goes to, 
Verse 9.144
How can there be true existence 
In contrived objects like a reflection, 
Which is seen in conjunction with something 
And which does not exist when that is absent?
Reasoning to establish “emptiness” from the viewpoint of effect 
Verse 9.145
For a thing that is existent, 
What need is there for a cause? 
Then again, if that is not existent, 
What need is there for a cause? 
Verse 9.146
There is no transformation of a non-existent thing, 
Even by means of a hundred million causes! 
How can it in that state become a thing? 
But what else could be transformed into a thing? 
Whether we talk about arising of things or cessation of things, everything can be posited only by way of designation.
Verse 9.147
 Since things cannot be possible at the time of the absence of [it]. 
When will they come to exist as things? 
Without production of a thing, 
[It] cannot be freed from a non-thing. 
Verse 9.148
 Without being freed from non-things, 
No occasion will there be for a thing to exist. 
And a thing cannot change to a state of non-functionality, 
It would absurdly follow that it had two true natures.
Verse 9.149
In that way, as cessation does not exist, 
[The arising] of things does not exist either, 
All sentient beings at all times 
Never are arising nor ceasing.
Next is the result of the understanding of emptiness. 
Sameness of samsara and nirvana on the ultimate level
Verse 9.150
 Sentient beings resemble dreams. 
Upon analysis, they are like plantain trees. 
Whether they are released or not released from sorrow 
Ultimately, there is no difference. 
What happens to us is that things appear to have some kind of objective independence existence. Then accordingly, we cling to them and then all the different causes are created by which we experience all kinds of suffering. 
Advice on the need to strive to realize emptiness 
(a) What is the reality? 
Verse 9.151
With all phenomena empty in that way, 
What is there to gain? 
What is there to lose? 
Who is there to respect or scorn? 
Verse 9.152
From where does pleasure or pain arise? 
What is there to dislike or like? 
When investigated at the ultimate level 
What is craved by which? 
We need to meditate on emptiness in order to do away with the clinging to the objective existent, because of which we create lots of problems to ourselves.
Verse 9.153
Upon analysis, [what] world of living beings exist that will die here? 
Who will come into existence? 
Who has existed? 
Who is a relative and a friend? 
We have love and hate towards people because of clinging to some kind of objective independence existence in them as being this and that. If we are not able to develop any experience of emptiness in this life and just live our life like that. 
Verse 9.154
 Those of my kind, please understand 
That everything is like space. 
(b) Drawbacks of samsara 
But those wishing for happiness for a “self” 
Get agitated and excited
Verse 9.155
Through causes [such as] fights and festivities; 
From the distress, exertion, 
And disputes, they cut and stab each other. 
Living in great difficulties due to negativities. 
Verse 9.156
[Despite] coming to the favourable births 
over and over again, 
So often experiencing manifold pleasures, 
After death, they fall to the unbearable sufferings 
Of the bad rebirth for a very long time. 
Verse 9.157
In samsara, cliffs are aplenty; 
And there, one remains deprived of [knowing] the reality 
But since [samsara and nirvana] mutually contradict one another, [one unceasingly cycles in Samsara] 
In samsara, nothing [compares with] the realisation of the reality. 
Verse 9.158
 There, too, are incomparable and unbearable 
Oceans of suffering beyond any end; 
In [samsara], there is little strength; 
The life span is too short. 
Verse 9.159
 There, as well, with activities for longevity and health, 
With hunger and exhaustion, 
With sleep and harms, and likewise 
With fruitlessly keeping company with childish people, 
Verse 9.160
Life passes quickly and in vain. 
Yet, analytical wisdom is so difficult to gain! 
Furthermore, where is there [in samsara] a means 
To eliminate the habituated distractions?
Verse 9.161
 Again, the demon is striving there 
To bring about a fall to the most awful rebirth. 
There are too many distorted paths, 
It is difficult to transcend “doubt.”
Unless we are able to hit on the head of this grasping at true existence, we will have continuous sufferings. Although we are under the sway of our negative emotions, still we think that we are happy.
Verse 9.162
 It is difficult to obtain a good rebirth again; 
The appearance of a Buddha is extremely rare; 
And the currents of afflictions are difficult to abandon. 
Alas, suffering will go on unceasingly. 
Verse 9.163
 They fail to see their own suffering, 
Although they are infested with extreme suffering. 
Oh dear, this really is the cause to lament 
For those who are caught in the rapids of suffering 
Verse 9.164
For example, some people often perform ablutions; 
Then they jump into fire again and again; 
Even though in terrible states of suffering, 
They assume themselves to be happy. 
Verse 9.165
Likewise, there are those who frolic about, 
As if there were no old age and death. 
First, they will lose their lives, 
Then fall to an unbearable lower rebirth. 
The mode of apprehension of the great compassion 
Verse 9.166
Oh! When shall I come to bring peace 
To those tormented by the fires of suffering like these 
With a rain of happiness from my collection, 
Pouring forth from the clouds of my merit? 
Verse 9.167
Oh! When shall [I] respectfully accumulate merit 
Non-referentially, 
And teach emptiness to those 
Who have been ruined by objectification.
We have finished with Chapter Nine. 
When you think along these lines of reasoning of emptiness, then you will be able to see that suffering can be ended. What we are doing is actually as if we are willingly accepting suffering to befall us. 
Maybe I should do the final chapter on Dedication next year. Last time we will not clear whether we will finish the Chapter Seven or not. We will not be like that next time. 
Please look at the Third Chapter of Bodhicharyavatara, which is Embracing Bodhicitta (Full acceptance of the awakening mind). (Reference Text:  A Guide of the Bodhisattva’s Way of Life by Stephen Batchelor)
I thought of doing a ceremony for generation of bodhicitta. If we have more time, we could also do the Second Chapter as well which goes through the seven limb practice. Since we don’t have time, we will do the Third Chapter. Recite the third chapter together.
These two verses -V3.23 and V3.24 are for bodhicitta ceremony. 
Verse 3.23 
Just as the previous Sugatas
Gave birth to an Awakening Mind,
And just as they successively dwelt
In the Bodhisattva practices;
Verse 3.24 
Likewise for the sake of all that lives
Do I give birth to an Awakening Mind,
And likewise shall I too
Successively follow the practices.
First imagine Shakyamuni Buddha himself is here in person and being surrounded by his disciples Subhuti, Shariputra and so forth. Also imagine the great masters of India like Nagarjuna and so forth. For the Chinese, you can also imagine the great master like Xuan Zhang and so forth. For the Thais imagine your own great masters of the past who have done great contribution to the dharma. 
We have found this human life now. We have also met with the Buddhadharma. What we must do is to study and hear the teachings of the dharma. Then reflect on the meaning and do meditation on it so that we are able to make this human life a meaningful one. What we are going to go through is the generation of bodhicitta, which is the mind that is intended to become a Buddha, a fully enlightened being, for the benefits of all sentient beings who are numberless across the space. Not only do we generate this bodhicitta, this altruistic intention to become a Buddha, but we also will make the pledge to engage in the bodhisattva practices as well.  We have gone through the teachings of emptiness. Today, we covered the Ninth chapter, Wisdom. First, lets us all meditate on emptiness for a few minutes. For your convenience, it would be good to go along the two verses from Mulamadhyamakakarika which says: 
“I am neither my suffering physical aggregates, nor am I separate from these suffering physical aggregates. I am neither one with the suffering physical aggregates, nor different or separate from. And nor do I and suffering physical aggregates depend on one another intrinsically or independently. These suffering physical aggregates do not possess I / Me.”
In Master Nagarjuna’s text, it refers to as Tathagatha. So Tathagatha is neither one with the physical aggregates nor is not different from it. But we can relate this verse to ourselves. When you do this kind of analysis, what you find is that you will not be able to find anything being yourself.
HHDL (in English): “Close and meditate on nothingness. Investigate, where is I?  Where is Singaporean? Where is Chinese, Taiwanese, Korean, American, English, French and so on? This is simply designation on the combination of body and mind. If you investigate, body you can’t find. If you investigate mind, you can’t find. So the very basis of self cannot find. The self no base, self itself you can’t find. If we deny existence of self, it is foolish, I am here, like that, I can feel, this is a hand. So now investigate you can’t find, but it exists really. So therefore, the Middle Way is, now anything does not exist as appears. Its existence is finally mere designation. But it never appears as something mere designation but as something independence. So now existence exist then we must find. But we can’t find, therefore it does not exists as appears. Then also it is mere designation. Designation means nothing objectively exists, as Quantum Physics say. Now meditate on it for few minutes.”
Mind training (Reference Text: Eight Verses)
HHDL (in English): This is mainly explaining about altruism, infinite altruism. Since this is quite short we can learn easily. Since many years, I think 60 years I learned this. For example, when at the airport people announced delay, of another 30 minutes or another 1 hour. Then relax and recite this and think. Otherwise, when they announce 30 minutes, then 1 hour (HHDL showed the sign of frustration).  So I say whenever, without any sort of dream, think these things, and recite these very short teachings. For me very useful, I just read.
(HHDL gave oral transmission)
The last sentence also mentioned about Sunyata. So this is very short, but the content very vast. So it is quite useful, whenever you have some time, then just relax, then think this, and recite. Very helpful. 
HHDL (in English): Now, we make some kind of pledge. I never harm other people or other insects. Some exception about mosquitoes (HHDL laughs) Now, no exception. Any sentient beings, I will never harm them. Whenever possibility, I will serve. That is the real purpose of my life. Now make the mental pledge. Those who consider themselves as Buddhist, then think ultimate aim should be Buddhahood in order to serve sentient beings. Then non Buddhist such as Christian and Muslims practitioners also make some kind of pledge “The whole of my life I dedicate to serving God. The best way to serving God is serving humanity. God in a mysterious level which you can’t see. Bit to the God’s creations, those creatures we can see, so there is possibility to serve them. Since these are created by God, so the practical way to serve God when you serve God’s creations. Then those non-believer, since so long we are human being, we have this marvelous intelligence. This intelligence must be some positive and constructive way I should utilize this intelligence. For constructive way, I will never let this intelligence be under the destructive emotions such as anger, such as hatred, such as jealousy. We can make it. This is not something holy thing. This is a practical thing. In order to get happy life, keep here more compassionate feeling. That mental attitude itself immediately reduces fear. So the compassion brings closeness that reduces fear, distrust and gradually develops trust and friendship. We are social animals, we need friends. The proper way, make friend but not money, not power, not just artificial smile, but sincere warm heartedness. That is the real source of friendship. Friendship entirely base on trust. Trust base on compassion. So non-believer, think along these lines. Now on, just all my life, should be, honest, truthful human being. And through that way, you can carry your life more transparent. As a result trust come. Result you will be a happy person. Your family will be happy, and wherever you go, more friends you will receive. Now lets us make some kind of pledge.
THE END