Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Engaging in the Deeds of a Bodhisattva/lesson46.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:52:17.800898
================================================================================


The favorable conditions for the generation of joyous perseverance are the
four powers:
   1. The power of aspiration
   2. The power of steadfastness
   3. The power of joy
   4. The power of relinquishment
Of these four powers, we have finished with the power of aspiration. In
short, whatever practice we are going to undertake, the success in that
practice comes on the basis of having a strong aspiration/yearning for that
outcome or goal of that practice. On the basis of this power of aspiration,
then comes the power of steadfastness.
There are different types of joyous perseverance.
[The four types of joyous perseverance:
   1. Armor-like joyous perseverance
   2. Joyous perseverance of application
   3. Joyous perseverance non-discouragement
   4. Joyous perseverance of non-contentment ]
Is there a link between the four powers and these different types of joyous
perseverance?
This is something to analyze and to think about.
I would think that there is a relation between the first power, the power
of aspiration, and the armor-like joyous perseverance. This is because the
armor-like joyous perseverance is a form of joyous perseverance that is
developed or generated prior to engaging in the actual activity or practice
that one has decided to do. That is, prior to whatever practice, one puts
on the armor-like of joyous perseverance. Having this strong belief and
aspiration for that goal, then that produces a very strong enthusiasm and
joy in the heart. This occurs prior to actually engaging in whatever
practice one is going to do.
Whether there is any connection or relationship between the armor-like
joyous perseverance and the power of aspiration, this is something you can
think about.
Armor-like joyous perseverance is the mind that is enthusiastic about
whatever virtue that one is engaging in. It is a mind that is enthusiastic
about it and takes delight in it, and this occurs prior to actually
engaging in that virtue.
Then there is power of steadfastness that is applied when one is actually
engaged in the virtue. So there is a relationship between power of
steadfastness and the joyous perseverance of application.
What is the joyous perseverance of application?
Joyous perseverance of application is the mind of enthusiasm and delight
while one is actually engaging in that virtue.
In our earlier discussion on the power of steadfastness, we are advised to
consider carefully before we undertake any endeavor, and in this case here
is virtue. So before we actually undertake any practice or virtue, we
should analyze and think carefully whether we can do it or not and whether
we will be able to complete the task or not. After having made the decision
and after having started on that practice, the power of steadfastness is
used to apply on oneself to such virtues until one bring the task to
completion. I would think that this is the relationship between this power
of steadfastness and the joyous perseverance of application.
Joyous perseverance of non-discouragement is sometime called as the joyous
perseverance of non-disturbance, in that, the mind is not disturbed. In my
own view, there is a relationship between this joyous perseverance of non-
discouragement and the power of steadfastness.
While accumulating virtue or engaging in a particular virtue or practice,
it is possible that along the way you may feel discourage or your mind get
disturbed for whatever reason. At that point it is especially important to
still yourself to generate the extraordinary courage. That means, you need
to have extraordinary enthusiasm for the task that you are already doing
such that you can continue in that practice and see it to completion. This
is what I think. You have to analyze and think about it.
The fourth type of joyous perseverance is the joyous perseverance of non-
contentment. I think there is a relationship between joyous perseverance of
non-contentment and the power of joy.
Joyous perseverance of non-contentment is a mind that is enthusiastic about
virtue and is delighted in the practice but it is not easily contented. It
is a mind that doesn’t allow you to feel “I have already done this”, which
maybe only a very small practice but you feel satisfied with it. Rather, it
is a mind of delight and enthusiasm that doesn’t take satisfaction in
whatever one has achieved but tend strives to do more. I would think that
maybe the relationship between joyous perseverance of non-contentment and
the power of joy.
As for the power of relinquishment, I’m not exactly sure but perhaps one
can relate the power of relinquishment to the joyous perseverance of non-
discouragement. I cannot say this for sure but when you think about it, one
can come up with an explanation and can reasonably make a connection
between the power of relinquishment and the joyous perseverance of non-
discouragement.
In order to make a connection between these things, we first must know what
the four powers are and what they on their own are. We also need to know
the four types of joyous perseverance. On the basis of knowing these two
sets of phenomena then we can analyze to see whether there is any
connection between them.
We were looking at the power of steadfastness and in particular we were
looking at the three types of pride:
   1. Pride about action,
   2. Pride about ability
   3. Pride about afflictions
In developing the power of steadfastness, one has to cultivate these three
types of pride.
I think the pride about action essentially means that whatever virtuous
action/karma that one is accumulating or creating, one has this idea “I’m
going to do this on my own. I don’t need any friends or companions to
accompany me along the way. I don’t need them to help me. Rather, I would
do this on my own.” This is the pride about action. So the pride about
action is essentially a very strong kind of courage i.e. “I will do this by
myself alone.”  You must understand that the context for this discussion is
the bodhisattva practices. We are talking about the trainings of
bodhisattvas. Of course bodhisattvas already have wholehearted resolved,
and they take on the personal responsibility to accomplish the welfare of
sentient beings. They always have the thought “I will do this by myself
alone”.
One needs the pride about one’s ability, without that there will be
problems. What are the faults for not having pride about one’s ability?

|(b) Being proud of [one's] capacity    |
|(i) The shortcomings of taking no pride|
|in one's capacity                      |
|(ii) The benefits of taking pride [in  |
|one's capacity]                        |
|(iii) Abiding in pride as an antidote  |
|(iv) It is unreasonable to be proud of |
|the afflictions                        |
|(v) The benefits of pride as an        |
|antidote                               |

|(i) The shortcomings of taking no pride|
|in one's capacity                      |


Verse 7.52
When encountering a dead snake,
Even crows will act as though they are garudas.
If I am weak
I shall be harmed by even a small downfall.
Verse 7.53 a,b
How do the faint-hearted who have given up exerting themselves
Find liberation from destitution?
Khen Rinpoche (In English): I don’t know how the example works here - crow
acting like a garuda? What does it meant by that? What are they trying to
tell from the example? The crow acting likes a garuda - what are they
talking about? Just wondering what they are trying to tell through the
example. Anybody have any idea?
Student 1:  The crow wants to eat the snake and as the crow know that the
snake is already dead, it is no more afraid and becomes braver than the
garudas.  So it means that if I am weak and not like a garuda, I will be
defeated by a small downfall.
Student 2: The translation I have here says: When crows encounter a dying
snake, they will act as though they were eagles. Likewise if my self
confidence is weak, I shall be injured by the slightest downfall.” The
analogy is that normally the crow is fearful of snake for whatever reason.
Because the snake is already weak, either it is dying or is dead, therefore
the crow can pretend to be very courageous like a garuda. They have a lot
of confidence because they know that the snake can no longer harm them.
I’m just wondering whether the analogy of the dying snake could refer to
the task that we actually have to apply ourselves to. Actually those tasks
are not as difficult as we think they are, but if our confidence is weak,
that means we don’t have the self confidence that we could tackle those
practices, then we will be injured by the slightest downfall.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): Now everybody acting likes the crow.
Student 3: My thinking is that the dying snake is like your self confidence
and the crow is actually the downfall.  For example when your self
confidence is like becoming like a dying snake, so it is like your
confidence is actually weakening. Then the crow which is the downfall can
actually attack you.
Khen Rinpoche (In English): See, for this one example, people has different
commentary and understanding. I also don’t know exactly. Her idea is
totally different from what the two students are explaining. Hers is
opposite.
Here the meaning is that in order to vanquish the afflictions, one must
have very strong courage and the pride about one’s ability thinking: “I can
vanquish the afflictions. I definitely can do it.” One need to have that
kind of courage. If one’s courage is small and weak, one will be affected
even by a small downfall. If one doesn’t have the pride about ability and
one’s courage is weak, even a small fault or mistake can throw one into the
lower realms.
Whether it is accomplishing virtue or abandoning non-virtue, if one’s
determination is weak and does not have the courage then one will not be
able to abandon non-virtue and one will not be able to accomplish virtue.
As such, one will be harmed in this life and also in the future lives. As
such, it would be difficult to break free from cyclic existence, and it
would be difficult to achieve freedom and liberation. That is the meaning.
Based on the meaning, how should one interpret the analogy as the analogy
has to fit with the meaning? If that is the case, what Student 3 had said
maybe applicable in that the dead snake here could refer to one’s lack of
determination or courage. If one does not have any determination or
courage, even a small little bird like a crow can harm.
Khen Rinpoche (In English): Make sense?
Student 4: I am thinking the other way round. The small downfall is like
the dying snake or dead snake, that means they are easy to attack. When you
meet small downfall, you can easily overcome. But if you don’t have the
determination and when difficulties come, you will run away. In the first
place when you have started without the right mind set thinking  “This is
like going to be difficult”  and if you don’t have the perseverance, then
whenever small downfall comes, it is like the dying snake or dead snake,
you can easily overcome. But when the more difficult comes, you cannot
overcome.
Khen Rinpoche (In English): The dead snake is what?
Student 4: Small downfall.
Khen Rinpoche (In English): Then the crow is what? Yourself?
Student 4: Yeah. That means if you don’t have determination, you can only
overcome small downfall like the dying snake.  When you meet small
downfall, you act as if you are like garuda. If you don’t develop that kind
of self confidence right from the beginning knowing that it is going to be
difficult, then when the slight downfall comes, you can only overcome
slight downfall like dying snake.
Khen Rinpoche (In English): Okay, I didn’t really get exactly. Anyway, I
don’t know exactly which way is better.
The pride about ability is this confidence in one’s ability to vanquish the
afflictions. If one has strong confidence in one’s ability to vanquish the
afflictions, one will not be harmed by even the great downfalls. But if one
doesn’t have any confidence or if one’s courage is weak, then one can be
harmed even by small downfalls; you don’t have to talk about the big
downfalls. Even the small downfalls can cause harm.
In Gyaltsab Je’s commentary, verse 7.52 and 7.53ab comes under the outline
“The fault of not having pride about ability.” If you think about how the
outline is phrased and then the example, usually the crows will have
difficulty dealing with snakes or taking advantage of the snakes. But if
the snake is dead, then the crows can do whatever they want with it.
Likewise, I guess it means that if one’s determination (or one’s confidence
or one’s courage) and one’s pride about ability is non-existent or is very
weak one can even be harmed by something insignificant.
Next is the benefit of having this kind of pride.

|(ii) The benefits of taking pride|
|[in one's capacity]              |


Verse 7.53 cd
By generating pride and exertion,
Even the great will find it hard to overcome me.
Verse 7.54
Therefore with a steady mind
I shall overcome the downfalls.
If I am defeated by a downfall,
My wish to be victorious over the three realms will become a joke.
By generating pride about ability, one applies and exerts in confessing the
negativities and restraining oneself from all the downfalls. As such, one
will not be harmed even by any great downfall, and one will not be thrown
into the lower realms.
By generating this pride about ability, one can even overcome the root
downfalls.
Without this pride about ability and without confidence, one will be harmed
even by small downfalls. At the same time if one says: “I want to achieve
the state of omniscience/full enlightenment and I want to conquer the three
realms”, then this becomes a joke.

|(iii) Abiding in pride as an     |
|antidote                         |


Verse 7.55
I will conquer everything
And nothing at all shall conquer me!
I, a son of the Lion-like Victor,
Shall dwell in this pride
I guess “I shall conquer everything that needs to be conquered” to means “I
will abandon all the afflictions. I will abandon all the objects of
abandonment. I will do this.”
“I, a son of the Lion-like Victor, Shall dwell in this pride” – here it
says “I will abide in this pride about my own ability like the child of the
Victorious One, the Buddha, who had overcome or vanquished the four maras.”
This section on the pride about ability essentially is courage and
confidence in one’s ability to vanquish the afflictions and thinking “I am
going to vanquish the afflictions and I can vanquish the afflictions. I am
able to do so”. It is to have that confidence in this.
Next section talks about why it is wrong to follow after afflicted pride
(i.e. pride that is an affliction)

|(iv) It is unreasonable to be     |
|proud of the afflictions          |
|(a') Decrying pride in the        |
|afflictions                       |
|(b') The disadvantages of that    |
|(c') The reasonableness of        |
|abandoning it                     |

|(a') Decrying pride in the        |
|afflictions                       |


Verse 7.56
Any migrating being is destroyed by pride.
Afflicted, he has no pride.
Those with pride do not succumb to the power of the enemy.
They have come under the power of the enemy of pride.
The three types of pride that we were just talking about are:
   1) Pride about action
   2) Pride about ability
   3) Pride about affliction
These three types of pride are not the pride that is one of the six root
afflictions*.  Although the word is the same but the three types of pride
are not the afflicted pride, i.e. they are not the pride which is a root
affliction. The pride which is a root affliction is an object of
abandonment, whereas the three types of pride that were just discussed here
is not an object of abandonment.
*Six root afflictions
1. Attachment
2. Anger
3. Pride
4. Ignorance
5. Doubt
6. Wrong view
We talked about the fully completed Buddha, the foe destroyer or the arhat.
A foe destroyer is one who has vanquished the enemy of afflictions which
include the affliction of pride. Of the three kinds of pride, pride about
affliction is the kind of pride that the bodhisattva cultivates. That is
not the pride that is a root affliction.
The bodhisattvas cultivate this pride about ability so that they can
vanquish the afflictions. That pride about ability is not an afflicted
pride and is not something to be abandoned. In fact, they need this pride
about ability, because when they generate the pride about ability they can
also vanquish the ordinary pride – the afflicted pride.
You need to know that there is a difference between the ordinary pride (the
pride that is an affliction) and the pride about ability which we have been
talking about. Although it is called the pride about ability it is not the
actual afflicted pride. This pride about ability that the bodhisattvas
cultivate is in fact essential, and they need it because with that they can
vanquish the afflictions including the afflicted pride. So, you must not
confuse with these two kinds of pride: pride about ability and afflicted
pride.
There is a difference between the pride about ability and the ordinary
pride in term of what they do to the mind. When there is pride about
ability, it means it is the confidence that “I can vanquish the
afflictions. I will vanquish the afflictions.” With that kind of pride
about ability, the mind doesn’t come under the control of the afflictions.
But with the ordinary pride, when the afflicted pride manifests the mind
comes under the control or the influence of afflictions and that will lead
to many problems. As such, it is wrong to follow after the ordinary pride
or the afflicted pride.
What are the faults of the ordinary or afflicted pride? What does it do to
us?

|(b') The             |
|disadvantages of that|


Verse 7.57
Inflated by afflicted pride,
I shall be led by pride to the bad migrations.
It destroys the joyous festival of being human.
I shall become a slave, eating the food of others*,
(Ven Gyurme: Eating the food of others i.e. leftover)
Verse 7.58 a,b
Stupid, ugly, feeble,
And despised everywhere.
These are the faults or problems of following after pride.
Next is why it is appropriate to abandon pride?

|(c') The reasonableness of   |
|abandoning it                |


Verse 7.58 c,d,e
Tough people inflated by pride
Are also included among those having pride.
Tell me, what is the inferior like!
It is said that if the mind is puffed up with arrogance or with pride then
such people can never taste the dharma. He will be despised by others and
will become lowly person. This afflicted pride or ordinary pride is not the
pride about ability that is cultivated by the bodhisattvas.  This afflicted
pride cannot be counted as the pride about ability that the bodhisattvas
cultivate. Why? If you say that then you will not be able to find anybody
on earth would say that it is difficult to cultivate the pride about
ability. I guess this is what is meant by the last line of verse 7.58:
“Tell me, what is the inferior like!”
Next verse talks about the benefits of having the pride of the ability.

|(v) The benefits of pride as |
|an antidote                  |


Verse 7.59
Whoever seizes pride in order to conquer the enemy of pride,
He is the one having pride, the victorious hero.
Whoever definitely destroys the rampage of this enemy of pride,
Completes the results of a Victor in accordance with the wishes of
migrating beings.
This is an advice on how to generate the pride about ability in order to
vanquish the afflictions.
“He is the one having pride, the victorious hero” refers to the person who
has very strong pride about ability. The person who develops this pride
about ability to vanquish or to conquer his own afflictions is a hero. They
are called hero because they are out to vanquish or conquer their own
afflictions. Those who act in such a way to vanquish their afflictions
achieve the provisional goals of high status and the definite goodness i.e.
liberation and enlightenment.
With that, I have finished with the pride about ability. In short, there is
a big difference between the pride about ability and normal afflicted
pride. One should not confuse with these two. The pride about ability is
something to be cultivated, and the afflicted pride is an object of
abandonment. Through cultivating the pride about ability there are many
benefits. If one follows the afflicted pride, then there are all these
hosts of disadvantages and faults. As such the bodhisattvas cultivate the
pride about ability.
Having said all these, maybe you can think about this: What is the
difference between the pride of the action and the pride about ability?
Khen Rinpoche (in English): That is question. Anybody help? Anybody have
answer on what is the difference of these two?
Student 5: The pride of the action is referring to determination and then
the pride about ability is confidence.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): First is the determination then next is the
confidence. Good. Anybody has any other idea or the same?
Next is the section of the third type of pride which is the pride about
affliction.  Earlier in the pride about ability, it is a confidence in
being able to vanquish the afflictions. It is a very strong determination
thinking “I will vanquish the afflictions.” Then on the basis of that
pride, when one engages in vanquishing the afflictions, at that time there
is also a very strong determination which thinks “I will not let the
afflictions touch me. I will not let them take hold in my mind at all.
Rather, I will destroy them completely”. That is the pride about
affliction. So, that is a very stable determination and courage.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): I think I will finish in next class the joyous
effort.
Student 6: I would like to clarify whether these
   1) Armor-like joyous perseverance
   2) Joyous perseverance of application
   3) Joyous perseverance of non-discouragement
   4) Joyous perseverance of non-contentment
Can these somewhat classify under the three type of joyous perseverance
which are:
   1) Armor-like joyous perseverance
   2) Joyous perseverance of gathering virtue
   3) Joyous perseverance of acting for the welfare of living beings?
Ven Gyurme: In short, you are saying the four types of joyous perseverance
can be subsumed into the three types of joyous perseverance?
Khen Rinpoche: Whether it is the armor-like joyous perseverance in the
three-fold division of joyous perseverance or armor-like joyous
perseverance in the four-fold division of joyous perseverance, they are the
same thing. That is related to the power of aspiration.
The armor-like joyous perseverance is a mind which occurs prior to engaging
in any virtue, and based on that you engage in virtue.
Then there is joyous perseverance in application. When you are joyous
perseverance in something you could be gathering virtue, or you could be
acting for the welfare of sentient beings. After you have started on a
particular practice, and when you apply yourself in a particular virtue
either you are gathering virtue or you are acting for the welfare of
sentient beings, the power of steadfastness becomes very important.
Whether you are engaging any virtue or whether you are working for the
welfare of sentient beings, you need the pride about action, the pride
about ability and the pride about affliction.
You need this power of steadfastness, and you need these three types of
pride in order to be able to complete the practice or that virtue. In order
to complete that virtue or practice, the power of joy comes in and the
power relinquishment comes in as well.
When we say we joyously persevere in virtue, what does it mean? It is
either we are gathering virtue (i.e. doing something virtues) or doing
something to benefit sentient beings.  In order to be successful, we need
the four powers. Of the four types of joyous perseverance, you have joyous
perseverance of application, joyous perseverance of non-discouragement and
joyous perseverance of non-contentment.  These occur when you are applying
yourself in virtue. You have already engaged or started in the process, so
these three are to be cultivated when you are engaging in virtue.
Now if you think about it, you can make a connection between the three-fold
division and the four-fold division of joyous perseverance. You can make a
connection between the type of joyous perseverance and the different kinds
of power. The more information you have then the more things to analyze.
When there is the more to analyze, you see the connection between different
things and your perspective becomes more deep and wider. Basically it comes
from thinking.
Student 6: If I can simplify a little bit, for the armor-like it is the
armor-like whether it is three-fold or four-fold. But under the four-fold
joyous perseverance, the joyous perseverance of application, joyous
perseverance of non-discouragement and joyous perseverance of non-
contentment are under gathering virtue under the three-fold. Of course the
last three also relating to the acting for the welfare of living beings.
Khen Rinpoche: To make it easy, prior to whatever virtue you are going to
engage in, you must have a very strong interest. You must want it so much.
You must have a very strong yearning for it. Whether we call it armor-like
joyous perseverance or whether we call it power of aspiration that is what
it is referring to. With very strong yearning, you really want it. That is
why when you are thinking about doing something to achieve it, you must
want it.
The armor-like joyous perseverance and then power of aspiration have to
occur prior to the actual engagement in the virtue. When you have started
to engage in the virtue it is either virtue as in gathering virtue or it
could be the virtue in the sense of working for others. Whatever you are
set up to do, whether you are gathering virtue or you are working for the
welfare of sentient beings, and in order to complete that task  of either
gathering virtue or accomplishing the welfare of others, you need the three
other powers:
   1) Power of steadfastness
   2) Power of joy
   3) Power of relinquishment
Whether it is gathering virtue or whether you are accomplishing the welfare
of sentient beings, if you are thinking of it in term of four-fold division
of joyous perseverance then you need the joyous perseverance of
application, you need to apply yourself to the task.
Then you cannot be discouraged. Then you need the joyous perseverance of
non-discouragement.
You need to enjoy doing it and need to do even more. So you need the joyous
perseverance of non-contentment. With these three types of joyous
perseverance you are then able to complete the chosen task whether it is
gathering virtue or accomplishing the welfare of others.
Student 7: In the presentation of the twelve links, projecting karma and
actualizing karma were presented, what is the role of completing karma
there? In the presentation of the effects of karma, projecting karma and
completing karma were presented, what is the role of actualizing karma
there?
Khen Rinpoche (in English): Somebody come to answer for that.
The question is: If we look at the presentation of karma in term of
projecting karma and completing karma, what is the function of actualizing
karma?
Khen Rinpoche (in English): Come on, those already graduate.
Student 8: Actualizing karma is very strong and it will make sure it will
bring forth the effect.
Ven Gyurme: Effect of which karma?
Student 8: Projecting karma
I have mentioned before, after you have accumulated the projecting karma
but in order to bring forth its effect, it must be nourished by craving and
grasping. When that projecting karma is nourished by craving and grasping
to the point when it is certain to give rise to its effect and it becomes
…..??
Student 7: The projecting karma is no more during the time of causal-period
consciousness, so what karma is being nourished by craving and grasping?
Essentially, once projecting karma is accumulated, it ceases and does not
exist. But the seed (or the potential or the imprint or the latencies) of
that projecting karma that was left in the mental continuum is nourished by
craving and grasping.
This is complicated when we talk about completing karma. In the
Vashubandhu’s Abidharmakosha, one accumulates many virtuous karma to be
born as a human being. But it is stated in the text that one karma projects
and the rest completes. It is also states that one’s rebirth is not
propelled by many karma.
Then the Compendium of Knowledge (Abhidharma-samuccaya), the higher
Abhidharma by Arya Asanga,  the assertion is very different. He said that
one karma can project one rebirth, one karma can also project many
rebirths. He also said that one rebirth can be propelled by many karma.
Anyway, this is the statements to think about. In future we could discuss
further. This is what is being mentioned in the text. We can think about it
and maybe next time we can analyze or discuss.
In the next lesson, we should be able to finish the rest of chapter seven.









