Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Engaging in the Deeds of a Bodhisattva/lesson1.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:52:14.551934
================================================================================


Compounded things are impermanent. Based on that, one establishes that
there is suffering. And based on the reason of suffering, one goes on to
establish that phenomena are selfless.
When the Buddha first taught the dharma, he said that all compounded
phenomena are impermanent. There are different levels of subtlety behind
the explanation of what impermanence really is. There is coarse
impermanence and subtle impermanence. The impermanence that the Buddha was
mainly alluding to is subtle impermanence. So realizing what subtle
impermanence is a challenging task. However, without realizing subtle
impermanence, it is not possible to understand the suffering of
conditionality (also translated as pervasive compounded suffering). Out of
the three types of suffering*, suffering of conditionality is the third
type. So without understanding or realizing subtle impermanence, there is
no way to realize what suffering of conditionality is.
*[Three types of sufferings: 1. Suffering of suffering  2. Suffering of
change  3. Suffering of conditionality]
It is said that all compounded phenomena are impermanent but the actual or
specific example of the impermanent phenomenon that we should primarily
focus on is ourselves. We ourselves are in the nature of impermanence.
Without realizing that we ourselves are in the nature of impermanence, then
it is difficult for us to see how we are actually suffering. It is really
difficult to realize our own impermanence particularly on the fact that we
are in the nature of subtle impermanence.
It is in our own experience that when we think of ourselves there is the
“I” or the person who woke up in the morning, and then there is the “I” or
the person that exists in the later part of the day, let’s say, in the
evening. When we think of ourselves, we look at the “I” of this morning and
the “I” of now, we spontaneously and instinctively feel that it is the same
“I” i.e. the “I” or the person hasn’t changed at all. Similarly, when we
look at our body, we feel that the body of this morning and the body of the
current moment is the same. It hasn’t changed. So, to realize subtle
impermanence is very difficult.
What we instinctively believe is that the “I” of this morning and the “I”
of the evening, the body we have this morning and the body of this current
moment is the same; it never change. We instinctively believe that this is
the case. But is that the reality of the “I”? Is that the reality of our
body? No! When we think about it, the reality is that the “I” and our body
has changed. In fact, from this morning up till now, it has changed in each
and every single moment. Up till now, it is changing but we don’t realize
it and we don’t see it.
Imagine you set a stick on fire and then twirl it quickly. When you do
that, there is an appearance of a fire wheel. But in reality, there isn’t a
wheel. Likewise, although we instinctively believe that the “I” and the
body do not change from moment to moment and it appears the same to us, but
in reality the body and the “I” are constantly changing in each and every
moment. So the point is that while we instinctively believe and think that
is the reality i.e. the “I” of this morning and the “I” of now is the same
and didn’t change, and the body of this morning and the body of now didn’t
change. Although we believe this is how it appears to us, this is what we
believe but the reality is that that is a mistake. It is not true, it is
false.
In the great treatises in the study of logic, the common statement is
phrased in this way:
The subject sound is impermanent because it is a product.
So by the valid proof of product, one establishes that sound is
impermanent.
In this case when we talk about sound and proofing that sound is
impermanent by the reason of it being a product:
- impermanence here means disintegration and
- product here means creation i.e. something new is created.
But when you think about the meaning of these two, impermanence and
product, they are actually one entity but different isolates.
[From Lorig Lesson 1: An impermanent phenomenon is mutually inclusive with
functioning thing, product, ultimate truth, specifically characterized
phenomenon and composed phenomenon.
Impermanent phenomenon = existent phenomenon that undergoes momentary
change in each and every single moment
Product = created or produced phenomenon]
Khen Rinpoche (spoke in English): Hope you are not confused. Not confused
on first day!
If we apply this line of reasoning by changing the subject to “I”, then:
The subject “I” is impermanent because it is a product.
Or my body is impermanent because it is a product.
One’s body is a product because it is produced. That being the reason, then
one establishes that one’s body is in fact impermanent.
What one has to establish at the end of the day is that we are impermanent
and our body is impermanent because it was produced and it is in the nature
of impermanence. It is changing and disintegrating moment by moment. Why?
Because it is a product, it was produced.
That is why the Buddha said “Because it is produced, it is a phenomenon
that undergoes disintegration”. By the very reason, therefore anything that
is produced, it has the nature of disintegration. It is impermanent.
Because it is produced, then that phenomenon that is produced is in the
nature of impermanence. It undergoes disintegration in each and every
single moment.
Production arises due to a cause. There must be a cause that gives rise to
production. What then is the cause of that phenomenon having the nature of
impermanence? Is there a cause other than the cause that led to its
production? Or is there something else? In the Buddha’s teachings, it is
asserted that the cause of the production of a particular phenomenon is
itself the very cause of its disintegration. This is something that we need
to think about and establish for ourselves.
Impermanence and product are essentially having the same one entity/nature;
just that they are different isolates. Of course this is an extremely
difficult point to realize.
In order to develop definite understanding and realization of the meaning
of subtle impermanence, one has to realize that whatever is produced
necessarily undergoes disintegration. It is the nature of impermanence.
Otherwise there is no way to realize subtle impermanence.
If you light a candle, there is a flame. So when the candle is lit, there
is light/illumination. When the candle flame dies off, the light disappears
as well. Does the ceasing of the light happen simultaneous with the
cessation of the flame of the candle? Or is there an intervening period
(i.e. first the flame goes out, and then the light/illumination ceases)?
Khen Rinpoche (spoke in English): Or at the same time?
The point that one has to understand is an impermanent phenomenon undergoes
momentary change in each and every single moment. While that particular
impermanent phenomenon exists, it exists as a continuum. For example, the
body that existed in the morning and the body that exists now, there is a
continuum. While that specific body exists during that time, it is not that
the body does not undergo change. There is a continuum of the specific
impermanent phenomenon, and in each and every single moment of that
continuum disintegration is happening. Change is happening. This is what we
have to understand.
When we think about this, we have to utilize our time especially when we
have the time and opportunity. We should not to let it go to waste but to
educate ourselves, to learn and to reflect on the Buddha’s teachings. By
continually reflecting on impermanence, this will impel us to take the
opportunity as much as possible and whatever time we have to move the mind
in the direction of virtue - whether doing prayer, engaging in practice,
study or learning. Whatever we learn and study, we should always apply it
to our own mind and try our best to use it as much as possible to weaken
and to reduce our afflictions - the three mental poisons. We have to remind
ourselves of our own impermanence and tell ourselves to engage in virtues.
Whatever that is good, we should seize the opportunity. We should make a
pledge to ourselves while there is the opportunity. When all the different
conditions are still there, we just have to try our best to make use of the
opportunity.
Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds
With regards to the approach that we can take when studying this text,
ideally if we can study the text by following the outline of the
commentary, then there is a great benefit. The purpose is to help us to
gain a good overview and understanding of the different sections and
different parts of the text. But I don’t think we will be able to do that
in our case. Rather if we can just get some understanding of some of the
verses in the text, then I think that will suffice for our purpose. For
those of you who really have the interest and would like to read the root
text together with the outlines of the commentary by Gyaltsab Je, the
outline of Gyaltsab Je’s commentary to this root text is available in
English. Those of you who are interested can always find out how to get
your hands on it. I hope that I can just try to explain the meaning as much
as possible of the verses. I hope to go as quickly as I can.
The study of this text is different from the study of some other
philosophical subjects. This text is intellectually not that challenging.
In fact, it is not difficult to understand. This text which is called
Engaging the Deeds of the Bodhisattva has ten chapters.
The first chapter is an explanation of the benefits of the mind of
enlightenment (or bodhicitta). This is a teaching of the Mahayana. So in
order for a person to be a Mahayanist, one must have the realization of
bodhicitta. Then one becomes a Mahayanist. In order to develop bodhicitta,
one has to first develop the belief in bodhicitta, develop enthusiasm for
developing bodhicitta and develop faith in bodhicitta. For that reason, the
benefits of bodhicitta are explained in the first chapter. It doesn’t mean
that one will be able to adopt bodhicitta and generate bodhicitta even if
you have enthusiasm, faith and belief in it. In order to adopt bodhicitta
and to generate bodhicitta, one must overcome the obstacles; which are the
negativities. That have to be purified and one has to accumulate the
merit/virtue; which is the favorable condition. On the basis of confessing
and purifying one’s negativities and collecting merit, one has to adopt
bodhicitta through ritual. For those reasons, therefore there are chapter
two and chapter three.
Chapter two is called confessing negativities.
Chapter three is completely adopting or upholding bodhicitta.
So one adopts bodhicitta through a ritual, one develops and generates this
mind to enlightenment. But it is insufficient to just adopt bodhicitta
through a ritual. After one has adopted and generated bodhicitta through a
ritual, it is important to not let the mind of enlightenment that was
adopted to degenerate. In order to not let one’s commitment degenerate, one
has to know exactly what to adopt and what to discard. For that reason,
there is chapter four which is conscientiousness.
After adopting bodhicitta it is important to not let it degenerate. After
adopting bodhicitta through a ritual, there is the training in the deeds on
the practices of a bodhisattva. With respect to that, there is the general
training and the specific training.
The specific training refers to the training in the perfections.
The general training here will be covered in chapter four when there is the
teaching on conscientiousness i.e. teaching on what one has to adopt, what
one has to discard with regards to one’s training.
Chapter five is vigilance or introspection. Once one has adopted
bodhicitta, it is important to maintain one’s ethical discipline. In order
to maintain one’s ethical discipline, one needs mindfulness and vigilance.
For that reason, therefore there is an explanation of that in chapter five.
Chapter six deals with the perfection of patience.
Chapter seven on joyous perseverance.
Chapter eight on the perfection of meditative stabilization.
Chapter nine on the perfection of wisdom.
Chapter ten is the chapter on dedication.
|Chapter…    |Explanation on …                 |
|Chapter one |the benefits of the mind of      |
|            |enlightenment                    |
|Chapter two |confessing negativities          |
|Chapter     |completely adopting or upholding |
|three       |bodhicitta                       |
|Chapter four|conscientiousness                |
|Chapter five|vigilance (or introspection)     |
|Chapter six |perfection of patience           |
|Chapter     |joyous perseverance              |
|seven       |                                 |
|Chapter     |perfection of meditative         |
|eight       |stabilization                    |
|Chapter nine|perfection of wisdom             |
|Chapter ten |dedication                       |













If you were to ask where is the practice of the perfection of generosity
indicated in the text? According to the commentaries, the perfection of
generosity is indicated in the chapter of dedication because in the chapter
of dedication, there is the verse which says: To dedicate one’s body and
roots of virtue and enjoyments to others.
So these are the ten chapters. This text Engaging the Deeds of the
Bodhisattva is essentially a teaching showing the whole practice of the
Great Vehicle - the Mahayana.
The dedication prayer that most people are aware of is:
jang chub sem chog rinpoche - may the precious bodhicitta not yet born,
arise and grow, may that born have no decline but increase forever more.
That verse essentially is the condensed meaning of all the ten chapters of
this text.
So if you expand on the meaning of this dedication prayer, then you have
these ten chapters. But if you were to condense the subject matter or the
meaning of these ten chapters, it can be condensed into this one dedication
verse.
In the verse “may the precious bodhicitta not yet born, arise and grow”,
when we talk about bodhicitta or the mind of enlightenment, you can look at
it in terms of the conventional mind of enlightenment and the ultimate mind
of enlightenment. When we say “may the precious bodhicitta not yet born,
arise and grow”, we are talking about these two minds of enlightenment -the
conventional mind of enlightenment and the ultimate mind of enlightenment.
In order for that which has not arisen for it to arise, you have the first
three chapters explaining how to make that happen.
The first chapter is explaining the benefits of bodhicitta.
Chapter two is confessing negativities and chapter three is completely
upholding or completely adopting bodhicitta.
It is not sufficient to adopt bodhicitta and then let it degenerate. As the
dedication prayer goes
   May the precious bodhicitta,
   Not yet born, arise and grow,
   May that born have no decline,
   But increase forever more.
It is important not to let this bodhicitta which has arisen to degenerate.
As a method for stopping the degeneration of the bodhicitta that has been
generated, then there is the practice of conscientiousness, vigilance and
patience which are taught in chapters 4, 5 and 6. So the chapters on
conscientiousness, vigilance and patience become very important.
Then the dedication prayer ends with “increase forever more”. On top of not
letting the bodhicitta that has been adopted to degenerate, you must ensure
that it increases as well. For that, one needs joyous perseverance, one
need to develop meditative stabilization, and one needs wisdom as well.
Therefore you have chapters 7, 8 and 9.
So the bodhicitta that has not arisen, one must develop it. Once it is
developed, you must ensure that it does not degenerate. On the basis of
that, then one strives to increase the bodhicitta.
The result of following this process is that one achieves the final fruit
of attainment. The whole purpose of attaining this final fruit of
attainment is solely to work for the benefit and the welfare of others. In
that sense, the whole purpose of cultivating bodhicitta, not letting it
degenerate and then striving to increase it is to achieve that goal – the
final fruit of attainment which is for others. In this prayer, it is kind
of like a wish or an aspiration for that final fruit of attainment to
benefit others. So this prayer is like a wish or an aspiration for that
final fruit of attainment to benefit others.
The first three chapters are:
1. Explaining the benefits of bodhicitta,
2. Confessing negativities
3. Thoroughly embracing bodhicitta
These are the methods for generating bodhicitta that has not yet been
generated
The following three chapters are:
4. Conscientious
5. Relying on vigilance
6. Patience
These are the methods to prevent bodhicitta from degenerating.
The next three chapters:
7. Joyous perseverance
8. Concentration
9. Wisdom
These are the methods to increase bodhicitta that had been degenerated.
The last chapter:
10. Dedication
This is a concluding prayer for dedication.
It is said that the motivation for doing anything is very important
especially the motivation in the beginning of doing something is very
important, isn’t it? Likewise, the motivation for learning and studying
this text becomes important. Each of us has to find our own motivation. We
have to look inside us and ask ourselves “Why am I here? Why should I
studying this? Why am I studying this? Why am I learning about this?” We
have to have an answer for ourselves. We need that. So when we set the
motivation, we need an answer for ourselves. You have to find your own
answer.  Until you find the answer, you have to ask yourself over and over
again “Why? Why?”
Khen Rinpoche (spoke in English): Did you find? Haven’t found? I just share
my thinking. When I was studying when I was young around 12 to 15 [years
old], I have no idea why I am studying Buddhist philosophies. I have no
idea. I didn’t have much idea. I didn’t have motivation. Why I am studying?
I am just following the other people. There are classes in the morning and
night that you have to go. There is no choice. Only at the age of 18 when I
debate in Kopan, there are some Geshes come from Sera. Those people answer
then we have to debate. It is extremely difficult debate with them. They
are scholar and they can say everything like enlightened beings. Any
questions you ask, they can answer for you. Which texts you ask, they can
answer for you. That is what I feel when I was 17 or 18 when I debated with
them and that feeling came in my heart. I can’t imagine how they can
remember everything in their brain. Of course, those Geshela studied all
the subjects for about 10 year to 15 years before, yet they still remember
everything. We are young at that time. If we study just now even that we
don’t know. I just admired and quite surprised. Some kind of wish arise
“How wonderful if I can answer like that. Only at that time, some kind of
motivation arises for me. I think that is called motivation. How wonderful
if I know all the texts. Whichever text that I did, I understand
everything. At that time also Lama Lhundup teaches us, one sentence like:
jang chub sem chog rinpoche. Of course, I have zero idea at that time. They
can explain really good the words. How wonderful if I am able to understand
the topic. So, that is how that made me to complete my study. Not complete,
mere labeling to complete the study. That happened to me. For me, that
motivate for me to study so long for about 15 to 20 years. Because of that
how many times you study, how many books you read that almost never ending
learning, there are never ending of questions. The questions coming more
and more, you know more but something you don’t know more. So it is quite
challenging. For me it is like that, always wondering “Want to know! Want
to know! Want to know!” But at that time, I don’t have much motivation
going to teach others or go to meditation. I didn’t have that thought in my
mind. For me, I just want to know! I want to know! Just want to know
everything! A little bit kiasu-ya. That pushes me. Somehow all the time
that kind of mind keeps coming so that pushes me to study for the more.
Only that time then really sometimes you think so much energy, so many
commentaries then you read. You received so many teachings sometimes you
think you know that but sometimes the teacher asked the questions you don’t
know anything. What you understand it is totally wrong. So there I find
teacher is extremely important at that moment. He can really clarify you,
making very clear what is right, what is wrong. Sometimes when you read the
book, looks like you understand something but you cannot be right. You are
giving just some rough idea. You don’t really go deep down. With the
teacher, I find much more beneficial, really you can understand deep down
with the good understanding. At that time, you really appreciate the
teacher is there. This is how I feel and how I motive myself. Just to share
that.
Everybody has to ask oneself why one is going to study this. Motivation is
everything. Motivation is the driving force. Of course, there are whole
varieties of motivations. Everybody’s motivation is different. Some people
want to know because they want to learn. Maybe some people really want to
put into practice. Some people may think that because they really want to
know and then be able to share, teach and help others. Whatever it is and
whatever it is not, the point is that one has to find the driving force
i.e. the motivation that drives oneself. The reason why people got stuck or
don’t really achieve much because they are neither here nor there. It boils
down to not being clear in their mind of what they want – the motivation.
That is why motivation is everything. It is the thing that drives and
determines the output and the result. So, whenever one study or learn, it
is important to check and adjust one’s motivation. Based on that and as
much as possible then one learns.

Chapter One
Explanation of the Benefits of the Mind of Enlightenment
1. The meaning of the title
2. The translator’s homage
3. The meaning of the text
1. The meaning of the title
In the root text, it is said: In the Indian language: The
Bodhisattvacharyavatara.
In English: Engaging the Deeds of the Bodhisattva. That is how the text
starts.
“In the Indian language” means in Sanskrit.
The name of the text is The Bodhisattvacharyavatara.
“Bodhi” is in Sanskrit. “Bodhi” in Tibetan is made up of two syllables:
jang and chub.
There is something really great and important to be understood.
Jang is to purify all the obscurations. Here, to purify all the
obscurations that prevents omniscience (or all knowingness).
Chub is to internalize or to actualize. The point is to gather and to
complete all the good qualities.
In fact, there is so much that one can understand and read into the meaning
of jang and chub. All these depend on one’s level of education. If one’s
scope of learning is limited then one’s understanding of jang is to means
purify or to get rid of something. But there is so much to say about jang.
Here is to purify what? To purify obscuration. If one goes into more
details, then what kind of obscuration? There is the afflictive obscuration
and knowledge obscuration. Then one can go deeper and deeper as to what
they are.
As for chub it means to internalize or actualize all the qualities. For
example, we can talk about all the qualities and realizations of the ten
bodhisattva grounds, which for us are something quite inconceivable and is
difficult to fit into our limited mind. The point is that if one’s scope of
learning is narrow then there is only so much that one can understands from
these words. When your scope of learning and with extensive learning, there
is so much you can read and you can get when come into contact with the
words jang chub. Then the clearer the idea that one has for jang and chub.
When you think of enlightenment, you think of Buddha. Then you really feel
that this Buddha is something that is really out of the ordinary and is
really something very special. That kind of understanding arises. It is
widely known and believed by most people that there is no need to do
extensive studies. What is the benefit of learning so much? I always say
that is not the case. That is wrong because your scope of learning
determines how much you can get as in this case when you understand what
jang chub is. Whether we say jang chub, enlightenment, Buddha or the object
of refuge, we are talking about the same thing. The more learning you have
will translate into more understanding in what jang chub or who on earth
you are entrusting yourself to. You are entrusting yourself to the Buddha
isn’t it? The more education and the more learning you have, and when you
come into contact with the words or when you think of the Buddha, the taste
is very different. When you think of the Buddha, your faith, your
experience, and your taste are just very different. If you have a good and
complete understanding of what jang chub is, and when you think of your
object of refuge, the Buddha, then you really will be able to feel that
this is not your ordinary neighbor next door. The Buddha is really
extraordinary. If you can understand what jang chub is, all the qualities,
realizations and the abandonments and why the jang chub is achieved, that
is for the sake of others and for sentient beings then you understand that
your object of refuge, the one who you entrusting yourself to is liked
this. Then it is really helpful for giving rise to very strong faith and
devotion. That is jang chub.
Meaning of “sattvacharyavatara”
Sattva in Sanskrit (as in bodhisattva) and is sempa in Tibetan. Sattva here
refers to the courageous one who works for the welfare of others.  So then
you have bodhisattva.
Charya means conduct or deed.
Avatara means to engage in.
So that is the title of this.
|Bodhisattvacharyavatara                                                    |
|Sanskrit |Tibetan   |Meaning                                               |
|Bodhi    |jang chub |Jang is to purify all obscurations.                   |
|         |          |Here, to purify all the obscurations that prevent     |
|         |          |omniscience                                           |
|         |          |Chub is to internalize or to actualize i.e. to gather |
|         |          |and to complete all the good qualities.               |
|Sattva   |sempa     |The courageous one who works for the welfare of       |
|         |          |others.                                               |
|Charya   |(cho pa)  |Conduct or deeds                                      |
|avatara  |(jug pa)  |To engage in                                          |


2. The translator’s homage
Homage to all the buddhas and bodhisattvas.
Then you have the verse of homage made by the lotsawa of the past. Lotsawa
is loosely translated in English as translator. The translator paid homage
to all the buddhas and bodhisattvas.
The Tibetan kings of the past instituted a rule or a system with regards to
paying homage at the beginning of one’s translated work. For example, here
is “Homage to all the buddhas and the bodhisattvas”.
Sometimes there is “Homage to the youthful Manjugosha” and sometimes there
is “Homage to the omniscient one (the all-knowing one)”. The point behind
these three different kinds of homage is to indicate the scriptural
collections that this particular treatise falls into. So by looking at the
homage you will be able to identify immediately and easily as to which
scriptural collections that this particular treatise fall into.
Here in this case, the homage is paid to all the buddhas and bodhisattvas.
This is an indication that this treatise falls into to the sutra collection
(sutra pitaka).
|If the lotsawa paying homage to:    |Indicate treatise belong to:    |
|Homage to youthful Manjugosha       |Knowledge collection (Abhidharma|
|                                    |pitaka)                         |
|Homage to the Omniscient One        |Vinaya  (Vinaya pitaka)         |
|Homage pay to all the buddhas and   |Sutra collection (Sutra pitaka) |
|bodhisattvas                        |                                |


Based on the object to whom the translator is paid homage to, one can
easily identify which scriptural collection that treatise fall into.
Why do we need to give a name or title to a treatise or a particular text?
In this case, this is called Engaging the deeds of the Bodhisattvas. Why do
we have the name? Why do we give it a name? According to The Descent into
the Lanka Sutra (Lankavatara), the Buddha said that one affixes a name to
the treatise in order to eliminate the confusion of the sentient beings. Or
else they will be confused if you don’t put a name.
Khen Rinpoche (spoke in English): The Buddha said that if there is no name
then the people will be confused. That is why Buddha has to give the name.
Q&A
Student 1: Is great compassion a kind of fear of sentient beings taking
rebirth in samsara?
Khen Rinpoche: That is the kind of compassion we have, but I think the
actual compassion is not liked that. Fully qualified compassion is not
liked that. For the actual great compassion, it is the mind that is unable
to bear the sentient beings is suffering. It is mind of great courage: very
strong and courageous mind.
Great compassion is that mind that is unable to bear sentient beings’
sufferings. Although one doesn’t have any solution but one has courage,
strength of mind, and very strong and powerful courage. Because it is such
a courageous mind it can induce the next mind, which is the mind of
wholehearted resolved with the attitude thinking “I myself will do it
alone”. Such a kind of attitude cannot arise if one doesn’t have very
strong courageous attitude.
The kind of compassion that we have is the very ordinary and limited kind
of compassion because our kind of compassion is mixed with attachment.
Sometimes we have that feeling of compassion arising because it is mixed
with attachment and it is not free from biased. While we generate that kind
of ordinary compassion the mind also becomes quite tight and quite narrow.
You feel kind of uneasy, disturbed and with some worries. That is the kind
of compassion that we have and it is called partial or partisan compassion.
The mind of great compassion is a mind that does not have preferences over
some sentient beings and not with others sentient beings. As such there is
no prejudice. I don’t think such a pure mind of great compassion comes with
these kinds of worries and fears. In fact it is a very courageous mind, I
guess.
Student 2: Regarding the practices here, we should develop great compassion
to become a Buddha. I always have this mental block that even if you become
a Buddha you still cannot release the suffering of sentient beings. So the
question is: Why becomes a Buddha? Even the Buddhas have enlightened but
still sentient beings’ suffering still going on and on and on. We aspire to
become a Buddha. If we become a Buddha, can we really stop the suffering of
sentient beings?
Khen Rinpoche (spoke in English): Look liked you don’t want to get
enlighten. You want to be enlightened or not? You think you can help
somebody? You cannot help anybody you think? I am talking about now. Can
you help somebody?
(Answers inaudible from student)
Khen Rinpoche (spoke in English): If you are better can you help more? If
you have good heart, you have plenty of money, possible ya?. Can help 10
people, 20 people, 100 people by depending on qualities and money and heart
isn’t it? If you are enlightened, can help many people? So quickly get
enlighten faster.
Student 3: Is it true that you have to develop single pointed concentration
in order to develop bodhicitta? If that is the case, then why the practice
of concentration is after the bodhisattva’s deeds?
Khen Rinpoche: If you look at the great treatises, it is quite evident, for
example, in Maitreya’s Abhisamayalankara. In the commentary to that, you
need calm abiding in order to actualize bodhicitta. Of course it can be
explained in the context of the perfections where you have the perfection
of meditative stabilization which precedes the perfection of wisdom. In the
discussion of the perfection of meditative stabilization here when we talk
about calm abiding, we are not talking about calm abiding in general.
Because the calm abiding in the continuum of a bodhisattva is not
necessarily a calm abiding that is focused on emptiness. So the discussion
of the generation of calm abiding in the context of perfection is more
referring to the calm abiding focusing on emptiness, and based on that one
develops the union of calm abiding and special insight. If you remember our
discussion in the previous module on the Paths and Grounds, the
bodhisattvas achieve the calm abiding focusing on emptiness on the Mahayana
Great Path of Accumulation. When that bodhisattva has achieved the special
insight focusing on emptiness, it is only then he becomes someone who is on
the Path of Preparation. Subsequently, when that bodhisattva realizes
emptiness directly then he becomes someone on the Path of Seeing.

-----------------------
May the precious bodhicitta,
Not yet born, arise and grow

May that born have no decline,


But increase forever more.



