Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Engaging in the Deeds of a Bodhisattva/lesson35.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:52:14.604089
================================================================================


Student: In relation to the question about at the time of death whether a
person can accumulate projecting karma and that projecting karma can become
actualizing karma or not, I think if a person at the time of death were to
realize emptiness, it is possible for that projecting karma that is created
before death to immediately become an actualizing karma that will affect
the next rebirth due to the heaviness of the karma that has been
accumulated.
Khen Rinpoche (In English): Are you asking a question or are you answering?
If you are asking me a question, you are just saying your own idea or what?

(Student said she is answering the question and elaborated her opinion.
Audio file: 4:13 to 6:10)
Khen Rinpoche (In English): No no, very long. What I want to know is that
you said at time of the death cannot create projecting karma, why?
Student: 6:26-7:13 minimum
Ven Gyurme: When does the time of death start?
Student: 7.24-7.43 minimum
Khen Rinpoche (In English): Why cannot create at the time of the death? Why
we cannot create projecting karma?
Student: 7.54 – 8.03min
Khen Rinpoche (In English): Why? Whatever you said, question is still
there. Why? Why have to before death? Why not time of the death?
Student: 8.21 – 8.54min
Khen Rinpoche (In English): You are not answering to that. Time of the
death, can be a very strong virtuous mind arise, so that can create
projecting karma isn’t it?
Student: 9.30 – 9.44min
Khen Rinpoche (In English): At the time of the death, very strong virtuous
mind can arise, so that can leave positive imprint in your mind, isn’t it?
So that means you can create projecting karma at the time of the death, yes
or no? So the question is: At the time of the death, whether you create
projecting karma or not?
Student: Yes
Khen Rinpoche (In English): Now you say yes. Earlier you said no because of
some reasons. Just now you said that projecting karma must to be created
before the death, not at the time of death. \
Student: 10.26-10.36 minimum
Khen Rinpoche (In English): Projecting karma, you already accept that part
isn’t it?  At the time of the death you can create projecting karma, same
idea?
Student: 11.08 – 11.14
Khen Rinpoche (In English): Why again? Why cannot nourish that karma?
Student: 11.21-12.11
Khen Rinpoche (In English): Moment doesn’t have to be 10years, 20 years
isn’t it? Moment can be one moment, 10 seconds can be moment, isn’t it?
Moment doesn’t have to be 10years, one life gap isn’t it? Moment can be 1
second, 10seconds. At the time of the death is not only short period, time
of the death have some time there. So my question is that there is some
time there, so you create projecting karma then why not that karma can be
produced result? That is the question.
Student: 12.55-13.41
Khen Rinpoche (In English): Still you are not getting what I’m asking.
Student: Sorry, I will go and think about it.
Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds
In the last lesson, we saw how the enemy or the harm doer must exist as a
condition for us to practice patience, so in dependence upon that person
acting as a condition for us to practice patience, and if we do cultivate
patience, we then accumulate the collections and purify our negativities.
In that sense, that person is not a harm doer, instead that person is a
benefactor; somebody who is helping us.
If we get upset and retaliate against that person, then that person gets
upset and become angry in return. As a result of being angry with us and
retaliating against us, he/she will accumulate non-virtue and the karma
that goes to the lower realms where he/she will have to suffer for a long
time. In that sense, we have become a harm doer to that person. So that
person has become a benefactor to us and then we have become the harm doer
to that person. As such, the teaching tells us that for those reasons, it
is completely inappropriate to hold on to that person as an enemy and to be
upset with that person.
When we are facing with such a person in our lives, then it is good to
think about what we have learned here in the teaching and analyze whether
that enemy, the person who is harming us, is the actual harm doer or we are
the harm doer. Is that harm doer in fact our benefactor? Whether we are in
fact the actual harm doer? This is what the teaching tells us. If that is
the case, in reality we actually have become the harm doer.
Having said this, of course we will raise the objections against such a
line of reasoning which says that person is the benefactor and we are the
harm doer. We will object to that. How can that be? How can it be that that
harm doer is actually my benefactor? Not possible. This is what we think.
The line of reasoning is that that person exists to help us practice
patience. If we practice patience, we get all the benefits. So instead of
being harm doer, he is actually my benefactor. But then we think “How could
it be the case. Because of him harming me, then I get angry. When I get
angry, I am throwing myself to the lower realms. So without that person, I
won’t go to hell. So how can the person be my benefactor? He is the
condition for me to go to hell.”

|(b) Abandoning objections                                       |
|(i) Rejecting [the position that holds] that it is invalid for  |
|others to do something that benefits us                         |
|(ii) Rejecting [the position that holds] that it is invalid for |
|us to bring harm upon others                                    |
|(iii) Arresting ingratitude towards those who act beneficially  |

|(i) Rejecting [the position that holds] that it is invalid for  |
|others to do something that benefits us                         |


Verse 6.50 a,b
If I have the excellent quality of thought,
I will not go to hell.
Although our existence is a condition for that person to go to hell, it
doesn’t necessarily mean that therefore we will go to hell. Although we
maybe a condition for that person to create negativities and for that
person to go to hell but it doesn’t mean that we will go to hell. We will
not go to hell if we have the excellent quality of patience, i.e. if we
have the practice of patience. Whatever the situation is, from our side, if
we practice patience, we will not go to hell. We don’t create the cause.
But if we don’t cultivate patience, we get upset and angry then we will go
to hell.
We are refuting that it is incorrect that our enemies is our benefactor.
Next is refuting that it is incorrect that I am harming others.

|(ii) Rejecting [the position that holds] that it is invalid for |
|us to bring harm upon others                                    |


Verse 6.50 c,d
If I am protecting myself,
How will they accrue merit here?
If we say that the other person is my benefactor, then he is helping me. If
he is helping me then of course he won’t go to hell. How will he go to
hell?
Khen Rinpoche (In English): How will you go to hell? You don’t go.
So the 3rd and 4th lines of verse 6.50 are the answer to that thought.
If I practice patience, I am guarding myself, but how does that protect the
harm doer?
Yes, we guard ourselves. If we practice patience we protect ourselves. We
stop accumulating negativities. As such, we don’t have to go to the lower
realms so we are guarding ourselves from the lower realms. But our practice
of patience doesn’t save others from going to hell. As such, if it doesn’t
save the other person from going to hell, in reality, we are still the harm
doer.
We may also think that if the person who is harming us actually in reality
is the benefactor, then we also should be a benefactor to others. How?
Therefore it is also right for us to harm others because we are also
benefitting them.
Khen Rinpoche (In English):  Everyone wants to be the benefactor. We all
are benefactor of the anger. Sometimes people said “Sometimes when people
get angry the person they say “I am teaching you patience”. But actually
the person is not teaching patience. The person said “I am teaching you
patience” but actually they are not teaching patience. In order to teach
patience, the person must be patient. That means the person is not really
teaching patience, he is practicing unpatience; not teaching patience.
Sometimes I see that many people, even husband and wife say “I teach you
patience.”  Saying nasty and bad things then they say “I’m teaching
patience,” but actually not really teaching patience.
Such a way of thinking is inappropriate. It is wrong. Why?

|(iii) Arresting ingratitude towards those who act beneficially  |


Verse 6.51
Nevertheless, should I return the harm
It will not protect them either.
By doing so my conduct will deteriorate
And hence this fortitude will be destroyed.
Let’s say somebody harms you. Instead of accepting it, you retaliate.  What
will happen? If you retaliate, that harm doer becomes more upset and more
disturbed, and accumulates even more negativities.
If you think “Actually I’m a benefactor to the person. I’m helping the
person when I retaliate,” how does causing him to be more upset and more
disturbed and accumulating more negativities be an act of helping that
person? How does retaliation help and benefit that person? In what way are
you benefitting? There is no benefit whatsoever. When you retaliate, you
don’t benefit that person in any way. The person gets more disturbed and
upset and accumulates more negativity. So your retaliation doesn’t protect
that person from his/her own anger, and on top that, you harm your own
practice of the four wholesome virtues. The four practices are:
   1. When we are scolded, we should not retaliate likewise
   2. When we are hit and beaten, we should not retaliate likewise
   3. If somebody exposes our faults, we should not do likewise
   4. When somebody is angry with us, we should not react with anger.
These are the four wholesome virtues or practices.
Therefore it is completely wrong to think that by retaliating, you are also
benefitting that person.
If you adopt the view thinking that you have now become the benefactor when
retaliating and causing the person to practice patience, then you should
analyze whether there is any benefit or not? There is no benefit because it
causes the person to be more upset, more angry, and as such, the person
accumulates more negativities. So there is no benefit whatsoever. On top of
that, if the person in question is a practitioner training in cultivating
bodhicitta, then when you retaliate, it only harms your four wholesome
practices as mentioned earlier. It will also harm your practice of
patience.
Next is explanation of how it is appropriate to be patient in the face of
criticism, contempt, slander and so forth.
The next two verses are basically telling us that it is appropriate to
meditate on patience when we are on the receiving end of contempt, slander,
criticism or hearing something unpleasant. So the teaching is saying that
if we think about it carefully, such criticism, contempt, slanders or harsh
speeches directed at us don’t actually harm our bodies and mind.

|2” Being patient with those who would belittle you and so forth |
|a” Despising and belittling one does not harm one’s body        |
|b” It is unreasonable for one to be furious with a person who is|
|himself in a rage                                               |
|c” It is unreasonable to be furious because material gain has   |
|been obstructed                                                 |
|d” It is unreasonable to be furious because others lack faith in|
|you                                                             |

|a” Despising and belittling one does not harm one’s body        |


Verse 6.52
Since my mind is not physical
In no way can anyone destroy it.
Through it strongly adhering to my body,
My body is harmed by suffering.
Verse 6.53
Since contempt, harsh speech,
And unpleasant words
Do not cause any harm to my body,
Why, mind, do you become so angry?
Our mind or consciousness is immaterial and is not physical. As such it
cannot be harmed by any kind of weapons.
How do we suffer physically when our body is harmed? It is said that
because we have a very strong grasping at our body and hold on to it as
“mine”, therefore when the body is physically harmed, we feel the harm. It
is said that if we don’t have that concept of the strong grasping at the
body, even though somebody may do something physical to the body, we will
not have that idea “I’m being harmed. My body is being hurt”.
When we face direct criticisms or when somebody says something nasty to us
or if somebody say something unpleasant about us behind our backs,
essentially whether it is criticism or somebody saying something nasty to
us or talking behind our backs, and if we look at the criticism or harsh
words or the unpleasant words, they are only words and sound. Can words and
sound harm our body in anyway? The answer is no. They cannot even harm our
bodies in the smallest way. If words and sound cannot harm the body in the
slightest way, how could it ever harm the mind which is non-physical? If we
think about it, there is no way it can harm.
If these unpleasant words, criticisms, or harsh speech can really harm us,
it must either harm our body or mind. If something is harmed, it is either
our body or mind. These words or sound cannot really harm our body in any
way. If it cannot harm the body, then how could it ever harm the mind which
is non-physical? Since it cannot harm the body, neither can it harm the
mind, then there is no real reason to feel justified in being upset when we
experience those criticisms, harsh and unpleasant words.
We accept that these unpleasant words, contempt and harsh words cannot harm
our body and neither can it harm our mind. Of course we don’t accept it
easily. We then come up with further reasons to justify our anger and
retaliation. We think “The words cannot harm me physically or literally it
cannot do damage to my mind, it cannot hurt or make my mind go out of
existence, but when people say these things and others get to hear about
it, then they will not like me on the account of hearing those things. I do
not like that when others don’t like me. Therefore, I don’t like the person
who is saying those things to me.”
So the answer is in verse 6.54.

|b” It is unreasonable for one to be furious with a person who |
|is himself in a rage                                          |


Verse 6.54
If others’ disliking me
Will not devour me
Either in this or in another life,
Why do I not want it?
If we think that the criticism directed at us, the contempt that others
have for us, the unpleasant words and harsh speech that will cause others
to dislike us, therefore we feel justified in being upset. Then the
question which we should ask ourselves is “How does people dislike for me
harm mw in this life? Will you eat me up? Will you harm me in this life?
How does their dislike for me harm me in my future lives? It doesn’t harm
me in this life. If doesn’t harm me in my future lives. So they can dislike
me but I don’t have to dislike them for disliking me.”
Others may dislike us. As the result of somebody’s criticism and saying
something unpleasant about us, about reputation and so forth, that may act
as the condition for others to dislike us. So what if others dislike us? If
they dislike us, so be it. If they dislike us, we don’t have to dislike
them back in return. They can dislike us but if we dislike them as a result
of their not liking us, then we are accumulating additional unnecessarily
negativities.

We also have more to say about that “Yeah, they dislike me and I don’t have
to dislike them. But when somebody says something nasty about me, he hurts
my reputation, and when others hear about it others will dislike me and
will lose faith in me. That is a problem. When others lose faith in me,
they dislike me then I will have less money. It will hurt my income which I
can gain from the relationship. So I will lose up. If the person didn’t say
all those nasty things, I will not lose up. I need all these things and
they are important to me. If I lose them then it will become a problem for
me. Therefore I have a reason, and I am justified to feel upset with the
person who is saying those nasty things about me.”
This way of thinking is mentioned in the verse 6.55.

|c” It is unreasonable to be furious because material gain has |
|been obstructed                                               |
|(1) It is unreasonable to be furious at obstructions to       |
|material gain because they quickly perish                     |
|(2) Arresting the pursuit of wrongdoing                       |
|(3) Establishing, by means of an example, the unreasonableness|
|of craving material gains                                     |
|(4) The reasons craving material gains is unreasonable        |
|(5) Refuting the reasoning behind spending one’s time in      |
|material pursuits                                             |

|(1) It is unreasonable to be furious at obstructions to       |
|material gain because they quickly perish                     |


Verse 6.55 (a,b)
Because it will hinder my gain,
I do not want this.
We used that as the reason to feel justified of being upset to the person
who says nasty things about us.
The reply to that is:
Verse 6.55 (c,d)
I shall discard my gains here
And my negativities will remain securely.
Let’s say we retaliate because we feel justified; “I need to protect my
source of income. I need to protect my reputation and my gains. So it is
justifiable for me to retaliate.” Let’s say we do retaliate, and are
successful in stopping people from talking about us, and we stop people
from disliking us. As the result our income or our source of money will not
deteriorate. Then we manage to get a lot of money. Even if we manage to do
all that, there will come a day that we will leave everything behind
anyway. That is for sure. For sure we have to die and go on to the next
life. But in the process of retaliating, and striving to maintain a good
reputation and having people like us so that we are able to keep our money,
we are accumulating a lot of negativities; primarily through anger. In that
process, anger is embedding itself even stronger and deeper in our mind
because it becomes more stable every time we get angry. We are enhancing
and strengthen that imprints.  We are accumulating more non-virtue, and all
of these remain with us when we go on to the next life. These will cause us
to suffer in our future lives.Therefore it is inappropriate, basically
incorrect, to feel justified in retaliating against criticism and the
people who are damaging our reputation for the sake of protecting our
wealth and our income, material gain and so forth.
The main reason is that even if we do manage to protect our wealth or
accumulate a lot of wealth through retaliating, they all have to be left
behind at the time of death. But the negativities that we accumulate in the
process of retaliating in order to protect the wealth remain securely and
firmly in our minds and they will harm us in our future lives.
After saying all of these, we will still object.  “Material gain and money
is important. I need money to survive. Without money, how am I going to
survive? I need to eat. I need a roof over my head. I need to survive. It
is not unreasonable to want all these. If anybody who harms my source of
income or takes away my money or my property then I will have a very
difficult life. I can even die. Therefore I have the right to retaliate,
and it is justifiable for me to be upset. Therefore it is only right that I
need to retaliate and do something about it. I need to fight and get what I
need. It is alright to do that. What is wrong with that? You mean I can’t
fight for my survival?”
Then there is always a reply to whatever we think. The reply is in next
verse.

|(2) Arresting the pursuit of        |
|wrongdoing                          |


Verse 6.56
Thus it is better that I die today
Than live a long time through wrong livelihood.
Even if I should live a long time,
There will be the very suffering of death.
There are people who accumulate wealth through harming others or causing
harm and problem to others motivated by anger, jealousy, competitiveness in
a negative sense and so forth. Some are able to sustain their livelihood
and make a living through harming others quite successfully in the sense
that they accumulate a lot of money or wealth. They even live a long time.
But sustaining their livelihood in such a way through harming others
actually constitute wrong livelihood. So as such it is better to live a
shorter life and die earlier than to live in long life that is sustained by
wrong livelihood. It is better to live a short life that is not sustained
by wrong livelihood than to live a long life sustained by wrong livelihood.
Because even if you live a long life that is sustained by wrong livelihood
you accumulate so much negativity that it will harm you in your future
lives. Put aside the future lives, even in this life at the time of death
it will cause you a lot of problem.
The essential point here is that it is of no benefit to sustain one’s
livelihood through harming others. Even if you manage to accumulate a lot
of wealth, actually in reality it is of no benefit. Therefore the Kadampa
masters say:
It is better for the evil ones (those who commit non-virtue) to die earlier
i.e. to have a shorter life.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): The meaning is same. That is the meaning.
[BP1 Part 2 L10] There are 5 kinds of wrong livelihoods as mentioned in the
Lamrim and The Precious Garland:
1. Flattery – in the hope of getting something in return, one flatters the
   benefactor or sponsor.
2. Hinting – wanting to get something but saying so indirectly to another
   person, e.g. “I have enough to wear but I could do with a little bit
   more cash.”
3. Giving in order to receive – e.g. giving a small gift to the benefactor
   in the hope of getting something big in return.
4. Exerting pressure on others – obtaining something through force by
   harassing the benefactor who may not have the wish to give.
5. Being on one’s best behaviour – e.g. an ordained person acting in a holy
   way to impress the benefactor, hoping to get something from him.
Next is showing through example of how it is inappropriate to crave for
material gain.

|(3) Establishing, by means of an example, the                |
|unreasonableness of craving material gains                   |


Verse 6.57
Suppose someone should awaken from a dream
In which he experienced one hundred years of happiness,
And suppose another should awaken from a dream
In which he experienced just a short while of happiness,
Verse 6.58
For both of these people who have awakened
That happiness will never return.
Similarly, whether my life has been long or short,
At the time of death it will be finished like that.
Here it gives an example of someone who enjoys a lot of things in the
dream. This is to illustrate that craving for object of desire, material
gain, and material development are inappropriate and has no real meaning.
Let’s say you fall asleep and has a very nice dream.  In the dream you
experience the five nice objects of desire -form, sound, smell, taste and
touch. That dream lasts for very long time. But once you wake up, the whole
experience is really just an experience and is just an object of memory.
There is nothing that you can hold on to. There is nothing that you can
utilize. Likewise in real life, even if you live for a very long time, say
if you live for a hundred years and you have a perfect hundred years - you
have all the objects of enjoyment; whatever you want. You have a very good
and enjoyable life. But at the time of death, all those enjoyment become
only an object of memory. You cannot enjoy them again. You can’t enjoy
something that is already a past. You cannot utilize them again. It all
becomes like a dream. At the time of death that person’s life is of no
different from a person who has a shorter life. At the time of death it is
the same, as everyone is the same at the time of death. Whether you have a
long enjoyable life or you have short enjoyable life, at the time of death
whatever enjoyments and pleasant experiences is just a dream; it just an
object of memory, and nothing else.
Whatever enjoyments we may have had in the whole life, at the time of death
we cannot experience them again. On top of that, we will never experience
the same experiences again in the future lives.  Whether we have a short
enjoyable life or a long enjoyable life, at the time of death, it is all
the same.
That is showing through example why it is incorrect to crave for material
gain.
Next is showing the reason why it is incorrect or is inappropriate to crave
for material gain

|(4) The reasons craving material gains is unreasonable       |


Verse 6.59
Although I may acquire abundant gain
And enjoy happiness for a long time,
I shall go forth naked and empty-handed,
Just like having been robbed.
Even we spent our whole life accumulating wealth, resources, properties and
so forth, and even if we do manage to derive some satisfaction, some
enjoyment, and some pleasure from them, and we may live for a very long
time having those enjoyments, but at the time of death, we have to leave
all these behind. Literally we will be stripped of all of these things, as
if at the time of death, we are stripped of all our possessions by a
robber. We can’t bring anything to our next life.
This is pretty much the same as what is mentioned in The Stages of the
Paths to Enlightenment in the section of death and impermanence. In that
outline it says that at the time of death, nothing helps except the dharma.

There are three points in the outline of that section:
At the time of death:
   1) Our wealth and our possessions do not help us. It is of no benefits
      whatsoever.
   2) Out friends, relatives and loved ones are of no used. It is of no
      benefit to us whatsoever.
   3) Even our body – the thing that we cherish the most -is of no benefit
      whatsoever.
The conclusion is that at the time of death, nothing is of any benefit to
us except the dharma.
The thing that we have just mentioned here are plainly obvious and you
don’t have to think to understand this. This is the reality and that is
what we see. We see people died, and when they died, they can’t take
anything with them.
So far, the teaching is telling us that it is not right to have an
attachment and to crave for material gain and all these things, but we have
many reasons to attempt to prove that there are situations where money is
important and beneficial. In the Buddhists circle, many people think “If I
have a lot of money and I live a long time I can accumulate a lot of
merits. I can make a lot of offerings. I can many holy objects. I can print
texts and make stupas. I can do many wonderful things and through that I
can accumulate merits and I can purify my mind of negativities. So, money
is useful and it is good. Since I have money, I can do many of these
things. In order to have this money, and out of no choice sometimes we have
to be angry. We need attachment but nevertheless it is still okay because
with all the money I can do all these wonderful things. I can accumulate a
lot of merits. I can purify my minds of obscuration. So, it is not true
that craving is bad all the time.

|(5) Refuting the reasoning behind spending one’s    |
|time in material pursuits                           |


Verse 6.60
OPINION: If I were to live due to gain,
Then I shall exhaust negativities and [increase] merit.
RESPONSE: If I were to get angry on account of gain,
Will not my merit be consumed and negativities created?
Verse 6.61
If my very life were to degenerate
For the sake of that,
Then what will be the use of the life
Of who commits only negativities?
Khen Rinpoche (in English): Okay, that is the answer.
These verses are telling us that it is incorrect to follow after anger and
attachment, and thinking that following after anger and attachment to
accumulate money so that we can use it to accumulate virtue and purify our
mind. S Basically such line of reasoning is incorrect.
If we think “In order to be able to do some of these things to accumulate
merits and purify my mind, and practicing dharma, I need money and things.
In the process, sometimes it is alright to get angry and to have
attachment.” If we think in such a way then didn’t we accept earlier that
anger has many disadvantages? For example, if we get angry, we can destroy
the root of virtue accumulated over a thousand eons. We can also deplete so
much merit. We have accepted that there are so many negative consequences
of anger. Wouldn’t we experience all these disadvantages?
You said you follow after anger and attachment in order to be able to
sustain your life and to practice the dharma, and you also accept these
negative consequences when you get upset and angry.  When we follow after
attachment and get angry, we destroy the root of virtue accumulated over a
very long period of time and we have to experience the whole list of
consequences of anger. Doesn’t this harm our supposed motivation of
sustaining our life to practice the dharma? On one hand we say we want to
live a long life and need to have money to practice the dharma but yet we
are doing things to destroy that opportunity in that life. So, there is a
contradiction.
We may feel justified in getting angry and have attachment to money and
possession so that we can practice the dharma and accumulate merits and
purifying our minds of obscuration. But doesn’t getting angry leads to the
destruction of merits which you say you are trying to accumulate? So there
is an internal contradiction in one’s position?
There is much more to come. Essentially whatever the argument maybe, the
point that this chapter is trying to tell us is that no matter how you
think about it, you will not be able to justify by getting angry. This is
what the text is trying to say. No matter how you want to argue you will
not be able to succeed. You will not able to find any real justifiable
reason to get upset, contradictory to what we believe. We believe that
there are always situation and time and the reason to get upset. We have
many excuses. But whatever we can think of, it is mentioned in the text and
answer is given. We just have to think about what is mentioned in the
text..

DISCUSSION QUESTIONS FOR SUNDAY, 22nd JUNE 2014

   1. Explain the last two lines of Verse 84 from  Chapter  5,  which  comes
      under the ethics of working for the welfare of sentient  beings.  What
      actions are the buddhas allowing?
(Khen Rinpoche:  We should  go  deeper  into  this  question  and  not  just
discuss it in a superficial manner. For instance, killing is said  to  be  a
natural misdeed. What does a natural misdeed mean?)
There were times when the buddhas gave permission  to  some  individuals  to
engage in the ten non-virtues. We should also look at issues such as:
    • Who were allowed to engage in the ten non-virtues?
    • Was permission granted to engage in all or only some of the  ten  non-
      virtues?
    • If only some of the ten non-virtues were  permitted,  what  are  these
      permitted non-virtues and what is  the  reason  for  permission  being
      granted?
    •  What  are  the  circumstances  under  which  these  non-virtues   are
      permitted?
    • Even if these non-virtues were permitted by the buddhas, do the people
      who were allowed to engage in them accumulate negativities or not?
    • Why are some of the ten non-virtues not permitted?
These are some pointers to guide you in your discussion  of  this  question,
to look at it from various perspectives).

   2. What are the faults of anger?






   3. What are the causes of anger?

   (Khen Rinpoche: I have mentioned in class that when we elaborate  on  the
   causes of anger, we can talk about 24 situations or conditions).



   4. What advice is given in  the  text  to  cultivate  the  patience  that
      accepts suffering? Similarly, what advice is  given  in  the  text  to
      cultivate  the  patience  that  is  intent  on  Dharma?  What  is  the
      difference between these two types of patience?

