Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Engaging in the Deeds of a Bodhisattva/lesson9.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:52:25.449260
================================================================================


You may have heard of this particular genre or prayer that is called
Calling the Guru from Afar. It is important to know what exactly does
Calling the Guru from Afar means.
Khen Rinpoche (In English): You know what is that?
“Calling from afar” has nothing to do with geographical proximity or time.
“Afar” has to do with, metaphorically speaking, the distance or the space
between your own mind and the guru’s mind. So Calling the Guru from Afar is
an attempt or an exercise to shorten the space or gap between one’s mind
and the guru’s mind.
One can look at this from the ultimate perspective or a conventional
perspective.
• From an ultimate perspective, there is no real difference between one’s
  mind and the guru’s mind in that both are in the nature of emptiness.
• From a conventional perspective in terms of appearance, there is a wide
  gap between one’s mind and the guru’s mind in terms of the qualities.
From the perspective of the appearance of the conventional perspective,
there is a wide gap between one’s mind and the guru’s mind in terms of the
qualities. In that sense, the guru is superior to you in terms of
qualities. So Calling the Guru from Afar is to shorten the gap. Essentially
when one calls the guru from afar, one is making a heart-felt supplication
base on a thorough understanding of how one does not have the qualities and
how one is tormented in samsara. By having that single-pointed faith and
trust in that the guru has the power to protect one from those fears and
suffering, and it is within that faith and devotion one makes the
supplication. When one has a single-pointed devotion to one’s own guru,
then one is not far from the guru, one becomes nearer. If one does not have
the single-pointed devotion, then one is far from the guru.
When you have this single-pointed devotion, this single -pointed devotion
and faith is the real teacher, the actual guru. This is the actual guru/
inner guru. This actual guru/inner guru arises in dependence on the outer
condition, which is the outer guru; the guru that appears to us. The outer
guru is the external condition, the empowering condition, in dependence on
which you have this single-pointed faith. When that faith arises, that
single-pointed faith is the actual guru, the real teacher. This is the
essential point.
When the inner guru arises, the single-pointed faith and devotion arises.
It is due to this we get closer to enlightenment. It is due to this we
please all the Conquerors. It is due to this we will not come under the
sway or influence of negative friends. If we have this inner guru, and when
the single-pointed devotion and faith arises, this is the inner guru. If we
don’t have this, just having an external guru, the external conditional
guru, that doesn’t mean just because we have an external guru we will be
liberated or we get closer to enlightenment. It is impossible to be saved,
or to be protected just by having the external guru if one doesn’t have the
single-pointed devotion. When one have single-pointed devotion, then one
becomes closer to the guru, and one becomes closer to enlightenment.
I think this is the point behind Calling the Guru from Afar. Why do we need
to call the guru from afar? This is because as of now there is a big gap or
distance between one’s mind and the guru’s mind. Calling the Guru from Afar
is an intense and heart-felt supplication made out of single-pointed
devotion. The whole point of Calling the Guru from Afar is to make our mind
closer to the guru and closer to enlightenment. The thing that reduces the
gap or that makes us closer to enlightenment and that makes us closer to
the guru is this intense heart-felt devotion. When this inner guru, which
is the single-pointed devotion, arises then it is possible to actualize all
the realizations of the path, all the qualities of the path starting from
the topic of the human life of freedom and endowments, death and
impermanence, and so forth. All these qualities and realizations of the
path arise from the inner guru, which is faith and single-pointed devotion.

Khen Rinpoche (In English): People might think why we need to call the guru
from afar. He’s just in front of you.

Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds
We have finished with the section on making  offerings.  If  you  understand
the benefits of making offering, you bring the merit field  or  the  buddhas
to the mind. Even if you just  offer  a  single  flower,  the  benefits  are
innumerable. It is said that even if you just offer  a  single  flower,  you
accumulate a lot of merit. At the end, by depending on the group  of  virtue
accumulated from offering just that one flower will be a cause for your  own
enlightenment. By having a decisive ascertainment or  understanding  of  the
benefits of making offerings, both  actual  and  those  offerings  that  are
actually set up and those that are mentally transformed, strive on this.

|Homage                 |
|A Verbally expressing  |
|homage                 |
|B Physically           |
|prostrating            |

|A Verbally expressing   |
|homage                  |


In general, paying homage can be done with one’s body, speech and mind. In
the text, first, one pays homage with one’s speech by expressing verses of
praise.
Verse 2.23
I eulogize the oceans of excellent qualities
With oceans of branches of melodious praise;
May these clouds of pleasant eulogy
Certainly arise always to them everywhere.
One eulogizes the qualities of the buddhas. Here there are many verses that
praise the buddhas, praising their qualities and so forth. When one recites
these verses, it is like paying homage with one’s speech.
When one is reciting the respective verses in praise of the buddhas and so
forth, one can imagine that the praises that one is reciting, the melody
and the sound of these praises fill the whole of space. Then one offers
that.
One thinks that one is constantly and always eulogizing or verbalizing
these verses praising the buddhas.
Sometimes the verses are recited in pleasant tunes, with nice melodies and
so forth. For those who have a reasonably good voice, praising the buddhas
with all these melodious tunes and so forth can become an offering.
Khen Rinpoche (In English): So good to have good voice.

|B Physically prostrating                |
|1 [To the] Three Jewels                 |
|2 The basis for the arising of          |
|bodhicitta and so forth                 |
|3 Prostrating to the abbot, acharya,    |
|master and so forth                     |

|1 [To the] Three  |
|Jewels            |


Verse 2.24
With bodies as numerous
As all the atoms within the field,
I bow with my body to all buddhas of the three times,
The Dharma, and the supreme community.
One pays homage and prostrates to all the buddhas of the past, the present
and the future.
One prostrates to the scriptural and realizational dharma in the mental
continuum.
One prostrates to the children of the Conquerors, the bodhisattvas.
One prostrates with as many bodies as equaling to the number of atoms in
all the buddhas fields.
When one is paying homage, when you are reciting the verses in praise of
the buddhas through remembering their qualities, physically you adopt a
respectful demeanor and then mentally you have faith and devotion, when
these three are present, that will make a complete practice of paying
homage with one’s body, speech and mind.
Paying homage with one’s mind is the most important, that means, having
faith and devotion. Through this faith and devotion that comes from
recollecting the qualities of the Three Jewels, on the basis of that if you
engage in praising with your speech, then prostrating to them physically,
this faith and devotion that you have will make paying homage with your
body and speech perfect.
This is something that you must bear in mind.  You really need to keep this
and note this down. Of the three, paying homage with your body, speech and
mind, paying homage with the mind is the most important, that is having
faith and devotion that comes from remembering the qualities of the Buddha,
Dharma and Sangha. On that basis, you should engage in praising them with
your speech and prostrating to them physically. So having this faith and
devotion in the Three Jewels is the most important, and that is the mental
homage. If one doesn’t have this, then it is difficult for there to be any
great benefit just by prostrating physically or just merely reciting some
verses or praises. It is difficult for these practices alone to have any
significant impact on your mind in that you don’t see it or you don’t feel
it, that isn’t mean the transformation of the mind. When one has this faith
and devotion in the Three Jewels, then paying homage to them physically and
verbally becomes easy. Otherwise, without this faith from the heart,
sometimes just prostrating physically or just merely reciting some verses
or praise becomes like a chore.

|2 The basis for the arising of         |
|bodhicitta and so forth                |


Verse 2.25 ab
I pay homage to the basis of the mind of enlightenment,
To all supports of offering,
I pay homage to the basis of the mind of enlightenment such as the
representation of the buddhas like statues or to the Mahayana scriptural
collections or to the object from whom you are going to adopt bodhicitta
and so forth. Also to all supports of offering, basically to all the
representations of the buddhas and their body, speech and mind.

|3 Prostrating to the abbot, acharya,    |
|master and so forth                     |

Verse 2.25 cd
To all abbots and masters
And to all the [holders of] supreme conduct.
Essentially, one prostrates to the abbot who grants you the pratimoksha
ordination, the preceptor who grant the vows and also to those who are
abiding and striving on the path to liberation. They are also objects of
prostration. Those who abide in the supreme conduct are those who help you
to abandon the negative actions and behavior and cause you to enter and
abide on the path to liberation, one prostrates to them as well.
There are two types of physical prostration:
• Prostration involves touching the five points of one’s body to the ground
  (two palms, two knees and the forehead) with the five points.
• Full length prostration, basically laying one’s body flat on the floor
Whether you are doing the prostration that has five points of the body
touching the ground or you are doing the full length prostration, you touch
both hands to the crown, to the throat, and then to the heart before one go
down.   That is how it is done. When one starts the prostration by joining
the hands at the crown, one can pray that “Through this may I receive the
blessings of all the qualities of the buddha’s body and may I achieves all
the qualities of the buddha’s body”.
It is explained in the teachings that there are innumerable benefits from
making prostration. Even just making one prostration has innumerable
benefits. For example, it is said that when you prostrate physically, your
body covers a physical space when you prostrate on the ground. The number
of atoms covering that space going all the way down to the core of the
planet, and there are many number of atoms that are covered. It is
explained in the teachings that one creates the causes to be born as the
wheel turning or universal monarch equal in number to the atoms that are
covered by your body. Finally the roots of virtue will become a cause for
one to achieve full enlightenment. By bearing in mind these benefits, you
should strive in making prostrations even if it is just making three
prostrations a day.
Whenever we learn the dharma, we study and hear all these different
advices, we should try to adopt them and put them into practice of those
that are within our reach. Those that are actually can be done, implement
it. Then that will actually fulfill the whole purpose behind learning the
dharma.
BP1 L8: When we put our hands together in the mudra of prostration, our two
palms should not be pressed completely flat against each other. It is said
that making prostrations with both palms completely pressed against each
other is actually the tradition of non-Buddhists. We should place the palms
of our hands together to form the shape of a lotus, leaving some space in
the middle. Buddha explained this practice in the Great Nirvana Sutra. We
should put our palms together, making the shape of a blossomed lotus with
space in the middle. We are advised to visualize holding a wish-fulfilling
jewel inside the palms, with the thumbs touching and tucked inside the
palms.
When we prostrate, we should straighten our bodies upright when we get up
from each prostration. If possible, we should touch our foreheads, throats
and hearts with both of our palms in the mudra of the blossoming lotus.
First, we touch our crowns with our palms, and at the same time, we
contemplate the qualities of the holy body of the Buddha. We generate faith
by doing this.
Then, we touch our palms together to our throats and reflect on the
qualities of the holy speech of the Buddha and generate faith.
Finally, we touch both of our palms to our hearts and, at that time, we
contemplate the qualities of the Buddha’s holy mind.
This is a method for us to generate faith in the Buddha.
At the same time when we touch our palms to our crowns, we make the prayer:
‘May I and all sentient beings achieve all the qualities of the Buddha’s
holy body.’
When we touch our palms to our throat, we make the prayer, ‘May I and all
sentient beings achieve all the qualities of the holy speech of the
Buddha.’
When we touch our palms to our heart, we make the prayer, ‘May I and all
sentient beings achieve the qualities of the Buddha’s holy mind.’
There are some who contemplate, when they touch their palms to the crowns,
that all negativities they have accumulated with their bodies are
completely purified. When they touch their palms to their throats, they
visualise that all negativities they have accumulated with their speech are
purified. When they touch their palms to their hearts, they visualise that
all negativities they have accumulated with their minds are purified.

|Refuge          |
|A Causal refuge |
|B Resultant     |
|refuge          |


What is refuge? It is a mind that one fears the suffering of cyclic
existence and the lower realms. It is a conviction in the power and ability
of the Buddha, Dharma and Sangha to rescue or to protect us from those
suffering. That is what refuge is.
There is a difference in the way of going for refuge for a person of small
capacity, a person of middling capacity and a person of great capacity. The
difference comes due to their perspective.
You have to understand that the presentation of refuge according to the
Hinayana would differ from that of the Mahayana. Of the four Buddhist
tenets, two are Hinayana tenets: the Great Exposition School and the Sutra
School. Their assertion as to what the Buddha, the Dharma, and the Sangha
are different from the Mahayana. If you do remember, both the Great
Exposition School and the Sutra School assert that the Buddha became a
Buddha in one sitting starting from the Path of Preparation. In one
sitting, he travels the Path of Seeing and Path of Meditation, and then he
achieves the Path of No-more-learning. The body in which he achieves
enlightenment in is the body of an ordinary being, therefore is a
contaminate body. As such, for the proponents of the Hinayana tenets – the
Great Exposition School and the Sutra School- the Buddha’s physical body is
not the Buddha because it is true suffering. The proponents of the Great
Exposition School and the Sutra School posit that the Path of No-more-
learning, the true path, the realization in the continuum of Shakyamuni
Buddha is the Buddha Jewel.
These proponents do not assert the Sangha jewel to be the superior being,
but rather, they assert the qualities of realizations and the true path in
the superior being continuums, to be the Sangha jewel.
These proponents assert that the factor of abandonment of the object of
abandonment in the continuum of Buddha and the superiors to be the Dharma
Jewel. That is the Three Jewels according to the proponents of the Hinayana
Tenets.
The proponents of the Mahayana Tenets have a very different presentation as
to what the Three Jewels are.
First, in the Mahayana, there is the presentation or the assertion of the
four bodies. The four bodies are Buddha. The form body of the Buddha can be
posited as Buddha Jewel.
The True Path and True Cessation in the continuum of the Buddha are posited
as the Dharma Jewel.
The superiors are posited as Sangha Jewel.
Is the body of a superior bodhisattva Sangha Jewel or not?
Khen Rinpoche (in English): What do you think? Still you don’t know what is
the Three Jewels? Still learning?

|           |Hinayana tenets                           |Mahayana tenets         |
|Buddha     |The realization, the true path of Path of |The form body (the      |
|Jewel      |No-more-learning in the continuum of      |complete enjoyment body |
|           |Shakyamuni Buddha                         |and the supreme         |
|           |                                          |emanation body) of the  |
|           |                                          |Buddha                  |
|Dharma     |The factor of abandonment, the object of  |True Path and True      |
|Jewel      |abandonment, in the continuum of Buddha   |Cessation in the        |
|           |and the superior                          |continuum of the Buddha |
|Sangha     |The realizations, the true path, in the   |Superior beings         |
|Jewel      |continuum of the superior beings. (They do|                        |
|           |not assert the Sangha Jewel as the person,|                        |
|           |the superior being)                       |                        |


There is the presentation of the causal refuge and the resultant refuge as
well.
Causal refuge is the mind that believes and has conviction in the Buddha,
Dharma, and Sangha that exists in the continuum of someone other than
oneself as having the ability to protect one from those fears.
Resultant refuge is having an understanding or faith and conviction in the
Buddha, Dharma and Sangha that one will actualize in one’s continuum in the
future as having the power and potential to protect oneself from the
fears..
The verse that we usually recite:
      I go for refuge until I am enlightened
      To the Buddha, the Dharma and the Sangha
That can indicate the causal refuge.
      By the virtues that I created by practicing generosity and so forth
      May I achieve enlightenment for sentient beings
That can indicate the resultant refuge.
      The unsurpassed teacher is the Buddha.
      The unsurpassed refuge is the Dharma.
      The unsurpassed guide is the Sangha.
The Buddha is the unsurpassable teacher, the one who shows us refuge.
What is it means to go for refuge to the Buddha? It is a pledge of never to
stray or to adopt a path that is not shown by the Buddha. Basically it is a
pledge or promise to practice and to train exactly in accordance with what
the Buddha has taught.
The Buddha is the one who shows the path. The path itself is the Dharma.
When we take refuge in the Dharma, we are making a pledge “I will practice
this path” - the thing that we are going to enter and practice is the
Dharma. The Dharma is that which is shown by the Buddha. So taking refuge
in the Dharma means making a pledge “I will practice this Dharma exactly in
accordance with how the Buddha has shown or how the Buddha has revealed”.
Through practicing the Dharma, whatever qualities of the Dharma that arise
in the mind, that is the refuge/ protection – the unsurpassed
refuge/protection.
For example you are abiding in some kind of vows for one day. When you
adopt such kind of vow and abide in it, you have that quality of the vow in
your mind, and that is what protects you. That can be an example of the
unsurpassed refuge/protection.
Superior beings are our companions, the one who helps us to enter and
actualize the path. The superior beings are the Sangha. Going for refuge to
the Sangha means making a pledge “I will practice exactly in the way they
have done and in the way they are doing”. That is a pledge.
Essentially that is what refuge is. Refuge is a heartfelt promise. It is a
pledge. It is a promise.
In relation of going refuge to the Buddha, it is a pledge of holding on to
the Buddha as the unsurpassed teacher and making a pledge to practice in
the way that he has taught and in the way that he has revealed.
Going for refuge to the Dharma is to practice that Dharma that he has
revealed.
Going for refuge to the Sangha is making the heartfelt promise/pledge to
practice in the way that the Sangha, the superior beings, have done or are
doing, and in exactly like them and taking them as an example.
Refuge is very important at the beginning for it leads to all the other
qualities and realizations. Actually all the practices can be condensed
into the practice of going for refuge to the Buddha, the Dharma and the
Sangha.
The sutra, The Stainless Space (or Sky), stated that if the merit of going
for refuge were to materialize, even the whole of space would not enough to
accommodate it.
Verse 2.26
Until the essence of enlightenment,
I go for refuge to the Buddhas.
Likewise, I go for refuge to the Dharma,
And to the assembly of bodhisattvas.
On the basis of going for refuge, there is the branch of confession. The
teaching tells us that in the first place we should strive not to be
stained by the fault or negativities. Despite striving to avoid the
negativities and faults due to familiarity with afflictions, even if
negativities are accumulated, one should not just leave it as it is but
rather one should strive to confess and purify them.
In the practice of confession, you are supposed to apply the four opponent
powers.
The four opponent powers are:
   1. The power of eradication (literal translation: the power of regret)
   2. The power of applying the antidote
   3. The power of restraint
   4. The power of basis (in LRCM, it is “the power of support”)
The power of eradication means having regret for having committed the non-
virtue in the past.
In order to develop regret, we have to reflect on the three effects on
every single non-virtue.
Every non-virtue will have three effects when it ripens:
   1. The fruitional effect
   2. The concordant effect
   3. The environmental effect
The concordant effect is divided into two:
   1. The causally concordant effect
   2. The behavioral concordant effect
BP1 L11 For example: the negative action of killing. The fruitional effect
of the act of killing can be a rebirth in the hell realms. When the
fruitional effect of the act of killing is exhausted and one passes away as
a hell being, even if one were to be reborn as human being, the causally
concordant effect of the act of killing that would be experienced in that
human rebirth would be to have a short life. That would be the causally
concordant experiential effect of killing. Even if one were to be born as a
human being, because of having killed in the past, one would have the habit
of liking to kill again. That is the causally concordant behavioral effect.
What about the environmental effect of the act of killing? One will be
reborn in a place or country that has famines, or one has difficulty
finding food. One will also have a lot of sicknesses.
The next power is the power of applying the antidote.
According to Shantideva’s Compendium of Trainings, six antidotes are
listed:
   1. Relying on the profound sutras
   2. Meditating on emptiness
   3. Relying on recitations (of mantras)
   4. Relying on the buddhas’ holy form, i.e., making statues, tsa-tsas and
      so forth
   5. Relying on making offerings
   6. Relying on the names
The power of restraint is essentially making a pledge or promise to not
engage in non-virtue again in the future. The power of the support refers
to going for refuge to the Three Jewels and developing bodhicitta.
When we accumulate negativities due to overwhelming afflictions, we
shouldn’t leave it as it is but we have to confess and engage in practice
of purification. It is said that there isn’t any negative karma, no matter
how heavy it is that cannot be purified through confession.
BP1 L11 There are many reasons why negativities can be purified. This is
because the nature of the mind is clear light. The mind by nature is free
from afflictions and has never been polluted by them. The afflictions are
adventitious. When an antidote is applied, they can be removed. These are
some of the reasons that prove that negativities can be purified.
Many people believe that you have to actually act it out the non-virtue
physically or verbally i.e. the action has to manifest out physical or
verbal way for it to be considered to be an accumulation of negativity or
non-virtue. That is not true. Of course when you do that you accumulate non-
virtue. Through having strong negative thought itself will leads to
accumulating negative karma, especially having strong ill-will or the
thought wanting to harm.  Remember when we were looking at the Stages of
the Path to Enlightenment, if we really feel like killing somebody and we
keep the thought strongly in our mind and entertaining the thought, just
that mental act itself constitutes accumulating the karma of killing.
There are four permutations between karma accumulated and karma created.*
Harboring the thought to kill and harboring it for a long time constitute
the karma of killing that is accumulated but not created. Of course, there
are also actions or karma that are created but not accumulated and so and
so forth. When we talk about karma that is accumulated, essentially it
involves strong intention mentally. There is a mental force behind it. With
regards to entertaining the thought of killing, all you need to do is to
hold on to that thought that you really want to do it. When you hold it in
your mind you will accumulate the karma of killing although not created.
Although the action has not manifested in you actually carry out the act
physically but once you have the strong thought and is there for a while,
you accumulated the karma of killing.
When we say such karma is accumulated, essentially we are saying a bad
imprint is planted on the mind. That is what the bad imprint is planted on
the mind. When you have such thought of killing then you accumulate the
negative karma of killing although it is not created yet. That places a
very powerful strong negative imprint in the mind. It is only a matter of
time it will ripen. It will definitely ripen unless it is purified through
confession.
The teaching tells us that if we accumulate negativities and non-virtue we
have to purify through confession. We cannot just leave it as it is because
it will not go away on its own. While it is a completely different matter
if when we die somehow the imprints of non-virtue just disappears on their
own accord. Since that would not disappear on their own accord but rather
that will follow the mind wherever the mind goes, then there will come a
time when it will ripen and one will experience the various effects on that
ripening.
*Four permutations between about karma done and karma accumulated:
1. Karma done and accumulated
2. Karma not done and accumulated
3. Karma done and not accumulated
4. Karma neither done nor accumulated

|An extensive explanation of the first power                                      |
|A Having investigated the way in which the negativity was performed, feeling     |
|regret                                                                           |
|B Cultivating regret by fearing [the prospect] of dying while still in possession|
|of the negativity and going for refuge                                           |
|C Cultivating regret by reflecting extensively on the way one has performed      |
|pointless negativities                                                           |
|D Reflecting on the way in which negativities bring about fear                   |


|A Having investigated the way in which the negativity was performed, feeling   |
|regret                                                                         |
|1 Requesting the attention of the object to whom you confess negativities      |
|2 Confessing negativities performed in the past by means of their time, cause, |
|and aspect, etc.                                                               |
|3 Confessing strong negativities [that were directed at] special objects       |
|4 Confessing with regret by reflecting on the undesired effects                |


|1 Requesting the attention of the object to whom  |
|you confess negativities                          |


Next verse is calling the attention of those whom you are going to confess
your negativities.
Verse 2.27
With folded hands I request
The complete buddhas and bodhisattvas
Who possess great compassion
And reside in all directions.
|2 Confessing negativities performed in the past by means of  |
|their time, cause, and aspect, etc.                          |


Verse 2.28
Since beginningless cyclic existence,
In this life and in others,
Unknowingly, I committed negativities
And caused them to be done.
Verse 2.29
Overwhelmed by the mistakes of ignorance
I rejoiced in what was committed,
But now seeing these mistakes,
From my heart I confess them to the Protectors.
(Protectors is also translated as saviors)
You bring to mind all the buddhas and bodhisattvas by thinking of them as
abiding in front of you. In their presence you confess all the negativities
that you have accumulated by first generating regret. You generate regret
for all the non-virtue committed not only in this life but also confess all
the non-virtues that you have accumulated or created since beginningless
lifetimes. You confess all the non-virtues performed by yourself, or the
non-virtues that you have caused others to accumulate. You also confess the
non-virtues that you have accumulated through rejoicing in the non-virtues
of others. You confess all such negativities and the non-virtues which have
arisen from your afflictions.
In the presence of the buddhas and bodhisattvas, you are taking
responsibility and acknowledgement from the heart saying “These are all the
stuffs that I did and are really unacceptable. These are just not right.”

|3 Confessing strong negativities [that were       |
|directed at] special objects                      |


Verse 2.30
Whatever harmful acts of body, speech, and mind
I have done by means of afflictions,
Towards the Three Jewels,
My parents, my spiritual masters, and others;
Here one is confessing all the negativities that one has accumulated due to
the afflictions:
- in relation to those objects who are endowed with qualities like the
Buddha, the Dharma and the Sangha
 -in relation to those who have helped us, our parents, father and mother
and
- to our own gurus who have very kind to us
You confess all the negativities that due to the three poisons - ignorance,
anger and attachment - in relation to these special objects that you have
accumulated with your body such as being disrespectful to them, through
causing them, through hurting or harming them, through criticizing, through
belittling them or through developing wrong views.

|4 Confessing with regret by reflecting on   |
|the undesired effects                       |


Verse 2.31
All the terrible negativities
Done by me, a wrongdoer,
Who have the created faults of a multitude of misdeeds,
I admit to the Guides.
|B Cultivating regret by fearing [the prospect] of dying while still in     |
|possession of the negativity and going for refuge                          |


Verse 2.32
I may die
Before my negativities have been purified;
Please protect me in such a way
As will swiftly and surely free me from them.
Here one goes for refuge and seeking protection so that one can purify
oneself of all the negativities before death. That is thinking about having
to purify one’s negativities through the understanding how death is
uncertain.
Next, I guess it is thinking about having to purify the negativities while
understanding at the time of death is uncertain.
Verse 2.33
The untrustworthy Lord of Death
Without waiting, whether or not something has been done;
Whether one is sick or otherwise,
Suddenly comes; do not be complacent about life.
This verse is saying that we have to purify our negativities quickly
because there is no telling as to when death will happen.
-There is no saying that death will happen before you have finished one’s
work or after you have finished your work.
-There is no telling that death will only happen when you are sick and will
not happen when you are not sick.
- There is not certain that you will die at a particular place, it is not
certain that you will die at a particular time and it is not certain that
you will die in such and such medical condition.
Since the time of one’s death is uncertain then one has to purify the
negativities. By reflecting on verses of 2.32 and 2.33, and by bringing to
mind how death is certain and the time is uncertain then you should
persuade yourselves to strive in purifying your negativities.
The point here is generating regret by bringing to mind how if for whatever
reason you are suddenly going to die now then there are all these
negativities leftover due to not having purified them. So by thinking of
the certainty of death and the uncertainty of the time of death then you
develop the sense of urgency having to start purification now.
The next verse I guess you can relate it to the point on how at the time of
death, nothing of any benefits except dharma.
Q&A
Student 1: How can we take refuge in an arya superior as the Sangha Jewel
when their body is true suffering and in the mental continuum of such a
person there are still projecting karma that can propel them back to
samsara?
Khen Rinpoche (In English): You mean the bodhisattva’s body is bodhisattva?
Are you saying that?
Student 1: Arya superior the one that has realized emptiness in the Path of
Seeing.
Khen Rinpoche (In English): So arya bodhisattva is the object of refuge?
Are you asking that?
Student 1: Yes
Khen Rinpoche (In English): Of course. Then?
Student 1:  But the body…….
Khen Rinpoche (In English): The body is not the arya bodhisattva.
Student 1: The person is constituted of body and mind right?
Khen Rinpoche (In English): The body is not the arya bodhisattva.
Student 1: Okay. I see
Student 2:  Verse 2.32
   I may die
   Before my negativities have been purified;
   Please protect me in such a way
   As will swiftly and surely free me from them.
Is this verse just an expression of asking or pleading for help rather than
as stated “As will swiftly and surely free me from them”?  Is it just an
expression rather than being able to be helped by the Three Jewels in such
a manner. Is it just an expression of desperation or expressing fear?
Khen Rinpoche: If we don’t purify our negativities then we will be born in
the lower realms and experience all the suffering there. So out of fear and
not wanting that to happen to us then one is making a plea requesting the
Three Jewels to protect us from that. So, it is confessing and
acknowledging having regret for having done all those non-virtues and
expressing in a form of request.
Student 2: Is “As will swiftly and surely free me from them” just an
expression?
Khen Rinpoche (In English): Yes.
Student 3: In lesson 7, you talked about:
- the Ultimate Dharma Jewel being true path and true cessation
- the Ultimate Sangha Jewel also being true path and true cessation.
I want to just clarify that the Ultimate Dharma Jewel is true path and true
cessation in the mind of a superior being. Will it be correct to say that
the Ultimate Sangha Jewel can be described as a superior being who has the
true path and true cessation in their mental continuum?  Basically are you
talking about the same thing but the focus is slightly different between a
Dharma Jewel and a Sangha Jewel?
Khen Rinpoche: Essentially we posited them to be the same. What is Ultimate
Dharma Jewel and what is Ultimate Sangha Jewel? It is the true path and the
true cessation.
Student 3: Just the true path and true cessation which is actually the
mental accomplishment in the mind of the being? Would it be right to say
that then? We are focusing on the true path and true cessation which is a
mental attainment in the mind of the superior being.
Khen Rinpoche: That goes without saying. Definitely!
Student 3: The reason I am a bit confused with this is because when we were
doing this topic in the BP 1, I could have noted this incorrectly:
- the entity of the Dharma Refuge Jewel was said to be the accomplishment
of the mind whereas
- the entity of the Sangha Refuge Jewel was said to be a being, like a
person.
That is why I am slightly confused. I don’t know whether that is incorrect.
Khen Rinpoche: That is fine if you are not looking the Dharma Jewel and
Sangha Jewel in terms of ultimate and conventional.  In general, when you
say what is a Dharma Jewel? It is true path and true cessation. What is a
Sangha Jewel? A superior. That is fine.
But if you were to look at the Sangha Jewel in detail, looking at what is
an Ultimate Sangha Jewel and what is the Conventional Sangha Jewel, then
you have to be able to posit them? According to the commentary of
Uttaratantra:
- the Ultimate Sangha Jewel is posited to be a superior being and
- the Conventional Sangha Jewel is posited to be a group of at least four
fully ordained monks.
That is one way.

