Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Engaging in the Deeds of a Bodhisattva/lesson43.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:52:18.104894
================================================================================


Recently we looked at the laziness of attachment to ignoble activities,
which is a kind of laziness that is attached in doing things that are
essentially quite bad or not beneficial. In that section, we were told that
if we live our whole life distracted by all kind of things and if we live
our life under the control of our ignorance, anger and attachment, then
that will be entirely inappropriate. Rather than living life in such a way,
we should practice the dharma. The advice to abandon the laziness of
attachment to ignoble activities is essentially an advice to practice the
dharma, because the dharma is the real cause of happiness. Through
understanding the antidote to this laziness that is attached to ignoble
activities is to develop an enthusiasm for dharma. It is through such
enthusiasm, one abandon or counteract the laziness of attachment to
inferior or ignoble activities.
We have to practice the Buddhadharma for it is the cause of the everlasting
happiness. The content of subject matter of the entire Buddhadharma is
essentially contained in the three scriptural collections. The three higher
trainings is the essential meaning of the three scriptural collections.
One of the things that are stopping us from actualizing these three higher
trainings is distraction. We are distracted solely by the affairs of this
life. If we live our life just working only for the affairs and the
happiness of this life, then we will not be able to actualize the dharma.
The Buddhadharma is the cause of everlasting/ infinite happiness. One of
the things that stop us from actualizing the dharma is the laziness that is
attached to all kinds of ignoble activities such as the attachment to the
happiness of this life. One of the ways to counteract this kind of laziness
is to develop real enthusiasm for the Buddhadharma from the heart. It has
to be a heartfelt enthusiasm for the Buddhadharma that comes from seeing
the Buddhadharma is the cause of everlasting/infinite happiness. Having
said that, even if one has such an enthusiasm for virtue or enthusiasm to
actualize the dharma, but if one feel discourage i.e. if we have this
laziness of discouragement then that will also be a big obstacle. As such,
the following sections of the text deal with this kind of laziness.
Right from the beginning, it is very important to have that confidence that
we can definitely engage in the practice and actualize it. So right from
the beginning, it is important to uplift the mood or the mind and to have
the confidence that one can do the practice. Of the different ways of
classifying joyous perseverance, there is a type of joyous perseverance is
known as the armor like joyous perseverance.
When the warriors go to war, they will put on armor to protect themselves
against of all kinds of weapons. Similarly, right from the beginning of the
practice, one must put on this armor like joyous perseverance; which is a
kind of attitude which thinks “I definitely can do this.” It is a heartfelt
enthusiasm for dharma and for virtue.
Before you engage in the practice, you need to uplift the mood or mind. You
need to put the armour-like joyous perseverance which is the preparation
for the practice.
Then when one engages in the actual practice i.e. when one starts on the
process of the actual practice, then one needs the joyous perseverance of
application which is enthusiasm for whatever you are doing while you are
doing it. During the time of the actual practice, one takes up the practice
sincerely with enthusiasm and one carry out the practice with mindfulness
and vigilance.
During the actual practice, it is extremely important to do the practice
and carry out whatever one has decided on without any sense of
discouragement and not thinking: “Really, I can’t do this”. One needs to
have that kind of joyous perseverance non-discouragement.
There is also the joyous perseverance of non-contentment. If one has
already started on the practice of engaging in the practice of the
Buddhadharma or in the practice of some virtue, and after having
accomplished a little bit, one shouldn’t have this idea “I have done
enough.” One should have this idea “I am going to continue to practice and
increase on it.” One should not just feel satisfied or content with
whatever one is able to do, but rather to strive to be able to do more.
So these are the four types of joyous perseverance.
   1. Armor-like joyous perseverance
   2. Joyous perseverance of application
   3. Joyous perseverance non-discouragement
   4. Joyous perseverance of non-contentment
[BP1 Part 2 L20] In the Lamrim Chenmo, the division of joyous effort has
three parts:
1. Armour-like joyous effort
2. Joyous effort of gathering virtue
3. Joyous effort of acting for the welfare of living beings
The Ornament for the Mahayana Sutras classifies four types of joyous effort
while the Compendium of Knowledge refers to five types of joyous effort.

|3’. Abandoning the laziness that is disheartened about virtue        |
|a’ Instructions on making effort in the antidote to being            |
|disheartened                                                         |
|b’ How the scriptures teach the way to put the antidote into practice|
|c’ If one makes effort, laziness will be arrested and one will be    |
|capable of accomplishing enlightenment                               |

|a’ Instructions on making effort in the antidote |
|to being disheartened                            |


Verse 7.16
Without despondency, I should gather the masses of army
And diligently take control of myself.
Through equalizing self with others and
Exchanging self for others,
I guess this verse is talking about the four types of joyous perseverance.
Before one starts on any virtuous endeavor or dharma practice, one must
have a sense of enthusiasm i.e. one’s mood and one’s spirit must be high.
So, one must uplift the mind. That is armor-like joyous perseverance. As
one starts to engage in the practice, that engagement must be done happily
and with enthusiasm. That is joyous perseverance of application. In the
process of doing the practice, one must do the practice with enthusiasm and
without any discouragement - joyous perseverance non-discouragement. And
one does the practice mindfully and with vigilance. Then come a point in
time when one achieved the meditative serenity or calm abiding, one
achieved pliancy of the body and mind. That is when one gains the control
over one’s body and mind. One is able to employ one’s body and mind in any
virtue according to one’s wishes. When one has that kind of ability, from
then on one has the mastery over one’s body and mind that comes from calm
abiding. I guess that is when the last joyous perseverance –the joyous
perseverance of non-contentment can really sets in, because from that time
onwards, one can really strive on and on in the practice. I guess this is
the meaning of the first two lines of verse 7.16.
After having gained some mastery over one’s body and mind as the result of
meditative stabilization or calm abiding, one then meditates on bodhicitta
through the method such as exchanging self and others; which will be
covered in a lot details in the next chapter - chapter eight on Meditative
Stabilization.
If you think about the progression of the presentation of these different
practices, it is said clearly that the real cultivation of the actual
practice or the real practice of bodhicitta comes after one has gained the
mastery over one’s body and mind which is the effect of having actualized
calm abiding.
Having said that, perhaps this is why it is said “According to some views
such as Sera Je’s textbook, one need calm abiding before one can actualize
bodhicitta.” If you look at how things are presented in Shantideva’s text,
perhaps one could argued that there is some truth behind that assertion in
that one could only actualized bodhicitta after one has calm-abiding.
When I looked at verses 7.17 to 7.19, they are essentially the antidotes or
remedies for despondency or discouragement. The essence of that is that if
one put in the right effort and cultivates bodhicitta and do not give up
the bodhisattva training then there is no reason why one cannot achieves
enlightenment. They said that even the so-called lowly beings such as
flies, mosquitoes, bees and insects can achieve enlightenment if the
conditions are right, then what reason is there to put forth for us not
achieving enlightenment?

|b’ How the scriptures teach the way to put   |
|the antidote into practice                   |


Verse 7.17
I should not be despondent by thinking,
“How can I ever attain enlightenment?”
Thus the tathagatas who speak what is true
Have uttered this truth:
Verse 7.18
“If they develop the strength of exertion,
Even those who are flies, mosquitoes, bees, and likewise worms
Will win the unsurpassable enlightenment
Which is hard to attain.”

“Even those who are flies, mosquitoes, bees and likewise worms will win the
unsurpassable enlightenment” if they put in effort. Primarily the argument
that is being made by this sentence is that all sentient beings including
the flies, mosquitoes and so forth can achieved enlightenment because all
sentient beings possessed the buddha lineage (or buddha nature). This is
because the nature of all sentient beings mind is clear light and the
obscurations and the defilements are adventitious. All the obscuration and
defilements are not in the nature of the mind to be defiled or to be
obscured. It is just that these defilements and obscuration are there but,
fortunately, they are temporary and can be removed through the force of
antidotes. As such, this is one of the main reasons showing why all
sentient beings do indeed have the potential to achieve full enlightenment.
More details on this can be found in the next module during next year when
we look at Chapter One of Uttaratantra or the Sublime Continuum. Through
understanding how ourselves and all sentient beings do possess the buddha
lineage (buddha nature) and the potential to achieve full enlightenment or
omniscience if we work at it, we can counteract the laziness of
discouragement. Perhaps it would be beneficial if you could memorize verse
7.19, so whenever one feel hopeless and when one feel discouraged then one
can think about this verse.

|c’ If one makes effort, laziness will be arrested and one will be capable of   |
|accomplishing enlightenment                                                    |
|1" Reflecting on the way in which one will be capable of attaining             |
|enlightenment if one develops the strength of effort                           |
|2" It is reasonable to bear the hardships that accompany working to attain     |
|enlightenment, for they are not even a fraction of those of the lower realms'  |
|suffering                                                                      |
|3" As the king of doctors prescribed gentle rites for healing the great        |
|disease, it is reasonable to bear [the hardships involved]                     |
|4" There is no suffering in that and happiness increases, therefore, it is     |
|reasonable to take joy in that                                                 |

|1" Reflecting on the way in which one will be capable of attaining             |
|enlightenment if one develops the strength of effort                           |


Verse 7.19
Since I have been born human by race
And recognize what is beneficial and what is harmful,
If I do not forsake the deeds of enlightenment,
Why will I not attain enlightenment?
If you think about it, it is really very difficult, in general, to feel
discourage about practicing dharma.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): True? Not True? Interesting! That means you are
working very hard. You are practicing dharma. If that is not true, that
means you are working day and night practicing dharma. You got what I am
saying?
I think we never get discouraged by the practice. We kind of thinking “I
want to achieve enlightenment and that is my motivation”, and with that
then we recite some mantras, do some daily practice, do some studies and
then we feel content “That is great. I am doing great!”So for us there is
no room to be discouraged.
We are not at that level where we ever get discouraged about dharma
practice. For who does discouragement sets in? This person is somebody who
understands what enlightenment is, what Buddha really is, in short, this
person who understands Buddha is somebody who has eliminated every single
fault and have accomplished every single quality. This person understands
that such a state doesn’t happened without any cause or conditions, but
rather this person understands fully that any individual who want to
actualize this state needs to accomplish limitless varieties of tasks and
knows the overall picture and he understands how the practice has to be
done in what stage, without mixing up things and missing anything. This
person understands that any individual must traverse all these limitless
tasks over a very long period of time - countless of eons. When this person
has the complete understanding of all these and have the real conviction,
but when he is about to start, he feels “This is really tough, and is not
easy.” That is what you call discouragement.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): So we don’t have that. You don’t have the last
laziness. You have only the first two but it looks like you don’t have the
last one.  We also don’t need the antidote. Don’t have, so don’t need
antidote.
There are some who understand these various things. The cause of getting
discouraged is their understanding that in order to achieve omniscience
they have to engage in the extensive bodhisattva deeds such as the practice
of the perfection of generosity which is said to involve also giving up
one’s body or one’s life when appropriate. Faced by such a prospect, then
there are some who think “I understand I need to do this but I don’t think
so I can do this. No way!” That is how discouragement sets in. Such a worry
or fear is stated in verse 7. 20.
[BP1 Part 2 L23] In verse 7.18, the Buddha said that animals and insects
are able to complete the accumulation of the two collections and achieve
enlightenment through the power of joyous effort. We have achieved a human
rebirth, considered the best of the six kinds of rebirths, we are able to
articulate and to understand what needs to be abandoned and cultivated. If
we do not get discouraged, if we develop the altruistic intention and
follow the bodhisattva way of life, then we will definitely
be able to achieve the state of full enlightenment.
When we start to think: “How will I be able to develop this bodhicitta? How
it is possible for me to engage in such great deeds to benefit countless
sentient beings? How is it possible for someone like me to achieve
enlightenment?” - that is the time to recall what is mentioned in verse
7.19: “If I put in the effort, I will definitely be able to achieve
enlightenment.”
The text says that there is nothing that cannot be accomplished when one
has joyous effort. If animals can achieve it, then we human beings can
definitely achieve enlightenment. Therefore, there is no reason to be
discouraged.

|2" It is reasonable to bear the hardships that accompany working to attain     |
|enlightenment, for they are not even a fraction of those of the lower realms'  |
|suffering                                                                      |
|a" It is unreasonable to fear the hardships of giving up one's arms and legs,  |
|etc.                                                                           |
|b" One does not need to experience even a fraction of the lower realms'        |
|suffering                                                                      |
|c" An analogy illustrating the reasonableness of bearing minor suffering in    |
|order to destroy the great disease                                             |

|a" It is unreasonable to fear the hardships of giving|
|up one's arms and legs, etc.                         |


Verse 7.20
OPINION: Having to give away my legs, arms,
And so forth frightens me.
RESPONSE: Without analyzing what is heavy and what is light,
I am reduced to fear through confusion
Verse 7.21
Over countless billions of eons
I have been cut, stabbed, burned,
And chopped up many times
But I still have not attained enlightenment. *
*Ven Gyurme revised V7.21. In the text is:
      Over countless billions of eons
      I will be cut, stabbed, burned,
      And chopped up many times
      But I will not attain enlightenment.
The essential response to this fear is that such kind of fear is unfounded.
In the first place, what you need to fear is what you are not afraid of,
but you are frightened of what you do not need to fear. Essentially that is
the response.
The answer continues by saying “It is a different thing if you have to lose
your head, your arm and so forth after having generated bodhicitta. What if
you didn’t generate bodhicitta? Does that mean without bodhicitta you don’t
lose your arms and leg and so forth?” Then it is fine.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): You getting the point?
In the first place, do you understand what the fear is about?  Essentially,
what some people afraid of is engaging in the bodhisattva deeds of giving
up their bodies or having to sacrifice parts of their bodies for something.
If you don’t develop bodhicitta, if you don’t practice the bodhisattva
deeds and at the same time if you don’t end up losing your body, your legs
or your arms or so forth for whatever reason, then maybe there is a reason
for you to be afraid of the bodhisattva deeds of having to give up your
body. Obviously that isn’t the case, because we don’t have any bodhicitta.
Neither do we have any bodhisattva deed. Since the beginningless lifetime
up to now, how many lifetimes we have been cut, beaten, and chopped up for
nothing? Although we have been cut, beaten and chopped up many times since
in the past, but none of those experiences benefitted us, and none of those
experiences have made us come closer to enlightenment.
[BP1 Part 2 L23] V7.21 points out that we have been in cyclic existence
since beginningless time, experiencing all sorts of sufferings such as
having our heads chopped off, being stabbed, and taking rebirth in the hell
realms where we were burnt countless times. Yet such sufferings did not
benefit us at all nor help us in our quest for enlightenment. Sacrificing
our limbs is nothing compared to the sufferings we endured in the past.
Instead of being afraid of having to experience these terrible sufferings
again, we are afraid of the much smaller suffering of offerings our limbs
to others. We are afraid for the wrong reasons: we are not concerned about
that which is really serious but are worried about the trivial. Should fear
arise in our minds with regard to having to sacrifice our arms and legs for
the purpose of achieving enlightenment, then we have to reflect that we
have experienced far worse suffering in samsara since beginningless time.

|b" One does not need to experience even a fraction of |
|the lower realms' suffering                           |


Verse 7.22
Yet this suffering
For my accomplishing enlightenment will have a limit;
It is like the suffering of having an incision made
In order to eliminate the harm of pain destroying it inside.
Even if we have to put up with suffering and have to engage in austerities
and bear hardship in the process of achieving omniscience, still whatever
hardship that maybe involved is still relatively small. Also there is a
limit to it in terms of the time span of three great countless eons. It may
sounds very long but still you can put a number to it, so there is a limit
and there is an end. It is like putting up with a small problem in order to
overcome a big problem.
Do you think that the last two lines of V7.22 and V7.23 is an analogy of
bearing hardship in order to achieve the greater purpose of full
enlightenment? If so, how does the analogy works?

|c" An analogy illustrating the reasonableness of bearing minor        |
|suffering in order to destroy the great disease                       |


Verse 7.23
Even all doctors eliminate illness
With unpleasant medical treatments,
So in order to overcome manifold sufferings
I should put up with little discomfort.
I don’t know whether the last two lines of V7.22 and V7.23 are driving at
the same thing or not?
[BP1 Part 2 L23]If we were shot and the bullet was lodged in our stomach,
the doctor would have to operate on us to remove the bullet. We would
probably feel some pain. But we would be prepared to put up with the pain
in order to achieve the greater goal of removing the bullet. In the same
way, we should put up with the small suffering involved in order to achieve
the big goal of enlightenment.
Enduring the hardships that come with Dharma practice in order to achieve
greater happiness and eliminate samsaric suffering is analogous to the
patient who has to put up with some discomfort during his treatment in
order to recover from his illness. We develop determination and courage by
reflecting that by putting up with smaller problems and hardships, we can
achieve something really worthwhile. This prevents us from getting
disheartened.
|3" As the king of doctors prescribed gentle rites for healing the great        |
|disease, it is reasonable to bear [the hardships involved]                     |
|a" The Teacher taught a method by which we may be cured of the great disease   |
|without even needing to experience the mere suffering associated with curative |
|treatments                                                                     |
|b" Giving away one's body when one still finds it difficult to do so is        |
|prohibited                                                                     |
|c" It is taught that one gives away one's body [only] when one is familiarised |
|with the idea to a certain point, and thus there is no difficulty [in giving it|
|away]                                                                          |

|a" The Teacher taught a method by which we may be cured of the great disease   |
|without even needing to experience the mere suffering associated with curative |
|treatments                                                                     |


Verse 7.24
But the Supreme Physician does not employ
Such ordinary remedies;
With a very gentle procedure
He remedies the boundless great ailments.
V7.24 is like saying the Buddha shows us the method to cure the big
diseases without having to experience the slight suffering. The point is
that when the Buddha shows us the path of freedom to enlightenment, his
path is not like an ordinary solution like what the doctor prescribed all
kinds of disgusting tasting medicines. We may also have to undergo medical
procedures which involved cutting up the body and so forth. But rather, the
Buddha helps us to overcome all the problems by showing us the solution
that leads from bliss and happiness to bliss and happiness. It is a path
that brings about joy.
The Buddha prescribes happy, blissful and joyful path that leads to happy,
blissful and joyful result. If you look at the instruction for carrying out
the practice of meditation or changing the mind, it always involves an
advice to find a suitable seat. The Buddha doesn’t recommend unnecessary
discomfort or austerities. We are always been advise to sit on a
comfortable seat. While seated in the comfortable posture, then one look
inside as the practice is done inside with the mind. It doesn’t involve
much on the outside and it is dealing with the stuff inside. The method
that the Buddha has prescribed is actually a medicine and is the method to
eradicate karma and afflictions which is the root and the source of all the
problems that includes all sicknesses and so forth.
The path that the Buddha has prescribed is very soft and gentle one. It
does not involve harming or hurting ourselves. Having said that, do we
reconcile this with having to give up your legs and arms? There seem to be
a contradiction.
Khen Rinpoche (in English):  In order to get enlightened, whether you have
to give up your limbs and head or not? If you say no, the next question is
how you complete the perfection of generosity then?
(Student response inaudible)
Khen Rinpoche (in English):  Have to give up your body to get enlightened?
(Student response inaudible)
Khen Rinpoche (in English):  That mean you have not to read the text. Have
to give or don’t have to give?
The answer is in the next verse.
|b" Giving away one's body when one still finds it difficult to do so is        |
|prohibited                                                                     |


Verse 7.25
At the beginning, the Guide applies
The giving of such things as vegetables.
Later, having become accustomed to that,
One may progressively give away even one’s flesh.
“One may progressively give away even one’s flesh” - what does this line
mean?
V7.25 is the answer to that potential qualm. As stated earlier that people
found that they cannot reconcile with the fact that on one hand the path
that the Buddha has prescribed is said to be a gentle one that does not
involve any harm to oneself, but on the other hand there is an instruction
of having to give up one’s life and one’s body to achieve enlightenment.
The answer is in V7.25 - at the beginning of one’s practice of generosity
you give away what you find it easy to part with such as a plate of
vegetables or whatever. There are also instructions to accustom ourselves
to the practice of generosity i.e. to generate an increase the attitude or
the thought of giving. In the Lamrim, it explained how one could practice
of giving from one’s right hand to the left hand and from one’s left hand
to the right hand. One could also verbalize one’s intent “I want to give
this and I want to give that.” So it is getting oneself to that attitude of
giving, and through familiarizing oneself to the idea of giving then one’s
willingness and ability to give will gradually increases. It is said that
because of thorough habituation or familiarity with the practice of
perfection of giving, it will comes a point in times that one can give away
one’s body without any sense of loss.
It is also said that the bodhisattvas reach a point in their practice where
they are even able to give away their body without any sense of loss. For
such bodhisattvas, giving away their body is like anybody else giving away
a plate of vegetables. They don’t feel any sense of loss and there is no
attachment holding them back at all.

|c" It is taught that one gives away one's body [only] when one is familiarized |
|with the idea to a certain point, and thus there is no difficulty [in giving it|
|away]                                                                          |


Verse 7.26
At such a time when I have generated a mind
That regards my body as being like vegetables,
Then what hardship will there be
When it comes to giving away my flesh?
It is said that those who are not expert or those who are not skilful in
the correct order of the practice of training their mind in the path and do
not know how to progress stage by stage, these are the people who
experience physical and mental difficulties. It is said those who know how
to go about doing their practice correctly and in the correct order and so
forth, it is said that they don’t experience any hardship.

|4" There is no suffering in that and happiness increases, therefore, it is     |
|reasonable to take joy in that                                                 |
|a" Although there is physical and mental discomfort for a person               |
|unknowledgeable in the stages of accomplishing that path, there is no suffering|
|from such hardships for one who is knowledgeable                               |
|b" Therefore, for a great being, there is no cause for despairing in the       |
|prospect of remaining in cyclic existence                                      |
|c" Due to such reasons, in terms of progressing along the path, they are       |
|explained to be more knowledgeable than a Hinayanist                           |
|d" Therefore, it is unreasonable to be disheartened in the bodhisattvas'       |


Verse 7.27
Due to having abandoned negativities there is no suffering
And due to skill there is no unhappiness.
Thus mind and body are harmed
By wrong conceptions and negativities.
Earlier on we did look at the division of mind generation. If you divide
the mind generation into four, then there is a mind generation that is
associated with the Path of Seeing; which is the mind generation of pure
resolved; basically is the mind generation in the continuum those
bodhisattvas. Because of having that mind generation, they have abandoned
the non-virtue of body, speech and mind which is essentially the main cause
of experiencing physical pain. Because they have abandoned the cause of
physical pain, so even when these bodhisattvas cut their body and  give
away their body they don’t experience any physical pain.
The bodhisattvas on the 1st ground have perceived the meaning of
selflessness directly, therefore they are expert and skill in seeing the
truth or reality directly. As such even when they give away their body they
don’t experience any mental suffering
For the rest of us people, we are not Superior Bodhisattva. If we do give
away any part of our body, we will feel both physical and mental pain and
suffering. We experience physical suffering because we have not yet
abandoned the negativities. Because we have not abandoned the
intellectually acquired afflictions therefore we experience mental
suffering.
People like us folks have hold on very strongly to “I” and “mine”; grasping
at the “I” and mine. Therefore, we have the basis for experiencing mental
pain and suffering if we were to give away our body.
Because we have not abandoned negativities such as killing, stealing and so
forth, when we do cut and give away our body we will experience physical
pain.
In the Supplement to the Middle Ways, Chandrakirti said that when Superior
Bodhisattvas hear someone requesting them to give away their body, they
feel so happy and experience immeasurable joys. It is said that the joy
that such bodhisattvas experiences just by hearing this request far exceed
the joy that is experienced by the Hearers and Solitary Realizers foe-
destroyers (or arahats)  while in the their meditative equipoise on the
ultimate nature of reality and during this time those arahats are in very
peaceful state and nirvana. But the joy that the bodhisattvas experience
when they hear the request for their body to be given is said to exceed
even that joy that is experience by the arahats. It is said that if those
bodhisattvas get to offer their bodies, they experience even more
happiness. The joys that they experience even greatly exceed the joy that
they experience from hearing the request for their bodies to be given.
In the discussion in The Stages to the Path of Enlightenment, when comes to
the practice of giving there are appropriate times and inappropriate time.
One has to be skill and know when it is the appropriate time to give and
when it is an inappropriate time to give. When it is an inappropriate time
to give is when it is not at that level yet.  Although the body is true by
nature dirty and filthy but nevertheless one should not look down on the
body just because the body is dirty and filthy and not taking care of it.
In fact as a practitioner it is said that one has to guard the body because
one need it as a basis to practice the dharma. But you have to guard it
without any attachment to the body.  You guard it for the purpose of
practicing the dharma.  When the time is appropriate and one is at the
level then it is alright to give the body. To give away the body when the
time is inappropriate will not brings about any meaning or purpose to
oneself or to others.
Khen Rinpoche (in English):  If somebody ask you (for your body), please
don’t give. If somebody comes and asks for your hand, you can shake it but…

|b" Therefore, for a great being, there is no cause for despairing in the |
|prospect of remaining in cyclic existence                                |


Verse 7.28
If their bodies are happy due to their merits
And their minds are happy due to their skill,
Then, even if they remain in cyclic existence for the sake of others,
Why would the Compassionate Ones be disheartened?

|c" Due to such reasons, in terms of progressing along the path, they are       |
|explained to be more knowledgeable than a Hinayanist                           |


Verse 7.29
Due to the strength of the mind of enlightenment,
He exhausts his previous negativities
And gathers oceans of merit.
Hence he is said to excel the hearers
Remember in Chapter One of this text when the mind of enlightenment was
discussed, one of the many benefits of generating the mind of enlightenment
is that once that mind is generated even the most powerful negativities can
be purified. Another benefit of having generated the mind of enlightenment
is that once the mind is generated henceforth even when one is distracted
and lying down doing whatever, the merits in that person is on the increase
continuously.
There is also a verse that says if you want what kind of happiness, whether
it is samsara or enlightenment, those kind of happiness comes from
meditating on bodhicitta.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): There is one verse, can you remember?  I cannot
find that verse.
Verse 1.8
Those who wish to destroy the multitudes of sufferings of existence,
Those who wish to dispel the unhappiness of sentient beings,
And those who wish to enjoy multitudes of happiness,
Should never forsake the mind of enlightenment.
 “Those who wish to destroy the multitudes of sufferings of existence” – so
whatever samsaric problems or sufferings can be vanquished by bodhicitta.
“Those who wish to dispel the unhappiness of sentient beings” – if one wish
to dispel whatever problems and sufferings sentient beings have the method
is to generate the mind of enlightenment.
“And those who wish to enjoy multitudes of happiness” – whatever happiness
you want to enjoy and whatever happiness you want others to enjoy the
method is again to generate bodhicitta.
The “multitudes of happiness” here is primarily the happiness of omniscient
or full enlightenment is to be achieved through the meditation of
bodhicitta.
Those who wish for all these things “should never forsake the mind of
enlightenment” which means should always meditate on bodhicitta.
I think I did mention to you that to memorize this verse.
Through the generation the mind of enlightenment one is able to easily
exhaust the hosts of negativities and one is able to finish the collection
of merit. As such one practice of one’s path greatly excel the Hearers’
path.
[BP1 Part 2 L24]The generation of bodhicitta is the primary reason why
bodhisattvas are superior to Hearers. It is bodhicitta that transforms
their direct realisation of emptiness into a full-fledged realization.
Unlike the direct realization of emptiness achieved by the bodhisattvas,
the realization of emptiness attained by the Hearers and Solitary Realiser
arhats cannot act as the antidote to the obstructions to omniscience.
Bodhisattvas are, therefore, superior to the Hinayana arhats in terms of
both their collection of merit and wisdom.

|d" Therefore, it is unreasonable to be           |
|disheartened in the bodhisattvas'                |


Verse 7.30
So, having mounted the horse of the mind of enlightenment
That dispels all disheartenment and weariness,
And proceeds from happiness to happiness,
Which ones who know of this mind would lapse into despondency?
It is said that those who really understand the extensive benefit of having
generated bodhicitta will never get discouraged from meditating on
bodhicitta and will never get discouraged from cultivating the
bodhisattvas’ deeds. The teachings say this is how it is impossible for
them to feel discouraged.
Up to here is the advice of the method on how to deal with the laziness of
discouragement.
With that we have covered the three types of laziness:
   1. Laziness of just hanging around and not doing anything which is the
      laziness of procrastination
   2. Laziness of attachment to ignoble activities
   3. Laziness of discouragement
Now we have finished looking at the three types of laziness and the
recommended antidotes and remedies. What is left to be done is for
everybody to individually to go back and look at the antidotes and try them
and see whether they do actually work or not.  So that is what left to be
done.
[BP1 Part 2 L24] Discouragement (disheartenment) relates to mind while
weariness relates to the body. Bodhisattvas have neither because they are
both eliminated by bodhicitta, the blissful path, in dependence on which
they achieve the state of full enlightenment.
“Which ones who know of this mind”: Knowing this, how could anyone with
discernment become discouraged? Some commentaries take this discernment to
refer to the ability to differentiate between what is right and wrong.
Another commentary points out that this quote refers to those who possess
realizations. Yet another commentary interprets this to mean those who
really understand the benefits of bodhicitta. If we take mind here to mean
bodhicitta and know of this mind, as the knowledge of the benefits of
bodhicitta, then it can be interpreted as, ‘‘a person who knows the
benefits of bodhicitta will never become dispirited.”
“Having mounted the horse of the mind of enlightenment” - We can easily
reach our destination by riding a subdued horse on a paved road. The horse,
here refers to the blissful path, bodhicitta. Mounting the horse of
bodhicitta, which has been generated in our minds, we ultimately reach our
destination - buddhahood. Those who can discern between right and wrong and
wish to achieve enlightenment never become disheartened. Therefore, strive
in joyous effort and do not lapse into despondency.
In summary, it is inappropriate to become disheartened with accumulating
the two collections of merit and wisdom – the causes of enlightenment – for
they will quickly eliminate all suffering of body and mind. It is
completely appropriate, however, to be disheartened with accumulating the
causes of cyclic existence, because such causes only bring about limitless
suffering. The former puts an end to suffering, while the latter only leads
to more suffering. Knowing the qualities of one and the faults of the
other, why should we then become disheartened about achieving
enlightenment?
Q&A
Student: The bodhisattvas on the Path of Seeing who is cutting his flesh to
give away to someone who requested for it, how does one link for someone
who has abandons negativities such as killing, one does not experiencing
physical pains and who has abandons the intellectually acquired afflictions
does not experience mental suffering. What is the precise reason to explain
the two links?
 Answer: You are aware of the accumulation of the two collections, isn’t
it? Bodhisattva accumulates the collection of merit and the collection of
wisdom:
- The collection of merit result in the form body
- The collection of wisdom result in the truth body
The perfection of generosity, ethical discipline and patience come are
classified under the collection of merit.
It is said that depending primarily on the perfection of wisdom one
accumulates the collection of wisdom which is the cause of the dharmakaya,
the truth body.
Through the good accumulation of merit through the perfection of
generosity, ethical discipline and patience it is said that one enjoy
bodily bliss, as in V7.28 “If their bodies are happy due to their merits”.
“And their minds are happy due to their skill” –these Superior Bodhisattva
experience mental bliss primarily because of their perception of the truth
i.e. the direct perception of selflessness.
If you compare non-virtues and the apprehensions of self, non-virtues are
coarser, and through non-virtues, one experiences bodily suffering. When we
talk about non-virtues, essentially it is a non-virtuous mind.
So “If their bodies are happy due to their merits” – the bodily bliss is
the result of their collection of merit, then the opposite must be that
accumulation of non-virtues result in bodily pain.
If you compare the physical and mental suffer, mental suffer is more acute
than physical suffering, because mental suffering is difficult to get rid
of. Because of the apprehensions of the self, then non-virtues arises.
The roots of the entire problem especially the mental unhappiness is what
we called ego or apprehensions of self. Until we have overcome the
apprehensions of the self, then there is no way to overcome the mental
unhappiness and mental suffering. As such, there is a need to generate the
antidote to the self grasping.
[A Necklace for Those of Clear Awareness Clearly Revealing the Modes of
Minds and Mental Factors by Yeshe Gyaltsen, pg. 18] What is the difference
between bodily and mental feelings? Feelings that arise in the retinue of
the five sense consciousness are called “bodily feelings”; feelings that
arise in the retinue of the mental consciousness are called “mental
feelings.”
Khen Rinpoche (in English):  Am I answering your question or not? As simple
as that!
The essence of the answer is that in dependent on the collection of merit,
one achieve the rupakaya (form body), and in dependent on the collection of
wisdom, one achieve the dharmakaya (truth body). Then you think about it.
Khen Rinpoche (in English):  From there you evaluate yourself how each of
them is non-virtues, wisdom realize emptiness, why that ….I don’t know to
combine together. I think something like that. If you think more then maybe
you find answer somewhere right there.


