Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Engaging in the Deeds of a Bodhisattva/lesson45.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:52:15.972360
================================================================================


** Verse 7.40 was not covered in class**
[BP1 Part2 L24] b" The reasons for that
Verse 7.40 ab
The Muni himself has said
That interest is the root of every class of virtue;
The Buddha says in the sutras The Ocean of Intelligence and the Moon Lamp
that the roots of virtue of working for liberation and enlightenment all
come from the aspiration for the Dharma. Therefore, it is inappropriate to
abandon aspiration. It is obvious that those who have strong aspiration for
the Dharma become good practitioners. Those with middling aspiration become
middling practitioners and those who have no aspiration for the Dharma
remain as ordinary beings. Aspiration is important in whatever we do, be it
studying or practicing; without it, nothing gets done. When studying the
Buddha’s teachings, we need aspiration to learn as much as we can. Without
it, we only end up receiving imprints in our minds and they remain forever
at that level.
It is important to aim high. When we see a person doing prostrations, we
should not think, “I can’t do that,” but instead take that person as a role
model and aspire to become like him. But when we see an angry person, we
should not follow his example. No one is perfect; nobody has all the
qualities and is free from all faults and obscurations from the start. If
such a perfect person existed, there would be no need for the Dharma.
Everyone has different karma and levels of intelligence. Some enjoy good
conditions to practise Dharma while others do not. Due to such differences,
there will also be differences in people. By aiming high and striving to
develop joyous effort, all this helps us develop the aspiration for the
Dharma. Without it, our Dharma practice will degenerate and we will only
experience unhappiness. What we want is happiness. Therefore, we have to
create the cause for virtue and practice the Dharma. Aspiration for the
Dharma is essential and extremely important. In order to experience perfect
happiness, we must create perfect causes in terms of perfect virtue and
practice. This requires the perfect aspiration for the Dharma.

|3" The cause for  |
|esteem            |
|a" Presentation   |
|b" Explanation    |

|a" Presentation   |


Verse 7.40 cd
Its root is constant acquaintance
With the ripening results.
The root of aspiration is the constant acquaintance with the fruitional
effects of karma –understanding how happiness is the fruit of virtuous
actions and suffering the fruitional effect of negative actions. Meditating
on the law of cause and effect and generating the faith of conviction in
karma becomes the root for the generation of aspiration. This is the same
advice as the major outline in the Lamrim literature which states that,
“meditating on karma is the root of all happiness and goodness.”
With our faith of conviction in karma, we will naturally have the
aspiration to abandon non-virtuous actions, which cause suffering and,
naturally, we have the aspiration to engage in virtuous actions, which
causes happiness. At best our aspiration is weak because we do not have the
heart-felt faith of conviction in karma.
We have started with the outline: Increasing the favorable conditions for
the generation of joyous perseverance.
In that outline, the four powers were discussed.
The four powers are:
   1. Power of aspiration
   2. Power of steadfastness
   3. Power of joy
   4. Power of relinquishment.
We have started with the first one, the power of aspiration.
What is joyous perseverance? Joyous perseverance is the enthusiasm for
virtue.
There are four powers for developing joyous perseverance. The first is the
power of aspiration. In this context, the power of aspiration refers to the
yearning for practice and for virtue. In order to be able to cultivate any
practice or virtue, one must have yearning, that is one must want it.
If that is the case, then how does one develop such a yearning or
aspiration? As it is said in the root text, the root of aspiration is
constant meditation on the fruitional effects of karma. That means if we
want to develop a yearning for the teachings or practice, we have to
reflect and come to an understanding of the presentation of karma and its
effects, in particular to reflect on the effects of one’s actions. One
thinks of the various effects of any one karma in terms of its fruitional
effects, causally concordant effects and the environmental effects.
In essence, what it is saying is that to be able to practice the dharma,
you need to have a very strong yearning for it, you must want to do it
yourself and you must have that strong aspiration or yearning. And that in
turn is dependent on your faith of conviction in karma. So your interest
for the practice is commensurate with your faith of conviction in karma.
Therefore, it is mentioned in the Stages of the Path literatures that the
root of all the happiness is this faith of conviction in karma and its
effects.
In order to expand on the discussion of karma and its effects, then there
are the next few verses which deal with reflecting on the effects of
virtue, the effects of non-virtue, and the effects of mixed karma.
First is contemplating on the mixed karmic cause and effect

|b" Explanation                    |
|(1) Reflecting on mixed karma and |
|its effects                       |
|(2) Reflecting on solely white    |
|karma and its effects             |
|(3) Reflecting on black karma and |
|it effects.                       |

|(1) Reflecting on mixed karma and |
|its effects                       |


Verse 7.41
Suffering, mental unhappiness,
The various kinds of fear,
As well as separation from what is desired
Will arise from negative deeds.
Verse 7.42
By performing virtues intended in the mind,
Wherever I go, due to those merits,
There I shall be honoured with
The excellences that are their results.
Verse 7.43
Although one who commits misdeeds wishes for happiness,
Wherever he goes,
There those misdeeds
Will completely destroy him with the weapons of suffering.
We experience many kinds of problems and sufferings. On the bodily level,
we experience sicknesses, or the discomfort of heat and cold. Likewise, we
also suffers mentally and being unhappy. In life, we experience suffering,
mental unhappiness, the various kinds of fear, as well as separation from
what is desired. We are separated from the things that we desire and come
into contact with the things that we don’t desire. This is how cyclic
existence/ samsara is.
Basically verse 7.41 is saying that all these varieties of undesirable
experiences and results do not come into being causelessly. They don’t
arise without any causes and conditions. But rather these are said to be
the fruitional effects of the non-virtues that we have accumulated. This
verse is actually the presentation of cause and effect - karma.
We have an aspiration or yearning for virtue which comes from faith of
conviction in karma and its effects. Based on that yearning for practice,
for dharma, and for virtue, and if we accumulate virtue which is a cause of
happiness, then wherever we may go, due to the power of the merit or virtue
that we have accumulated, we will experience the fruitional effects of
those virtues; basically happiness.
If we only accumulate non-virtues, and at the same time we want success and
happiness, will we achieve the result of happiness or not? The answer is
no! Even if what we want is only success and happiness but if we commit
misdeeds or accumulate non-virtues, then wherever we go, those misdeeds
will accompanies us. When they are ripened, they will only bring about
sufferings.
The outline that goes with these three verses is reflecting on mixed karmic
cause and effects. When we talk about mixed karma, we are not talking about
white karma (or virtue) and black karma (or non-virtue). In the
presentation of karma:
- there is a classification of karma into projecting karma which impels or
throws a future rebirth and
- there is a classification of completing karma which literally completes
that life.
For example, being born in a higher realm is a good rebirth which is the
result of a virtuous projecting karma. Let’s say in that life one has good
health and long life, wealth and prosperity and all kinds of happiness.
That life is completed with virtuous completing karma.
Let’s take the rebirth as a sentient being in the lower realm as an
example. A rebirth in the lower realm is the result of non-virtuous
projecting karma, and that life is filled with suffering. So in that sense,
that life is completed with non-virtuous completing karma.
Even if one gets a good rebirth which is a result of virtuous projecting
karma, but in that life, there are people who experience short life, many
sicknesses or are poor and destitute. They live their life like that, and
their life finishes with those kinds of problems and sufferings. Although
that person has a good rebirth which is a result of virtuous projecting
karma, but his life is completed with non-virtuous completing karma.
Let’s take an example of a dog that is kept by a rich family. The rebirth
of a dog is a result of non-virtuous projecting karma. Generally a dog that
is kept by a well to do family lives in a big house and may have people
looking after it. It gets what it wants, all kinds of food and so forth.
Although the rebirth as a dog is a result of non-virtuous projecting karma,
but its life is filled with all these kinds of enjoyments. As such, this is
an example of a life that is completed by virtuous completing karma.
There are different classifications of hells. There is what we called the
occasional hells. To be born in an occasional hell is a result of non-
virtuous projecting karma. But in some of these occasional hells, it is
said that in different times of the day, for example, during the entire
night, the beings that are born in that particular occasional hell may
experience a lot of happiness, pleasure and all kinds of enjoyments. That
is a result of virtuous completing karma. Comes daytime when the sun rises,
whatever happiness and pleasures that they experienced at night ceases, and
is replaced by unimaginable pain and suffering. That is the result of non-
virtuous completing karma. In the case of such beings that are born in
these kinds of occasional hells, their lives are completed by both virtuous
and non-virtuous completing karma.
It was mentioned in the teachings that there is a butcher who slaughter
animals in the day. As a result of having that kind of livelihood, he was
not able to abandon killing during the day, but he was able to abandon
killing during the night. So he took on the vow not to kill at night. He
was born in one of these occasional hells. As a result of being a butcher
slaughtering animals in the day, he experienced unimaginable suffering and
pain in the day, but comes night time, his experience was completely
changed. Whenever it is night time, he would experience unimaginable
pleasure, comforts and enjoyments, which is the result of taking on the vow
of not killing at night.
There is also an account of a woman who was only able to avoid sexual
misconduct in the day but was not able to avoid sexual misconduct at night.
In the day, she kept the vow of not engaging in sexual misconduct, but she
was not able to do at night. As a result, after she was born, her
experience was opposite of the butcher in that in the day, she experienced
happiness and comfort. Come the night, because of having engaged in sexual
misconduct at night in the past, she experienced problems and sufferings at
night.
What is the moral of these accounts? It is that we should try as much as
possible to abandon non-virtues and to keep to whatever vows and trainings.
Even if we cannot do it for a long time, but at least for whatever period
of time that we are able to do it. We should not underestimate the result
of even keeping vows for a short period of time. By thinking about this, we
should not look down on keeping vow. One should not have this idea “What is
the point as I cannot keep these vows” and so forth.
There are some who are born as human which is a result of virtuous
projecting karma. In the earlier part of their lives, things go on well and
have a lot of success and enjoyments. That is a result of virtuous
completing karma. But in the later parts of their lives, their life
suddenly changes. They have no success and they meet with a lot of problems
and sufferings and they finished life like that. Of course that is the
result of non-virtuous completing karma. This is an example of a life that
is completed by both virtuous and non-virtuous completing karma.
The lesson from these accounts is that whatever happiness or suffering one
experience in a good rebirth, say as a human being, whatever happiness one
experiences in life as a human being, you have to understand that it is the
result of virtuous completing karma, and whatever problems you experience
is a result of non-virtuous completing karma. Likewise, when we see how
beings in the lower realms and animals experience life, whatever sufferings
they experience is a result of their non-virtuous completing karma, and
whatever happiness they experience is a result of their virtuous completing
karma. We have to understand this to develop certainty about it and to have
conviction in that.
In the section on karma in the Stages of the Path literature, one of the
general characteristics of karma is that karma is certain (or karma is
definite).  This is what it meant in our discussion about this. When we say
karma is certain (or karma is definite), it means that:
-  if we accumulate virtue, that virtue is certain to bring about happiness
and the result of virtue can only be happiness, and
- the result of non-virtue can only be suffering, and is certain to be
suffering.
That is what is mentioned in the Stages to the Path - karma is certain (or
karma is definite).
Next is contemplating on white karmic cause and effect.

|(2) Reflecting on solely white    |
|karma and its effects             |


Verse 7.44
As a result of virtue, I will become a spiritual child of the Sugatas
dwelling in the hearts of vast, fragrant, and cool lotuses,
The food of the Victors’ pleasant speech will cause my splendour to grow,
My supreme body will emerge from a lotus that will unfold due to the light
of the Munis and
I will abide in the presence of the Victors.
If one is able accumulate virtue well, one can be reborn in the Pureland of
the Buddha such as the Pureland of Amitabha Buddha which is called
Sukhavati. The Pureland is very vast, expansive and beautiful. It is said
that when one is reborn in a lotus in Sukhavati, one grows up listening and
hearing the speech of the Buddha, which is like the sustenance of one’s
growth in the Pureland. So hearing the Buddhas’ speech will cause one’s
splendor to grow.
I guess this is what the verse is talking about.
When a normal human is conceived in the womb, the development of the baby
in the womb is sustained by the nutrients from the mother’s body. Likewise,
when one is born in a lotus in Sukhavati, one will develop physically and
grows in the lotus. The sustenance is the Buddhas’ speech, which is like
the nutrients that the baby gets from the mother in the womb. Comes the
time, the light from the exalted body of the Buddha causes the lotus to
fully bloom, and it is said that one’s supreme body will be emerged from
the lotus, and it seems like one’s body is also adorned with the various
characteristics such as different marks and signs. After one has emerged
from the lotus, in this case, we are talking about Sukhavati, the Pureland
of Amitabha Buddha, one comes into the presence of Amitabha Buddha. One
then lives the life hearing the teachings from Amitabha Buddha. All these
experiences are the results of white or wholesome karma.
Next is contemplating on the black karmic cause and effects.

|(3) Reflecting on black karma |
|and it effects.               |


Verse 7.45
As a result of many non-virtues, I will be very wretched due to all my skin
without exception being ripped off by the henchmen of Yama,
Molten copper melted by tremendous heat will be poured into my body,
Pierced by flaming swords and daggers, my flesh will be cut into hundreds
of pieces,
And I shall plummet upon the fiercely blazing iron ground.
These are said to be the experiences of those who accumulate non-virtues.
[BP1 Part 2 L26] The fruitional effect of having engaged only in non-
virtue, such as killing, is rebirth in the hell realms. Once there, we will
be attacked by the frightful hell guardians, the henchmen of Yama, with
their flaming swords and daggers. As our skin is ripped off, we will suffer
tremendously since our skin will be as delicate as that of a baby. We will
experience unbearable pain as molten iron and copper are poured onto our
bodies. We will be pierced by blazing weapons, cut into a hundred pieces
and spread out on the, fiercely blazing iron ground. All these unbearable
sufferings will have to be borne day and night for a long time.
Understanding that these experiences are the results of non-virtuous
actions, we generate the aspiration wanting to abandon the negative actions
we currently engage in and refraining from such actions again in the
future.

|4" Conclusion |


Verse 7.46 ab
Therefore, I should be interested in virtue
And with great respect acquaint myself with it.
Ven Gyurme’s translation:
Therefore, I should practice to have belief in virtue,
and with great respect to meditate on it
This is a concluding summary to the discussion on karma. Prior to this was
a discussion on the need to have yearning for virtue, for practice, and for
the dharma. The root of that yearning is having a faith of conviction in
karma. As such, there is some explanation on the results of virtue and the
results of non-virtue. The conclusion here is that as the results of those
reflections, one should have that yearning to abandon non-virtues and the
yearning to cultivate virtues.
With that I think we are finished with the first power, the power of
aspiration. Then next must be the power of steadfastness. Whatever you are
going to engaged in practice or virtue, first you should investigate right
from the beginning whether it is appropriate and whether you have the
ability to do it or not? Upon investigation, then from the time you engage
in that chosen activity, you should see things through and make sure that
you completed that task or that practice. That is what is meant by the
power of steadfastness.

|b’ The power of stability                  |
|1" Stable effort                           |
|2" Having undertaken [joyous effort],      |
|stabilizing its engagement                 |

|1" Stable effort                           |
|a" Examining it well and undertaking it    |
|b" The disadvantages of discarding it after|
|one has undertaken it                      |

|a" Examining it well and undertaking it    |


Verse 7.46 cd
Having undertaken through the procedure of Vajradhvaja*,
I should cultivate pride.
* Vajradhvaja –Vajra victory banner
Verse 7.47
At the beginning having examined the endowments,
I should either undertake it or not undertake it.
It is best not to undertake it,
But once I have undertaken it I should not withdraw
When the sun rises, the sun from its own side can illuminate everything on
this planet. But in a certain location, due to the terrain or whatever
factors such as underground cave where the sunlight cannot reach those
places, that is not the faults of the sun as the sun on its own side can
illuminates. If the factors such as uneven terrain and so forth do not
exist, the light of the sun can reach everywhere.
It is said that those real bodhisattvas who work day and night for sentient
beings have the capacity to do so. From their own side, they are no biased
i.e. thinking of working for some and not for others. From their own side,
they want to work for all sentient beings. If those sentient beings have
wrong views, then they are not going to be benefitted by that bodhisattva.
That is not the fault of the bodhisattva as the bodhisattva has the wish
and even has the capacity. If the sentient beings are not ripe, then that
is not the fault of the bodhisattva. The problem lies with the sentient
beings. If the sentient beings in question are matured and their minds are
suitable to be ripened then the bodhisattvas will be able to help those
sentient beings.
This is an advice on cultivating pride but not in the negative sense i.e.it
is a “can do” attitude “I can do it myself.” It is for generating courage.
Based on the example of the bodhisattva who gives their bodies, the
bodhisattvas are able to work for others regardless of how sentient beings
are. From their own side, they want to work for others. That is the example
that we can look up to in that while at times even if you want to do
something that is positive to help others but you feel that you are unable
to do so in relation to some people; “How is it possible? It is not
possible and I can’t do it in relation to this group of people (or that
person)” and so forth. You feel disheartened. When you feel that, then you
remember how the bodhisattvas act. The point here is generating courage
with the “can do” attitude: “From my own side, I can engage in that
practice and in that virtue.” As it says in the verse - “I should cultivate
pride.”
We are advised to think carefully before we decide to undertake a
particular task. In general, this is how it should be but here we are
discussing this in the context of starting a practice or engaging in a
particular virtue. So whatever virtue or practice in question, in the
beginning before doing it we should think and analyze it carefully whether
we can do it or not. After a careful consideration, if we think we should
do it and can do it, we should pledge ourselves in doing it; just like
making a promise to ourselves.
Here the teaching says that if we find that we are unable to do it for
whatever reasons after a careful consideration, then for the time being it
is better to decide not to do it; as it says here “It is best not to
undertake it,.”  Or upon careful consideration and if we feel that it is
something that we should do and is something that we are able to do then we
should set up that determination to engage in it. Once we have formed that
determination and pledge to do it, we must make sure we follow through by
completing that task without turning back; as it says: “But once I have
undertaken it I should not withdraw.”
Khen Rinpoche (in English): Don’t withdraw. Don’t withdraw your Basic
Program.
What is the problem if we give up halfway? We may decide to do something
but we surrender or give up halfway. So what is wrong with that?

|b" The disadvantages of discarding it     |
|after one has undertaken it               |


Verse 7.48
I will familiarize with that in other rebirths
And negativities and suffering will increase.
Also others and the time of the result
Will be inferior and will not be accomplished
It doesn’t matter in what we do, it could be studying or doing a particular
practice, or it could be doing a retreat.  Whatever practice or virtue it
may be, but after we have started on it and halfway we just give up and not
see it through and not completing the task, then it will sets up a very bad
habit of not finishing or not completing the tasks. It doesn’t end in this
life. Because of this bad habit then we will experience the causally
concordant behavioral effect in the future lives, which means that again in
the future lives, we will also not complete on whatever we have set up due
to this bad habit formed in this life.
If we do not complete whatever task we have set up to do, we formed this
very bad habit of not completing things. Then as a result, it will affect
us in this life and in future lives. If we do things like that, whatever
things we do, we start but never finish, and then starts another one and
never finish, and start another one and never finish. Then whatever we do
will have no power. There is no strength, so whatever we do have no power.
Next is an explanation of the three types of pride. The three prides are:
   1. The pride about action
   2. The pride about ability
   3. The pride about afflictions

|2" Having undertaken [joyous effort],     |
|stabilizing its engagement                |
|(1) A brief presentation                  |
|(2) Explaining each individually          |

|(1) A brief presentation                  |


Verse 7.49 ab
Apply pride to the three:
Actions, afflictions, and ability.

[BP1 Part 2 L26] The pride about karma (or action) means enthusiasm for and
delights in engaging in virtue for the benefit of others.
Being proud of the afflictions is a mind that wishes to destroy the
afflictions.
Being proud of one’s capacity is a mind that thinks, “I can engage
enthusiastically and with delight in actions to benefit others, and I can
overcome my afflictions.”
Some commentaries clarify that these 3 types of pride are not to be
cultivated prior to engaging in an action, but are to be generated when we
become disheartened in the course of engaging in the virtuous activity we
had chosen.

|(2) Explaining each individually              |
|(a) Pride of karma                            |
|(b) Being proud of [one's] capacity           |
|(c) Being proud of the afflictions            |

|(a) Pride of karma                            |
|(i) Identifying the pride of karma            |
|(ii) The reasons one acts in that way         |
|(iii) Being proud of assuming the burden of   |
|others of inferior karma                      |

|(i) Identifying the pride of karma            |


Verse 7.49 cd
Thinking, “I alone shall do it,”
Is the pride of action.
This pride about action is the courage which thinks “I can do it myself
alone.” This is pretty similar to the wholehearted resolved; which is part
of the sevenfold cause and effect instruction that starts from:
   1. recognizing all sentient beings as one’s mother,
   2. remembering their kindness,
   3. the wish to repay their kindness,
   4. love
   5. compassion,
   6. whole hearted resolve
   7. bodhicitta
The wholehearted resolve is in the context of the thought thinking “I will
achieved omniscience/full enlightenment myself in order to liberate all the
sentient beings.”  On the basis of that, then comes the mind of
enlightenment/bodhicitta. The pride about action is similar in the attitude
that thinks “I myself alone will achieve this.”
[Lamrim Chenmo, Vol. 2, pg. 197]  Pride about action means that no matter
who else may be your companion as you practice the path, you do not count
on them but accomplish it yourself alone. The thought, “I alone shall
achieve this without having any expectation of others,” is similar to
pride, so it is given the name “Pride about action.”
Next you have the pride about ability.

|(ii) The reasons why one acts|
|in that way                  |


Verse 7.50
Afflicted, powerless beings in this world
Are unable to accomplish their own welfare.
Migrating beings are not able like me,
Therefore I shall do this.
Usually when we come across unruly sentient beings, we think “How is it
possible for me to liberate that sentient being (or sentient beings)?” That
is the usual attitude. But here in the context of someone who is a
practitioner of the mind of enlightenment/bodhicitta striving to achieve
enlightenment for sentient beings, then such a practitioner takes on the
responsibility on oneself to do it for others. When such a practitioner
look at sentient beings, they understand that these sentient beings cannot
even achieve their own happiness, then how is it possible that they can
work for others? Here the practitioner of the mind of
enlightenment/bodhicitta generates that determination, confidence and the
positive pride thinking “They cannot do it but I can do it. I will do it
for them.”
|iii) Being proud of assuming the burden of  |
|others of inferior karma                    |


Verse 7.51
If others are doing inferior work,
Why do I sit around?
I do not perform it out of pride;
It would be best for me to have no pride.
“Inferior work” - here one can consider inferior work to mean anything that
is not dharma. Anything that doesn’t become dharma is inferior work.
Starting from the affairs of this life, one just completely being
preoccupied to the affairs in this life, and one is only interested and
attached to the happiness of this life. As a result, one work so hard to
defeat the enemies and on the other hand to sustain one’s circle of friends
and relatives; literally sustaining the loved ones and defeating the
enemies. As such one spends one’s whole life on that. These are example of
inferior work. From one’s side, one does not lead life like that, one does
not follow and one does not keep company of those who engage in these.
Rather, the emphasis is on training the mind, and here is on the basis of
bodhicitta. One of the goal here is to one is able to practice the six
perfections.
Here if you read inferior work to literally mean moving things around such
as people carrying goods, shifting things and so forth. When we see such
people who are burdened with such work are suffering and need help, instead
of just sitting around and look, we should just do something provided that
through helping, that does not become a cause for negative karma.
Whatever one has set out to do or whatever one is able to do, one may have
done that and at the same time one feels very proud in a negative way or
become conceited and start advertising “I did this and that for him. I did
this big job….”, as it is says here that is wrong.
Here the advice is “I do not perform it out of pride, it would be best for
me to have no pride” so to be able to engage in the practices of
benefitting others or the bodhisattvas practices. All these are done for
others and without any conceit.
Q&A
Student: In the process of striving in virtue, from beginning to end, we
have the various types of joyous perseverance, as well as the four or six
powers. How does one relate them to each other? If not then how does one
integrate them in this whole striving in virtue process?
How does one integrate these two types of joyous perseverance: joyous
perseverance of armoring as well as the power of aspiration, for example?
In striving for virtue, we find that these two are present. So how does one
integrate them together?
In the Maitreya’s Ornaments of the Mahayana Sutras, there are four types of
joyous perseverance.
   1. The amour like joyous perseverance
   2. The joyous perseverance of application
   3. The joyous perseverance of non-discouragement
   4. The joyous perseverance of non-contentment
Khen Rinpoche (in English): Maybe I explain next time.
We will look at it next time. From your side you have to know what are the
four types of joyous perseverance and the four powers. Basically it is a
question about the relationship between these two sets. I am not exactly
sure whether there is any correlation, so it is something that you have to
analyze.
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS FOR SUNDAY, AUGUST 24, 2014
1.  What are the three types of laziness and their respective antidotes?
2. It is said that the hardships that achieving enlightenment entail do not
constitute even a fraction of the sufferings in the lower realms? Why is
that so?
3.  What are the reasons that the bodhisattva superiors do not experience
physical and mental suffering when they are giving away their bodies? Is it
really possible for anyone to achieve such a feat? Why?
4.  What is the best way of bringing about a yearning for the Dharma?

Special Notice:
No class on Thursday (21 Aug) and coming Tuesday (26 Aug)








