Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Engaging in the Deeds of a Bodhisattva/lesson5.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:52:13.474047
================================================================================


Going back to what we have been discussing on impermanence, essentially the
real meaning of impermanence is momentary disintegration. Because
compounded phenomena (or composed phenomena) undergo change each and every
single moment, therefore they are impermanent. We should apply this
understanding of impermanence to our body and mind and understanding how
our body and mind undergo momentary disintegration. By looking at how we
ourselves and our body and mind are undergoing change in every single
moment, and because of that, therefore we ourselves and our body and mind
are impermanent.
Going back to what I have brought up in the first lesson on the statement
which says “Because it is impermanent, therefore it is in the nature of
suffering”.  We ourselves and our body and mind are impermanent and they
undergo momentary disintegration. We and our body and mind undergo
momentary disintegration without a choice. They are helplessly and
powerlessly undergoing momentary disintegration because they are product of
the results of our karma and afflictions. Because of karma and afflictions,
we and our body and mind undergo momentary disintegration. And because we
ourselves and our body and mind undergo momentary disintegration due to the
power of our karma and afflictions, therefore they are in the nature of
suffering.
“Because it is impermanent, it is in the nature of suffering. Because it is
in the nature of suffering, it is selfless”. We ourselves and our body and
mind complex -our aggregates- undergo momentary change, therefore they are
impermanent. They undergo momentary change due to the power of karma and
afflictions. As such, it is in the nature of suffering. What is the link
between this and selfless as it is said “Because it is in the nature of
suffering, it is selfless”? Then there are few ways of interpreting the
relationship and the meaning between these two. One is this: earlier we
have said that our aggregates -the body and mind- and we ourselves are in
the nature of suffering because we are the products that are under the
control of our karma and afflictions. So we ourselves and our body and mind
are under the control and influence of something else. Because of that, we
can say that we ourselves and our body and mind are empty of independent
self.
We are in the nature of suffering. Our body and mind complex -our
aggregates- are in the nature of suffering. They are in the nature of
suffering because they are under the control of karma and afflictions;
which means that they are under the control of something other than
themselves. As such, there cannot be an independent self. The aggregates
and we are being in the nature of suffering. This is a reason to establish
that our body and mind are selfless and to establish that the self does not
exist independently.
This discussion and those related discussions in the past are mainly for
those who have been around for a while; especially those of you who have
studied some of the previous modules such as Tenets and so forth. It is not
so much for the new people. It is more mainly for those who have done some
earlier study. It is something very important for them to think about;
basically back to the basic statement “Because it is impermanent, it is in
the nature of suffering. Because it is in the nature of suffering, it is
selfless”.  This gives an idea what you can contemplate on when you look at
these two basic statements and trying to find the relationship between each
of those. Also help you to establish how the former is the reason for
establishing the latter.
All composed phenomena such as our body and mind are impermanent because
they undergo momentary change. We are in the nature of suffering, and our
body and mind are in the nature of suffering because they are under the
control of karma and afflictions. As such, it is not reasonable to have
very strong grasping and attachment to one’s body and mind because they are
in the nature of suffering. That is another way of explaining how it is
selfless because it is in the nature of suffering.
I have given you two interpretations and two ways of looking at the
relationship between the nature of suffering and selfless. So keep in mind
of these two. So by thinking “Because it is impermanent, therefore it is in
the nature of suffering. Because it is in the nature of suffering, it is
selfless,” it is kind of like taking a first step in working to reduce our
anger and attachment. By thinking of our own impermanence of our body and
mind, and if we understand this well, naturally our afflictions will
decrease. On top of that, if we can contemplate on how we and our body and
mind are in the nature of suffering, then of course that will also helps
very much in reducing our afflictions. Also, if we can reflect well on the
meaning of selflessness, it goes without saying that the afflictions will
naturally decline. We will experience more peace and happiness when our
afflictions are weaker.
If we can remember these three lines and then reflect on it, it will be
helpful especially at times when our minds are distracted or when our minds
are disturbed. So if we can remember and think about the lines; “Because of
impermanence, it is in the nature of suffering. Because it is in the nature
of suffering, it is selfless,” this is a method to work with our
afflictions. Afflictions can arise when things are going well. When things
are going well, we have this idea “everything is going well and it is
fine.” That is the situation whereby strong attachment arises; especially
this complete preoccupation with the happiness of this life alone. At such
a time, in order to counteract this attachment, we could reflect on these
three things. Likewise, when we are disturbed, or when the mind is
depressed or unhappy, we could also think about these three things.
Of course the best antidote to the afflictions is to meditate on
emptiness/selflessness. But that is out of reach for us, and it is quite
impossible. There is bodhicitta as well. But that is also really difficult.
What is within our reach, and what is highly possible is to think about how
we ourselves and our body and mind are by nature impermanent and they are
in the nature of suffering. This is highly accessible and within our reach.
This is something that we can understand much easier and it is easier for
us to put into practice. So this is the first step that we must take,
rather than thinking about emptiness or bodhicitta.
It is mentioned in the Stages of the Path to Enlightenment literature that
amongst all the ideas, the idea of impermanence is the most powerful.
Whether reflections on impermanence will really help us or not is something
that you have to discover for yourself. You have to think about it. Try it
out and see at times when you are completely absorbed and preoccupied with
the happiness of this life, when things are going well or when you are
feeling down and disturbed. When you meditate and reflect on impermanence
of things and events in life, see whether it helps or not. This is
something you have to discover for yourself. A correct reflection and
meditation on impermanence will not lead to further depression. It will not
lead to further unhappiness. A correct reflection on impermanence is very
helpful for the mind. It really calms the mind. On top of that, a correct
reflection of impermanence gives courage and determination. It can also
lead to strengthening of one’s love and so forth.
For example, if you understand that you may die tomorrow or you have this
strong idea “I’m going to die tomorrow.” Then suddenly you find that there
is no reason to be upset anymore. What is the point of getting angry
anymore if you know that for sure you will die tomorrow? If you understand
that you are going to die soon tomorrow, then you are able to let go your
possessions and house easily. You see that there is no point when you know
you are going to die. If you really know how to think about impermanence,
this will be the experience. With that kind of mindset, I think whatever
remaining lifespan you have, you will use it more meaningfully. If one
understands life is short, what is the point of living it in a miserable
way? What is the point of being unhappy all the time? What is the point of
accumulating non-virtues? It is pointless. So such thoughts arise due to
reflections on impermanence. One may also develop thoughts of engaging in
virtue and doing things that will make one really calm and peaceful. One
may also think about doing stuff that will be of help to others.
Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds
Some correction on the boundary of the four types of mind generation as
explained in the last lesson.
We divide the mind generation in terms of their boundaries, and there are
four.

|Boundary of  the mind generation                                       |
|Mind generation of aspiring      |Ordinary bodhisattva on the Mahayana  |
|conduct                          |Path of Accumulation and Path of      |
|(Bodhicitta that comes from      |Preparation                           |
|belief)                          |                                      |
|Mind generation of pure noble    |Superior bodhisattva on the 1st to 7th|
|intention                        |ground                                |
|(Pure superior intent mind       |                                      |
|generation)                      |                                      |
|Mind generation of full          |Superior bodhisattva on the 8th, 9th  |
|maturation                       |and 10th ground                       |
|(Fully ripen mind generation)    |                                      |
|Mind generation free from all    |Buddha superior on the Buddha ground  |
|obscurations                     |                                      |
|(Obscuration abandoning mind     |                                      |
|generation)                      |                                      |


Another thing to note is these two words: bodhicitta and mind generation.
A lot of times it means the same thing. A lot of times they are used
interchangeably. But there is indeed a difference between the two.
Bodhicitta exists from the Mahayana Path of Accumulation up to the 10th
ground in the continuum of a bodhisattva.
Mahayana mind generation exists from the Mahayana Path of Accumulation up
to enlightenment.
We have finished with the benefits of the mind generation - both
aspirational and engaged.
In the last lesson I said verse 1.20 may be a source for stating the
benefits of aspirational bodhicitta. But in the commentary it seems clear
that verse 1.20 is related to the benefits of engaged bodhicitta. So verse
1.20 is essentially saying that the Buddha himself stated the benefits of
engaged bodhicitta in the Sutra Requested by Subahu.
 It is said that in this sutra the Buddha talked about the immeasurable
benefits of bodhicitta for the sake of those who are of the indefinite
Hinayana lineage.
 (BP1L5: The quotation from the Subahupariprccha Sutra reads:
  If one perseveres for the sake of bringing happiness and benefit to an
  infinite number of beings, then the infinite roots of virtue from this
  infinite aim that bears in mind the happiness and benefit of all sentient
  beings shall increase, expand and reach towards fulfilment every moment,
  day and night, regardless of whether one is unconscientious or even
  asleep.
This quotation from the Buddha is specifically made to a person of
indefinite Hearer lineage (of indefinite lineage means those who can change
their lineage) and also for those who are afraid when they look at what
they have to do in order to achieve enlightenment; such as having to
accumulate the two collections of merit and wisdom for an inconceivable
period of time. Because of this, they may fall into the Hinayana path. The
Buddha talked about the benefits of bodhicitta to these types of persons to
prevent them from falling into the Hinayana path due to the fact that they
are afraid of having to spend so much time finishing the
accumulations.indefinite lineage means those who can change their lineage.
In this sutra, the Buddha was saying that when we generate engaging
bodhicitta, whatever we are doing, whether sleeping, lying down, working
etc, we will accumulate merit continually without a break. So by generating
engaging bodhicitta, there is no need to be discouraged or be disheartened
about the time needed to finish the two accumulations.)
Next is establishing that aspirational bodhicitta and engaged bodhicitta
does have those benefits as stated.

|Establishing [the benefits] by means of     |
|logic and reasoning                         |
|A The validity of obtaining benefits from   |
|aspiring bodhicitta                         |
|B The validity of obtaining benefits from   |
|engaging bodhicitta                         |
|The validity of obtaining benefits from aspiring bodhicitta           |
|1 As the functions of accomplishing virtue are limitless, the benefits|
|are great                                                             |
|2 There is no altruistic intention that surpasses [aspiring           |
|bodhicitta]                                                           |
|3 How could such an intention to benefit sentient beings not bring    |
|about benefit for oneself as well?                                    |
|4 Conclusion and praise                                               |


First is establishing with reasoning the benefits of aspirational
bodhicitta.








Verses 1.21 and 1.22 are establishing that aspirational bodhicitta does
indeed have those benefits.
Verse 1.21
If even the thought to relieve
Sentient beings of merely a headache
Possesses the attitude to benefit
And possesses boundless merit,
Verse 1.22
Then what need is there to mention
The desire to dispel the boundless unhappiness of each sentient being
And to accomplish boundless good qualities
Of every single one of them?
Once there was this householder, a layperson, who wanted to explore the
oceans so that he can find some treasure. His mother got to hear about this
and pleaded with him not to go because it is very dangerous. The mother was
crying and grabbing his legs not allowing him to go. The son got upset and
scolded his mother saying “All this talk of yours, holding on and crying is
really inauspicious”. He then kicked his mother on the head. He then
proceeded to the ocean to look for the treasure. Somehow, for whatever
reason, the ship began to sink and split into half. He was able to get hold
of some planks from the remains of the ship and floated on the sea. One day
he was swept and managed to find a dry land. He came onto the island which
initially looked very attractive and very pleasant. Then he saw a spinning
iron wheel. Immediately upon seeing that spinning iron wheel, that spinning
iron wheel descended on his head and started cutting his head. He felt so
much pain. There and then he realized that this is the ripening of his own
karma of kicking his mother on the head. He knew and understood that was
definitely the case. Then he generated the thought “May my experience of
this immense pain and headache be a substitute for all the sufferings of
others who will have to experience something similar to me. May my
experience of this intense pain purify the negative karmas of others who
have created a similar karma.” Immediately upon having that pure virtuous
thought, he passed away and was reborn in the celestial realm.
So this is the story behind verse 1. 21.
Our parents are immeasurably kind to us. For us, they are very powerful
object because of their immense kindness. The lesson that we can draw from
this story is that we have to take good care of our parents and be
respectful of them.
Khen Rinpoche (spoke in English): When I was reading the story, then I
remember one thing. I don’t remember but my mother was telling me this
story. Three, four years ago, one day she was telling the story in my room.
I think that time I was just two years old. I think she said two and half.
I was young. My mother and father already planned to go to India from
Nepal. When they go to India that time, they have to walk one week to reach
to the border and then take bus. They already planned to go to India for
business or something like that. They left me behind with my grandmother
and grandfather. My grandparent’s house is quite long a distance away,
maybe two to three hours walking distance from my home. I think she said
she put me there. After that, one or two days after she brought me to my
grandparent’s house, she supposed to leave for India. Then my mother had a
dream. She dreamt about me saying “Mother, don’t go” and holding her leg.
She dreamt I was really cry and holding her leg “Please don’t go, please
don’t go”. She had this dream. Next morning she supposed to go as they
already planned. Somehow she doesn’t feel comfortable. She didn’t go to
India. Then she went back to the grandparent’s house and picked me up and
she decided not to go for her trip. Of course I don’t remember anything. I
did cry or hold. I don’t know. So my mother cancelled all her trip. My
mother said that after 1week, I was so sick and almost died. She mentioned
that if she left, I will be dead. She was telling me that. Then I feel
really kind of her because she sacrificed her whole trip. Because of her
dream, she cancelled her trip. She did mention that if she go, I will be
dead. So I feel quite touched when my mother told me this story. I didn’t
cry but really touched.
I mean it is just a simple thing of a mother. What she did, she really
sacrifice. I think for everyone it is the same. Somewhere and somehow they
did help a lot. They sacrifice their lives for us. So, when I was reading
this story of holding leg, I remembered about my mother.
Our parents are immeasurably kind to us, so as much as possible we have to
take care of them.
Back to this householder who just merely generated the thought that may his
experience of the pain be a substitute for all those who have similar
karma. It is just a simple a thought as that. But due to that thought, he
passed away from that life and was freed from that pain. He was reborn as a
worldly god in the celestial realm. If such a mere thought has that much
benefit, then it goes without saying that having the intention to free all
these sentient beings from their sufferings and to establish them in the
highest happiness would have boundless benefits. Many times people wonder
and some even ask what benefit can there be just by having a thought? I
mean it is a good thought but how can it be a real benefit? But you can see
that this is not the case if we are talking about actual bodhicitta. If one
is able to generate the uncontrived, fully qualified, actual realization of
bodhicitta, although this bodhicitta may not be directly conjoined with any
of the bodhisattva deeds, just that pure actual bodhicitta itself will
bring about boundless benefits.
Next continue with the benefits of the aspirational bodhicitta.

|There is no altruistic intention that surpasses    |
|[aspiring bodhicitta]                              |


Verse 1.23
Who has such an altruistic intention as this?
Do even fathers and mothers have it?
Do the gods and sages?
Does even Brahma have it?
In general, fathers and mothers are usually considered an authority in
one’s life and are considered good people and kind. They do have good
intentions for their children. What do they wish for? Generally, they wish
for their children to have long life and good health, to have wealth and
prosperity and to have power. That is about it. They don’t wish their
children to achieve enlightenment.  Of course, the parents, in general,
have these good thoughts and good intentions for their children. They don’t
have aspirational bodhicitta, and they don’t have such an intention. You
could say that the parents do not think about bodhicitta because they do
not know that such a thing exists and they do not know how to generate such
a thought.
How about the gods and the rishis (sages) who are said to possess
supernatural powers such as clairvoyance and so forth? Even they do not
have bodhicitta. You could say that parents do not have bodhicitta because
they do not know what bodhicitta is and they do not how to go about
developing it. Most of the gods, the celestial beings, the worldly gods
including nagas have super human ability, supernatural ability and powers,
some can read the minds of others, some can look into the past, but
nevertheless they don’t have bodhicitta. The point here is that they don’t
even have the thought thinking: “I must achieve omniscience in order to
accomplish the welfare of others”. They don’t even have the aspirational
bodhicitta.
You could say that these gods and sages do not have bodhicitta because they
do not have the thought of benefitting others. What about Brahma? In order
to be born as Brahma, one must have cultivated the practice of the four
immeasurables*. But in the case of the Brahma who has cultivated the
practice the four immeasurables doesn’t have bodhicitta. He doesn’t have
the thoughts “I will achieve full enlightenment in order to accomplish the
welfares of others”.
*The four immeasurables - equanimity, love, compassion, and joy
Essentially verse 1.23 is saying that parents who are asserted to have an
authority in life and is someone who is kind and is someone to look up to.
In general, parents don’t have bodhicitta. Neither do the gods or the
powerful one have bodhicitta. Even Brahma doesn’t have bodhicitta.
One of the four immeasurables thought is immeasurable love.
Love is the thought wanting others to have happiness. Such love is an
antidote to malice or ill will.
Compassion is the thought wishing others to be freed from suffering.
Compassion is an antidote to belligerence; which is a derivative of anger.
Immeasurable joy is the thought not wanting others to be separated from
happiness. Joy is the antidote to dislike. Equanimity is a wanting sentient
beings to be freed from afflictions. Equanimity is an antidote to
afflictions such as anger and attachment.

|Four immeasurables                                                          |
|Love      |Thought wanting others to have happiness    |antidote to malice  |
|          |                                            |or ill will         |
|Compassion|Thought wishing others to be freed from     |antidote to         |
|          |suffering                                   |belligerence        |
|Joy       |Thought not wanting others to be separated  |antidote to dislike |
|          |from happiness                              |                    |
|Equanimity|Thought wanting sentient beings to be freed |antidote to         |
|          |from afflictions                            |afflictions         |


In order to be able to meditate on bodhicitta, one must first have
meditated and cultivate compassion. In order to have good meditation and
cultivation of compassion, one must be preceded by good cultivation of
love. Even we are not able to practice exactly as it is taught in the
Stages of Path to Enlightenment literature, Lamrim, and in relation to all
sentient beings if we can have the thought from the heart wanting everyone
to be happy and to be freed from suffering, then that for us is love and
compassion. Then we can also have the feel from the heart that may everyone
not be parted from happiness and may everyone be freed of the afflictions.
So these are the four immeasurables: love, compassion, joy and equanimity.
If we can think about these things, just a good reflection can bring up
some thought of love, compassion, joy and equanimity. Just the mere arising
of these thoughts can lessen whatever malice, anger and so forth. With
these reflections we can reduce our anger and attachment. Only when we have
reduced our anger and attachment, the thought of wanting to help others and
wanting to benefit others can arise.
Sometimes people wonder “Is there any actual real benefit just by sitting
there and generating some good intentions, for example, just sit there and
just hope may others be happy?” If you think about it, really there is
actual benefit. The mind does change. When all the afflictions decrease,
the thoughts of wanting to do something to benefit others can then arise.
So, that is the benefit, isn’t it?
People do wonder all these instructions of developing bodhicitta and so
forth are so much and difficult to do, and at the end of the day what one
should do? At our level, this is something practical and something that is
within our reach. It is not that we are not able to think of love and
compassion. It is possible, isn’t it? We just have to sit down and try to
think along those lines: “Wanting others to be happy whoever he/she is
including the enemies, wanting others to be freed from suffering including
the enemies”.  When it gets down to the actual practice and the actual work
then of course it is challenging. At this level, it doesn’t require us to
actually stand up and go and actually do something. We just have to sit
down and change our way of thinking first.
Khen Rinpoche (spoke in English): That one is easy. You just sit down and
think. That is all. You don’t need to do much. You need your nice and
comfortable cushion, sit down and just think. Simple as that. Can or not?
As I said earlier, whether you are talking about love or compassion, the
strongest thought to have in the beginning is thinking about impermanence.
About how we ourselves is impermanent and is disintegrating in every moment
and how our love ones and the people that we don’t like are also changing
in every moment, and in fact they are disintegrating in each and every
moment. With this thought of impermanence as the basis, it will then be
much easier if we can contemplate on love and compassion. This is something
that every one of us has to do for ourselves. We have to put aside time to
sit down and reflect. We have to turn inwards and then reflect. If we don’t
think about it, we don’t really sit down and contemplate, of course,
nothing will happen and there is no change. We have to try for ourselves by
putting aside not less than five minutes and see whether we experience any
change or not.

|How could such an intention to benefit sentient beings not bring     |
|about benefit for oneself as well?                                   |


Verse 1.24
If those beings have not
Even dreamt before of such an attitude
For their own welfare in their dreams,
How can they generate it for the welfare of others?
Even sentient beings such as our parents in general, the gods, the sages
and even Brahma have never ever wanted enlightenment for their own sake and
not even in their dreams then how is it possible that they would have
actual bodhicitta? How would they even think of achieving omniscient to
accomplish the welfare for others?
Verse 1.25
Such a mind of welfare of sentient beings
Does not arise even for their own sake;
An outstanding jewel of the mind,
An unprecedented wonder is born.
The commentary says that this precious superior mind of the bodhisattva
that wishes to attain enlightenment in order to place all sentient beings
in happiness and for all sentient beings to abandon all of their suffering
has not been generated even for a moment by other sentient beings for
themselves. So others should also regard the generation of this exalted
mind that is not arisen before as praiseworthy. They should strive in it.
Bodhicitta is an exalted mind and is a very special mind. If it really
existed in anybody’s mind, it would be such a wonder. It will really be
praiseworthy. The arising of such an actual bodhicitta has to arise due to
relying on the Mahayana virtuous friend. It is said in the celestial realm,
there are wish fulfilling trees. You can liken generating bodhicitta to
finding and having a wish fulfilling tree on this planet. Wish fulfilling
trees are said to exist in the gods realm. If you look at the commentary on
the practice of offering the mandala, it is explained that the material of
the wish fulfilling trees are precious jewels; the roots are made of gold,
lapis lazuli and different kinds of jewels. Then the fruits of the trees
are also jewels like diamond and so forth. It is wish fulfilling in that
whatever you ask of it, whatever you think, whatever you desire, whatever
wealth you want and so forth, the tree can bestow those. Such are said to
exist in the celestial god realm. Bodhicitta is likened to wish fulfilling
tree in that when it arises it can fulfill all one’s hopes.
Khen Rinpoche (spoke in English): Talk about the tree, I went to the Sai
Baba’s place long time ago. Sai Baba – the Hindu master. Long time ago in
1980 I went there for holiday because it is very cheap. All the foods are
free and the rooms are only 6 rupees; something like that. I spent three
days there. That time I went to his place. There was one tree on the hill.
People said that this tree whatever you wish you can get from it. Sai Baba
manifests - you want banana, the tree will give banana, you want apple, you
will get the apple. There was one tree near his cave, and it is mentioned
that is the wish fulfilling tree. I am not saying that is the real one.
There are different kinds of super knowledge, in simple English, super
human ability. When talk about magical powers, of course the best kind of
magical powers arise from having certain levels of concentration. One can
also have magical power by reciting mantras. Magical powers can also arise
by depending on external substances. The magical powers that arise from
meditating on concentration are said to be the real deal and it is very
powerful.
Next is establishing the validity of the benefits of engaged bodhicitta.
We will stop here for today. In the next lesson, we will finish the rest of
the chapter one.

Q&A
Student 1:  I want to clarify the earlier verses starting from verse 1.9
and the few verses that follow before the divisions of the bodhicitta were
explained. That bodhicitta that is referred to that mind of enlightenment,
are we talking about aspirational bodhicitta or engaged bodhicitta?
Khen Rinpoche (spoke in English): General
Student 1: Bodhicitta in general? It means both of them together?
Khen Rinpoche (in English): Can be general bodhicitta.
Student 1: (Question rephrased by Khen Rinpoche) Is there any order in the
generation of the two bodhicitta? Do you need engaged bodhicitta to enter
the Mahayana Path?
Khen Rinpoche: Whether it is an aspirational mind generation or engaged
mind generation, both are fully qualified mind generations. Whoever has it,
he/she is a Mahayanist. It is 101 percent sure that such mind generations
do not exist in the continuum of those who has not entered the path.
As to whether aspirational bodhicitta must precede engaged bodhicitta or
not,  in the first place, this is a very big question and it is something
that is not really straightforward and not clear in the text.
I remembered seeing something like this, the first mind generation that
arises is the aspirational bodhicitta.
But I don’t remember exactly which text. Of course, as to what this
statement means is another thing.
It is clear in the text that the mind generation in the continuum of a
bodhisattva superior who is in meditative equipoise is aspirational
bodhicitta. These are the couple of things to think about.
I said that I remember reading this text which said the initial mind
generation that arises is the aspirational mind generation or aspirational
bodhicitta. But it is also said that one enters the Mahayana path with
realization of calm-abiding. Having said that then the question is: Is
bodhicitta achieved while in meditative equipoise? If so, then that makes
the initial bodhicitta aspirational?
Khen Rinpoche (spoke in English): I am not making any conclusion here. I am
just throwing the ideas. I am not saying this is right. Open dialog for you
to find out more.




