Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Engaging in the Deeds of a Bodhisattva/lesson22.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:52:14.704423
================================================================================


There is a verse from the Seventh Dalai Lama Kelsang Gyatso which says:
  All the phenomena of both samsara and nirvana are the fabrication/
  creation/ projection of the conceptual thought. By apprehending phenomena
  to exist ultimately, we are deceived. As such, do not apprehend phenomena
  as truly existing but rather look at them as empty.
What the verse is saying is that everything in samsara - all the harms, all
the problems and everything about nirvana/liberation - are the
creations/projections of the mind in that they are all merely posited by
thought.
So far what we have seen in the text are the descriptions about all the
sufferings and problems of this life, and all the sufferings and problems
of the future lives are the creations/ projections of the mind. They all
arise from the mind. These are the problems of samsara.
The verse is saying that all sufferings and problems of samsara are the
creations/ projections of the mind.  They come to existence as something
that is merely posited by thought.
Essentially, liberation/nirvana is also a quality dependent on the mind and
is achieved through the mind. When we talk about non-abiding nirvana, it
comes about from the mind. In the last lesson, we saw how the six
perfections are all qualities that are dependent on the mind which includes
the wisdom perceiving the ultimate nature of reality- the wisdom of
realizing selflessness. It is a quality that is dependent on the mind and
is achieved through the mind.
The verse that I have cited earlier is saying that everything in samsara
and nirvana is creation/ projection of the mind and is merely posited by
the conceptual thought. That is the reality of every phenomenon in both
samsara and nirvana. Every phenomenon included in samara and nirvana exists
as something that is merely designated/ imputed by thought. Although that
is the reality, when everything that is included in both samara and nirvana
appear back to us, they don’t appear to us as something that is the
creation of the mind. They don’t appear back to us as something that is
imputed/ designated by the mind. But rather, they appear back to us as
something existing from the side of the object, existing right there under
its own power, and exists inherently from its own side. All phenomena in
samara and nirvana appear back to us in that way and we believe and accept
that appearance. That is how we are being deceived and cheated.
As in our earlier discussion, like the example of how the enemy actually
exists, in reality our enemies are the projection/ creation of our own
mind. It is only because of our anger and in the perspective of that anger
then there is an enemy. So it is a creation of our own mind. If there is no
anger from our side, then the enemy, the person who harms us or disturbs
us, does not exist. Enemy does not exist for us if we don’t have anger.
Because we have anger, then the enemy exists and that causes us pain and
problems. Only in the perspective of the anger, there is the appearance of
an enemy, and we believe that enemy does exists.
Imagine there is a situation where you have no anger at all. Then it
doesn’t matter whatever harm that person does to you. As long as the anger
does not manifest, and as long as the anger does not exist in your mind,
then the label “enemy” does not exist. It only exists when anger comes up.
So it is clear from this example the enemy is the creation/ projection of
your own mind. In absence of anger, regardless of what the person may does
to you and if you are not angry, then the label “enemy” does not exist for
you.
On top of that, if the mind understands the label “enemy” is a mere
designation and is the projection of the mind, then there is no real enemy
from the side of the object. The anger becomes powerless and very weak
because there is no basis for them to be upset. But for you, not only is
there the appearance of an enemy right there from its own side and nothing
to do with your mind, the issue does not lie with you and everything lies
from the side of the object, the problems exist from the side of the
object, then there is a real enemy existing right there. That is how the
enemy appears back to your mind. The mind assents to the appearance and
believes in that. That is how strong anger arises. Therefore, the verse
says:
   All the phenomena of both samsara and nirvana are the fabrications/
   projections of the conceptual thought. By apprehending phenomena to
   exist ultimately, we are deceived.
When we are deceived in such a way, then we experience suffering.
All the phenomena of both samsara and nirvana are the fabrication/
creation/ projection of the conceptual thought. By apprehending phenomena
to exist ultimately, we are deceived. So this is how we are deceived. When
we are deceived in such a way then we experience suffering. The verse ends
with:
   Therefore, do not hold on to the mistaken appearance, but rather look at
   it as empty.
So do not believe in the mistaken appearance, and do not assent to the
mistaken appearance of inherent existent.
Do not believe in the mistaken appearance of the enemy existing right there
from its own side, but rather, seeing it as a mere projection of the mind.
Do not assent to the mistaken appearance but look at that appearance as
empty. Understand that mistaken appearance is not the reality, and it
doesn’t exist in the way it appears. Therefore, it is empty.
Verse like the one that I have just cited is quite useful. If we can
memorize them and reflect on it, it could be very useful for us. Likewise
in the last class I have mentioned that verse 5.17 could be very useful for
us if we can memorize it and to think about it.
Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds

|Wisdom relies on the|
|mind                |


Verse 5.17
Even those who wish to obtain happiness and overcome suffering
Will wander with no aim
If they do not comprehend the secret of the mind
The principal Dharma.
The “secret of the mind” is “the principal dharma”. Here the “secret of the
mind” is basically the ultimate nature of the mind which is also the
ultimate nature of all phenomena in that the mind and all phenomena do not
exist from their own side, they do not exist inherently and they are empty
of existing inherently.  That is the ultimate nature of the mind and all
phenomena. Without understanding this, no matter what you do, you will
always run into problems.

[Bp1 L26] Without comprehending this secret of the mind (the meaning of
selflessness), there is no way we will be able to achieve the sorrowless
state or nirvana. When we do not understand this secret of the mind, even
if we want to cut the root of samsara, there is no way we will be able to
do so. We will continue to circle in cyclic existence.
The point here is that we need to develop the wisdom that realises
selflessness or emptiness. If we do not realise this, we will not be able
to cut the root of samsara and we will continue to circle in cyclic
existence. Therefore, it is important to develop this wisdom. The
development of this wisdom also depends on the mind.

|The method for guarding the trainings:|
|guarding the mind                     |
|A By guarding the mind, one comes to  |
|guard all                             |
|B The reasons for that                |
|C Making effort in guarding the mind  |

|C Making effort in guarding the mind  |
|1 Brief Presentation                  |
|2 Extensive Explanation               |


Verse 5.18
This being so,
I shall hold and guard my mind well.
Except for the mode of conduct of guarding the mind,
What use are many other modes of conduct?
Like what we saw in the earlier sections of this chapter, all the suffering
and problems of this life and all the suffering and problems in the future
lives, all the fears of this life and all the fears that we will experience
in the future lives are the product/ creation of the mind. Likewise, all
the happiness and bliss of this life and all the happiness and bliss that
we will experience in the future lives are also the product/ creation of
the mind. As such, there is nothing more important than guarding the mind.
In order to guard the mind, we have to be mindful of what we need to adopt
and practice. We also need to be mindful of what we need to discard.
“We need to be mindful” means not forgetting what we need to adopt, and not
forgetting what we need to discard. Every now and then, we should apply
introspection i.e. is to be vigilant and check to see what the mind is up
to. So this is how we have to guard our minds.
The verse is saying that we have to continually guard our mind without
letting our mindfulness and introspection degenerate. There are many other
modes of conduct, behavior and practice that one can undertake with one’s
body and speech. But if one undertakes all these behaviors and practices
with one’s body and speech and yet at the same time neglecting to guard the
mind, what use is there to engage in all those conducts with your body and
speech?
Even if you cultivate all kinds of behavior, practices and modes of conduct
with the body and speech and yet at the same time you neglect to guard the
mind, then these various modes of conduct will not bring about any great
purpose. So you should understand from the very beginning that all these
different kinds of modes of conduct and certain kinds of behavior and
practice that you adopt and engage in with your body and speech are the
methods to help to subdue or to tame the mind. You should remember that
from the very beginning. You should ensure that these behavior, practices
and modes of conduct of your body and speech ultimately have to benefit the
mind in that they have to contribute to the protection of the mind.
Essentially the verse is saying that if you neglect to guard your mind,
then no matter how much effort you put in, how much physical or verbal
hardship you are enduring, and if you don’t guard and protect the mind,
there isn’t any great purpose or real benefit you will experience from
those behaviors.
There are people who mistakenly think “What is the use of doing
prostrations?  What is the use of circumambulations? What is the use of
doing daily prayers? They don’t benefit the mind. All these are not
important. So why should we engage in that?”  It is a huge mistake to think
like that.
There are many people who mistakenly think “There is no use doing these
practices of prostrations and circumambulations and daily recitations. What
is the point as they don’t contribute to the betterment of the mind?” With
that as the reason, they just give up and yet at the same time they are not
doing anything with their minds. It is not as if they are also doing
anything spectacular to guard and protect their minds. That is a huge
mistake because they end up with nothing.
If you are not doing any of these activities, practices and behaviors with
your body and speech, in reality if you are really guarding and protecting
your mind i.e. really doing the real practice guarding your mind with
mindfulness and introspection, perhaps there is something to be said even
if you don’t do those other practices with your body and speech. But most
people end up with nothing. So it is important not to end up like that.
It is important not to misinterpret the meaning of these verses except you
may use this as a reason not to engage in any of those practices such as
circumambulation or prostration. Then you say: “Shantideva says:
   “Except for the mode of conduct of guarding the mind, what use are many
  other modes of conduct?”
What is the point of doing that? Or people may quote verse 5.16 and say:
“You can go and recite your prayers, engage in all sort of hardships for
long periods of time but if you are doing it with a distracted mind, what
is the point of doing it?” If you use that to substantiate your wrong
position in that there is no point doing any of these things anyway, then
you are wrong.
The intent of the Bhagavan, the Buddha, behind these statements is that if
you engage these practices with a distracted mind, you will not achieve any
great purpose. He did not say you will not achieve anything. There is still
some benefit. It is just that it doesn’t hit the point. You don’t really
get the real actual benefit. It is not as if you get nothing.
The point behind these verses so far is that they are saying there is a
need to protect and guard our minds. There is a need to change our mind for
the better and the positive change of the mind comes from the inside, in
that we have to transform the mind from the inside. Transformation depends
on the mind. Therefore, it is important to guard the mind.
[BP1 L26] Whatever virtue we do with our bodies and speech, we should try
our best to make sure that those practices will contribute to changing our
minds. Even if we recite just one “Om Mani Padme Hum,” but that single
recitation brings some sort of positive change to our minds, then that is
far better than someone reciting tens of thousands of “Om Mani Padme Hum”
with nothing happening to the mind. We should try our best to ensure that
whatever practices we do contribute to changing our minds for the better.
If that does not happen, then it becomes empty no matter how long we spend
- years, or thousands of years or whole lifetimes – doing the practices.
This is the reason why people do not change even though they remain
Buddhists their whole lives. Instead of changing for the better, anger,
attachment, pride or jealousy grows by the year despite doing all these
practices. It boils down to the fact that the practices they have been
doing did not become the cause for them to change their minds for the
better.
|Extensive Explanation                   |
|A The way to guard the mind             |
|B The reasons it is necessary to guard  |
|it                                      |
|C The benefits of guarding it           |
|D Devoting oneself to mindfulness in    |
|order to guard the mind                 |

|A The way to guard the mind             |


Verse 5.19:
Just as I would be attentive and conscientious of a wound
When amidst an unruly, freed crowd,
So I should always guard the wounds of my mind
When dwelling among negative people.
Imagine you are going to a place where there will be a lot of people and
you know that these people are quite careless, not conscientious and not
careful. They do not have much mindfulness. Neither are they vigilant. If
you happen to have an injury or an open wound and with no choice you have
to go into the midst of these people, you have to be very careful and with
constant lookout to make sure that they don’t aggravate your wound. You
will do everything you can to protect yourself.
Likewise, the verse is saying that if you have to go into a crowd and mix
with people, there are always people who will agitate you. They may be the
objects that stir up your attachments. In those situations, you have to be
careful and constantly to rely on mindfulness and vigilance to check and to
guard the mind against anger and attachment. You have to be vigilant and
see “Am I developing anger because there are such people around?” or “Is my
desire or attachment arising because of all these objects of attachment
lying around”. If you are not mindful and vigilant when you are mixing with
people, then when you come into contact with undesirable object, you will
get upset, you will get angry. If you come into contact with desirable or
pleasant object, there is danger that you may develop strong desire and
attachment. Of course when you get upset or if you get attach, then you
suffer so much pain. As such, you have to guard your minds.
As in the teachings that are ideally for beginner, beginner should dwell in
isolation. You should stay far away from the object of anger, and you
should stay far away from object of desire especially in the beginning when
you are training your mind because the mind is still weak. If you meet with
the object, the mind changes immediately and can gets affected. In order to
make the initial training a bit easier and to get hold of the training with
some stability, so for beginners, ideally you should live literally in
hermitages, live in isolation, and to live alone to give yourself some
space to work with the mind. The reason being you need to protect and guard
the mind.
For beginners, the minds are so easily affected by the external
environment. When meeting with an object of anger or attachment, the mind
immediately gets affected and then becomes attached or angry. So for those
who really want to tame and subdue their minds, as you will always see this
advice in the teachings, ideally you should live in isolation or go for
retreat to tame the mind. That is the purpose. When you look at the advice
for those who want to develop meditative serenity/calm abiding, in order to
develop meditative serenity/ calm abiding, your mind needs to be free of
mental chatters and discursive thoughts. You need to have as few discursive
thoughts as possible so that you can then develop calm abiding. As such,
you need to develop calm abiding in isolation so as you need to isolate
yourself from the hassle and bustle of busy life.

|B The reasons it is         |
|necessary to guard it       |


Why is it necessary to guard the mind in such a way?
Verse 5.20
If I am conscientious of a wound
Through fear of the small suffering of a wound,
Then why do I not guard the wounds of my mind
Through fear of being crushed by the mountains of Mass Destruction?
The verse starts with a worldly analogy. If you happen to have an injury or
an open wound and if something bad comes into contact with the wound, you
will suffer tremendously with lot of pain. As such, you are usually very
careful when you have an open wound. You will do everything to protect it.
You will be very mindful and vigilant in protecting the wound.
If you are so conscientious of such a wound, then if you are not mindful
and vigilant in guarding your minds but instead you end up following after
the negative mind and accumulate negativities. These negativities will
result in so much suffering in the future lives such as suffering in the
lower realms. As such, you should put even more attention into guarding the
wound of your mind.
As verse 5.7 says,
  Who intentionally created
  The weapons of hell beings?
  Who created the burning iron ground?
  From what did all those hosts of women ensue?
All those unbelievable suffering of the lower realms and the hells are the
result of the negative mind. All these unbelievable suffering really comes
from the untamed negative mind. Since we do not want these suffering, we
have to stop the negative mind. We have to guard the mind.
The main point is that we don’t like suffering and since suffering comes
from the untamed and unsubdued negative mind, then we have to guard the
mind if we don’t want suffering.

|C The benefits of guarding  |
|it                          |


Verse 5.21
Should I behave in such a way,
Then whether among negative people
Or even in the midst of women,
The steady effort of restraint will not decline.
People who are constantly mindful and vigilant are able to maintain their
trainings in any situation, and they will not be affected by those
situations. They are also very stable in those situations. So, if you are
constantly mindful and vigilant, it doesn’t matter what kind situation you
are in. You can be in situation whereby there is a lot of negative people
or in a situation where there are a lot of objects of desire and attachment
such as women and so forth. So if you are continuing being mindful and
vigilant it doesn’t matter what situations you are in, it will not affect
your practice of restraining or taming your mind.
Here the verse says “even in the midst of women”, but it is not just about
women. The author Shantideva is a monk and is also a guy. From the
perspective of a man, generally speaking, women are the object of
attachment or desire. So it is not just about women. If you are women then
you have to apply “even if in the midst of men.”
Khen Rinpoche (In English): You know how to apply? Joking……..
This is the benefit. The verse is saying that if you are able to be mindful
and vigilant continuously then it doesn’t matter what situation you are in,
you are able to keep your trainings and keep your vows.

|D Devoting oneself to mindfulness in     |
|order to guard the mind                  |


Verse 5.22
It is better to be without gain,
Honor, body, and sustenance,
And it is better to let other virtues degenerate,
Rather than ever to let the mind degenerate.
“Gain” here refers to material gain such as gift, award, reward, honor,
respect, praise, people pay homage to you, prostrate to you, or may even
give up their lives for you or people give you the necessities in order to
sustain your life. The verse here is saying that it is easy not to have all
these things.
There are many virtues that you can engage with your body and speech. Even
if you don’t do any of those and even if those practices degenerate, it is
no big deal. According to Gyaltsab Je’s commentary, it is of no big deal to
not to have any of this gain, honor or respect from people and not to have
any possession or sustenance. Even if you don’t do much of those virtues
that you engage with your body and speech, and even if they do degenerate,
it is not such a big deal. But it is a big deal if you degenerate your
mind. Here degenerating the mind means that if you let your good heart,
bodhicitta, degenerate. That should never degenerate because you have to
remember that in the context of our discussion here we are talking about
protecting and guarding the mind, and in the context of the bigger picture
of cultivating the altruistic intention - the bodhicitta.
The verse here is saying that it is not a big deal of not having all these
necessities of life. It is also not a big problem even if they do
degenerate or if you don’t have much of it. It is also not such a big deal
if you do not get to do those virtues of the body and speech, and even if
they do degenerate, it is not such a big deal. However, if the conduct of
guarding the mind through mindfulness and introspection degenerates then
that becomes a big deal. Why? That will result a great loss.
Verses 5.18 – 5.22 showing us why we need to strive in guarding the mind.

|An extensive explanation of the way to practice              |
|1 The method for guarding the trainings: guarding the mind   |
|2 The method for guarding the mind: guarding mindfulness and |
|alertness                                                    |
|3 The way to train in the conduct of guarding the mind by    |
|means of mindfulness and alertness                           |
|4 The branch or method of excellent trainings                |

|2 The method for guarding the mind: guarding mindfulness and |
|alertness                                                    |
|A Brief Presentation                                         |
|B Extensive Explanation                                      |

|A Brief Presentation                                         |


Verse 5:23
To you who wish to guard your minds,
I thus fold my hands [and urge you],
“At the cost of your life, guard
Mindfulness and introspection!”
Prior to this verse, there was already an explanation of all the problems
that come with not guarding the mind and the reasons for why it is
important or appropriate to guard the mind. We have finished with that.
Now, Shantideva is imploring and urging those who considered as followers
of him (Shantideva), he is urging them to guard their mindfulness and
introspection even at the cost of their life.
He is asking those who believed in him and those who wish to follow him do
not let the mindfulness of virtue degenerate and do not let their
introspection (that checks and sees what one is up to with one’s body,
speech and mind) degenerate.
With his folded hands, Shantideva is urging us to guard our mindfulness and
introspection. He is not showing us respect or having faith in us with his
folded hands but rather it is the gesture of showing his understanding of
the importance of guarding one’s mindfulness and introspection. He is
emphasizing how important it is.

|B Extensive Explanation                                     |
|1 The disadvantages of lacking alertness                    |
|2 Guarding mindfulness as a method of guarding alertness    |

|1 The disadvantages of lacking alertness                    |
|A If one is separated from mindfulness and alertness, any   |
|action one performs has little force                        |
|B Wisdom will not become pure                               |
|C Ethics will not become pure                               |
|D Virtues accumulated in the past will be destroyed         |
|E The accomplishment of virtues not previously performed    |
|will be hindered                                            |

The faults of not having introspection itself have 5 points:
   1) Any action that is devoid of introspection has less power
   2) One does not generate pure wisdom
   3) One does not generate pure ethical discipline
   4) The virtue that was accumulated earlier will be destroyed
   5) It obstructs the accomplishment of virtue that was not accumulated
      previously

|A If one is separated from mindfulness and alertness, any   |
|action one performs has little force                        |


Verse 5:24
People who are disturbed by sickness
Lack strength in all actions.
Likewise, the minds disturbed by confusion
Lack strength in all actions.
Those who are sick will find it difficult to go to work, and if they do go
to work, they probably not able to do a good job. Likewise, the virtuous
actions of those whose minds are confused or disturbed by ignorance or
confusion will have little power.
The function of mindfulness and introspection are different.
What mindfulness does is that non-forgetfulness. The function of
mindfulness is to allow us to not forget what we are supposed to do and not
forget what virtue is and what non-virtue is.
It is introspection that enables us to know whether a particular action
that we are going to engage in or a particular action that we are engaging
in is correct or incorrect.
Without introspection we will not able to see that. If we engage in action
but not applying introspection, we would not be able to tell whether the
action is good or bad. Then obviously that action will have little power.
The verse here is saying that if there is no introspection/ vigilance, even
the virtuous action that one engages in would have little power or little
efficacy. So, if one lacks introspection or vigilance, one would not
generate pure wisdom.
[BP1 L26] When people, who are usually very intelligent and capable, are
tormented by serious illnesses, they may not be able to speak or carry out
their usual activities such as their jobs. In the same way, when those, who
are usually considered very intelligent and of clear minds, etc. are
somehow distracted due to lack of mindfulness and vigilance, they become
confused as to what should be adopted and what should be abandoned. Because
of this, whatever virtuous action undertaken by that mind will have very
little force behind it.

|B Wisdom will not become|
|pure                    |


Verse 5:25
Whatever has been heard, contemplated, and meditated
By those whose minds lack introspection,
Just like water in a leaking vase,
Will not remain in mindfulness.
The verse is saying that in the absence of introspection, then whatever
wisdom you may have developed will slowly degenerate or disappear. In the
absence of introspection, the mind tends to wander and get distracted by
other stuffs. If you are not vigilant, even if you do manage to develop
some kinds of wisdom such as gaining some kinds of wisdom arisen from
hearing, reflection and perhaps even from meditation, these different kinds
of wisdoms would slowly disappear and degenerate.
Here the analogy of a leaking vase given in the verse. This is to highlight
the fact that no matter how much water you pour into a vase that has holes
or cracks at the bottom, slowly the water will just leak away.
The verse is telling us that having mindfulness alone is not sufficient.
You need to have introspection and be vigilant. In this context, if you
don’t have vigilance even the wisdom that you developed will slowly
disappear and degenerate.
[BP1 L26] Wisdom develops from mindfulness. Mindfulness is not forgetting
the virtuous object. If mindfulness deteriorates, wisdom deteriorates.
Wisdom arises and develops from the development of memory.  The text
mentions the necessity of relying on mindfulness also, in addition to
vigilance. Even if we have vigilance, we will not be able to retain the
object or whatever knowledge we have gained without mindfulness. Therefore,
mindfulness is also important
Food for thought
You just think about this. Remember from the twelve-link, there is
actualizing karma. The teaching mentioned that the actualizing karma has to
be nourished by craving and grasping. Where do you draw a line between an
actualizing karma being nourished by craving and grasping and not being
nourished by craving and grasping? What is the boundary of this
nourishment?
The point is this, the actualizing karma has to be nourished by craving and
grasping before death. Does it happen one month before we die or one week
before we die or on the day of death or one minute before we actually die?
Khen Rinpoche (In English): You all know the twelve-link. Already graduated
from the twelve-link, isn’t it? I think you are clear about the question.
Are you? No? I think I have to teach the twelve-link again.
In simple English, when is the actualizing karma activated?  A human being
is a rebirth in the desire realms and is activated by craving and grasping.
So to be born as a human being, when is the karma being nourished by
craving and grasping? Is the craving and grasping that activates the karma
to be born as a human being virtue or non-virtue? Is the desire or
attachment of the desire realms virtue or non-virtue?
Khen Rinpoche (In English): It is non-virtue or virtue? The attachment is
virtue or non-virtue? No doubt it is non-virtue. It is non-virtue, isn’t
it? Yes? It is non-virtue. You have to accept that it is non-virtue. It
cannot be virtue.
So it follows that it is actually non-virtue that is the activator of the
karma that causes us to be born as a human being which is a good rebirth.
So, actually the non-virtue play a very important part as it brings
together the condition for us to born as a human being which arises from
non-virtue.
It seems that the non-virtuous mind that brings about the good rebirth. How
is that so? Therefore at the time of death, you don’t have to worry about
dying with non-virtuous thoughts. You don’t need to worry and don’t need to
put in so much effort to die with virtuous thoughts?
Khen Rinpoche (In English): Are you getting my question? The point is that
you must get the question what am I asking.
The question is that the karma that is going to be born as a human being
has to be necessarily nourished or activated by craving and grasping. But
craving and grasping are afflictions and are non-virtues. Are you saying
that good rebirth is a result brought about by non-virtue?
