Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Engaging in the Deeds of a Bodhisattva/lesson11.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:52:21.848206
================================================================================


I have mentioned in the past that whenever we recite those preliminary
prayers before class, we should visualize Shakyamuni Buddha in front of us.
On the basis of recollecting the qualities of his exalted body, speech and
mind, then recite the prayers. If you are able to do that, that makes you
very fortunate. We need to remember that all the time even just to be able
to just thinking of Buddha, recollecting his qualities and reciting those
verses of praise , even though it may be just for a short period of time or
just a couple of minutes, it is very fortunate. If you think about it, just
by doing this makes that particular day meaningful. Of course, if it makes
that particular day meaningful, then that is something to rejoice in.
I thought to mention this. There are many people who take on many
recitation commitments that come with attending many empowerments. Because
of this, they accumulate whole set of recitations that they have to do. But
after a while, most of these people feel that it is kind of pointless doing
these prayers or commitments. There are many people who feel like they just
have to do it and they don’t see the purpose and the meaning behind it.
If it is a commitment, it is really a commitment and you have to do it.
Ideally, when one do self-generation practices or sadanas, as one recites
the words of the practice, one should be reflecting on the meaning of those
words. If one is not able to reflect and meditate on the whole practice, at
least one can hold onto the divine identity of being the deity, and then
recite the words. That is one method.
Here we are talking about in the context of doing self-generation deity
practice. If not, then at least one focuses on the Six Sessions Guru Yoga.
Guru yoga is the main thing, so one recites that prayer and reflects on it.
If one cannot even handle any meditation or any reflection, what one can do
is just verbally recite the prayer. It is called a daily recitation because
it is meant as a recitation. Then some people may wonder “Is there any
point by just blurting it out?”
For it is a commitment, and you have already committed to it, then you just
have to do it. Even just merely reciting the words in order to fulfill your
commitment, at least you are purifying the negativities and obscurations
you have accumulated with the speech.
When you pay homage physically, it is said that you purify the negativities
of the body. When you recite the prayers of the daily recitation
commitments, you will purify the negativities of speech. So by believing in
this, you just have to continue your commitment without giving it up.
This is to respond to those people who come to me and tell me “Oh, I have
all these commitments and I just can’t handle it. Can I just not do it?”
Let’s say you really have this daily commitment which takes one or two
hours, then you just have to recite it.
You just have to do it. It is better than not doing it. In my opinion, it
is a different matter if instead of spending the 1-2 hours just reciting,
and in place of that you can do some other virtuous and meaningful
practices or meditation, then at least you are doing something as a
substitute. But in place of just merely reciting the daily prayers, and you
decide not to do anything and end up doing nothing, then it is better to
spend the 1-2 hours reciting rather than not doing anything.
When people come and ask me, if I tell them “Yeah, you can stop your
practice”, they will stop their practice. They will even stop doing their
recitation and finally do nothing else in place. That wouldn’t be right. In
its place, if at least you are doing something meaningful and virtuous,
then perhaps something could be said about it.
It seems like many people have this problem. They take on all these daily
recitation commitments of sadanas, and some of them don’t feel like
continuing doing it. Some of them feel it is more like a chore and a burden
if they do it. Since they feel there is no choice for them, they just have
to do it.
As I said earlier, ideally you should be reflecting and meditating as you
are reciting the words and doing the practice. If you cannot do that, then
at least you have to go through the practice and recite it. You have to do
it as it is a commitment. As I said earlier, just merely reciting the
prayers will purifies immeasurable amount of negativities accumulated with
speech.  So it is not as if just merely reciting the prayers does not have
any benefit. There is benefit. If you cannot even do that, if in its place,
you can really do some other good practices and doing it well, then in my
opinion, at least that can act as a substitute. Let’s say in place of that,
you could just think of Chenrezig and recite Om Mani Padme Hum and
cultivate good heart, at least you are doing something virtuous. My point
is that you have to do something meaningful and virtuous. If you want to
give up your commitments, in its place at least you should do something
virtuous. Then in my opinion, at least that is good.
Khen Rinpoche (In English): At the same time, I’m not saying you can give
up your commitment. I’m not saying that. If you want to give up, then do
something else. I’m not saying give up your commitment. So don’t
misunderstand me. One of my teachers kept so many commitments. His
commitments are like one volume. He started his prayer from morning 5.30am
until 11.30am. I don’t know whether he has time to meditate or not. I’m not
sure. He just read. What I saw was he just read quickly; like more than 200-
300 pages. I don’t think he has time to meditate on each and everything.
Even at the age of 80, he was doing that. Probably he was doing meditation
but I’m not sure how to tell. Mostly I see this is how they did their
commitment. I mentioned this because people asking me “Can I don’t do my
commitment?” It is difficult for me to answer. If I’m the one who give the
commitment then I say “Ok, don’t do,” then?  My idea is that if you really
cannot do or you really don’t want to do the commitment, then does
something else such as do some meditation, do some chanting or do something
else. I think that’s the way to do. Hopefully, I have answered this for
everyone. Next time please don’t ask me again. One answer kills everyone.
I understand that kind of feeling.  Sometime I personally do feel a bit
like that as well.
“What is the point of just reciting so many of these?” If you think like
that, then ask yourself: “If I don’t do this, what am I going to do in its
place? What better alternative do I have?” Of course if you can meditate as
you recite, then that should be the case. Even if you cannot meditate, at
least just reciting the words itself which is the Buddha’s speech and
Buddha’s teachings, it have the benefit to purify the negativities.
Everybody likes to recite sutras such as Golden Light Sutra and Sanghata
Sutra. Everybody also likes to recite a long list of mantras and dharanis.
Why do people recite these? Why do you recite these? Because you believe
that there is benefit. So if there is benefit in reciting these, there must
be benefit in reciting your daily prayers as well, because they all are the
same – they are the Buddha’s teachings.
Here we are talking about commitments. Since it is a commitment, and you
have already promised to take on that commitment to do the practice, then
it is best that you continue doing those practices without stopping. As I
have said in the case of self-generation practice, even if you cannot
meditate from beginning to the end, you can focus on one aspect of the
practice, for example, in the section on generating oneself as the deity.
At least you can just focus on doing that, and then you can just recite the
rest of the practice.

Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds
We started on the power of applying the antidotes. The text gives the
example of how a sick person would rely on a skilled doctor. He/she will
follow the doctor’s advice accordingly. If that is the case, it will even
more important for us who are afflicted by the sickness of afflictions to
follow the advice given by the skilled doctor, the Buddha.
The ordinary sickness associated with our physical health is only confined
to one life. Sooner or later, the sickness will stop when we die. But the
sickness of the afflictions goes beyond one life, it go on and on, and
doing so much harm to us in myriad ways.
Our sickness of the afflictions doesn’t harm us only. It potentially can
cause us to harm numberless sentient beings. Therefore, it is appropriate
to practice in accordance with the advice of Buddha in order to pacify the
sickness of the afflictions.
|1 The need to quickly purify negativities as illustrated by the analogy of  |
|disease                                                                     |
|A Stating the meaning of the analogy                                        |
|B There are great disadvantages to the disease of the three poisons; [in    |
|addition] the medicine for destroying them is rare                          |
|C Thus it is reasonable to practice in accord with the words of the Teacher,|
|the supreme doctor                                                          |

|C Thus it is reasonable to practice in accord with the words |
|of the Teacher, the supreme doctor                           |


Verse 2.56
Then the intention not to act in accordance
With the words that can uproot every misery
Of the all knowing physician
Is extremely bewildered and an object of scorn.
In order to pacify the sickness of the afflictions, we have to rely on the
instructions of the All Knowing One, the Omniscient Buddha, who can help us
to eliminate the root of all our physical and mental suffering and
sickness. If we do not follow his advice, but engage in behaviors that are
contrary to his advice, then it will be extremely foolish. Instead of
following the buddha’s teachings, if we were to live our life just
continuously accumulating negativities, then we become an object of
ridicule by all the buddhas and bodhisattvas.
The great master Nagarjuna gave the analogy of someone vomiting into an
extremely precious container which can be made of precious jewels or gold.
So if someone were to vomit into that container, that person will be
considered very foolish. Likewise, if after having found the human life of
freedom and endowments, instead of using it to accomplish that which is
meaningful, we only engage in negative actions and just constantly
accumulating non-virtue that would be even so much more foolish.
I think here it is about making a pledge to practice the teachings exactly
as it was taught by the Omniscient One, the Buddha, who is the supreme
physician.
Next is using an analogy.
|The reasons why it is reasonable to make effort in |
|purifying negativities                             |
|1 The need to quickly purify negativities as       |
|illustrated by the analogy of disease              |
|2 Showing the need to purify by means of the       |
|analogy of an abyss                                |

|2 Showing the need to purify by means of the       |
|analogy of an abyss                                |


Verse 2.57
If I need to be conscientious
Near a small, ordinary precipice,
Then how much more so near the precipices of long duration
That drop for thousands of yojanas?
When we are moving up and down a flight of stairs, we usually move with
caution. We do it conscientiously knowing that if we are not careful, we
may slip and hurt ourselves.
If we are so conscientious when moving up and down a flight of stairs with
the fear of slipping and hurting ourselves, what need is there to mention
of the need to be even more careful and more cautious when creating
negative karma? This is because negative karma will throw us into the abyss
of the lower realm. Once we fall into the abyss of the lower realm, we have
to stay there for a very long period of time, and it will be very difficult
to be liberated from those existences. Therefore, we need to be more
cautious and more careful about not creating negative karma. By remembering
we will go to the lower realms and have to suffer there for a long time if
we accumulate non-virtue, then we cultivates conscientiousness. This
ordinary example of being so careful and so cautious when we are moving up
and down a flight of stairs, then it is so much more to be even more
careful, more conscientious and more cautious when we accumulate
negativities.
The text talks about applying the antidotes to the negativities that we
accumulate and applying them immediately.

|The reasonableness of making effort quickly                           |
|1 One should make effort in applying the antidotes to negativities    |
|from this very day onward                                             |
|2 As there is absolutely no reason not to fear suffering, being lazy  |
|about cultivating the path is unreasonable                            |

|1 One should make effort in applying the antidotes to negativities    |
|from this very day onward                                             |


Verse 2.58
It is inappropriate to stay happily
Thinking, “Today alone today I shall not die,”
For inevitably the time will come
When I shall go out of existence.
You should apply the antidotes right away, and not thinking that you will
do it in the future after a month or after a year. It is inappropriate and
incorrect to do that because there is no guarantee that you will not die
tomorrow. So it is not correct thinking “I will not die today”, as there is
no guarantee you will not die tomorrow. So by understanding the time of
death is uncertain, then you have to apply the antidotes right away.
Since there is no guarantee that tomorrow will come, one has to strive and
apply the antidotes right away.
It is inappropriate and incorrect thinking; “There is no point worrying
about that. There is no point fearing it. Therefore there is no reason to
worry. There is no reason to fear”.
If you think “I’m not afraid of death. I am fearless”, then the teachings
says it is incorrect and inappropriate.

|2 As there is absolutely no reason not to fear suffering, being lazy  |
|about cultivating the path is unreasonable                            |


Verse 2.59
Who will grant me fearlessness?
How can I be surely freed from this?
If I shall inevitably go out of existence,
How can I remain in mental happiness?
If one thinks; “I am fearless about death. I will not be afraid at the time
of death. There is no point worrying about it”.  That is inappropriate
because, whether you like it or not, at the time of death, because of
having accumulated negativities throughout life, fear will arise. At that
time, nobody can help you. The buddhas cannot take away your fear. The
result of those non-virtues will ripen and there will be suffering in the
future. At that time, nobody can help; not even the buddhas and the buddhas
cannot take away that fear.
Whether you like it or not, fear will arise at the time of death. There is
nobody, not even the buddhas, can guarantee you saying that you will not
experience any fear and any worries. Nobody can do that. Fear will
naturally arise. Therefore it is wrong to just live life happily, without
any worries, just eat, sleep and enjoy and not caring about death. That is
wrong.
It is without a doubt that death will come and at the time of death, there
will be worry and fear. Therefore, you have to start applying antidotes
right away.
You may think “I am not fear of death.” Because it hasn’t knocked on your
doors yet. Because it hasn’t happened, you think you are confident that it
wouldn’t be a problem. But when it happens, almost for sure there will be
some worries. There will be at least some fear especially if you know that
you did not spend your life in virtue. For sure, there will be worries and
there will be fear at the time of death.
It is said that there are three levels of real dharma practitioners.
        • The junior dharma practitioner dies without regret knowing that
          “At least I did something in this life”. So he dies without
          regret.
        • The middling practitioner dies without fear knowing that “I did
          pretty good practices in this life”.
        • The best practitioner faces death happily, and he is ready to go.
          The teachings state that such practitioners go happily.
We really need to keep this in our own mind. When our time comes, even if
we cannot go happily but at least we should go without regret. We should
remind ourselves now that we still have the opportunities, we are still
healthy and all the favorable conditions for us to learn and practice, we
should take the opportunity and do as many meaningful and many virtuous
actions as possible.
That finishes the power of applying the antidotes.
Next is the power of refraining from engaging in negativities. Now we are
talking about relying on the mind of restraint.

|The fourth power: The power of turning away from        |
|wrongdoing                                              |
|A Refraining from negativities from this day onward by  |
|regretting negativities                                 |
|B Confessing negativities performed in the past         |
|C Requesting the attention [of holy beings] and pledging|
|to turn away from wrongdoing                            |

|A Refraining from negativities from this day onward by  |
|regretting negativities                                 |
|1 Purifying pointless negativities                      |
|2 Making effort day and night in the methods for being  |
|liberated from negativities                             |

|1 Purifying pointless negativities                      |
|a.  As material wealth is not reliable, it is           |
|unreasonable to be attached to it                       |
|b.  It is unreasonable [inappropriate] to be attached to|
|close friends and so forth                              |

|a.  As material wealth is not reliable, it is           |
|unreasonable to be attached to it                       |


Verse 2.60
What remains with me now
From the past experiences that have gone?
Through my adherence to them
I have gone against my spiritual masters’ advice.
This verse is talking about abandoning attachment to the object of desire.
We have been utilizing these objects of desire - form, sound, smell, taste
or touch - since beginningless lifetimes. When these objects of desire -
form, sound, smell, taste or touch- comes into contact with the
consciousness, we experience pleasure, but it last only for very short
time. They don’t last.  When that pleasure finishes, we go on looking for
the next experience of pleasure. That is how we lead our life from one
short pleasurable experience to another short pleasurable experience. We
just spend our life like that looking for the next one, isn’t it? But
whatever pleasure we are talking about doesn’t last. Then we have to find
the next experience of pleasure. In that sense, it is really meaningless.
When we experience pleasure again through coming contact with these objects
of desire - form, sound, smell, taste or touch - it is meaningless to be
emotionally involved with that pleasure,  to get hung up on it and to be
attached to it because that experience will not be any difference and will
never be any difference from the past experience. All the past experience
of pleasure that we have experienced arises and lasts for very short time
and it disappears. So, whatever new experiences of pleasure that will or
would arise would not be any difference and will not be any difference.
The teaching is saying that while we know that whatever pleasure that we
are going to experience will never be any different from the past
experience and it would only last for short time but we disregard the fact.
We still continue to be emotionally hung up, involved and to be attached to
this pleasure. We work so hard for it.
We disregard the teachings of the guru, and teachings of the buddhas. We
just run after the pleasure, emotionally hung up to it and attached to it.
In the process we keep on accumulating non-virtue and negativities and
disregarding that. This is what many are doing. The teachings are telling
us not to do that.
Here we are talking about applying the power of restraint by bringing to
mind how so far we have transgressed the advice from the guru and the
buddhas.

(BP1 L14)  Verse 60 is saying that these worldly pleasures are pointless
and without meaning. Now and in the future, all our experiences with
objects of desire would be like this: coming together of our
consciousnesses and the objects, followed by the experience of an instant
of pleasure and then, in the very next moment, the experience begins to
disintegrate.
We can look at this in three ways - past, present and future - with regards
to our experiences with sense objects or objects of desire.
In the past, we have already experienced many pleasures that came from
enjoying sense objects but they have disintegrated. What remains are the
memories.
In the present, we understand how our experiences of pleasure do not remain
for more than an instant. They are in the nature of disintegration
Based on the experiences that we had in the past and in the present, we can
understand that all our experiences of pleasure that are derived from
enjoying sense objects in the future will also end up in the same way.
By thinking in this way, we can understand that any pleasure that is
derived from enjoying sense objects is pointless.
It was pointless and meaningless in the past, is meaningless in the present
and they will be meaningless in the future as well.
Reflecting along these lines will reduce our grasping or attachment to the
sense pleasures. If we do not do this and continue our attachment to sense
pleasures, we will not refrain from creating negative actions. We put in a
lot of work and effort in order to enjoy such sensual pleasures but, along
the way, we create a lot of negativities that will cause us many problems
at the time of death. By behaving in such a way, we are going against the
advice of our gurus. We are also going against the advice of the Buddha. By
going against their advice, we will not only suffer a loss in this life but
also a loss in our future lives.

|b.  It is unreasonable [inappropriate] to be        |
|attached to close friends and so forth              |


Verse 2.61
Leaving behind this life
And likewise my friends and relatives,
If all alone I must go elsewhere
How appropriate are friends and enemies?
All the people whom we considered to be so important in our life, the
parents, the relatives, loved ones, close friends and also all our
possessions and so forth, when it is time to die and to leave the world,
none of them can accompany us. When we die and we leave for the next life,
we have to go alone. It is not as if we have a choice of deciding where we
want to end up. This will be determined by all our own karma. The karma can
throw us anywhere from the lowest of the hell up to the peak of cyclic
existence. On the day when we are going to die, none of them can follow us.
None of them will be of any benefit to us. None of them can help us at the
time of death. You can only go alone.
The teachings say:
‘The king leaves behind his kingdom at the time of death, the beggar leaves
behind his begging bowl and walking stick at the time of death”.
The things that they leave behind maybe different, but their way of going
to the next life is exactly the same. They have to leave everything behind
and they have to go alone.
The point here is there is no reason to be attached, to be emotionally hung
up, involved and attached with friends and loved ones. Why? Because many of
times we accumulate non-virtues out of attachment to them. By thinking
about this we apply the restraint as much as possible in avoiding our non-
virtues.
The next verse talks about the need to strive day and night to liberate
ourselves from negativities

| 2 Making effort day and night in the methods for     |
|being liberated from negativities                     |


Verse 2.62
“How can I be surely freed
From non-virtue, the source of suffering?”
Continually night and day
Should I only consider this.
At the time of death, the loved ones are of no benefit whatsoever and our
enemies cannot harm us. What harm us at the time of death is all the non-
virtues and negativities that we have accumulated for their sake. All the
non-virtues are accumulated out of attachment to loved ones. The non-
virtues here are the innumerable instances of the ten non-virtues
accumulated for their sake. The non-virtues and the negativities that we
have accumulated for their sake will cause us to experience innumerable
suffering. As such it is only appropriate to strive day and night actually
thinking about how one can be liberated from such negativities.
Here it involves thinking about the presentation of cause and effect and
more importantly it is about having the faith of conviction in karma. On
the basis of reflecting on the working of cause and effect – karma - and in
particular how the various sufferings that we all have to experience when
our non-virtue that we have accumulated ripens, with that understanding in
mind, we strive in purifying the negativities as much as possible day and
night.
Next identifying what exactly are we confessing.

|B Confessing negativities       |
|performed in the past           |
|1 What is it that one is        |
|confessing?                     |
|2 The way to confess            |

|1 What is it that one is        |
|confessing?                     |


Verse 2.63
Through unknowing and ignorance,
Whatever I have committed,
Be it a natural misdeed
Or a stipulated negativity,
The non-virtues that we have accumulated can be divided into:
1.  Natural misdeed
2.  Stipulated negativity
What is a natural misdeed?
The natural misdeed is a non-virtuous action by nature regardless of who
the actor is. It doesn’t matter whether the person who performs that
particular karma is holding vows or not.  That natural misdeed is by nature
non-virtues. It doesn’t matter who engages in it. Whoever engages in it
accumulates that non-virtue.
Stipulated negativity only applies to people who have vows. A stipulated
negativity is a negativity that is committed when one goes against the
rules that are stipulated or laid down by Buddha. For example, ordained
people are not supposed to eat after noon. The act of eating after noon is
not a natural misdeed in itself. It is not necessarily negative karma, but
for an ordained person who in particular eats after noon then it becomes a
stipulated negativity.
Stipulated negativity is a negativity that is an action that goes against
the rules laid down by the Buddha, and that includes any kind of vows. If
one goes against any kind of vows that one has taken, that will be a
stipulated negativity.

|2 The way to confess            |


Verse 2.64
I confess all of them directly
In the presence of the Protectors
With folded hands, prostrating again and again,
My mind terrified by suffering.
You think of all the buddhas and bodhisattvas abiding in the space in front
of you.
Then recollects and brings to mind all the negativities that you have
accumulated.
With folded palms and with intense regret, you confess all those
negativities to the extent that there will be tears swelling in the eyes,
your hairs standing on its ends, and you expressing verbally with intense
regret of all the negativities that you have accumulated.
With folded palms one confesses in the presence of all the buddhas and
bodhisattvas of the ten directions all the negativities that one has
accumulated without concealing anything.
The last verse is making a pledge or promise to refrain from negativities
after requested the attention of them.

|C Requesting the attention [of holy beings] and pledging|
|to turn away from wrongdoing                            |


Verse 2.65
I request the Guides
To please accept my negativities as being mistakes.
Since they are not good,
I shall not do them again.
By acknowledging the faults as the faults, all the non-virtues that one has
accumulated as non-virtues, and by promising or making a pledge to not
engage in them again, that is how one confesses.
This concludes chapter two: Confessing Negativities.
The teaching talks about the great importance of doing the practice of
confession. It is very important that we must confess our negativities and
engage in purification practices.
The teaching says that it is due to our negativities and obscurations that:
- when we listen to the teachings we cannot retain the words,
- when we reflect we don’t understand the meaning and
- when we meditate or familiarize the topics, or try to internalize them we
don’t get any experience or realization. These are due to our negativities
and obscurations which obscures the mind.
We have to engage in the practice of purification through applying the four
powers:
The first one is the power of eradication
We have to generate real regret for all the non-virtues that we have
accumulated since beginningless lifetimes. We confess all the non-virtues
that we have performed by ourselves, we confess all the non-virtues that we
made others to engage in and we have to confess having rejoiced in the non-
virtues of others. We also accumulated non-virtues in relation to special
objects; powerful karmic objects. We have to bring those non-virtues to
mind and confess them. The way of generating regret is to bring forth to
mind all the future suffering that we will experience when these negative
karma ripens.
Through reflecting on the three points:
-  the certainty of death,
-  the uncertainty of the time of death and
-  how at the time of death nothing except the dharma is of benefit
one also develop regret.
We should generate regret through reflecting or bringing to mind all the
fear and the suffering that we will experience at the time of our death. On
top of that, we have to think of all the future suffering after we have
taken rebirth that is the result of our non-virtues. Through that one
generated regret.
Next is the power of support
Essentially this is going for refuge to the Three Jewels.
Going for refuge, we bring to mind the buddhas and bodhisattvas such as the
eight great sons, then offers oneself to them. One makes a promise to
follow their advice after having offered oneself to them.
Next is the power of antidote
Here one brings to mind all the faults and disadvantages of the sickness of
the afflictions and how it harms ourselves and how it causes us to harm
others. With this in mind, we apply the antidotes which are the teachings
given by the Buddha on the basis of acknowledging that the Buddha, the
Omniscient One is the supreme physician.
The teaching also mentions the importance of relying constantly on
mindfulness and vigilance to spot the arising of any non-virtues in the
mind. If we notice that non-virtue has already arisen, we have accumulated
non-virtue, we should confess and purify. We should do something about it
right away without postponing it into the future by reflecting on how the
time of death is uncertain.
Then the power of refraining from committing non-virtue again
Here the text talks about recollecting how all the pleasure that we
experience in the past is meaningless. Likewise all the pleasure that we
are currently experiencing is very much the same, then restraining
ourselves from committing non-virtues out of attachment and so forth.
Essentially chapter two, the chapter on confession, is telling us to apply
the four opponent powers and to purify our negatives as much as possible.

