Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Engaging in the Deeds of a Bodhisattva/lesson4.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:52:13.343154
================================================================================


I have talked about the needs to reflect on impermanence, and if you
remember the statement from the text on logic which says: “Because it is
impermanent, it is suffering. Because it is suffering, it is selfless”. We
have to reflect on impermanence. Otherwise, it will be difficult to
practice any dharma and it will be difficult to make one’s dharma practice
pure.
When we talk about impermanence, we are not just talking about death. The
actual meaning of impermanence is momentary disintegration i.e. how change
occurs in every moment. It is not as simple as saying that impermanence
means death; as in the case of our own life. It is not that death suddenly
comes knocking and descends on us. The reason why the life ends with death
is because life is changing from moment to moment and until death one is
getting closer and closer to that state. So, the understanding that one
should have is that in each and every single moment one is moving closer
and closer to death. In each and every moment, we are moving closer and
closer to death - the end of this life. Death is something that most people
fear and dislike but nevertheless we are helplessly moving closer and
closer to death. We have no choice. We basically get closer and closer to
death in each and every moment due to our own karma and afflictions.
When we are talking about ourselves or this body and mind complex that we
have, we came into this life and took on this body and mind, and these
aggregates were born under the control of karma and afflictions. In each
and every single moment, we are moving towards death, and it is our karma
and afflictions that is responsible for this. So it is the karma and
afflictions that has thrown us powerlessly into having this set of body and
mind. It is that same karma and afflictions that are responsible for this
body and mind and we ourselves are disintegrating and changing from moment
to moment, and ultimately dying. Because we are under the control of our
karma and afflictions, therefore our existence is in the nature of
suffering.
We are impermanent and undergo momentary change. So does our body and mind.
Since that is the reality, there is no reason to grasp and attach to it by
holding on to it as never ever changing. Our existence is in the nature of
suffering, so there is no reason to be attached to it and by holding on to
it as something pleasurable. Sometimes it is also explained that because
the body and mind, the aggregates, are in the nature of suffering,
therefore they are also unclean, filthy and dirty.
Things that are dirty and filthy are things that cause us to generate sense
of revulsion when we come into contact with it. So when we relate this to
the body and mind, and because it is dirty or filthy by nature, there is no
reason to grasp and to be attached to it. So this contaminated body and
mind is an object to generate revulsion and not an object of attraction
because it is by nature filthy and dirty.
How is the complex of our body and mind selfless? Our body and mind is a
result of our past karma and afflictions. Similarly, we ourselves, the I,
the person is also the kind of a product of that karma and afflictions.
That being the case, therefore it is inappropriate to grasp on strongly to
the body and mind as being possessed by this I, it is belonging to me, this
is mine and so forth.
The point is that it is inappropriate to grasp on strongly to the body and
mind as being mine. On the basis of that, we generate very strong
attachment. If we have good understanding and reflection on these points:
    - how this body and mind that we have are in the nature of impermanence,
    - how this body and mind that we have are in the nature of suffering,
    - how this body and mind that we have are in nature dirty and filthy and


    - how this body and mind that we have is selfless
then we should be able to get a hold over our attachment. The point is to
work with our attachment and to reduce our attachment.
Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds
In the past few lessons, we have seen how we have a suitable working basis
for generating virtuous thoughts and in particular for generating the mind
of enlightenment. We have the suitable body and mind to do so. But this
doesn’t mean that one will do so. It is very important to contemplate and
meditate on death and impermanence. Otherwise, there is no way to generate
the mind of enlightenment.
(Note: mind of enlightenment = bodhicitta)
In the last lesson we saw the benefits we will experience if we are able to
generate the mind of enlightenment/bodhicitta. In short, when we are able
to generate bodhicitta:
-  it will purify those very powerful negativities,
-  we will accumulate lots of positive potentials and merits
-  our own wishes will also be fulfilled
Essentially, the benefits of having generated bodhicitta is that one can
easily finish the accumulation of merits and one can also easily purify
those negativities, even those very powerful negativities.
In the last lesson we also looked at some of the analogies that illustrate
the benefits of bodhicitta. We have finished with that. So if bodhicitta is
to be generated, then what exactly is the nature of this bodhicitta? What
is its entity and what are its divisions?

|Identifying the nature of bodhicitta              |
|1 Divisions of the nature                         |
|2 Explaining the divisions by way of analogy      |
|3 Explaining the different benefits of aspiring   |
|and engaging bodhicitta                           |


In verse 1.15, we see how bodhicitta is divided by way of its entity. There
are two types.
Verse 1.15
In brief, you should understand
The mind of enlightenment to be of two types;
The mind that wishes enlightenment
And the mind that engages enlightenment.
In order for it to be a mind generation, the two aspirations must be
present:
1. Aspiration for enlightenment
2. Aspiration for the completion of the welfare of sentient beings
There is a thought that thinks: “I must achieve full enlightenment in order
to fully accomplish all the aims and the welfare of others”. Here “others”
means all the sentient beings. So such a thought is mind generation.
In short, there is this thought that thinks “I must achieve full
enlightenment in order to accomplish all the aims of other sentient
beings.” This mind is called a mind generation.
(BP1L4: Bodhicitta is sometimes referred to as an aspiration; technically
bodhicitta is not a mental factor but is the main mind.)
As to how this mind generation can be brought about, we have already
discussed this when we studied the Lamrim, the Stages of the Path to
Enlightenment. As you know, in order to generate this mind generation, one
must train in the instructions for generating such a mind. One can generate
this mind through:
   1. The seven-fold cause and effect personal instructions, or
   2. The instruction of exchanging self and others
Such a mind generation does not come about easily. There is a process in
which one go about doing it, which we have already discussed this in the
past.
When such a mind generation is divided by way of its nature/entity, then
there are two:
   1. The aspirational mind generation
   2. The engaged mind generation

• If we divide bodhicitta by way of entity, there are 2 types (aspirational
 mind generation and engaged mind generation).
• If we divide bodhicitta by way of examples, there are 22 types.
• If we divide bodhicitta by way of its boundary, there are 4 types.
In the module of the Heart of the Perfection of Wisdom Sutra, we did look
briefly at the presentation of the Mahayana Paths and Grounds. I think all
of you can still remember that presentation. In terms of the five paths, we
have:
    - Mahayana Path of Accumulation,
    - Mahayana Path of Preparation
    - Mahayana Path of Seeing
    - Mahayana Path of Meditation
    - Mahayana Path of No-more Learning.
If we divide the mind generation in terms of the boundary, there is the
mind generation in the continuum of the bodhisattva on the Mahayana Path of
Accumulation and Path of Preparation. That bodhisattva is still an ordinary
being, so the mind generation in the continuum of that bodhisattva would be
called the mind generation of aspiring conduct.
The mind generation in the continuum of the superior bodhisattva on the 1st
to 7th ground would be the – mind generation of pure noble intention.
The mind generation existing in the continuum of the  superior bodhisattva
on the 8th, 9th and 10th person is called mind generation of full
maturation.
Khen Rinpoche (spoke in English): Whether mixed up I don’t know.
The last one will be revealed in the future.
The fourth one, by way of boundary, the mind generation existing in the
continuum of the buddha superior  is called the mind generation free from
all obscurations.
If we divide mind generation by way of example, there are 22 types.
I believe we have looked at the first three types:
   1. Earth-like mind generation
   2. Gold-like mind generation
   3. Moon-like mind generation and so forth.
The Mahayana Path of Accumulation is divided into three:
   1. Mahayana small Path of Accumulation
   2. Mahayana middling Path of Accumulation
   3. Mahayana great Path of Accumulation
 ➢ The mind generation in the continuum of the bodhisattva on the Mahayana
   small Path of Accumulation is call the earth-like mind generation.
 ➢ The mind generation in the continuum of the bodhisattva on the Mahayana
   middling Path of Accumulation is call the gold-like mind generation.
 ➢ The mind generation existing in the continuum of the bodhisattva on the
   Mahayana great Path of Accumulation is called the moon-like mind
   generation. Here we are talking about the waxing moon.
 ➢ The mind generation in the continuum of the bodhisattva on the Mahayana
   Path of Preparation is called the fire-like mind generation
 ➢ When the practice of generosity starts on the 1st ground, that mind
   generation in the continuum of that superior being is called the
   treasure-like mind generation.
This gives you an idea of the development of the mind generation.
In the presentation of the ten grounds, there is a perfection associated
with each ground. Likewise there is a name for the mind generation
associated with those grounds. So there are ten.
In particular on the 10th ground, there are five types of mind generation
particularly associated with the 10th ground.
Then we have the last three which are named as preparation, actual and
conclusion.
 ➢ The preparation refers to the mind generation during the last moment as
   a sentient being.
 ➢ The actual refers to the Uninterrupted Path; which is the meditative
   equipoise of Buddha.
 ➢ The conclusion refers to the wisdom of post meditation session in the
   continuum of Buddha.
Khen Rinpoche (spoke in English): You hearing it first time, of course you
don’t understand. Just leave it there, don’t worry. If you have interest
then…. Now is just throwing idea. Don’t worry if you don’t understand.
Don’t worry.
For our purpose here, we just have to go according to our root text. We
just have to know:
- what exactly is mind generation
- what is its entity
- if the mind generation is divided by way of its entity, there are two
types: aspirational and engaged.
- if the mind generation is divided by way of examples, what kind of minds
it accompanies, then there are 22 types.
- if the mind generation is divided by way of its boundary in terms of the
paths and grounds, there are 4 types
There is no way we can go this in detail, perhaps sometime in the future.
The point for me to give you a little bit more information is to show you
that a text like this is not as simple as it seems. Some people think that
this is an easy text. One just picks it up and will understand.
Khen Rinpoche (spoke in English): Just to highlight that and don’t think it
is simple. Last time when I explained about the word “Sugata”, with just a
simple word you can explain 10, 20 hours about the Sugata. I mean how one
wants to elaborate.
|Divisions|                                                                    |
|Entity   |Aspirational mind generation (exists from the Mahayana Path of      |
|         |Accumulation up to the end of the continuum of sentient beings)     |
|         |Engaged mind generation  (exists from Mahayana Path of Accumulation |
|         |up to Buddha ground)                                                |
|Examples |On the Mahayana small Path of Accumulation - earth-like mind        |
|         |generation                                                          |
|         |On the Mahayana middling Path of Accumulation -  gold-like mind     |
|         |generation                                                          |
|         |On the Mahayana great Path of Accumulation - moon-like mind         |
|         |generation                                                          |
|         |On the Mahayana Path of Preparation - fire-like mind generation     |
|         |On the 1st ground - treasure-like mind generation                   |
|         |There are ten grounds with a perfection associated with each ground,|
|         |so there is a name for the mind generation associated with these    |
|         |grounds.                                                            |
|         |On 10th ground, there are five types of mind generation. Last three |
|         |are:                                                                |
|         |The preparation refers to the mind generation during the last moment|
|         |as a sentient being.                                                |
|         |The actual refers to the Uninterrupted Path; which is the meditative|
|         |equipoise of Buddha.                                                |
|         |The conclusion refers to the wisdom of post meditation session in   |
|         |the continuum of Buddha.                                            |
|Boundary |Ordinary bodhisattva on the Mahayana Path of Accumulation and Path  |
|         |of Preparation – mind generation of aspiring conduct                |
|         |Superior bodhisattva on the 1st to 7th ground – mind generation of  |
|         |pure noble intention                                                |
|         |Superior bodhisattva on the 8th, 9th and 10th ground – mind         |
|         |generation of full maturation                                       |
|         |Buddha superior on the Buddha ground - mind generation free from all|
|         |obscurations                                                        |

Next is an explanation of these two-fold divisions of bodhicitta by way of
an example.
Verse 1.16
As is understood by the instances
Of desiring to go and going,
So the wise should understand respectively
The distinction between these two.
For instance, someone who is seated and develops the thought “I want to go
to this place” but he remains to be seated. Then there is another person
who acts on this thought. He gets up and proceeds towards the destination.
While he is proceeding towards the destination, there is also the thought
thinking “I want to go to this place”.
In these two instances, they are both similar in having the same thought of
wanting to go to a place, but one is still seated but the other has acted
upon it.
Both aspirational mind generation and engaged mind generation are similar
in that both have the thought thinking “I must achieve full enlightenment
in order to achieve the welfare of sentient beings”. They are similar in
that, but in order to be an engaged mind generation, it has to be conjoined
with the practice of the bodhisattva such as the perfection of generosity.
If the mind generation is not conjoined with such a practice, then it is an
aspirational mind generation.
If you prefer simplicity and don’t want to make things complicated, you
could just leave it as that:
 ➢ If mind generation is conjoined with bodhisattva deeds, then it is
   engaged mind generation
 ➢ If it is not (conjoined with bodhisattva deeds), then it is an
   aspirational mind generation.
Those who desire that can just leave it as that.
But a question will arise “What does it mean when you say mind generation
is conjoined with the practice of the bodhisattva deeds such as
generosity?”
Then you must answer the question.
If you say that in order for it to be engaged mind generation it has to be
conjoined with the practice of the bodhisattva deeds such as the practice
of generosity, then another question will arise: “Does it means that it has
to involve the actual giving of some objects as a gift?”
Khen Rinpoche (spoke in English): That is asking a question.
What is the meaning of mind generation that is conjoined the bodhisattva
deed of giving?
While you leave things simple, you could just leave it as “Mind generation
that is conjoined and not conjoined with bodhisattva deeds.” Just leave it
as that. Just like when we talked about the 22 types of bodhicitta, and we
can leave it as that. But if you are asked what exactly does it means then
you need to think in order to arrive at the answer.
The great masters have debated and talked about this. They say that it is
better to distinguish aspirational mind generation from the engaged mind
generation by seeing if that mind generation is directly conjoined with the
bodhisattva deeds or not. So the word “directly” has to be there. Whether
it is aspiration mind generation or engaged mind generation, they are all
necessary conjoined with the bodhisattva deeds in one way or another.
Therefore it would be better to add in the additional word “directly” into
the definition.
If you settled for that, then another question will arise: “What is the
meaning of “directly” conjoined?”
Khen Rinpoche (spoke in English): That is how the debate comes.
When we say a mind generation that is directly conjoined with bodhisattva
deeds, there is this aspiration for full omniscience - there is this mind
aspiring to omniscient in order to accomplish the welfare of others. This
aspiration to omniscient has to be manifest.
Take for instance bodhisattva superior who is in meditative equipoise
directly perceiving emptiness. That superior being in the perspective of
that wisdom, nothing else appears except emptiness. In the continuum of
this bodhisattva superior, no other minds are manifest except for this
wisdom of meditative equipoise.
Then question arise: “In the continuum of the bodhisattva who is in
meditative equipoise directly focusing on emptiness, is there bodhicitta or
not?”
Khen Rinpoche (spoke in English): What do you think?
The question: Is there bodhicitta in the continuum of such a bodhisattva
superior in meditative equipoise?
It is either “Yes” or “No”.
If you say “No”, then the question arises: Isn’t he a bodhisattva?
If you say “Yes”, “How does bodhicitta exist in the continuum of such a
bodhisattva superior in meditative equipoise?”
 If you say “Yes”, you have to say how? You need to explain.
The mind of enlightenment/bodhicitta is a mind. If the mind exists in the
continuum of a bodhisattva superior in meditative equipoise, then you must
explain how it exists. You cannot explain that bodhicitta exists in the
form of an imprint or predisposition. If it is a mind then you have to
explain how it exists as a mind. There are different positions taken by the
scholars of the past.
There are some who assert: “No, bodhicitta does not exist because in order
for it to exist it must be manifest”. There are those who assert that in
such a case it exists but it is not manifest.
According to the textbook of Sera Je college, we assert that it exists but
it is not directly conjoined with   bodhisattva deeds. As such, of the two
- aspiration mind generation and engaged mind generation- the bodhicitta
existing in the continuum of the bodhisattva superior in meditative
equipoise would have to be posited as to be an aspirational mind
generation.
In short, an aspiration mind generation is mind generation that is not
directly conjoined with the bodhisattva deeds whereas an engaged mind
generation is a mind generation that is conjoined with the bodhisattva
deeds.
As for the boundary of these two types of mind generation:
– Aspirational mind generation exists from the Mahayana Path of
Accumulation up to the end of the continuum of sentient beings
-Engaged mind generation exists from the Path of Accumulation up to Buddha
ground.
Summary:
• Mind generation is the mind with the thought that think “I must really
  achieve omniscience – full enlightenment - in order to accomplish the
  welfare of sentient beings”. Such a mind is called mind generation.
• If you divide such a mind generation by way of its entity, then there are
  two: aspirational mind generation and engaged mind generation.
• If a mind generation is directly conjoined with the bodhisattva deeds,
  then it is an engaged mind generation. If it is not directly conjoined
  with the bodhisattva deeds, it is an aspirational mind generation.
• What is the boundary of aspirational mind generation? It does not exist
  in the continuum of those who have not entered the Mahayana path and it
  does not exist on the Buddha ground. It exists from the Mahayana Path of
  Accumulation up to end of the continuum of a sentient being.
(BP 2Heart Sutra L1) What is the boundary of the engaged mind generation?
It does not exist prior to entering the path and it exists from the
Mahayana Path of Accumulation up to Buddhahood.
Does mind generation exists in the continuum of Buddha?
According to Gyaltsab Je’s commentary on Engaging the Bodhisattva Deeds, he
says “Yes”. Otherwise, if you say mind generation does not exists in the
continuum of Buddha then you would also have to assert that Buddha doesn’t
have refuge, Buddha doesn’t have bodhisattva vows, Buddha doesn’t have
pratimoksha vows, Buddha doesn’t have tantric vows. Gyaltsab Je says very
clearly that you must assert that Buddha has mind generation.
This is the position of Gyaltsab Je asserting that Buddha has bodhicitta.
Of course one can deliberate on this and discuss.
What is mind generation? The mind possessing the two aspirations:
Aspiration to accomplish the welfare of others and aspiration to full
enlightenment - omniscience. Buddha is already fully enlightened, does
Buddha still have an aspiration to omniscience?
Khen Rinpoche (spoke in English): This is exercise for your brain.
It is the same thing with refuge. Refuge possesses two characteristics. It
is essentially the faith in the Three Jewels’ power and ability to protect
us from the fears of the suffering of the lower realms and the suffering of
samsara.
This is something to think about. Does Buddha have mind generation? If yes,
does Buddha have the aspiration to omniscience?
Khen Rinpoche (spoke in English): Is your brain functioning? No
functioning?
Next is the benefit of the aspirational mind generation.
Now it is clear that the aspirational mind generation is not directly
conjoined with the bodhisattva deeds. Having said that, all the benefits of
bodhicitta that were explained earlier, is there any difference between the
benefits of aspirational mind generation and engaged mind generation?
The next verse talks about the benefits of aspirational mind generation.

|Explaining the different benefits of aspiring and |
|engaging bodhicitta                               |
|A The benefits of aspiring bodhicitta             |
|B The benefits of engaging bodhicitta             |


Verse 1.17
Although great fruits will arise in cyclic existence
From the mind that wishes for enlightenment,
An uninterrupted flow of merit will not arise
As in the case of the engaging mind.
Although the aspirational mind generation is not directly conjoined with
the bodhisattva deeds, as such:
    - it is a mere aspiration and
    - it is just a pledge to achieve enlightenment
 Nevertheless, it is still a cause for enlightenment. It can also give rise
to great results even in this life.
Although the aspirational mind generation is not directly conjoined with
the bodhisattva deeds but just merely generating this mind of enlightenment
definitely brings about full enlightenment; it is a cause for full
enlightenment. That is understood.  Even just this mere mind generation can
bring about happiness of the humans and gods. It is cause for such good
rebirths and it is also the cause to eliminate all poverty.
The benefits of aspirational mind generation are stated in the sutra
Liberation of the Superior Maitreya:
 Son of the lineage, it is like this. For example, the precious diamond
 though broken still outshines the supreme ornaments of gold and it still
 keeps the name “precious diamond” and eliminates all poverty.
 Son of the lineage, likewise the precious diamond of the mind generation
 for omniscience, even without significantly outshines all the gold
 qualities of the Hearer and Solitary Realizer, it keeps the name of
 “bodhisattva” and eliminates all poverty of cyclic existence.
The person who generates this Mahayana mind generation, regardless of
whether the mind generation is directly conjoined with the bodhisattva
deeds or not, that person immediately outshines all the Hearers and
Solitary Realizers and acquires the name or title “bodhisattva”.
There is a difference in the benefits of aspirational mind generation and
engaged mind generation as says in the verse: “An uninterrupted flow of
merit will not arise as in the case of the engaging mind”. Of course there
are many benefits just generating this aspirational mind generation,
nevertheless the benefits of aspirational mind generation is not like the
benefits that comes from the engaged mind generation. Although an
uninterrupted flow of merit does not arise as in the case of the engaging
mind, nevertheless there are many benefits from merely generating the mind
of enlightenment. There are many benefits of just having the aspirational
mind generation for it is a cause for enlightenment, you acquire the name
of “bodhisattva” and so forth and it can eliminate poverty of cyclic
existence. There are many benefits. So it is incorrect to say that there
are no benefits just by generating the mind of enlightenment alone.
Therefore, do not forsake this mind of enlightenment. If one’s mind
generation is directly conjoined with the bodhisattva deeds, then the
ensuing benefits will be greater.
So what are then the benefits of the engaged mind generation?
Verse 1.18
For one who has perfectly adopted this mind
With the thought never to turn away
For the sake of totally liberating
The infinite realms of sentient beings,

Verse 1.19
From that time onwards,
Even while asleep or lacking conscientiousness,
A force of merit equal to the sky
Will continuously ensue.
If one’s mind generation is directly conjoined with the deeds of the
bodhisattva, what kind of benefits will ensue? Such a person with the
engaged mind generation, even if he/she is drunk, is asleep or is abiding
in the state of non-conscientiousness, a force of merit equal to the sky is
said to continually arise. The text is saying that for a person who has an
engaged mind generation, whatever he/she does, there is always “a force of
merit equal to the sky will continuously ensue”.
Aspirational mind generation is just mere thought thinking “I must achieve
omniscience in order to accomplish the welfare of others” whereas in the
case of the engaged mind generation, on the basis of that, one is actually
directly engaging in the deeds.
So an aspirational mind generation is a mere cause for enlightenment
whereas the engaged mind generation completes the causes for enlightenment.

BP1 L5: Besides merely wishing to attain enlightenment for the benefit of
sentient beings, if one promises to train in the six perfections or
bodhisattva deeds, one will accumulate immeasurable merit continually in
each and every single instant whether we are falling asleep, sitting,
standing, lying down or whatever we are doing. On top of the aspirational
bodhicitta, if our mind generation of bodhicitta is conjoined with the
practice of the bodhisattva deeds, then all our virtue will be much more
powerful and we will continually collect virtue without a break and those
virtues will also increase.

|The reasons there are such benefits     |
|1 Establishing [the benefits]by quoting |
|scripture                               |
|2 Establishing [the benefits] by means  |
|of logic and reasoning                  |


Next is establishing that there are such benefits through scriptural
authority and through reasoning.
The next verse is establishing through scriptural authority by stating the
source. Is this scriptural authority a proof for the benefits of
aspirational mind generation or engaged mind generation? I’m not entirely
sure but it may be more comfortable if we take it that this is establishing
the benefits of aspirational mind generation.
Verse 1.20
For the sake of those inclined towards the lower,
This is taught along with the correctness
By the Tathagata himself
In the Sutra Requested by Subahu.

Q&A
Question: What is waxing moon?
Khen Rinpoche: To describe the moon as a waxing moon, when you look at the
moon from the 1st to 15th of the lunar calendar, the moon becomes bigger
and bigger. The moon gradually takes shape and on the 15th day the moon is
round and complete at its fullest. After the 15th you wouldn’t call it a
full moon as the moon gradually becoming smaller and smaller.
Question: Regarding the benefits of bodhicitta and doing the six
perfections, for a person like myself who is not even reaching a small
scope, I can at best contemplate on the seven causes and effects and the
practice of the six perfections. Would this be the expectation from a lowly
person like myself? What I should do when I go home after listening to this
teaching?
Khen Rinpoche: This text is an instruction for a practitioner of the
Mahayana, i.e. for someone who can meditate on bodhicitta. For the kind of
people who practice, there are trainees of various differing abilities:
those of highest faculty, middling faculty and dull faculty.
Ideally if you follow the scheme of things then you first have to develop
renunciation and determination to be free from samsara and so on and so
forth. Even if one cannot do that, but the point here is that while you
have the opportunity with this suitable working basis, try to accumulate as
much merit as possible.
If you look at the training of a person of small capacity, one of the
essential training of such a person is to reflect on death and
impermanence. What should be the outcome of having done such a reflection?
That reflection should help the person become a better human being with
more good heart. If one realizes death and impermanence then one comes to
see that one’s friends, enemies and those who are not related in anyway are
all impermanent and all are going to die. In that sense there is no real
purpose to having attachment to one and strong aversion or dislike for the
other.  Based on the reflection on death and impermanence the result should
be that one aspires to be a better person in such a way at least not to
harm others and as much as possible to have love and compassion. One of the
results of contemplating on death and impermanence is to come to this
conclusion. That is the best way to extract the essence from this human
life of freedom and endowments - to make it meaningful is to cultivate a
good heart, and to have love.
If you look at the training of the person of medium capacity, essentially
is to just realise that everything in samsara does not go beyond the nature
of suffering. Everything in samsara does not transcend suffering and
everything is in the nature of suffering. We contemplate on how the things
that we have discussed earlier – impermanence, how things are in the nature
of suffering and how contaminated phenomena are unclean, dirty. Because
they lack a self there is no reason to strongly grasp or be attached to
stuff. Through such reflections one reverses and turns away from grasping
and attachment. Then one cultivates love in place of that.
The point that are found in the training of person of small and medium
capacity, whether through meditating on impermanence and death or the
suffering of samsara are methods for us to be a better person and a better
human being with good heart and to translate that into having better
relationships in the family and with one’s friends and so forth. I guess
the practice has to start like that. When translated into practice, that is
how we have to start. Ideally at the end of the day it has to be for all
sentient beings, but it is not easy. So you have to start from one’s own
family. The result of cultivating such a practice is to first see happiness
and harmony in one’s family. Through that everybody is happy. That cannot
be achieved if there is disharmony and fighting in the family. Then saying
one is practicing bodhicitta for all sentient beings become just talk. By
thinking of death and impermanence we can try to be a better person, a more
caring and loving person. Also by being mindful that life is short you
abandon negativities.
Khen Rinpoche (spoke in English): Ok, that is the practice. Go back home
and start from your home. Don’t fight at home.

(Heart Sutra BP2 L1)
