Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Engaging in the Deeds of a Bodhisattva/lesson33.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:52:12.911315
================================================================================


The teachings tell us that our mind follow whatever it is habituated with.
It is the quality of the mind such that whatever the mind is familiar with,
then that particular object or activity is comprehended and is understood
more easily. Basically, we find it easier to do things which we are
familiar with.
In the last lesson, we saw how the teachings tell us that we have to be
patient to tolerate small problems and sufferings. By getting accustomed to
putting up or being tolerant with smaller problems and suffering, we can
gradually able to put up or tolerate with greater problems and
difficulties. The discussion here is in the context of practicing the
dharma. Why are we practicing the dharma? The purpose of practicing the
dharma is so that we can subdue the afflictions in our own continuum. So,
practicing the dharma means to go on a war against the afflictions and with
the goal of vanquishing the afflictions. You have to understand that in the
process of doing so we will experience a lot of challenges and
difficulties. It is at those times, we have to be tolerant and we have to
put up with the challenges and difficulties.
We have to cultivate patience that voluntarily accepts suffering and
problems that we meet. Having said that, then we must know how to do it.
When we say we have to put up with our problems and difficulties, we have
to tolerate all those unpleasant situations. It doesn’t mean that we just
sit there and do nothing when there is a problem. That is not what it
means. We must know how to deal with the situation. We must know how to be
patient. So this involves thinking. For example, when we meet with
difficulties, suffering, problems and challenges, we should remind
ourselves that whatever problems or sufferings that we are experiencing is
the result of our own non-virtue (negative karma) that we accumulated in
the past.  This experience of the problems and sufferings that we go
through is like a broom that sweeps away all the negativities and
obscurations.  This is what we can think. It is through thinking such a
reason then we accept the situation voluntarily.
We should also remind ourselves of the benefit of that experience of the
problem because without any problems or sufferings, we will not look for a
solution to that suffering. We will not remember virtue. We will not
practice virtue. When there are problems, and where there are sufferings,
these sufferings and problems persuade us to look for a solution. They
persuade us to engage in virtue, and also persuade us to think of the
future, the next life. Yes, we have to be tolerant. We have to put up with
the difficulties, problems and sufferings that we meet but we must know how
to do so. Tolerant in this context doesn’t mean just sit there and accept
it; “Oh, doesn’t matter.” There are some people who are like that. They
misunderstand and think “Just accept it.” But actually they are not really
accepting it because deep down they are just accumulating their
unhappiness. Then more and more unhappiness are accumulated. Then come a
time where all boils over and they will explode. Then they get even more
upset. There are people who are like that and that is not practicing
patience.
Many people have a wrong understanding of patience and what it means. They
feel that to practice patience means to keep quiet and just accept it. But
actually deep down they are not accepting it because deep down, their minds
are still disturbed. Practicing patience doesn’t lead to a disturbed mind.
Practicing patience means you look at the situation and deal with it
without disturbing the mind. When you deal with the situation, you think
about it from the various angles. The whole point of the exercise is to be
able to deal with the situation and yet at the same time inside, you don’t
get disturbed. So that is what patience is.
Verse 6.19 a,b
    . Even when those who are skilled are suffering,
    . Their minds remain very lucid and undefiled.
That is how patience should look like. When there is a problem, deep down
their minds are still clear and are not disturbed. In fact, the really
capable ones and the skilled ones are those who feel happy and joyful even
in the midst of a crisis or difficulty.
Next is meditating on the patience of certitude.  Essentially this section
discusses on how those people who get angry at us do so without any control
or without any independence.
[BP1 Part 2 L5] In essence, the greater the familiarity with the practice
of patience, the stronger our patience is. When our minds are strong and
courageous, we are able to endure difficulties to achieve the great purpose
of achieving the state of enlightenment to benefit other sentient beings.
We should therefore bear with whatever difficulties may arise.
“Those who are skilled” refers to the bodhisattvas. The bodhisattvas’ minds
are never disturbed regardless of the suffering they have to experience.
They are always very calm and happy. They are able to put up with
difficulties and suffering due to their familiarity with the practice of
patience and their strong, courageous minds. We, on the other hand, are
overwhelmed by even small problems, due to our lack of familiarity with
such practice.

|1” Being patient with those who would create suffering for you|
|a” Cultivating the patience that accepts suffering            |
|b” Cultivating the patience that is intent on dharma          |
|c” Cultivating the patience that pays no heed to those who    |
|cause harm                                                    |

|b” Cultivating the patience that is intent on dharma          |
|(1) An extensive explanation                                  |
|(2) Synopsis                                                  |

|(1) An extensive explanation                                  |
|(a) As both fury and the one who is furious, etc. rely upon   |
|causes, they are not independent                              |
|(b) Refuting the existence of independent causes              |
|(c) The need to overcome fury (anger)                         |

|(a) As both fury and the one who is furious, etc. rely upon   |
|causes, they are not independent                              |
|(i) Neither fury nor the furious person is independent        |
|(ii) Their causes and conditions are also not independent     |

|(i) Neither fury nor the furious person is independent                         |
|(1’) The reasons it is unreasonable to be furious with an afflicted person     |
|(2’) Fury is not willingly developed                                           |
|(3’) As all wrongdoing arises from causes and conditions, it is without        |
|independence                                                                   |

|(1’) The reasons it is unreasonable to be furious with an afflicted person     |


First, there is an explanation of why it is inappropriate for us to be
upset with a person who is harming us.
When we fall sick, most people including us can kind of accept it. We don’t
blame on anybody when we fall sick and feel discomfort. We put up with it.
But if there is somebody causing us problem, then we cannot put up with it.
In fact, we don’t want to put up with it.
When we look at our sickness, we understand that we have no control as the
sickness just happens. But to the person who is harming us, we think “He
did it on purpose. His whole existence is out there to destroy me. He is
out there to cause me problem. He did it on purpose. Since he did it on
purpose, then I have all the reasons to be upset with him. I have all the
reason to fight.”
Verse 6.22
As I do not become angry
At great sources of suffering such as bile disease,
Then why be angry at those with mind?
They too are provoked by conditions.
Verse 6.23
For example, although they are not wished for,
These sicknesses arise;
Likewise, although they are not wished for,
These afflictions forcibly arise.
Shantideva is asking us why we do not get upset when we have medical
conditions or sickness that is due to the imbalances of elements. Although
we feel uncomfortable when these sicknesses occur but somehow we don’t get
upset and we don’t get angry at the sickness. Why is it that we are angry
with those who cause us problems? Here “those” means sentient being who has
a mind.
We get sick for a variety of reasons. Sometimes we fall sick due to:
- the changes in the weather,
- the interference from non-human entities,
- the wrong diet, and
- the inappropriate lifestyle
There are a variety of conditions that causes us to fall sick. As such, we
don’t really have much control. We fall sick when the causes and conditions
are there. Sickness doesn’t arise without a reason. So we fall sick due to
certain causes and conditions and some of which we have no control over
them. Whatever it is, when we fall sick, we don’t blame the sickness.
We don’t get angry at the sickness because we know that sickness comes or
occurs due to many reasons. In that sense, sickness doesn’t have any
choice. Because of various causes and conditions, we experience discomfort
or sickness. But when we think of a person who harms us, we feel that we
are justified to get angry at the person, to retaliate and to fight. This
is because we think that person is harming us intentionally “He is out
there to get me, and he is doing it on purpose.” Therefore, we think “I am
right to be upset with him/her”. This is what we think, but actually in
reality, these two situations are similar. Both are similar in that the
sickness that we experience and the harm that we receive from another
person arise without any choice and without any independence because they
arise due to their own causes and conditions.
Due to certain causes and conditions that I have mentioned earlier, we
experience sickness. But we feel that the person is harming us
intentionally and has full control but actually is doing so without any
control and without any independence. Both of these examples are similar in
that they occur due to being under the control of some other factors. We
get sick because of varieties of reasons as mentioned earlier and the
person who is harming us is not really doing it intentionally because
he/she has really no choice. He/she is under the influence and control of
the afflictions. Because the person who harms us is an afflicted person.
Afflicted person means somebody who has afflictions and who is under the
control of his/her own afflictions. As such, when they caused us harm, the
act of harming us is not something that is arisen without any cause.
Precisely the person is harming us because of the afflictions such as anger
and so forth in his/her mind. Since the person who is harming us is doing
so under the influence of his/her own afflictions, as such he/she has no
choice because he/she is under the control of the afflictions. As such, the
harm that we experience is a dependent arising, i.e. is something that
occurred in dependence on some other factor. Because the harm that we
experience is a dependent arising, the harm that we experience is empty by
nature - empty of existing inherently.
When we think about dependent arising in this context,
    - we can focus on the emptiness of ourselves being the experiencer of
      the harm
    - we can think of the emptiness of the person who is causing us harm
    - we can also think of the emptiness of the harm itself, the action
The main point here is to understand that the people who harm us (the
perpetrator) or the people who are upset with us are not doing it out of
choice in the sense that they are under the influence and control of their
own afflictions such as anger. It is due to their afflictions they cause us
harm. As such, they are not independent. They don’t have control.
When we think about it, then it is not appropriate to get upset with the
person (the perpetrator) who is harming us. If we really want to be upset,
or we want to point finger, we should be upset with the afflictions of that
harm doer. So if we really want to be angry, we have to be angry at their
afflictions and not at the person.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): Are you getting the logic there? Whether you
can practice or not is another thing. But first thing you must get the
logic of what Shantideva is talking.
That is the logic. Of course, we also have our own logic. We would normally
and definitely think “Yeah, the sickness doesn’t have any choice. By
observing causes and conditions, they can arise, so I don’t blame the
sickness. Yes, you can tell me that the person doesn’t have any choice
because he/she is under the control of the afflictions. Why should I get
angry at his afflictions? His afflictions don’t have any intention to harm
me but he has intention to harm me. He is the one who has the intention to
harm me. He is upset with me, but not his afflictions”.

|(2’) Fury is not willingly      |
|developed                       |


Verse 6.24
Without thinking, “I shall be angry,”
People become angry with no resistance,
And without thinking, “I shall produce,”
Likewise anger itself is produced.
Before we get upset and when the mind is kind of okay, we don’t just sit
there and think “I’m going to harm this person. I want to do this. I want
to hurt this person.” Sometimes when we meet with certain conditions, then
the thought arises “I want to hurt this person.” But prior to anger
arising, nobody sits there and thinks “I want to harm this person. I want
to do this. I want to cause damage”. There must be some conditions coming
together then we get upset. Without those conditions coming together, we
will not get upset. So nobody sits there and wishes to be upset and to harm
others. But if we look at the conditions that makes us upset and makes us
want to harm others, although the conditions do lead us to getting upset
but the conditions themselves from their own side do not have any intention
to harm others. Even though these conditions do not have any thought of
causing harm to another person, but when these conditions come together,
then without a choice, anger arises and the thought to harm others arises.
You have to follow the line of reasoning. By using the example of sickness
earlier, we have established how sickness arises due to various causes and
conditions. As such, sicknesses do not arise independently. We also look at
how people do not get upset without any reason. They get upset and harm us
primarily because of their afflictions. Whether it is the person harming us
or whether we get sick, these situations arise because of causes and
conditions coming together.
Likewise, when we look at the person, any ordinary person does not have the
intention to harm or to hurt somebody. Nobody has the intention right from
the beginning to want to harm somebody. But when certain causes and
conditions come together and when these causes and conditions are complete,
somehow without any choice, anger arises and the thought to harm others
arise.
Why is that person harming us? We can say that the person has choice i.e.
the person has the intention and the afflictions don’t have the intention.
You can say that the person may not have the intention to harm us but the
person nonetheless still wants to harm us. Why? Because once the causes and
conditions for him to want to harm us come together, that thought of
harming us will arise in his mind naturally.

[BP 1 Part 2 L6] An analogy here may be helpful. The mirror has no
intention of reflecting anything on its surface, nor does the reflected
object have any intention of being reflected. However, when the object and
the mirror come together, there is a reflection of the object in the
mirror. Similarly, sicknesses and enemies come about through the mere
aggregation of causes and conditions. Neither have any intention of causing
us harm. The enemy may not have the initial thought to cause pain and harm
but when they are provoked, their anger arises and this leads to the
harmful actions.

|(3’) As all wrongdoing arises from causes and        |
|conditions, it is not independent                    |


Verse 6.25
All misdeeds there are
And all the various kinds of negativities
Arise through the force of conditions;
They do not have self-power*.
*[Ven Gyurme translated as “They do not have any independence”]
Due to afflictions such as anger and attachment, non-virtuous karma is
accumulated such as taking the lives of others, taking what is not given,
engaging in sexual misconduct, lying, divisive speech, offensive speech,
meaningless speech and so forth. All these non-virtues arise due to the
force of conditions. These non-virtues do not arise independently. They do
not arise independent on some other factors and they do not arise
intentionally.
We cannot intentionally want to do something without depending on some
other factors. The reason why people engage in non-virtue such as the acts
of harming others is because of various causes and conditions coming
together. As such, it is not as if these things arise without a cause or
they are independent or they are just done out of a wish or just that. No!
If we understand this, then when we look at the people who are engaging in
a lot of non-virtues such as people who engage in all kinds of acts of
harming others, if we really think about it, on top of not getting upset
with these people, in fact one would even generate compassion for them.
This is because we understand that they are under the control of some other
factors, and they are not doing it intentionally. This is the reality. When
people engage in non-virtue, when they cause harm to others including harm
to ourselves, we feel that they are doing it intentionally, they have
control and they have a say. This is what we think. This makes us even more
upset because we think that they are doing it on purpose or intentionally.
But that person is not doing it intentionally in the sense that he/she
doesn’t have any control. He/she is being controlled and pushed by his/her
afflictions. In the first place there are many causes and conditions for
that person to get upset with us. When these causes and conditions come
together, the person powerlessly and without any choice gets angry and then
motivated by his/her anger, they cause us harm.
If we are able to understand this line of reasoning, rather than feeling
“That person is doing it on purpose”,  we should see that the person really
have no choice, and he/she is completely powerless, and is completely under
the control of various causes and conditions and his/her own afflictions.
When this person is upset with us or harms us, it is really possible to
actually think “It is like that. What to do? Nothing can be done.” It is
even possible to have some thought of concern, affection, love, and
compassion for the harm doer. The person who is harming us is doing so
without any choice because he/she is controlled by the afflictions. Then
what about the harm doer afflictions such as their anger? Even the
afflictions itself do not have any independence.

|(ii) Their causes and conditions are   |
|also not independent                   |


Verse 6.26
These conditions that assemble together
Have no intention, “I shall produce,”
And neither does that produced by them
Have the intention, “I will produce.”
Without the external object visual form, there is no way to see it. You
cannot say “I saw something or the eye consciousness perceives the visual
form”.
Without the object sound, you cannot say “I heard something”. The ear
consciousness apprehending that sound would not arise.
Without the external object touch, tactility, there is no way you can say
“I feel that object”.
If it is without form, we cannot say “I saw something”. Without seeing
something, then you cannot say “It is beautiful” or “It is ugly”.
If there isn’t a tactile object, you will not be able to know the feeling
and tactility will not arise. As such, you cannot say “This is rough” or
“This is smooth”.
If the external object sound doesn’t exist, you can’t say “I heard
something.” Then you cannot talk about sound is being pleasant or
unpleasant.
In order for a pleasant or unpleasant feeling to arise, let’s say we are
talking about bodily feeling, there must be a coming together of the
object, the sense power and the consciousness. Through coming together of
these three things, which we call the mental factor of contact, then that
leads to feeling. Depending on how we perceive or we distinguish the
object, it is either pleasant or unpleasant. In order for there to be
feeling in the first place, there must be all these other factors.
Likewise, in order for anger to arise, there must a coming together of a
situation or an object, consciousness and mental sense power.
Anger can only arise when there is coming together of:
   1. There must be an external situation or an object
   2. There must be a sense power
   3. There also must be a consciousness.
These three must come together before anger can arise.
Although these three must come together in order for anger to arise, these
three things, whether on their own or collectively from their side they
don’t have the intention to produce anger.
The anger itself is a product of coming together of these three things.
Anger itself also doesn’t have the thought which think “I have now
produced. I have now arisen in dependence of these three things”.
The point behind this line of reasoning is to show that anger is not
generated intentionally. It is not due to that there being a person
thinking “I want to get angry” and then anger arises. The point is that
anger is product of other causes and conditions. When the causes and
conditions come together, anger will arise.

|(b) Refuting the existence of independent causes                               |
|(i) Refuting the independent self and principal of the Samkhyas                |
|(ii) Refuting the independent self of the Nyaya’s (Logicians)                  |
|(iii) Once one understands all migrators to be like emanations (they see that) |
|it is unreasonable to be furious (with them)                                   |

|(i) Refuting the independent self and principal of the Samkhyas                |
|(1’) Refuting that the principal generates independent expressions             |
|(2’) Refuting that an aware being autonomously experiences objects             |

|(1’) Refuting that the principal generates independent expressions             |


Next is positing our own position and then refuting the position of some
non-Buddhist schools. Obviously there is a difference between the position
of the Buddhists position and the non-Buddhists. The Buddhists’
understanding of causality is very much different from some of the non-
Buddhists schools. For example, there is non-Buddhists Indian philosophical
system called the Samkhyas who do assert causality but they assert that the
causes are independent. There is such a thing as an independent cause. The
cause that exists independently which is in completely opposite to what the
Buddhists assert. We assert causality. We assert that causes themselves are
under the control of some others factors so is other-powered.
First is refuting the concept of the principal and the generality that is
asserted by the Samkhyas, which is an Indian non-Buddhists system. They
have this assertion of principal and generality. They assert that this
principal and generality exist independently.
Verse 6.27
That which is asserted as the “Principal”
And that which is imputed as the “Self,”
Do not arise after having purposefully thought,
“I shall arise.”
Verse 6.28
If they are not produced and non-existent,
What is asserted to be produced at that time?
The Samkhyas, which is a non-Buddhist Indian philosophical system, assert
that everything that exists is included within the 25 categories. They
divide existence or object of knowledge into 25 categories and this list is
exhaustive. Whatever exist necessary falls into these 25 categories.
The Samkhyas talked about there being a principal and an aspect of the
principal (or an expression of the principal):
- the principal is like a creator of all the different aspects
- the aspects are the creations, the expression of the principal.
So there are 25 objects of knowledge for the 25 categories.
Of the 25 objects of knowledge:
    • One is the principal
    • One is the Self
    • The rest of the 23 are the aspect or expressions of this principal.
25 objects of knowledge = Principal + Self + 23 aspect of the principal
The Samkhyas assert that this Self is consciousness/awareness and is
permanent, unitary and independent.
The Samkhyas also talk about all the existence in the objects of knowledge.

All of these objects of knowledge can be subsumed under the six
terminological divisions such as quality, substance and so forth.
One of the six terminological divisions is substance.
In the division of substance, there are 9 things.
One of 9 things is Self. So, in that sense, Self is a substance.
We don’t have to worry what they all are.
The Self is in one of the divisions of substance, so the Self is not
consciousness. It is a form but nevertheless it is permanent, unitary and
independent.
This Self is a division of substance so this Self is said to be
substantially established.
Because it is substantially established, it is not dependent on some other
factor; but rather this Self acts as the basis for other qualities.
This is Samkhyas’ assertion.
Earlier on I have mentioned that there are six terminological divisions of
object of knowledge.
In the six terminological divisions, there is a division of substance and
one of the divisions is quality.
In general, in the division of quality, there are 24 qualities.
In the qualities that arise in dependence on the Self, there are 9 of those
qualities including happiness, suffering, anger and attachment. Anger,
being one of those qualities that arise in dependence on that Self, is said
to be produced by that Self independently.
Why does it fit into our discussion here?
The point here is that there is this Self that is substantially
established. This Self is not consciousness but nevertheless it is
permanent, unitary and independent. So, in dependence of this Self, there
are qualities that come about.
|One classification:                                                            |
|25 objects of knowledge = Principal + Self + 23 aspect of the principal        |
|Samkhyas assert Self is consciousness/awareness and is permanent, unitary and  |
|independent                                                                    |
|Another classification:                                                        |
|All objects of knowledge is subsumed under the six terminological divisions    |
|that include quality, substance and so forth.                                  |
|-in the category of substance, there are 9 things. Self is one of the          |
|substances, so Self is not consciousness, but a form and is permanent, unitary |
|and independent. Also Self is substantially established i.e. it is not         |
|dependent on some other factor.                                                |
|- in the category of quality, there are 24 qualities.                          |
|Samkhyas assert there are 9 qualities (such as happiness, suffering, anger,    |
|attachment and so forth) arise in dependence on the Self. So the Self acts as  |
|the basis for other qualities.                                                 |


The main point is that there are some non-Buddhist Indian philosophical
systems who do assert causality, but the problem for us is that they assert
causality but at the same time they assert that there are independent
causes i.e. the causes, being independent, without depending on some other
things and yet produces an effect. That is the problem. Logically for us,
that is not tenable and is not possible. So these six lines of verse 6.27
and 6.28 are saying that the Samkhyas philosophy is not right.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): You know why it is not right?
The point is that the Self, in dependence upon which qualities such as
anger and attachment are produced.
In the first place, the Self is itself is independent, and since it is not
produced, how can it produce something else?
Since you (Samkhyas) posit a cause that is independent:
- that means it is not dependent on some other factors,
- that means it can exist right on its own without depending something else
- that means it is not produced
- if itself is not produced, it is independent, then how can it produce
something else?
Just for the matter of analysis, even if you (Samkhyas) allow the
impossibility to be possible, by saying that the independent cause is
produced by another cause which is independent, and since it itself is
produced, how can it be permanent? It has to be impermanent! But you
Samkhyas assert that it is permanent.
If you assert that there is an independent cause and the independent cause
it itself is produced from something else, then it itself is not
independent and it is not autonomous. So it cannot be independent.
The point here is because Samkhyas said that there are causes and
conditions that produce things, but they assert that these causes are
independent.
• If the cause itself is independent, it is permanent and it is not subject
  to momentary change because it is not produced by something else.
• Since it is not produced by something else, it itself is permanent.
• If it itself is permanent it cannot produce an effect.
Therefore, the Samkhyas’ assertion that anger and so forth can be produced
from an independent cause, the Self, is untenable.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): You understand? I make it simple into two
sentences.
First you have to understand what our system, the Buddhists, view is.
• If it is a functional thing (or a product) then its existence is
  necessarily dependent on some other factors.
• It comes into being in dependence on some other factors therefore it is
  not independent.
• Whatever is a functional thing (product), that means it is a result of
  some other factors so it itself is necessarily other-powered. It cannot
  self-power.
That is the reality.
But some of these non-Buddhist schools say that there can be an independent
cause. There are causes that produce effects but the causes are
independent. For example, the Samkhyas said that the principal and the Self
are the causes that produce results but they themselves (the Self and the
principal) are permanent and independent. That is not tenable and doesn’t
work at all.
The main line of the reasoning is that there isn’t such a thing as a self-
powered cause. If it is a cause, it is necessarily other-powered. Other-
powered means it is not independent and it comes into being by depending on
some other things other than itself.
The reality is that:
• If something is a cause, it is necessarily impermanent, and it is
  necessarily other-powered. There isn’t such a thing as an independent
  cause.
• So, if it is a cause, it is necessarily other-powered. It is dependent on
  some other factors other than itself. Therefore it is not independent.
• A cause is necessary other-powered and not self-powered.
That is the reality. If that is the reality, then when you look at the
Samkhyas’ position, they talk of there being a principal and a Self and
they assert that these two are causes that can produce some effects.
Then we analyze. We look at the Self and the principal.
• Do the Self and the principal asserted by the Samkhyas arise from a cause
  or without a cause?
• If you say that they arise from a cause, the Self and the principal
  asserted by them to be permanent cannot exist. Because if the self and
  the principal are themselves product of other causes, they themselves
  cannot be independent; they cannot be self-powered. But the Samkhyas
  assert that they are self-powered.
• If they are self-powered, independent, they cannot produce things. But
  the Samkhyas say that the self and the principal can produce things, the
  whole varieties of effects.
• But if they are self-powered, they are permanent, they don’t undergo
  momentary change. How can they produce something else? It is impossible!

|(2’) Refuting that an aware being autonomously       |
|experiences objects                                  |


Verse 6.28 (c,d)
Since it would always be distracted to its objects,
It follows that it will never cease.
This is refuting the Self that is a consciousness asserted by the Samkhyas.

To keep it simple, the Samkhyas asserted that the Self engages or utilize
its objects from its own side independently without depending on some other
factors. This is what the text here is refuting.
The Samkhyas assert that the Self engages or utilizes its objects
independently from its own side. Then it leads to the logical fallacy
therefore it follows that once the Self engages in its objects, it would do
so continuously and forever without stopping. Because it does so
independently, then once it engages in its objects, it will engage in its
object forever without any stopping.
You have to remember the Samkhyas’ assertion here. They assert that this
Self that is independent and permanent. Permanent means never changing.
They assert that this self engages or utilizes its objects independently.
This is the assertion. Then what would the problem and the fallacy?
If you assert that there is such a permanent and independent Self that
engages its objects independently it follows that once it engages in the
object, it will continuously engage in the object because it never changing
and it is permanent. Then you will never be able to posit a time where the
Self is not engaging in its object because it is permanent and it is
independent.
But that can never be the case because we know that form and sound and so
forth change. If there is a change in the object, there must a change in
the experiencer. For example, if a form ceases to exist then you cannot
talk of a Self that is still utilizing the form that is non-existence.
The verse 6.28 c,d is to refute the assertion of the Samkhyas that this
Self can engage in its objects independently.
Next is refuting the assertion of another non-Buddhist Indian philosophical
system known as the Nyayagika. It is much the same thing.

|(ii) Refuting the independent self of the Nyaya’s    |
|(1’) It is not valid [to posit that] a permanent     |
|phenomenon produces an effect                        |
|(2’) It is not valid [for a permanent phenomenon] to |
|rely upon conditions                                 |
|(3’) Permanent phenomena are not related to          |
|conditions                                           |


Verse 6.29
If the Self were permanent
It would obviously be devoid of activity, just like space.
So even if it were to meet with other conditions
What could the unchanging do?
Verse 6.30
Even if, when acted upon, it remains as before,
Then what did activity do to it?
If it is said, “This is the activity of that,”
How could the two ever be related?
We just assume that we understood it.
[BP1 Part 2 L7] While both the Samkhyas and the Nyayas assert an
independent, permanent self, they are differentiated by the nature of that
self. The Samkhyas assert that the self is the consciousness while the
Nyayas assert the self is matter.
The Nyayas assert that the independent thought of harming is produced by
this independent and permanent self. Buddhists refute that such a self has
the ability to function at all. It cannot produce any effect since it is
permanent. Such a self is like uncompounded space, which do not produce
anything at all.
Next is the outline actually says it is inappropriate to be angry upon
understanding all beings to be like an emanation.

|(iii) Once one understands all migrators to be like emanations (they see that  |
|it is) unreasonable to be angry (with them)                                    |


Verse 6.31
Hence all are governed by others,
And through the power of that, they have no power.
Having understood in this way, I shall not become angry
At all things that are like emanations.
All the examples that were given earlier such as anger, sickness, the harm-
doers and so forth are all dependent arising in that they arise through the
force of some other factors. They do not arise of themselves. The harm that
we received is the result of the coming together of many causes and
conditions. The causes and conditions that brought about the harm that we
experienced are themselves the products of other causes and conditions.
Those causes and conditions are also products of other causes and
conditions and so forth.
When there is a harm-doer in our life - the person that causes us problems
and harms - that person is doing so because of his own afflictions, anger.
• Why is he angry? He is angry because of his own mental unhappiness.
• In the first place, why is there mental unhappiness? Because of various
  causes and conditions.
• Why are people unhappy? Because there is coming together of various
  causes and conditions such as an object or situation, the sense power and
  the consciousness. When these three come together, it produces an
  experience which makes the person unhappy. Because the unhappiness of the
  person builds up then the person get angry. Because of anger the person
  harms us.
So, usually there is this process. It all starts with coming together of a
situation or an object, the sense power and the consciousness.
Why are there these three things in the first place? If you think about it,
it must come from a cause. There is where karma and afflictions can come
into play. You can see this whole causal mechanism.
• Something arises because of a cause, and that cause itself is the product
  of other causes and so and so forth. As such, the various causes that
  bring about an experience themselves are products of other causes.
• As such, causes are not independent.
• Causes themselves are dependent arising.
• Causes are other-powered.
• Causes are not self-powered.
• As such there is no beginning. There is no beginning at all for this
  whole causal mechanism.
In short, if it is a functional thing, if it is a product, if it is an
impermanent phenomenon, it has no beginning.
If you look for an independently existing cause, the very first moment or
the real cause, you will not be able to find it because there is no
beginning.
• A cause is the result of some other causes.
• Those other causes are also the result of some other causes which must
  precede it and so forth. So going by this line of reasoning, in general,
  there is no beginning to causes. As such there isn’t an independently
  existing cause.
• As such things are dependently originated. Therefore you can say things
  are dependently arisen.
• As such, there isn’t a single phenomenon whose existence is not dependent
  on some other factors.
• As such there isn’t any truly existence phenomenon. There isn’t any
  phenomenon that exists by their own entity, from their own side, and
  independent on other factors.
It is impossible. Whatever exists is necessarily dependently arisen. As
such, phenomena are like illusions.

As such, the harm doer doesn’t exist independently. He is not truly
existent and he doesn’t exist from its own side. He came into being because
of inter-play of many causes and conditions. We can use this reflection to
counteract any anger that we have towards that person.
When there is anger in our mind, when we are upset with a situation, an
object or a person, we get upset in the perspective of this anger. We are
getting upset at the independently existing person. Our anger is directed
to an independently existent person, a real harm doer from its own side,
independently existing harm-doer, truly existent harm-doer.
A harm-doer that exists in himself right there, he is there to do bad.
There is no other reason for his action or his behavior. He is just there.
This is what we believe. We get upset at that. We get upset because of
that. So, we are getting upset at something that doesn’t exist.
Through reflecting on dependent arising, we have to realize that the thing
that we get upset at doesn’t exist.
How that person does not exist alone independently because there are many
causes and conditions that caused the person to act in that way. Because
there are many causes and conditions therefore that harm-doer is not
independent.
In order to help us to understand subtle dependent arising, we first have
to understand coarse dependent arising – dependent arising at the level of
causality.
There are many causes and conditions that make him angry, and that make him
do this to you. There is a whole list of causes and conditions. If you
understand that there is this whole list of causes and conditions that make
him do whatever he did to you then you realize that that person is not
independent.
By depending on our understanding of dependent arising at the level of
causality then we come to understand dependent arising at the subtle level.
Since his action is a product of various causes and conditions therefore he
is not independent. He does not exist from his own side. Therefore he is
empty of existing truly, empty of existing inherently.
This is how we can counteract anger with the reflection of the dependent
arising. First at the coarser level, at the level of causality, and based
on that we come to understand how things are dependently designated at the
subtle level.
