Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Engaging in the Deeds of a Bodhisattva/lesson16.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:52:25.471458
================================================================================


Question: When the bodhicitta is degenerated, one can avoid going to the
lower realms by purifying through the four opponent powers. Why can't this
purification also prevent one from delaying the path?
Khen Rinpoche: Let’s say that you are going to walk to a particular
destination. If your legs are in good condition, you will reach your
destination easily. If you break your legs, of course you can heal it or
mend it, but nevertheless, having broken your legs is an impediment or an
obstacle to reach your destination. You would have reached your destination
earlier or quicker if you didn’t break your leg.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): You got it or not? It is clear, No?
(Student’s further question inaudible)
Khen Rinpoche (English): Your question is why possible? Why takes longer?
That is your question, isn’t it? Prevent or why take longer? Just from that
example it can give idea why is possible. It doesn’t mean that you cannot
fix your legs. You can go to hospital to fix it and then become like normal
but that take longer time to reach the destination. No? It is like that.
There it mentioned that it is better from the beginning don’t break the
vows. They advise that. It doesn’t mean that you purify negative karma, and
then you cannot accumulate negative karma. Yeah it is possible that you can
purify but it postponing your destination.
The Fourth Chapter: Teaching Conscientiousness
We are now at the chapter of conscientiousness. After taking the
bodhisattva vows:
- one has to be conscientious about the bodhicitta that one has already
generated, and
- one has to be conscientious about the trainings in the perfection that
one has promised to undertake.
Regards to developing conscientiousness with respect to the bodhicitta that
one has generated, essentially this section talks about the reasons why it
is inappropriate to give up one’s bodhicitta.
In short there are many disadvantages and faults if one gives up the
bodhicitta that one has generated.
Since there are many great faults and disadvantages if one abandons the
bodhicitta that one has already generated, so by reflecting and keeping in
mind those great faults and disadvantages, one strives in applying
conscientious in not allowing one’s bodhicitta to degenerate.
We have finished with the section on being conscientious in not letting
one’s bodhicitta degenerate.
Next is the conscientious in the trainings.

|Cultivating conscientiousness with regards to the training         |
|1 Being conscientious about abandoning wrongdoing                  |
|2 Being conscientious about cultivating virtue                     |
|3 Being conscientious about abandoning afflictions                 |

|1  Being conscientious about abandoning wrongdoing                 |
|A If negativities and downfalls are not abandoned, one must        |
|continue [to take rebirth] in the lower realms                     |
|B The Buddhas and their children act with equanimity               |
|C The difficulty of obtaining the leisures and endowments          |
|D There is no opportunity to practise virtue if one has taken      |
|rebirth in the lower realms                                        |
|E The reason it is difficult to obtain the leisures and endowments |

|A If negativities and downfalls are not abandoned, one must        |
|continue [to take rebirth] in the lower realms                     |


Verse 4.12
Therefore just as I have promised
I shall respectfully accomplish it.
If from now on I do not strive
I shall descend from lower to lower states
At the time of taking the bodhisattva vow, one promises to abandon the 18
roots downfalls and the 46 faults. Here one should contemplate and think “I
am now going to practice in accordance with the promises I have made at the
time of taking the bodhisattva vows”.
The verse is saying that one should practice respectfully to guard against
committing the downfalls and the faults by remembering the benefits of
keeping to the training and the great disadvantages of going against the
trainings. It is said in one sutra (King of Concentration Sutra):
  “During these degenerate times, the benefit of keeping one precept for
  one day and night exceeds the merits that one accumulates from making
  countless offerings of umbrellas, victory banners, light and ornaments of
  jewels to a hundred billion buddhas for eons equal to the number of sand
  grains in the River Ganges”.
We should read about the benefits of keeping to the trainings, and the
great benefits that we can derive from doing so. We should understand the
benefits from keeping to the trainings. We should not keep to the trainings
and feel that it is like an obligation or a burden. But rather, if we
understand the benefits and what is in it for us, then we would do it
happily.
The verse says “respectfully accomplish” the promise - to respectfully
keeps to the trainings. That means to be able to do it happily, to strive
and to joyously persevere in the training. The meaning of joyous
perseverance is the mind that is enthusiastic about virtues.
One should reflect on the benefits of keeping the vows and trainings that
one has promised to undertake. On the other hand, if one takes on these
vows and commitments but do not put in any effort into keeping them, and if
one gets stained by all the downfalls and faults, the negativities that
come from committing these downfalls and faults will cause one to stay in
the lower realms for a long time.
If one thinks “It is alright that even if I don’t strive in keeping my vows
and abiding in the trainings that I have already promised to do so, and
because the numberless buddhas and bodhisattvas are so powerful, so kind
and so compassionate, they will definitely stop me from going to the lower
realms. They will continue to place me on the path to higher rebirths and
enlightenment”.  If one ever thinks like that, then one has to understand
that is a mistake. So thinking in such a way is a mistake. The answer to
that comes in verse 4.13.

|B The Buddhas and their children act|
|with equanimity                     |


Verse 4.13
Although countless buddhas have passed by
To benefit all sentient beings,
Yet I was not an object of their care
Because of my own misdeeds.
Numberless buddhas including Shakyamuni Buddha work only for the happiness
and welfare of sentient beings. Numberless of these buddhas including
Shakyamuni Buddha has already passed i.e. is already in the past tense.
Although numberless buddhas including Shakyamuni Buddha have come to pass,
however we were not saved by them due to the faults of our misdeeds and
negativities. We are like a patient that cannot be saved by even a very
good doctor. If the patient does not follow the doctor’s advice, there is
nothing the doctor can do. Similarly, we were not protected or saved by the
numberless buddhas and bodhisattvas in the past because of our misdeeds.
If you have a burnt seed, and even if all the cooperative conditions such
as water, fertilizer and so forth are there, the seed will not sprout. In
order to get it sprout, there must be something coming from the side of the
seed, i.e. the seed must have the potential to transform into the sprout.
But if the seed is burnt, no matter how much fertilizer and water there
are, you are not going to get any sprout. Likewise, all the numberless
buddhas and bodhisattvas may possess inconceivable power and compassion,
but because due to the power of our non-virtues, we were not protected by
them.
If you think “Even if buddhas and bodhisattvas don’t protect and rescue me
in this life, they will definitely do so in my next life”, it is also wrong
as in verse 4.14.
Verse 4.14
If I still act like this,
Again and again I will likewise experience
Bad migrations, sickness, bondage,
Mutilation, and laceration.
If one does not put any effort into guarding or keeping the vows that one
has promised to do so, and keep getting stained by the downfalls and
faults, the negativities that one accumulates from committing these
downfalls and faults will throw one not just once into the lower realms but
will throw one into the lower realms for many lifetimes.
Even if one is born as a human again, but because of the negativities
accumulated from transgressing the trainings, then it is said that one will
have to experience sickness, lack of freedom, bondage, and one may also
experience physical harms such as being beaten and so forth.
The point is that it is difficult to be protected by the buddhas and
bodhisattvas in the future lives if one is not careful in this life and if
one does not put effort into keeping the vows and the trainings that one
has promised to do so. Because of what we have just seen, by not keeping
the vows and we keep getting stained by these downfalls and faults, these
downfalls and faults would cause us to be born in the lower realms for many
lifetimes.
So it is wrong to think “It is okay if I don’t keep my vows in this life. I
will be protected in my future lives”.
How are you going to be protected if you are going to be in the lower
realms for many lifetimes?
The teachings say that even if you become a human being again, as a result
of having committed these downfalls and faults, you will have to experience
the causally concordant effects such as sickness and so forth. So by
thinking about these things, one should be conscientious in keeping one’s
vows.
It is possible that there are people who may think “I didn’t do that well
this time round, but in my next life when I get a human life of freedom and
endowments again, I will try harder then.” Having such a thought is a
mistake. Why? The answer is in the next verse.

[BP 1 L20] If we talk about the seed from the perspective of our buddha
nature, of course, all sentient beings have buddha nature. When we talk
about the degeneration of the seed, it refers to our buddha nature being
bound by our negativities. We have to remove these faults ourselves.
Sometimes, we go to the other extreme: “If I possess all the potential and
power to become a buddha, then I do not need the buddhas. What do I need
the buddhas for?” If we are thinking like that, we are implying that our
buddha nature is solid and inherently existent because it does not need to
rely on any other factors. The hearers and the solitary realizers arise
from the buddhas and the buddhas arise from bodhicitta. Whatever goals we
may have, be it to achieve the level of a hearer, solitary realizer or
buddha, we all need to rely on the teachings of the Buddha. We achieve
enlightenment by depending on the teachings or scriptures of the Buddha. We
will not be able to achieve enlightenment without depending on the advice
and the teachings of the Buddha. We need all these conditions before we can
achieve enlightenment. We will not be able to achieve enlightenment on our
own, without depending on these other factors.
Using again the analogy of the seed, even if the seed possessed the
potential to transform into a plant, the seed alone would not be able to do
this without depending on other conditions such as fertilisers, warmth,
water and so forth. In the same way, although we may have the buddha nature
or the potential to become a buddha, that alone will not help us to achieve
enlightenment.

|C The difficulty of obtaining a human life of leisures and endowments          |
|1 If bodhicitta deteriorates, it becomes difficult to obtain leisures and      |
|endowments that possess the four wheels - conditions [that facilitate practice]|
|2 Even though they have been obtained, one should make effort because they     |
|quickly perish                                                                 |

|1 If bodhicitta deteriorates, it becomes difficult to obtain leisures and      |
|endowments that possess the four wheels - conditions [that facilitate practice]|


Verse 4.15
If the arising of a tathagata,
Faith, the attainment of a human body,
And my being fit to cultivate virtue are rare,
When will they be obtained again?
It is said in the teachings that the coming of the Buddha is as rare as the
udumbara flower*. The appearance of a Buddha in any particular world system
is a very rare phenomenon.
*(Extract from Wikipedia) The flowers of the udumbara are enclosed within
its fruit, as in all figs. Because the flower is hidden inside the fruit, a
legend developed to explain the absence (and supposed rarity) of the visual
flower. In Buddhist mythology, the flower was said to bloom only once every
3,000 years, and thus came to symbolize events of rare occurrence.
If you remember our earlier discussion on what a great eon is in terms of
time, and before we go into that again, if you think about the time spend
that is generally needed for any particular individual to achieve
omniscience, in general, it is said that one needs to accumulate the
collection of merits and wisdom for three great countless eons in order to
achieve full enlightenment.
|                    |1. Eon of        |20 intermediate |
|One Great Eon       |formation        |eons            |
|(80 intermediate    |                 |                |
|eons)               |                 |                |
|                    |2. Eon of abiding|20 intermediate |
|                    |                 |eons            |
|                    |3. Eon of        |20 intermediate |
|                    |destruction      |eons            |
|                    |4. Eon of        |20 intermediate |
|                    |nothingness      |eons            |


One great eon is made up on 80 intermediate eons. In order to finish the
accumulation of merits and wisdom one needs three great eons in order to
achieve full enlightenment.
After having achieved enlightenment, the Buddha turns the wheel of dharma
in order to accomplish the welfare of sentient beings. If you look at the
time spent starting from the beginning of the formation of a particular
world system until its destruction, in one great eon there are 80
intermediate eons, most of the time the Buddha does not descend. Most of
the time, there are just the eon of darkness.
The Buddha will only descend during eons of abiding, and there are only 20
intermediate eons of abiding.
The Buddha does not descend during the entire 20 intermediate eons of
abiding. They will only descend when the average lifespan of the human
being is on the descent.
Of the 20 intermediate eons of abiding, half the time, for 10 intermediate
eons, Buddha does not descend. So you have only 10 intermediate eons left.
Of these 10 intermediate eons that are left, Buddha does not descend all
the time. It is only at certain time or intervals does the Buddha descend
during those 10 intermediate eons.
When you put all these together then you begin to have some understanding
of the rarity of the appearance of the Buddha in any world system.
We talked about human life of freedom and endowments. So there are the ten
endowments, five pertains to oneself, and five pertains to others.
When we talk about the five endowments that pertain to others, there are
four that are related to the Buddha’s descent and having taught the dharma,
and the dharma abiding and so forth.
There are also the five endowments that pertain to oneself. One of which is
having faith in the Buddhist teachings. That is also very rare as it is
very rare to have an appreciation of the Buddha’s teachings.
To achieve a human life that is endowed with the eight freedoms and ten
endowments is very rare. So it is a mistake to think that one will get such
an opportunity again in the future for one to have another human life of
freedoms and endowments is very rare. While we still have the opportunity,
we can do any kind of virtue we like, and we can just start doing it
immediately. As we are free of all the obstacles of doing so and we have
all the conditions, we should start right now.
So the point here is that the teachings are telling us that while we have
all the favorable conditions and free of all the obstacles, this is the
time to work hard and to strive. While it is incorrect to think “I will
practice later on in life. Now everything is going well. I have good
health, and I will continue to have good health. I will just do it later in
my life.” The teaching is telling us that thinking in such a way is also
incorrect.

The ten endowments
The five endowments that relate to others:
  1. Being born when the Buddha has appeared
  2. The Buddha gives Dharma teachings
  3. The Dharma remains
  4. There are followers of the Dharma
  5. There are people supports the Dharma practice
The five endowments that relate to oneself:
  1. Being born as a human being
  2. Being born in a central land
  3. Being born with complete sense organs
  4. Not created the five extreme negative karmas.
  5. Having faith in the teachings.
The eight freedoms:
The four situations of being free from the non-human states (which are not
conducive to dharma practice)
  1. Freedom from birth in the hells
  2. Freedom from birth in the hungry ghost realms
  3. Freedom from birth in the animal realms
  4. Freedom from birth as a long-life god
The four situations of a human rebirth free from the restrictions to the
Dharma practice
  1. Freedom from being born in a remote and irreligious land
  2. Freedom from being born when the Buddha has not come
  3. Freedom from being born mentally deficient or mute
  4. Freedom from holding wrong views

[BP1 L20] As in the outline: If bodhicitta deteriorates, it becomes
difficult to obtain leisures and endowments that possess the four wheels -
conditions that facilitate practice.
The four wheels referred to here are:
1. to be born in a conducive environment with harmonious friends who assist
us in the practice of virtue;
2. to be able to rely on holy beings with specific reference to the fact
that we have the opportunity to meet and rely on Mahayana gurus;
3. as a result of virtuous prayers made in the past, to engage in virtue
enthusiastically with one’s body, speech and mind ;
4. to have good and favourable conditions for the practice of the Mahayana
teachings. This comes about as the result of having accumulated or
performed virtue in the past.
These four wheels are the four Mahayana spheres mentioned in the dedication
prayer of the Guru Puja practice:
  By the force of this merit in all my lives
  May I never be parted from the Mahayana’s four spheres
  And may I reach the end of my journey along the paths of
  Renunciation, bodhicitta, the pure view, and the two stages

|2 Even though they have been obtained, one should make effort|
|because they quickly perish                                  |


Verse 4.16
I am free from sickness like the day
Fed and free from harm,
But life is momentary and deceptive;
The body is like an object on loan for but a lava*
* A unit of time that lasts 1.6 minutes [Ven Gyurme translated “a lava” as
short period of time]
If you look at a particular day in your life, when things are going well,
you have a good life, you are not sick, you have all the conditions, you
don’t have people destroying your life, and you don’t have any obstacles.
Although that may be the case for a particular day, but it is not certain
that the rest of your life will be like that.
Even if you assume the rest of your life will be good, you will be healthy
for the rest of your life and things will go well, even then, it will come
a point in time where it will end. From now till the end day, all these
favorable conditions are being depleted day by day and moment by moment.
Our body is just like an object that is taken as a loan. This precious
human rebirth is obtained just once. Just like something precious such like
gold or something similar that is on loan to you, there will definitely
comes a time that when that object which is on loan to you will be
repossessed without any choice by the owner. Likewise, there will come a
time when our life will be taken by the Lord of Death.
Therefore it is incorrect to think “I will keep to my vows and trainings
and my practice in the future”. Therefore, you have to be conscientious in
keeping to your promise.
There are times where people think that getting a human life of freedoms
and endowments is not difficult. It is something that one will just get
over and over again. With this assumption, one also assumes that it is
therefore alright to practice in the future when one get such an
opportunity again. Of course, that is incorrect.

|There is no opportunity to practice virtue if one has taken rebirth in the |
|lower realms                                                               |
|1 There is no opportunity to practice virtue if one is reborn in the lower |
|realms                                                                     |
|2 If one does not make the effort when one has obtained a higher rebirth,  |
|once one is in the lower realms, one will be ignorant with regards to what |
|is to be abandoned and what is to be cultivated                            |
|3 It is extremely difficult to be liberated from the lower realms [once one|
|has taken rebirth there]                                                   |

|1 There is no opportunity to practice virtue if one is reborn in the lower |
|realms                                                                     |


Verse 4.17
With such behaviour of mine
I will not obtain even a human body.
If this human form is not attained,
There will be solely negativity and no virtue.
We must remember the context of our discussion here. We are discussing in
the context of someone who has adopted bodhicitta through a ritual, having
generated bodhicitta, and having taken the bodhisattva vows; which is
basically an oath to practice the perfections. If this person does not
strive to keep to the oath that he/she has taken, but instead being
careless and keeps on accumulating non-virtues, and keeps committing the
downfalls and the faults, then what will happen to such a person? As in
verse 4.17, such a person will not even obtain a human rebirth. As such,
only the lower realms are opened to this person.
Of course, once you find yourself in the lower realms, you will not have
any opportunity to engage in anything that is beneficial or virtuous.
The teachings are telling us that if you do seriously look at your own
actions and behavior, you will come to understand that it will be difficult
for you to obtain such an opportunity again in the future. Even just to
obtain a human rebirth will be difficult. Of course, you will end up in the
lower realms. If you do end up in the lower realms, and if you think about
it, it is crystal clear that there will be no room or opportunity for
virtue. Instead you will only be engaging in non-virtue all the time. Once
you find yourself in the lower realms when non-virtue is continually being
accumulated then getting out of that situation and getting another human
rebirth will be extremely difficult.
While you may not be able to directly perceive the hell realm and the preta
realm, but you can observe the life of the animals. There are many kinds of
animals that have to live by killing others. They cannot survive without
killing others. There are many kinds of animal that have to live like that.
 Imagine you are born as an animal, and you put yourself in their
situation. If you think about it, for the whole life one is continually
killing just to survive. Then it is very clear that one is constantly
accumulating non-virtue. If that is the case, how is it really possible for
one to obtain a good rebirth henceforth?

|2  If one does not make the effort when one has obtained a higher rebirth, |
|once one is in the lower realms, one will be ignorant with regards to what |
|is to be abandoned and what is to be cultivated                            |


Verse 4.18
If, even when I have the good fortune of virtuous conduct,
I do not create virtue,
Then what shall I do when all confused
By the suffering of the unfortunate rebirths?
If you do not employ your body, speech and mind in virtue while you have
the human life of eight freedoms and ten endowments, then once you are in
the lower realms you would not be able to even to distinguish between what
is right and what is wrong. You would not be able to distinguish what is it
that you need to discard and what exactly that you need to cultivate/adopt.

If you do not even employ your body, speech and mind in even the smallest
of virtues while you have all the opportunities to do so, then if you do
end up in the lower realms such as the hell realm, you will be completely
overwhelmed by the suffering. You will be completely confused as to what to
abandon and what to cultivate. By thinking about this, you apply
conscientiousness in keeping to one’s training and to engage in virtue.

|3 It is extremely difficult to be liberated from the lower realms |
|[once one has taken rebirth there]                                |


Verse 4.19
If I do not create virtues
But readily amass negativities,
Then for hundreds of millions of eons
I shall not even hear the term “good migration.”
[Ven Gyurme translated “good migration” as good rebirth]
Here the verse is saying that while you have the opportunity and if you
don’t even cultivate even a small virtue but only accumulate negativities,
then you will be reborn in the lower realms and will have to stay there for
very long periods of time, and the verse is saying “for hundreds of
millions of eons.” Once you are in the lower realms it is very difficult to
get out. Forget about getting a good rebirth, even to hear the word “good
rebirth” would be extremely difficult.

|The reason why it is difficult to obtain the   |
|leisures and endowments                        |


Verse 4.20
For this very reason, the Bhagavan said
That just as in the case of a turtle inserting its neck
Into a yoke adrift upon the vast ocean,
It is very hard to attain the human state.
The Buddha taught in the sutras of the difficulty of obtaining a human life
of freedoms and endowments through an analogy. Imagine that there is a very
vast ocean and there is a golden yoke floating on the surface of the ocean
and is constantly moving about. Then at the bottom of the ocean, there is a
blind turtle. This blind turtle will only surfaces once in every hundred
year. The chances of that blind turtle surfacing and putting its neck right
into the hole of that yoke is very small. Likewise, the chance of getting a
human life of freedoms and endowments is similarly difficult.
In short, this section talks about how you have to be conscientious in
abandoning negativities and non-virtue. For if you are not conscientious in
abandoning non-virtue, and if you keep on accumulating non-virtue and being
stained by the downfalls and faults, then the results of all those negative
karma would be rebirth in the lower realms and you would have to stay in
the lower realms for a very long time. It would also be very difficult to
get out of the lower realms once you are in it. By keeping these points in
mind, then you apply conscientiousness in keeping to the vows and to the
trainings that you have promised to do so.
This is similar to what you can find in the Stages of the Path to
Enlightenment literature. In short, we have the opportunity to employ
ourselves in virtue, we do have the ability to do so, and we can do it. We
should start right away. It would be a mistake to postpone one’s practice
to the future.
These verses here from the Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds are very
powerful. You could use these verses for reflection especially at times
when you feel that it is difficult to keep the vows and keep to the
training. By reading these verses and contemplating them, you should find
the willingness and the joy to keep to the practice.
If you do love and cherish yourself, then you have to keep to the trainings
and keep to the practice. If you do not love yourself, then that is a
completely different matter. When we talk about loving ourselves, we are
not just talking about loving ourselves for one lifetime. We are talking
about real long term happiness. By thinking correctly, knowing how to think
and thinking in long term, you will come to regard the practice and virtue
as an ornament and not as a burden. It is something to be enjoyed rather
than something that is like a burden.
There are vows and commitments to be kept including commitments of daily
recitation and so forth. If you don’t know how to think, then sometimes you
will find doing these things a bit difficult. If you don’t know how to
think, you will find doing them a burden. So at those times you really must
know how to think by reflecting on those points as mentioned here. A lot of
it boils down to having faith of conviction in karma. Having this faith of
conviction in karma is so important.

|Being conscientious about cultivating virtue                               |
|A As negativities accumulated in the past are limitless, it would be       |
|reasonable to make effort in abandoning them                               |
|B The reasons the karma [that leads one to take rebirth in] the lower      |
|realms is not exhausted by merely experiencing suffering in the lower      |
|realms one time                                                            |
|C The reasons it would be reasonable to make effort in the antidotes to    |
|negativity                                                                 |

|A As negativities accumulated in the past are limitless, it would be       |
|reasonable to make effort in abandoning them                               |


Verse 4.21
If even by the negativity committed for an instant
One will abide in Relentless Torment for eons,
Then because of the negativities I have accumulated in beginningless cyclic
existence,
What need to mention my not going to a good migration?
[Ven Gyurme translated “Relentless Torment” as the Avici Hell]
The teachings say that if one has to be reborn in the hell realm just by
getting angry at the bodhisattva for even just one moment, then it goes
without saying that one will have to be born in the lower realms for a very
long time because of the immeasurable amount of non-virtue that one has
accumulated since beginningless lifetimes.
We have accumulated immeasurable amount of non-virtue since beginningless
lifetimes and if not purified, they will throw us into the lower realms.
Therefore, we have to strive and work really hard in confessing and
purifying all the negativities that we have accumulated since beginningless
lifetimes.

|B The reasons the karma [that leads one to take rebirth in] the lower      |
|realms is not exhausted by merely experiencing suffering in the lower      |
|realms one time                                                            |


Verse 4.22
Through experiencing merely that
I shall not be liberated,
Because while experiencing that in such a way
Other negativities will be strongly produced.
Between virtue and non-virtue, the teachings state that the heavier of the
two will ripen first.
If both virtue and non-virtue are of equal strength, the one that one is
more familiar with will ripen first.
If one is equally familiar with virtue and non-virtue, it is said that the
one that is created earlier first will ripen.
When we think about this, for us, the non-virtue is much more powerful. We
are also more familiar with non-virtue. If that ripens, then we would have
to experience the problems and sufferings. For that reason, we have to
confess and purify them.
There may be people who think “It is not really necessary to purify the
negativities because once they ripen and you would have finished
experiencing them. That’s it”.
There may be people who think “Once the negative karma or non-virtue
ripens, one goes to the lower realms, and one has to experience the
sufferings. All those sufferings will exhaust all the negativities that one
has accumulated. When those negativities are exhausted then one will be
liberated from the lower realms and one will get a good rebirth”.
Of course again, this is another incorrect position. The answer to that is
verse 4.22.
Verse 4.22
Through experiencing merely that
I shall not be liberated,
Because while experiencing that in such a way
Other negativities will be strongly produced.
Even if one finishes experiencing the fruitional effect of being born in
the lower realms as a result of the non-virtue accumulated in the past, one
will not be liberated from the lower realms. Why? Because when one is in
the lower realms, one always accumulating non-virtue. There is always
anger, there is always ill-will, and one engages in non-virtue such as
killing and so forth.  So it is wrong to say that one will be liberated
from the lower realms after one has finished experiencing the fruitional
effect of non-virtue. While one is experiencing that fruitional effect of
being in the lower realms, one is continuously accumulating non-virtue.
That will prevent one from being liberated from the lower realms.
With the basis of a lower realm rebirth, one’s ability to engage in virtue
is very weak. One is continuously accumulating non-virtue in that state of
existence. Therefore, the commentary says that we should strive now to stop
creating the causes of the lower realms.  We have to strive to purify all
the negativities that we have already accumulated in the past. If we do not
strive in virtue, after having obtained a good rebirth, then we will be
deceiving and cheating ourselves.

|The reasons why it would be reasonable to make effort in applying the antidotes|
|to negativity                                                                  |
|1 One deceives oneself if one does not make effort in virtue once one has      |
|obtained leisures and endowments                                               |
|2 One will experience suffering in this life                                   |
|3 One will be tormented with the suffering of the lower realms in the future   |
|4 The reasons why it would be reasonable to abandon negativities and make      |
|effort in virtue                                                               |

|1 One deceives oneself if one does not make effort in virtue once one has      |
|obtained leisures and endowments                                               |


Verse 4.23
If, having found such leisure,
I do not familiarize with virtue,
There can be no deception other than this;
There can be no confusion other than this.
[Ven Gyurme translated:
 “There can be no deception other than this” as there is no greater
deception.
 “There can be no confusion other than this” as there is no greater
confusion than this.]

This verse can be particularly effective if we can commit it to memory and
use it to constantly remind ourselves.
After having obtained such a human life of freedoms and endowments when we
have all the conditions to practice, we have met with the teachings of the
Buddha, we have met with the virtuous friend, and from our side if we do
practice, the best thing that can happen to us is to achieve omniscience –
full enlightenment. But even if that doesn’t happen, we can do something to
move closer and to generate bodhicitta. At the very minimum, at least we
should not die with any regrets. In order to die without any regrets, we
have to familiarize ourselves with virtue.
The teachings are telling us that the very least is we can die without any
regrets so that at the time of death we are satisfied and we can go without
any regrets by thinking “Due to the fact of having done some practice in
this life, I have done quite a fair bit. I don’t have regrets and I can
go”. So that is the minimum.
After having found this human life of freedoms and endowments, we have all
the opportunities to practice. We have met the teachings, we understand the
teachings, but if we don’t practice, when we die we will die with regrets.
Despite having met the teachings, despite knowing the teachings but because
of not practicing the teachings, instead spending our whole lives letting
ourselves to be controlled by our three mental poisons – ignorance, anger
and attachment – and living a life filled with the eight worldly dharmas,
then at the time of deaths, we will die with great regrets. If such a thing
happens, then there is no greater deception than this, and we would have
cheated ourselves. We have deceived ourselves in the greatest way.
This is about thinking to oneself “I should practice pure Dharma.”  If you
are not conscientious in practicing virtue, you will experience suffering
in this life.
Eight worldly dharmas
1.  Being pleased when receiving wealth
2. Being displeased when losing wealth
3. Being pleased when experiencing pleasure
4. Being displeased when experiencing misery
5. Being pleased at being famous
6. Being displeased at being in disrepute
7. Being pleased when praised
8. Being displeased when denigrated

|2 One will experience suffering in |
|this life                          |


Verse 4.24
If, having understood this,
Out of confusion I am indolent afterwards,
When it is time to die
Tremendous grief will rear its head.
Despite having obtained such favorable conditions, but we still spend our
lives indulging in the objects of desire. The teachings are telling us that
at the time of death, we will experience great regret because at the time
of death we will think “I didn’t do it. I didn’t practice”.  Then one will
experience great regret and great regret will result in great misery –
great mental suffering.
Most of us are in such a situation, isn’t it? Despite having all the
conditions for practice, we know we can do it, and we know how to do it,
but we always have our own long list of reasons why we cannot do it. We
will come out with a long list of reasons and then we use the list of
reasons to postpone our practice “Not now. Not now”. All of us are like
that, isn’t it?
If you take doing your daily commitments or daily recitation commitments,
and think “What is the point of doing this. What is the benefit?”
Immediately already there is a reason to not do it. Immediate there is a
reason to stop engaging in virtue. Rather than coming out with reason to do
something beneficial, you will always find reasons to not do it and
thinking “What is the point of doing this prayer.” Even if you want to do
it but sometimes you think “This is not the time” or “I don’t have the
time”. Again there is another reason to cut it off to not do it. Or when it
comes to educating ourselves in the Buddha’s teachings, some people think
“Now it is too late in my life, I’m old, I don’t have the ability”.
Immediately, again that becomes another reason to cut off virtue. Basically
there are so many whole lists of reasons that we can bring up and we use
all these whole long list of reasons to stop ourselves to practicing
Dharma. We cut the Dharma away from ourselves, isn’t it?
Actually we know what to do. We know what we have to cultivate and what we
have to discard. We know what we need to practice, what we need to stop
doing and we know we can do it now. But we don’t do it. We come out with
whole long list of reasons to stop ourselves from doing it.
The teachings are saying that if we live our lives like that and finishing
our lives like that then at the time of death we will definitely feel very
regretful. This will result in great misery and great suffering. It is
quite evident that such a thing will happen. It is like when we get sick
then we remember those times when we are well: “At that time I didn’t do
it. So wasted”.  We feel regret, isn’t it.
By thinking about these points, then we apply ourselves in
conscientiousness in cultivating virtue. If we are not conscientious in
cultivating virtue, we will suffer when we are in the lower realms.

|3 One will be tormented with the suffering of the  |
|lower realms in the future                         |


Verse 4.25
If my body burns for a long time
In the fires of hell which are difficult to bear,
Inevitably my mind will be tormented
By the blazing fires of unbearable remorse.



