Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Engaging in the Deeds of a Bodhisattva/lesson6.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:52:12.921467
================================================================================


“Because it is in the nature of suffering, therefore it is selfless,” I
have mentioned that there are two ways to reflect on this. You have to
analyze those two points which I have already explained to you in the last
lesson. You have to think about it over and over again to understand what I
have explained. You have to think and come to understand why “because it is
impermanent it is in the nature of suffering” and why “because it is in the
nature of suffering, it is selfless.” You have to think for yourself in
order to come to an understanding.
“Because it is impermanent, it is in the nature of suffering,” why is it in
the nature of suffering? This is because it has arisen from karma and
afflictions. Because it is arisen from karma and afflictions, it is in the
nature of suffering. You have to see why “because it is in the nature of
suffering, it is selfless”. You have to think from where the suffering
arose. Based on that, go on to see how “because it is in the nature of
suffering, it is selfless”. If you think deeply and analyze where the
source of suffering is, you should understand and discover that the very
root is this ignorance; which is an apprehension of a self. That goes back
to the view of the transitory collection. So that is the root of all the
sufferings. This is a mind which apprehends a self. Although the self is
apprehended by such a mind, which is ignorance, in reality such a self that
is apprehended by the ignorance does not exist.
(BP2 Lorig L27  (1) View of the transitory collection -The view of the
transitory collection observes the appropriated aggregates through which an
“I” is conceived. This “I” is apprehended to be separate, different, and
independent of the body and mind. This mind that conceives the “I” to be
self-sufficient substantially existent, i.e., conceiving it to be something
that is independent of the body and mind, is called the view of the
transitory collection.
The self that is apprehended by this ignorance does not exist whatsoever.
But its non-existence has to be proven.
For those of you who have been around for awhile, we have already talked
about this in the past.
There are different lines of reasoning that one can employ to establish
selflessness: there is the reasoning of dependant arising and the reasoning
of one and different.
Let’s us look at the reasoning of one and different. Essentially in this
line of reasoning, there are four essential points which must be grasped.
The first essential point is finding the object of negation. This is said
to be extremely important.
Based on that, the second essential point is establishing the pervasion.
The third essential point is establishing that it is not inherently one.
The fourth essential point is establishing that it is not inherently
different from the aggregates.
The first essential point of finding the object of negation is extremely
important. However, it is also very challenging to identify correctly in
one’s experience the object of negation - what exactly is the thing to be
targeted? Although it is difficult, you have to try.
If you should use an analogy to help in finding the object of negation, do
you remember the analogy of mistakening a coil of rope to be a snake?  In
the view of the mind that is mistakening a coil of rope to be a snake,
there is a snake appearing from the side of rope i.e. somewhere there.
Likewise, how does the “I” appear to one self? The “I” appears to exist
from the side of the body and mind - somewhere within that collection.
In the perspective of the mind that mistaken the coil of rope to be a
snake, how does that coil of rope appear? In the view of that mind, there
is a snake appearing from that coil of rope. In the view of this mind, the
concept of the snake does not appear as something imputed by the mind. It
does not appear as something projected by the mind. Likewise, when the “I”
appears, think of “I” or self, the “I” appears to exist from the side of
the body and mind. The “I” does not appear to us as something that is
projected or merely imputed by thought. This is the way in which the object
of negation appears to us.
Back to the analogy, in the view of that mind there is a snake appearing
right there from the side of the coil of rope. Likewise, in terms of a
grasping of a self, in the view of this mind, the “I” appears to exist from
the side of the body and mind; projecting itself from the side of body and
mind. It does not appear as something that is merely imputed by the mind.
But it appears as something that exist from the side of the body and mind.
This is how the object of negation - the inherently existent “I” - appears
to us.
In terms of the inherently existent “I”, there is this appearance of the
“I” existing from its own side; from the side of the body and mind without
it being imputed by the mind. This appearance is that which needs to be
negated. When we talk about the object of negation, we are not negating the
mere appearance of self. That is not what is to be negated. What that is to
be negated is the appearance of “I” existing from its own side - there is
this appearance of the “I” existing right there from the side of the body
and mind without being merely imputed by the mind. That appearance is what
that needs to be negated by the mind.
Our greatest difficulty is distinguishing between these two in our own
experience, although their manner of appearing is completely different.
When we talk about the inherently existent “I”, which does not exist, but
nevertheless it appears to exist. It appears there is this “I” existing
from its own side; right there from the side of the body and mind without
merely imputed by mind. That appearance is that which we need to negate -
which does not exist and needs to be negated.
We are not negating the mere appearance of the “I”.  But in experience
these two appear to be mixed and our greatest challenge is to see the
difference between these two. In our experience, we are not able to
distinguish these two. We are not negating the mere appearance of the “I”.
That exists. But we are not able to distinguish this from appearance of an
inherent existent “I”, and our problem lies in this. Until we are able to
distinguish this in our own experience, there is no way to move forward in
this process of realizing selflessness.
In the Heart of the Perfection of Wisdom Sutra, there was an explanation of
the fourfold of profound emptiness. In the Heart of the Perfection of
Wisdom Sutra, form is mentioned first; whereby it says:
 “Form is empty, emptiness is form”.
By changing the subject to self or the “I”, we can analyze by changing form
to the self: “I” is empty, emptiness is “I”.
‘“I” is empty’ means that the “I” which appears to exist from the side of
the body and mind without being merely imputed by the mind, and that “I”
does not exist whatsoever. Although there is an appearance of such an
inherent existent “I”, but in reality it does not exist. The self, the
actual “I” does not exist in the way it appears, therefore such an “I” is
empty i.e. does not exists. So the “I” is emptiness.
If the “I” does exists in the way it appears to us, it appears to us as
inherently existent. Then it should be findable. If you look for such an
“I” on the body and mind, you should be able to find it. But it is very
clear that no matter where you look for this inherently existent “I”, it
cannot be found.
The object of negation - the inherently existent “I” - which appears to us
that there is this real “I”  from the side of the body and mind without
being merely imputed by the mind. Such an “I” does not exist. For if it
exists, it can be found. If you look for such an “I” among the body and
mind, you will not be able to find it. Although it appears, it does not
exists in the way it appears. Therefore such an “I”  is empty; empty of
existing in such a way. Therefore “I” is emptiness.
The nature of the “I” is emptiness; whether it is form or the “I”. Here we
are talking about the “I”, the “I” is in the nature of emptiness. Although
the “I” is in the nature of emptiness, it is not to say that the “I” does
not exists. The “I” does exists. How does “I” exist? The “I” exists as mere
appearance; therefore emptiness is “I”.
By thinking how ‘“I” is empty, and emptiness is “I”’, one comes to
understand how the “I” does not exists in the way it appears to us. So the
I is empty of existing inherently. The “I” is empty of existing in the way
it appears to us. So the nature of the “I” is emptiness.
We are not saying the “I” does not exist, the “I” exists.
How does the “I” exists?
“I” exists as something which is merely imputed by thought.
“I” exists as mere appearance. This is how the “I” exist.
It is said that one should not have any partiality; whether one is partial
or bias, one is supporting only emptiness but neglecting appearances. Or
one could be bias and in favor of appearances but neglecting emptiness. If
one goes down such a path, one will never realize emptiness. So one should
not in the name of appearance, deprecate emptiness, and one should not in
the name of emptiness, deprecate appearances.
Correct understanding of mere appearance should help one to elicit an
understanding of emptiness. And correct understanding of emptiness should
help one to elicit correct understanding of appearance. They are mutually
complementary. Because of the reason that “it is in the nature of
suffering, therefore it is selflessness” so by understanding selflessness
i.e. by understanding how the “I” does not exists in the way it appears,
then one is able to uproot ignorance - an apprehension of a self which is
the very root of all the sufferings. And it is by uprooting the root of
suffering, you will be able to achieve nirvana; which is peace.
Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds

|The validity of obtaining benefits from   |
|engaging bodhicitta                       |
|1 The actual [benefits of engaging        |
|bodhicitta]                               |
|2 The validity of those                   |
|3 Dispelling doubts                       |


Next is looking at the validity of obtaining benefits from the engaged mind
generation.

|1. The actual [benefits of     |
|engaging bodhicitta]           |


Verse 1.26
How can I fathom
The merits of this jewel mind,
The cause of joy of all migrating beings
And the panacea for the suffering of sentient beings?
If the aspirational mind generation has all the above mentioned benefits,
then it goes without saying that the engaged mind generation would have
even greater benefits.
There is a citation from the Sutra Requested by Viradatta, which
establishes the benefits of this engaging mind. This sutra says:
  “If the merit of the mind of enlightenment were to take form, all of the
  sphere of space would be filled; it is even more than that.”

|2.The validity  |
|of those        |


Verse 1.27
If merely a benevolent intention
Excels venerating the buddhas,
Then what need to mention striving to make
All beings without exception happy?
(BP1L6 “Benevolent intention” refers to the aspirational bodhicitta)
The King of Concentration Sutra says:
  “The benefit of even just the thought wanting to achieve enlightenment
  for sentient beings is more powerful than the merit one accumulates from
  making numberless offerings to billions of Buddhas”.
If the merit of the aspirational mind generation is more powerful than the
merits one accumulates from making offerings to billions of Buddhas, then
obviously the benefits one gets from the engaged mind generation would even
be more powerful.
Here when we talked about the engaged mind generation, we are talking about
the mind of enlightenment that is actually conjoined with the practices of
the bodhisattva such as the practice of the perfection of generosity and so
forth.
Qualm: Sentient beings wish for happiness and do not want sufferings, and
by striving in this way, they are able to achieve happiness and abandon
sufferings. Aren’t they not proficient or skilled in achieving happiness
and abandoning sufferings? Why should others strive for their purpose?
Khen Rinpoche (spoke in English): This is one question that Hup Cheng asked
before. That time Hup Cheng asked why I need to get enlightened. This is
similar question.
The answer to that is in the next verse.
|3. Dispelling  |
|doubts         |


Verse 1.28
Although wishing to be rid of misery,
They run towards misery itself.
Although wishing to have happiness,
Like an enemy they ignorantly destroy it.
Everybody is the same in not wanting to have a short life. Nobody wants to
be poor and nobody wants to be sick. Everyone does whatever they can to
avoid these things. Although nobody wants to have a short life, people are
killing. Although nobody wants to be poor, they are stealing. They are
engaging in actions that are contrary to what they are looking for.
The teachings are telling us that although nobody wants problems and
suffering, and although that is the goal of everybody, but in actualizing
their goal, many are creating the causes for sufferings.
When you light a candle in the dark, somehow moths are attracted to the
candle flame. We don’t see here in Singapore, but in many places where if
you were to light candle in the dark, you will see moths are attracted to
the flame. They fly towards the flame and then get burn. The moths are
attracted by the candle flame. There is something that attracts them. In
pursue of that attraction, they fly towards the candle flame. But the moth
is not thinking of committing suicide by flying to the flame, it is looking
for something, but nevertheless, it gets burn by candle flame. Likewise,
sentient beings want happiness, but naturally they run towards the cause of
suffering, and in so doing then they suffer.
The teachings say that all of us are all the same in wanting to be rich, to
have long life and good health. But in practice, we don’t guard our ethical
discipline of avoiding the ten non-virtues. On top of not guarding ethical
discipline of avoiding the ten non-virtues, sentient beings create
immeasurable negative karma. In so doing, they act as if the virtue is
their enemy. So they actually end up destroying virtue and by almost like
seeing virtue as an enemy.

Verse 1.29
For those who are deprived of happiness
And burdened with many sorrows,
It satisfies them with all joys,
Dispels all suffering,

Verse 1.30
And clears away confusion.
Where is there a comparable virtue?
Where is there even such a friend?
Where is there merit similar to this?
Verse 29 is saying that bodhicitta, the mind of enlightenment, is the very
thing that can dispels all the misery, sorrow, and poverty of the sentient
beings. It is bodhicitta that can bestow on them every kinds of happiness.
Bodhicitta is that which bestow all joy, dispels all sufferings and clears
away all confusions. There is nothing else like bodhicitta. Bodhicitta
clears away confusion regarding what is to be discarded and what is to be
adopted. There isn’t anything like bodhicitta in terms of performing these
functions.
One will not be able to find a friend who is able to eliminate all
sufferings, bestow all joys, and clears away confusion with regards to what
is to be discarded and what is to be attained. With regards to accumulating
merits, there isn’t any other kind of merits that is comparable to
bodhicitta.
That is the end of the section which talks about the benefits of
bodhicitta. (The reasons there are such benefits)
I guess the reply to the qualm would be that if one has bodhicitta i.e.
when one develops the actual bodhicitta, one would be in the position to
clear away the confusion in the mind of others. That is to help others  to
clear away the confusion with regards to what they need to adopt and what
they need to discard. Clearing away the confusion in the minds of those
sentient beings who are running after the causes of suffering although they
want only happiness. By thinking about the benefits of bodhicitta, then one
strive to generate that which hasn’t been generated, and one prevents that
which has been generated from degenerating.
The point of reflecting over and over on the benefits of bodhicitta is so
that one develops a real aspiration for bodhicitta. You aspire to generate
it. By reflecting over and over on the benefits, come the time or the day
when you are really convinced that the bodhicitta does indeed has these
benefits, “I stand to gain, I have all these benefits.” Only then one would
have a strong and stable aspiration or desire to want to achieve
bodhicitta. This desire is like the desire for water that a very thirsty
person has. A person is very thirsty is always thinking about finding
water. At end of the day, the whole point of reflecting over and over again
on the benefits of bodhicitta is that you will develop a strong aspiration
and to want to work to develop it. Upon hearing and reflecting over and
over again and sustain reflection on the benefits of bodhicitta, and based
on that, you have this thought thinking “This bodhicitta is really
something that I must develop. I really must seek this bodhicitta”. When
such an aspiration for bodhicitta arises, this would then fulfill the whole
purpose of hearing and reflecting on the benefits of bodhicitta.
Since we don’t have bodhicitta, we don’t feel anything for the benefits of
bodhicitta. We just kind of wonder “Is this really true? How is it
possible?” At the initial stage of development, other than relying on the
Buddha’s speech, it is really difficult to develop or to infer that there
are such benefits. Of course bodhicitta is quite out of reach for us and it
is difficult. I have mentioned the other day that developing some
equanimity, and based on that developing some love and compassion is
possible and is within reach by thinking of how we need to rely on others,
and for that reason, how others are kind. One can come to develop some kind
of equanimity without having averse or very strong anger towards some and
very strong attachment for others. It is possible to do that. On that
basis, then develop some sincere feelings of wanting everyone to be happy
and to be free of suffering. When we are able to bring about such thoughts
– equanimity, love and compassion –the mind definitely becomes more relaxed
and less uptight. On top of that, if we develop bodhicitta we can infer
that the benefits must be even greater. I have mentioned about the practice
of the four immeasurables in the previous lesson. You have to try out for
yourself to see whether it works or not. In terms of practice, that is the
first step you have to take.
Next is explaining how those individuals who have the real bodhicitta in
their minds are worthy of homage.
|They are worthy of praise because even though they have not   |
|been entrusted [with a specific task], by drawing upon great  |
|compassion, they act to assist others                         |



Verse 1.31
If whoever reciprocates benefit
Is worthy of some praise,
Then what need to mention the bodhisattva
Who does good without its being asked of him?
In the worldly sense, when somebody receives help from another person,
normally the beneficiary would praise the benefactor by saying: “That
person was really very kind. He helped me. He did this for me.” In the
worldly sense, the beneficiaries do praise their benefactors. If that is
the case, then it goes without saying that bodhisattvas are worthy of
homage and worthy of being objects to whom we make offerings because they
help the sentient beings without being asked. The help that the
bodhisattvas render to the sentient beings is not some small little things.
Bodhisattvas work for the happiness of sentient beings - the happiness of
this life and the happiness of all their future lives. As such,
bodhisattvas are worthy of homage and worthy of being objects to whom we
make offerings.

|If someone who accomplishes the slightest of benefits is worthy|
|of compliments, someone who accomplishes all benefit and bliss |
|is worthy of the highest praise                                |


Verse 1.32
The world honors as virtuous
A man who procures mediocre food and for an instant gives it
Disrespectfully to a small number of beings,
That satisfies them for only half a day.
Verse 1.33
What need be said then of one
Who constantly bestows the unsurpassed bliss of the Sugatas for a long time

Upon countless sentient beings,
Fulfilling all their hopes?
Here is an example of a man who gives food to some people. The substance
that is given is food and the time of the period that are talking about is
very short while. It is not giving to many beings but just a couple of
sentient beings. It is not like he is giving a lot of food as well. He is
giving food enough for them to be not hungry for half a day and the manner
of giving is without respect. Even then the person who does this would be
regarded as quite a good person in this world; he is very generous, he is
helping the poor and doing something for the poor.
If there is such a person who gave just a small amount of food to a small
number of sentient beings for a short duration in a disrespectful manner is
worthy of praise, then what need is there to mention of those individuals
who work for all sentient beings until the end of samsara and who gives
sentient beings the highest uncontaminated bliss of full enlightenment
completely and doing all this with the attitude of love and compassion.
Then it goes without saying that such an individual is praise worthy.

|They are worthy of praise because they are the supreme     |
|field                                                      |
|A The reasons it is unreasonable to belittle a bodhisattva |
|in even the slightest way                                  |
|B The reasons it is reasonable to cultivate faith          |
|C Thus, it is befitting to pay homage to them and go for   |
|refuge                                                     |

|A The reasons it is unreasonable to belittle a        |
|bodhisattva in even the slightest way                 |


Verse 1.34
The Buddha has said that someone who generates an evil thought
Against such a benefactor as a Child of the Victors
Will remain in hell for as many eons
As there were evil thoughts.
It is said that the Buddha has taught that anyone who generates/develops
anger and evil thoughts towards the bodhisattvas will have to be born in
the hells for as many eons as there were moments of anger.

|B The reasons it is reasonable  |
|to cultivate faith              |


If moments of anger towards the bodhisattvas can have such destructive
consequences then what are the merit or virtues that can be accumulated if
one has faith in them? Here it says:
Verse 1.35 a,b
But if one acts out of an attitude of faith,
Its fruits will multiply far more than that.
It is said that those who act out of faith in relation to bodhisattvas will
experience results “far more than that”. “That” meaning how sentient beings
has to be born in hells for as many eons as there were moments of anger.
Bodhisattva is a special object; a very powerful karmic object, so:
-  Whatever evil thoughts or anger directed at bodhisattvas will have great
consequences
-  Whatever virtuous thoughts directed at bodhisattvas will lead to very
powerful and positive results

|C Thus, it is befitting to pay homage to   |
|them and go for refuge                     |


Verse 1.35 c,d
Even in adversity the Children of the Victors generate no negativity,
Instead their virtues naturally increase.
It is said that no matter what adverse conditions the bodhisattvas meet –
dangers to their lives, to their health or possessions and so forth – it
doesn’t harm them. It doesn’t affect them and doesn’t cause them to
generate negativities. Instead it encourages them to increase even more
their qualities and virtues.

Verse 1.36
I prostrate to the body of he
In whom the sacred precious mind is born.
I seek refuge in that source of happiness
Who brings to happiness even those who harm him.
Verse 1.36 is saying “I prostrate to the person who possesses in his
continuum the mind of enlightenment which eliminates both the problem of
samsara and nirvana”. One is prostrating to the bodhisattvas who only
benefit the sentient beings even those who harm them.
In short, the person who develops the bodhicitta - a bodhisattva - is an
object of homage and offering for all humans and gods. It is a great
negativity to harm bodhisattva.
One accumulates very powerful virtue from making offerings and paying
homage to the bodhisattvas. Even just by showing a pleasant demeanor to the
bodhisattva, one accumulates very powerful merits.
When one adopts through a ritual the aspirational bodhicitta that comes
with a commitment, one needs to abandon the four black dharma and cultivate
the four white dharma. One of the things to be cultivated is to generate
the recognition that all sentient beings are like one’s teacher, like the
founder, Buddha. The point is to train in pure appearance in relation to
all sentient beings, precisely because one doesn’t know who the other
person is. In this case one doesn’t know exactly who is and who is not a
bodhisattva. As we have seen earlier, if we get upset or angry with a
bodhisattva we destroy so much merit and accumulated so much negativities.
(BP1Middle Length Lamrim L10)












In our context here, I think many people have already taken the bodhisattva
vows and many have also taken the tantric vows through various
empowerments. In that sense, everyone can be said to be kind of special
object and then to regard one another without anger or without showing
unpleasant or disrespectful demeanor. If we can think along this line it
will be beneficial. Even if we do see or notice some faults in others, the
point is not to grasp at the fault and hold on to it so strongly. In doing
so the chances of getting angry is lesser. We could reflect on the faults
that we see as being impermanent; it is not that as if the faults will
always remain. The faults are not established from their own side. It is
not that the faults have always been there. In that sense the faults are
adventitious.
The Buddhas to whom we have faith now were not always Buddhas as they were
also sentient beings once with full of faults. When we talk about the
training in regarding others as the Buddha, seeing others as teacher, there
is a basis for that.  Although sentient beings are not Buddha now, they are
amenable? to be a Buddha in the future. They can be Buddhas because they
have the Buddha lineage. They have the seed of enlightenment within them,
they can become Buddhas, and they can develop bodhicitta. In that sense,
when we develop the recognition, we treat and look at sentient beings as
our teacher like the Buddhas. It is like paying respect and having regard
for the cause in that they can be a Buddha one day. Just as we will regard
the result, we also will regard the cause.
The point is that we should try not to get upset or angry and as much as
possible to focus on the qualities of others, and not to hang up on the
faults and grasping at it.  In that way we would not get upset by focusing
on the fault and not hang up on the faults. Sentient being is not something
that exists far away from us. Sentient beings are the people around us, and
in our context here, the people in the same class. As I have mentioned
earlier, many of you here have bodhisattva vows and tantric vows, in that
sense are also kind of special object. If we get upset and angry at one
another then we will accumulate negativities. As much as possible we just
respect one another. This is very important.
This is the end of the first chapter: Chapter One - Explanation of the
Benefits of the Mind of Enlightenment
Q&A
Student 1: In the last  lesson  you  talked  about  the  difference  between
bodhicitta as well as Mahayana mind generation in term of the boundaries.
Bodhicitta exists from the Mahayana Path of  Accumulation  up  to  the  10th
ground in the continuum of a bodhisattva.
Mahayana mind generation exists from the Mahayana Path  of  Accumulation  up
to enlightenment
It seems  to  imply  that  the  definitions  for  the  bodhicitta  and  mind
generation are different.
I can find the definition for Mahayana mind generation from the Ornament  of
Clear Realization. I’m not too sure about bodhicitta.
Khen Rinpoche (in  English):  Your  question  is  about  the  definition  of
bodhicitta?
Answer: In general, bodhicitta is mind  generation.  You  will  not  find  a
definition for bodhicitta that is separate from  that  of  mind  generation.
Bodhicitta or mind of enlightenment is  so  called  because  it  is  a  mind
generation existing in the continuum of a bodhisattva.  Because it  is  mind
generation existing in the  continuum  of  a  bodhisattva  it  is  called  a
bodhicitta.
Buddha  is  not  a  bodhisattva.  For  that  reason  Buddha   doesn’t   have
bodhicitta.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): For the sake of debate.
In general, most of the time we could say bodhicitta is mind generation
Khen Rinpoche (in English): Mind generation is bodhicitta. They are all  the
same. Normally we say that.
It may sound  weird  initially  when  you  hear  that  a  Buddha  is  not  a
bodhisattva.
Khen Rinpoche (in  English):   No?  Doesn’t  sound  weird?  Sounds  correct?
Buddha is not bodhisattva?
(Students response inaudible)
Khen Rinpoche (in English): I thought Buddha is bodhisattva.  Anyway,  think
about it.
Student 2: Last week you mentioned that love is the antidote for malice.  If
love is the antidote  for  malice,  that  applies  to  belligerence  because
belligerence is the mind  of  malice  as  well.  In  that  case,  compassion
shouldn’t be the antidote for belligerence. I remember in the Middle  Length
Lamrim, someone asked you whether  non-harmfulness  and  compassion  is  the
same thing. Because  the  definition  of  non-harmfulness  is  the  mind  of
compassion,  therefore  I  think  that  compassion  is  the   antidote   for
harmfulness.
Ven Gyurme: I cannot remember what the Tibetan  word  for  belligerence  is.
Khen Rinpoche asked me, and I said I think so, I don’t know.
Answer: In general, when you  talk  about  love  and  compassion,  sometimes
people kind of mix it up and think they are the same.
Love is the wish for others to be happy
Compassion is the wish for others to be free of sufferings.
If one has love, the thought of wanting others to be happy, the  thought  of
harming others wouldn’t be there.  When one is focusing  on  sentient  being
that is being tormented by suffering  and  has  a  wish  to  free  him  from
suffering, the thought of  harming  that  sentient  being  will  not  exist.
Harmfulness will not exist. Is there a difference then  between  harmfulness
and malice or ill will?
Khen Rinpoche (in English):  You have finished with the 51  mental  factors.
Also I forgot.
Student 3: Back to the four immeasurables, you  talked  about  the  antidote
for each of them to a particular thing. All of them seem to be antidotes  to
afflictions. Joy being antidote to dislike, I’m  not  too  sure  dislike  is
what afflictions. Dislike can  be  dislike  for  a  lot  of  things;  is  it
resentment, dislike for samsara etc?
Answer: Immeasurable joy is a thought not wanting  others  to  be  separated
from happiness. In that sense, it is  stronger than wanting others  to  have
happiness. Dislike would be the opposite of that. Instead of wanting  others
to not be separated from happiness, dislike is the  thought  wanting  others
to be separated from happiness. The mind of dislike is the  thought  wanting
others to be separated from happiness.

Extract from BP1L6: Qualm: When we have engaged bodhicitta, we are actually
engaged in doing whatever is necessary to fulfill the welfare of others.
Somebody might raise this objection saying “Aren’t we all expert in
achieving our own happiness? Aren’t we expert in getting rid of suffering
for ourselves? If that’s the case, since we are expert in doing that, why
do we need to work to make others happy? Why do we need to work towards
eliminating the suffering of others?” In other words, why do we need
buddhas? Why do we need bodhisattvas?
Answer: The answer is in verse 1.28. There is  a  need  to  benefit  others.
There is a need to have engaged bodhicitta to benefit  others.  Why?  It  is
true that all sentient beings want happiness  and  do  not  want  suffering.
Motivated by the desire to avoid suffering, they do  whatever  is  necessary
to achieve their goal of  getting  happiness  and  avoiding  suffering.  But
because their minds are clouded by ignorance, especially  the  ignorance  of
the law of cause and effect, even though they  want  happiness  and  do  not
want suffering, they engage in wrong  actions  in  order  to  achieve  their
goal. Although sentient beings have the wish of wanting to be happy  and  to
avoid suffering, they engage in unskillful or mistaken  methods  to  achieve
their goal. For example, when some people are tormented by the suffering  of
hunger and thirst, to remove this type of suffering, they  might  engage  in
killing another sentient being. In order to satisfy one’s desires, one  will
steal or engage in sexual misconduct. In short, sentient  beings  engage  in
the ten non-virtuous actions.



