Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Engaging in the Deeds of a Bodhisattva/lesson20.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:52:13.494821
================================================================================


Earlier on we saw how in order to protect one’s ethical discipline one has
to guard one’s mind. Without guarding one’s mind, there is no way to guard
one’s ethical discipline. Therefore, guarding one’s mind is very important.
The text tells us that if we guard or protect our mind well, then we cannot
be harmed by the external enemy.
When our minds are stirred by the waves of the incorrect mental attention,
the appearance of the external enemy then arises, which acts as a condition
for the inner enemy of the afflictions such as anger and attachment to
arise. When this inner enemy of the afflictions arises, what does it do to
us? It kills us.
The essential point here is that the main enemy is the inner enemy, which
is the affliction. We have to subdue the mind. When we discipline and
subdue our own mind, then there is no external enemy and the external enemy
cannot harm us. On the basis of recognizing the problems or faults of the
afflictions, we have to strive in destroying them.
The text tells us that if we let our minds being stirred by the waves of
incorrect mental attention, and when the afflictions arises, the harms they
will bring to us is very, very great, for the afflictions can throw us even
into the lowest of the lower realms, the Avici Hells. Such harms done to us
by the inner enemy is something the external enemy cannot do to us.
Here we are discussing the application of mindfulness and vigilance. In
this context, what should we be mindful of and what should we be vigilant
about? We should have mindfulness and introspection with regards to the
things we need to adopt and the things we need to discard. If we are able
to apply constant mindfulness and introspection regards to the things we
need to adopt, then it is said that the cultivation of virtues would be
easy.
Let’s take the ethical discipline of abandoning the ten non-virtues as an
example. Before we can apply mindfulness and vigilance in cultivating this
ethical discipline of abandoning the ten non-virtues:
- we first have to know what the ten non-virtues are,
- we need to recognize the individual entities,
- we need to understand how these ten non-virtues are created, and
- we need to know exactly how to abandon the ten non-virtues.
Without knowing these couple of points, there is no way we can apply
mindfulness because mindfulness is not forgetting something that we already
know.
My point is using the ten-non-virtues as an example. If we do not know
exactly what the ten non-virtues are, their entities, how to engage them,
how to turn away from them and so forth, we cannot apply mindfulness. We
cannot say we cannot be mindful in abandoning the ten non-virtues.
Therefore, we have to know.
Similarly, in order to keep whatever pratimoksha vows you have taken, you
have to know the trainings first before you can be mindful of that.
Similarly, in order to protect your bodhisattva vows, you have to know what
your bodhisattva vows are, and in order to keep the tantric vows, you have
to know what the tantric vows consist of.
Here we are discussing the practice of mindfulness and vigilance in
relation to the practice of ethical discipline. There are different kinds
of ethical discipline:
-  the ethical discipline of the pratimoksha vows,
-  the ethical discipline of the bodhisattva vows and
-  the ethical discipline of the tantric vows.
Whatever it is, before you can protect and guard these vows well with
mindfulness and vigilance, you first have to know what the vows are.
The ethical discipline we are discussing here is primarily the ethical
discipline of the bodhisattvas, which can be classified into three types of
ethical discipline:
   1. Ethical discipline of restraint
   2. Ethical discipline of gathering virtuous dharma
   3. Ethical discipline of benefiting sentient beings
The teaching states that these three types of ethical discipline form the
ethical discipline of the bodhisattvas. In order to keep and protect this
ethical discipline, we first have to know what they are and, on that basis,
we have to strive to protect them.
Acharya Shantarakshita says; “Because of apprehending things to be truly
existent, that acts as a condition for afflictions such as anger and
attachment to arise. Through apprehending things to be truly existent, then
the inner enemy of anger and attachment arise. If this grasping at things
as truly existent ceases, and if it is non-existent, then there is no way
for anger and attachment to arise. Therefore, the great master
Shantarakshita says; “The root or source of all the problems is the belief
in things to be truly existent.” This apprehension of truly existent, the
ignorance that grasps at a self, is the root of all the problems. If that
is destroyed, then there is no way for the inner enemy of anger and
attachment to arise. When there is no inner enemy, there will not be any
external enemy.
The appearance of the external enemy is very much dependent on having
anger. In the view of anger, there is a projection of external enemy; “This
person harms me.” Without hatred or anger, there will not be an external
enemy. The external enemy does not exist from its own side i.e. existing
right there inherently, but rather it is a product or creation or
projection of one’s inner enemy. It is said that if the inner enemy does
not exist, there will be no external enemy. Therefore, the teachings
emphasize the need to subdue our own mind.
If one thinks “No matter how much I can subdue my mind, there is no way to
stop these external problems and conditions. There are so many of them. So
whether I can subdue my mind or not, it doesn’t really matter because the
problem is still there.” One will not be able to protect oneself if one
thinks in this way. The answer to that is in verse 5.4 and verse 5.5.

|B An extensive       |
|explanation          |


Verse 5.4
Tigers, lions, elephants, bears,
Snakes, and all my enemies,
The guardians who are hell beings,
Evil spirits and likewise cannibals,
Verse 5.5
Will all be bound
By binding this mind alone,
And will all be subdued
By subduing this mind alone.
All the harms that may come from all the different kinds of animals -
tigers, lions, elephants, bears, snakes-, all of our human enemies, all the
hell guardians, all the different kinds of people who do black magic and
harms us, all the different kinds of blood drinking spirits and so forth.
If we are able to fasten our minds with mindfulness and vigilance onto
virtuous object of observation, such as compassion and bodhicitta, then all
these harms from animals, humans and non-humans will not be able to affect
us.
We are afraid of these things. When we see animals, we are afraid of being
harmed by the animals. We are afraid of being harmed by humans, non-humans
and so forth. If we analyze, the fear comes from self-cherishing. The
greater our self-cherishing is, the greater will be our worry and fears. In
place of self-cherishing, if we have strong thought of cherishing others in
particular if there is compassion and bodhicitta, although that will not
make the animal go away and even though the animal is still there, from our
side we will not experience fear.
Even if one meets with frightening animals such as poisonous snakes and so
forth, and if there is a strong thought of benefiting others, they will not
frighten us. Why? If there is a strong thought of benefiting others, the
mind is very stable, calm and relaxes.
Khen Rinpoche (said in English): If you sit there, maybe lion will eat you,
then how? What will you do? You have to calm, generate bodhicitta mind, and
you stay there. If the lion comes in front of you and eat you, how?  They
won't eat you? I am not sure. Maybe they won't eat you. Maybe lion must
have smell “Oh this not the right person because don’t have self-
cherishing. I like only those who has self-cherishing”.
In such a situation whether one will gets eaten or not, putting aside that,
if there is a really strong thought of benefiting others and one is
accustomed to that, then definitely from one’s side, one has no fear and no
worry.
There are many historical accounts of real bodhisattvas who have generated
the actual bodhicitta coming into contact with wild animals, and because of
their actual real bodhicitta, these wild animals naturally just get
pacified and subdued and stay by their side. Those who have bodhicitta are
able subdue others’ mind. I guess that is one of the symbolisms behind
certain buddhas and bodhisattvas sitting on lions, and some of them having
snakes as their hood covering their holy bodies.
That is why the teaching says “If our minds are subdued, then we are able
to subdue everything.” Those real bodhisattvas, wherever they go, when
people comes into their presence, somehow they are just naturally pacified.
Because of their powerful bodhicitta, everything gets pacified, and
everything becomes very calm.

|The reasons for that     |
|1 Wrongdoing depends upon|
|the mind                 |
|2 Qualities depend upon  |
|the mind                 |

|1 Wrongdoing depends upon|
|the mind                 |
|A Scripture              |
|B Reasoning              |
|C Synopsis               |


Next is explaining the reason for what has been mentioned so far:
1. There is an explanation of how the faults depend on the mind.
2. There is also an explanation of how the qualities also depend on the
mind.
On how the faults depend on the mind is discussed under three points.
   1. Scriptural citation
   2. The reason for that
   3. Summary

|A         |
|Scripture |


Verse 5.6
The perfect speech itself indicated,
“Thus all fears
As well as all boundless suffering
Originate from the mind.”
It is said that all fears and all boundless sufferings originate from the
mind. The fears of this life and the future lives arise from the negative
mind. Where is this stated? What is the source? In the Sutra of the Clouds
of Jewels, the Buddha says: “If one controls one’s mind, one controls all
phenomena”.
Next is establishing this through reason.

|B         |
|Reasoning |


Verse 5.7
Who intentionally created
The weapons of hell beings?
Who created the burning iron ground?
From what did all those hosts of women ensue?
Verse 5.8 a, b
The  Muni taught that all such things
Are the negative mind.
It is explained that in the hells, there are hell guardian who wheeled
different kinds of weapons such as swords and spears. Who or what created
these weapons? These are not created by the all mighty creator god.
Who created the burning iron grounds in the hell realms? The creator is not
somebody else. Similarly, who created the surrounding hells? There is a
surrounding hell that has a tree called the Shamali tree, which is a very
big and is as big as the mountain. From the vicinity of that tree, one
hears the cries of women. Who created this?
The beings who are born in that particular hell hear the cries of their
objects of attachment, and in this case here the object of attachment is
being women. The beings hear the cries of those women that one is attached
to. They hear the women calling out to them from the top of the tree. Due
to attachment, one climbs up the tree looking for the women. As one climbs
up the tree, one is pierced by all kind of swords. Then when one reached
the top of the tree, one hears the sound is coming from the bottom of the
tree. Again one climbs down the tree looking for the source of the cries of
those women that one is attached to.
Who or what is the creator of all these sufferings? It is not created by
somebody else, neither it is generated without cause. All these are the
results of one’s own negative mind.
You may tell someone that when human see the liquid, they see it as water,
but hungry ghost see the same liquid as pus and blood. Your explanation is
that this is due to karma. The hungry ghosts not able to partake the pus
and blood because this is what they see. But those people who are not
trained in logic and reasoning and who denied cause and effect will say:
“If you say that there is really pus and blood because the hungry ghost are
seeing it, then it must appear to me as a human being”. Our reply: “There
is no contradiction in that”.
If you thinks “This appearance of blood and pus is an appearance to the
hungry ghost’s mind, but in actuality there is no pus and blood. If that
blood and pus that appears to the hungry ghost really exist then it would
have to appear to a human being,” then you have to understand that it is
actually wrong.
Our reply: “This is very wrong, for if you assert that, you would also have
to deny the existence of hell fire since the hell fire is an experience
only to certain beings. Therefore it does not exist for you. In actuality
there is no hell and there is no hell fire.” If you think in such a way,
basically at the end of the day, you are denying karma.
If we argue: “What we see is water is seen as nectar by the gods, but we
don’t see nectar”. If we say nectar doesn’t exist just because we don’t see
nectar, then we also have to say that the water that appears to us does not
exist.”
Khen Rinpoche (said in English): You getting or not getting?
The point is this. If you say “Blood and pus is just an appearance to the
negative minds of the pretas. It doesn’t really exist.” If you phrase it in
such a way, then you are actually deprecating karma and its effects.
Why that line of thinking is wrong? The line of thinking is basically
coming from our human prejudice that if it exists, then human must see it.
It must appear to human for it to exists, and that is the prejudice. At the
end of the day, basically it all goes back to oneself “Because I don’t see
it, therefore it doesn’t exist.” Basically, the whole line of reasoning
goes back to that point.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): Yes? No?
What we human see a bowl of liquid that which is wet and moist as water.
Due to our very strong karma, it causes us to have this appearance of
water, and for us that exist as water. But for the hungry ghosts, that same
bowl of liquid appears as blood and pus. Due to their very strong karma,
for them, it is established as blood and pus for the hungry ghosts. From
the side of the liquid, the liquid is not established as water. Neither is
it established as blood and pus from the side of the liquid. For the gods,
because of their pure karma, the bowl of liquid appears as nectar. This
appearance of nectar to the gods is due to their own karma. Due to their
own merit, they see the bowl of liquid as nectar. If that bowl of liquid is
established as nectar from its own side and by its own nature, then whoever
sees that bowl of liquid would have to see nectar.
Everything that exists in the hells, all the different appearances such as
the weapons wheeled by the hell guardians, the burning iron grounds and so
forth are not created by somebody else. They are all created by one’s
negative mind. I guess the saying that all these frightening appearances in
the hells – the weapons, the fire, and the burning iron grounds - all these
are created by one’s negative mind. If one created the karma which
basically is the creation of one’s own mind, then there is this appearance
of all these frightening images that doesn’t have to be real fire existing
from its own side. But due to one’s negative karma created by one’s mind,
then there is a projection of the appearance of all these fire, burning
iron ground and so forth. Even though they do not exist from their own side
as a real fire, nevertheless these appearances torment the mind. One goes
through the experience of being burnt, being harmed and pierced and so
forth. It doesn’t mean that just because it is a mere appearance to one’s
negative mind therefore it cannot function. Although these are mere
appearances to one’s negative mind, a creation of one’s own negative mind,
nevertheless they function to cause problems, suffering and pain.
We may fall asleep and then dream of being trapped in a building that is
ablaze. We may even dream that we are burnt by the fire in the dream.
Although it is just a dream, there are all these appearances to the dream
consciousness. Nevertheless, in the dream you experience fear and you
experience pain. You may even wake up sweating all over. You could say that
it is just a mere appearance to the mind, but nevertheless the mere
appearance to the mind does cause suffering.
A mere appearance can function to generate fear. This analogy of a dream
fire should only be used to illustrate that the mere appearances can
function to cause fear and suffering. But that analogy cannot be used to
come to a conclusion that both the dream fire and hell fire are the same.
No, they are not the same. One exists and one doesn’t exist. The dream fire
does not exist, but the hell fire does exist. This is something that
requires deeper analysis. If you think deeper about this, what is the
difference between the dream fire and the hell fire? Of course, if you
think about it, you will get a headache. What is the difference then?
If you think about it, this is what you would probably end up saying: “Just
like the dream fire is a mere appearance to the dream consciousness, all
these hell fires, hell guardians, weapons and so forth are just a mere
appearance to the negative mind.” These hell fires, hells and so forth are
not as being described in the text that is so real, but it is actually just
a mere appearance to the negative mind. This is what you probably would end
up saying.
Is there any problem for you to say this? If you say that there isn’t a
problem, and you say that this is a conclusion, then it follows that there
is no hell fire. If there is no hell fire, then it follows that there is
also no hell. If there is no hell, then of course there cannot be any
hungry ghost.
It is not easy to posit the existence of something. What is the criterion
for whether something exists or not? How do you define or how do you posit
whether something exists or not? For all the tenets below the Prasangika,
the Consequence Middle Way School (CMWS), basically from the Autonomy
Middle Way School (AMWS) and below, whether something exists or not, it is
basically determined by whether there is a valid cognizer realizing that
object or not. For the CMWS, an existence is posited as a mere appearance.
If you were to ask somebody, or anybody who has the world view of the AMWS
and below this question:
Why is it that a human being doesn’t have horns? Why is it that the cows
have horns?
The answer they will give you is “because you can see that one has horns
and one doesn’t have horns” That answer is basically saying that the
presence of horns or absence of horns is determined by whether there is a
valid mind cognizing the horns or not.  That is how you determine the cows
have horns and the human does not have horns. This is the answer, isn’t it?
If you were to ask most people include those who hold onto the AMWS view,
the Mind Only School (MOS) and below, they will tell you; “Because you can
see one has horns and one doesn’t have horns.”
How do you validate the existence of horns? Because there is a mind
realizing horns. But if you consider their answer, what is it that they are
driving at end of the day? There is a horn right there from its own side.
At the end of the day, that is the very crux and the basis of all their
views. There is something right there from its own side. This very
existence from its own side is the number one target that which is negated
by the CMWS. Whatever everybody else asserts becomes the object of negation
that which is refuted by the CMWS.
According to the Prasangika, what is a horn? A horn is none other than that
which is posited by convention. The Prasangika say that a human does not
have horns and the cow has horns are posited conventionally; through
convention. That’s it. Whether the human doesn’t have horns, and the cows
have horns, both are the same in that they do not exist from their own
side.
The CMWS states that phenomena are posited conventionally, they are mere
appearances. Even though phenomena are mere appearances posited through
mere name and labels, nevertheless they function. According to the CMWS,
although all phenomena are mere appearances, nevertheless they function,
just like how a dream fire can cause fear and worries. Likewise, all these
appearances, the weapons, burning ground and fire in the hell realms, are
mere appearances to the negative mind. Nevertheless, they function to cause
pain, worries, and fears.
There is a difference between a dream fire and a hell fire. You have to
posit that there is a difference. The dream fire is posited to not exist
and the hell fire is posited to exist. Both are posited conventionally.
We have to think: What is the difference? Why is it that the dream fire
does not exist? Why is it that the hell fire exists?
Khen Rinpoche (in English): What do you think? It exists or doesn’t exist?
Hell fire, what do you think? Why?
Anyway, the point is this: Although the hell fire is mere appearance to the
negative mind, nevertheless, hell fire exists. They cause pain, fears and
sufferings. Therefore, it is important to protect the mind.

|C Synopsis|


Verse 5.8 c,d
Hence, within the three worlds
There is nothing to fear other than my own mind.
All the fears contain in the three worlds – desire realm, form realm and
formless realm –arise from the negative mind.
So this is the section explaining how all faults arise from the mind. Next
is an explanation of how all qualities depend on the mind.

|Qualities depend upon the |
|mind                      |
|A Giving relies upon the  |
|mind                      |
|B Ethics relies upon the  |
|mind                      |
|C Patience relies upon the|
|mind                      |
|D Joyous effort relies    |
|upon the mind             |
|E Concentration relies    |
|upon the mind             |
|F Wisdom relies upon the  |
|mind                      |


All qualities depend on the mind. There are six points:
   1. Generosity
   2. Ethical discipline
   3. Patience
   4. Joyous perseverance
   5. Meditative stabilization
   6. Wisdom
|A Giving relies upon the mind                                              |
|1 Completing the perfection of giving does not depend upon eliminating [all|
|types of] poverty amongst all migrators                                    |
|2 It is brought to completion by familiarizing oneself with the attitude of|
|generosity                                                                 |

|1 Completing the perfection of giving does not depend upon eliminating [all    |
|types of] poverty amongst all migrators                                        |


Verse 5.9
If the perfection of generosity
Were the alleviation of migrating beings’ poverty,
Then since there are still starving migrating beings,
In what manner did the previous Protectors perfect it?
[Ven Gyurme translated Protectors as Saviours]
Why is there such a fallacy? Because if the perfection of generosity is
contingent on removing all poverty, and since poverty still exists in
abundance, then it follows that all the buddhas of the past have not
perfected the perfection of generosity.
The perfection of generosity is the cultivation of the mind of giving that
is brought to fulfilment.

|2 It is brought to completion by familiarizing oneself |
|with the attitude of generosity                        |


Verse 5.10
The perfection of generosity is taught to be
The mind intending to give all things,
As well as its result, to all beings;
Hence it is simply the mind.
The completion of the perfection of generosity is said to be the complete
habituation of the mind of giving that gives away one’s body, resources and
roots of virtues together with their result, the merit from such giving.
One trains in the generous attitude, the mind that is willing and able to
give up everything – one’s roots of virtue, resources and body - and
including the effects of such giving, the merit. You give it away to all
sentient beings without any miserliness and attachment.
When one is thoroughly habituated with this attitude, then that is said to
be a completion of the perfection of generosity. Therefore, the completion
of the perfection of generosity is contingent on the mind itself and not on
the external situation or the external factors. You bring to fulfilment
this habituation of giving, and bring it to completion to its highest
level. You bring this generous attitude to its highest level through
becoming habituated with it thoroughly.  That is said to be the perfection
of generosity.
When we think of generosity, generosity has to be understood as a mind. It
is a state of mind. Generosity is defined as a generous attitude. The
completion of the perfection of generosity is bringing that generous
attitude to completion through habituation.
Next is the perfection of ethical discipline. The perfection of ethical
discipline is also a quality that is dependent on the mind. The completion
of the perfection of ethical discipline does not depend on the absence of
any sentient being that one could kill.

|B Ethics depends upon the mind                                                 |
|1 It is invalid [to say] that completing the perfection of ethics depends upon |
|the exhaustion of all sentient beings who kill                                 |
|2 It is brought to completion by familiarizing oneself with the intention to   |
|abandon [killing]                                                              |

|1 It is invalid [to say] that completing the perfection of ethics depends upon |
|the exhaustion of all sentient beings who kill                                 |


Verse 5.11 a,b
Where will the fish and so forth be driven
So that they will not be killed?
Hence, the attainment of the intention of abandonment
Is explained to be the perfection of ethics.
If the perfection of ethical discipline is posited as removing or putting
all the sentient beings that you can kill and putting them in a safe place
such that they cannot be touched by anyone, then the thing is that you will
never be able to do that or find a place to put everyone in such that they
will not be killed. If the mind of abandonment is brought to completion
through familiarization, that is posited as the perfection of ethical
discipline.
If you don’t want to kill and think “No matter what I will not kill. I will
not physically harm others even at the costs of my life.” That is ethical
discipline. It is a mind of abandonment, isn’t it?
Similarly if you think;“Doesn’t matter what happens I will not take what is
not given. I will not steal”. There is this mind of abandonment and that is
ethical discipline. Such a mind of abandonment is brought to completion
through constant familiarization. Then that is posited as the perfection of
ethical discipline.
You may encounter a situation whereby you have a choice to kill but you
restrain yourself thinking “I will not kill. This is not good, and I will
not kill” You restrain yourself, and that is ethical discipline. Just
sitting there and not killing anything is not posited to be ethical
discipline. Ethical discipline is a mind that is this attitude of
abandonment. You have this mind of abandoning. When this mind of abandoning
is brought to completion through constant familiarization, then that is the
completion of the perfection of ethical discipline.

DISCUSSION QUESTIONS FOR SUNDAY, 27TH APRIL 2014

1. (a)      What is the manner of rejoicing?
    (b)     How does one accumulate merit when rejoicing in the virtue of
others?

2.    The Buddha has conquered the four maras including the mara of death.
The Buddha is also omniscient and knows the wishes and dispositions of all
sentient beings. What then is the purpose of requesting the Buddha not to
pass into parinirvana and to turn the wheel of Dharma?

3.    It is said that conventional bodhicitta destroys both the afflictive
obscurations and the knowledge obscurations. How is this done?

4. (a)      After generating bodhicitta, why is it inappropriate to give up
bodhicitta?
    (b)   What happens when one gives up the bodhicitta that has been
generated?

5.  (a)     What are the faults of the afflictions?
     (b)  When they arise, how are we harmed by them?




