Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Engaging in the Deeds of a Bodhisattva/lesson36.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:52:14.715403
================================================================================


Relating to the Sunday discussion, pertaining to how the bodhisattvas have
the permission to engage in the three bodily non-virtues and the four
verbal non-virtues, but do not have the permission to engage in the three
mental non-virtues, so do bodhisattvas have permission to have covetousness
or not?
Khen Rinpoche (in English): This is question. Why? Don’t just say no. You
must give reason why. You said no is not enough, must explain the reason
why.
Student: Non-virtues of the mind.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): You mean killing is virtuous? Then people will
ask why killing is allowed for bodhisattva when killing is non-virtuous.
Have to think that. You already accept seven is allowed, then how can you
say is non-virtuous? You got the question? Why not allowed? Or allowed?
It is entirely possible for a bodhisattva to steal motivated by
covetousness, isn’t it? You can imagine that right?
Bodhisattvas have covetousness or not? Bodhisattvas have attachment or not?

Student: Yes
Are there situation where it is permitted for bodhisattvas to have
attachment? This is basically tied to the first question of the Sunday
discussion: Do the bodhisattvas have the permission to have covetousness or
not?
Student: No
Khen Rinpoche (in English): Explain why.
Student: Inaudible
Khen Rinpoche (in English):  Yes, that I know. I know the ten non-virtues,
and covetousness is one of them. I know that. My question is why not
allowed that?  The seven are allowed, and three are not allowed. Why three
are not allowed?  Question is that. But you still didn’t get the question.
Student: Inaudible.
Attachment or desire is an affliction. There are things that bodhisattvas
do out of attachment in order to accomplish great purposes for others. That
is clear. I think I have mentioned this before. The bodhisattvas do not
specifically focus on abandoning attachment. Unlike what is practiced on
the path to liberation in the Hinayana, where attachment is an affliction
and is necessarily must be abandoned.
In the Paramitayana or the general Mahayana, it is taught that the
bodhisattvas do use afflictions such as attachment as a method or as a
branch to accomplish great purposes for sentient beings. There are
historical accounts of bodhisattvas in the past who fathered many children
in order to benefit the teachings of Buddha.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): That is the question. Think about it “Why is
not allowed”. Next time you give me the answer why covetousness and
attachment are not allowed. Allowed or not allowed?  Why?
Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds
Next section is why it is inappropriate to be angry with others who have no
faith in us.

|d” It is unreasonable to be furious because others lack faith in you           |
|(1) As speaking ill of oneself causes one to lose faith in the speaker, it is  |
|reasonable to be furious with [the act of] speaking ill of others              |
|(2) If one can bear the lack of faith in others, it is reasonable to bear the  |
|lack of faith others may not have in oneself due to the afflictions            |

|(1) As speaking ill of oneself causes one to lose faith in the speaker, it is  |
|reasonable to be furious with [the act of] speaking ill of others              |


Verse 6.62
Since sentient beings will be weakened,
I shall be angry with those who say unpleasant things.
Why are you not likewise angry
With those who say unpleasant things to other people?
You may think that when others say unpleasant things to you, this may cause
some people to lose faith in you – “When these people hear the criticism
directed at me, they will lose faith in me. Since this is not what I want,
as such, I have the right to be upset with the person who is criticizing
me. Therefore I need to do something to that person since he is criticizing
me and saying bad things about me. He is exhausting his own merits and he
is going to the lower realms. Therefore I must stop him.”
We may feel that maybe we need a bit of aggressiveness or anger to stop
him. If we do happen to think like this, then the answer to that is in
verse 6.62cd: “Why are you not likewise angry with those who say unpleasant
things to other people?”
If you hear others criticizing somebody else who has more qualities than
you, in that situation, why are you not upset with those people who are
criticizing other people?
This is link to the earlier thought. Earlier on we said; “Somebody is
criticizing me and I need do something about it. Because he criticizes me,
he is exhausting his own merits and he is going to the lower realms. I have
to do something about it. Because of his lack of faith in me, then he will
go to the lower realms. I must do something about it.”  If that is your
reason, then when you hear another people criticizing another person, why
are you not angry since that reason also applies in that situation as well?
In that situation, it is appropriate for you to be upset, but you don’t get
upset when it involves somebody else criticizing another person.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): You get the logic? You must get the logic how.
Earlier on we think “When somebody is upset with me because he has no faith
in me. In being upset with me, not liking me and criticizing me, he will
degenerate his own merits and will go to the lower realms.”
We may see that as a reason “Therefore I must do something. I need to
counteract that.”
If that is what you really think, then that logic should also be applied to
the situation when somebody else is being criticized. When somebody else is
being criticized, the person who is criticizing that somebody else will
also be in the situation of non-faith. Therefore he is exhausting his own
merits and going to the lower realms. Going by the logic, even if you are
not the one being criticized but somebody else is being criticized, then
you should also be upset at the person who is criticizing the somebody
else, but you don’t. Actually, going by the logic, you should.
Of course, when this logic is thrown at us we will oppose it. We may think
“There is no reason for me to get upset because if I were to get upset then
there is no end to being getting upset. In the situation when somebody else
is being criticized, whether the criticism occurs or not, the
responsibility primary lies with the person who is being criticized. He/she
has to do something about it. It is not my problem and it doesn’t involve
me so I don’t have to get upset.”
If this is what we think, then verse 6.63:

|(2) If one can bear the lack of faith in others, it is reasonable to bear the  |
|lack of faith others may not have in oneself due to the afflictions            |


Verse 6.63
If you are patient with this lack of faith
Because it is related to others’ non-faith,
Then why are you not patient with unpleasant words
Since they are related to the arisal of afflictions?
In the situation where there is somebody who get upset and criticizing
another person primarily due to lack of faith or seeing the faults, and
when you look at such a situation, in your view you may think that there
must be a reason for that person to criticize the other person. The other
person must be at fault or may have done something wrong or have said
something wrong, therefore he is being criticized now.
This is what we think, isn’t it.  We may think “The person who is being
criticized definitely must have a role to play. He may have done or have
said something wrong. I don’t have to be upset in that situation. The
person who is being criticized is at fault. Since he created the situation
for him to be criticized, as such I have no reason to be upset at the
person who is criticizing him. It is none of my business. That situation
doesn’t affect me. As such, I shall remain relax and be patience.”
If that is the case, then back to yourself, you are being criticized when
the person who is out of non-faith saying those unpleasant words to you,
and he is doing so because of his own afflictions. As we have seen earlier
in the text, he has no independence whatsoever, but is under the control of
his own afflictions.
In essence, the teachings in this section is actually telling us that when
we experience all these problems such as criticism or people talking behind
our back, or people don’t like us or they have no faith in us, we should
put aside being getting angry with them. Of course, we shouldn’t be upset
with them. The teaching is saying that in reality we should be very happy
when these things happen. Like what was mentioned earlier in the chapter,
when we experience with problems and difficulties, we should regard the
difficult situations or problems as a broom that sweeps away all our
negativities. We should regard that situation as something to persuade us
to engage in virtues. So when we experience with problems as such
criticisms directed at us, we have to remember and remind ourselves that
ultimately it is our own doing. We are experiencing the situation now as a
result of the ripening of the non-virtues that we ourselves have
accumulated in the past. We don’t like it when these things happen to us.
This is what we call the eight worldly dharma. When we are experiencing
this eight worldly dharma, we can think about some of the advices that are
mentioned in this chapter and put them into use.
Up to this point in this chapter we have seen that there are so many
reasons thrown at us and proofing to us that no matter what we may think or
what we may say, at the end of the day, it can be shown that there is no
reason whatsoever to justify anger. Anger is completely inappropriate and
no exception is being made at all in regards to anger.
Next section talks about stopping ourselves from getting angry when our
loved ones, the people who matters to us and who we consider to be in our
circle are harmed. Earlier we have seen the many reasons why it is
inappropriate for us to be upset when we are harmed. That being said, even
if we accept that it is inappropriate to get upset when we ourselves are
harmed, but we may think that it is a different matter if our loved ones,
the people who matters to us and who we consider to be in our circle such
as our own teachers or people who have faith in us are harmed. Then we have
the reason to be upset thinking “I am not getting upset because of myself.”
Next verse is saying that even if the Three Jewels and so forth are harmed,
it is still inappropriate to be upset.
Gyaltsab Je put forth an argument that we ourselves may put forth:
“Although it is inappropriate for me to be upset when I am harmed, but if
the Three Jewels are harmed and even if I am upset, I won't incur any
faults because I am upset for the Three Jewels. As such I am not at
faults.”
 If we have such thought, then the answer to that is in verse 6.64

|b’ Arresting fury towards those who wrong those dear to oneself                |
|1” Arresting it by means of the patience that is intent on dharma              |
|2” Arresting it by means of the patience that pays no heed to those who cause  |
|harm                                                                           |

|1” Arresting it by means of the patience that is intent on dharma              |
|a” The reasons it is unreasonable to be furious with those who cause harm to   |
|statues of the Buddha, etc                                                     |
|b” Likewise, it is reasonable to be patient with those who cause harm to those |
|dear to oneself                                                                |

|a” The reasons it is unreasonable to be furious with those who cause harm to   |
|statues of the Buddha, etc.                                                    |


Verse 6.64
Should others talk frivolously about or even destroy
Holy images, reliquaries, and the sacred Dharma,
My hatred is inappropriate,
For the buddhas and so forth can never be harmed.
The objects to whom we go for refuge are the Three Jewels - the Buddha, the
Dharma and the Sangha.
Let’s say the Buddha is being harmed. It is impossible for the Buddha to be
unhappy; as such the Buddha cannot be harmed.
The Sangha Jewel here is referring to the Superior, those who have realized
emptiness directly. As such they have abandoned the intellectually acquired
grasping at a self. When they are harmed, they do not have the kind of
grasping with the feeling “I am being harmed.” As such they don’t become
unhappy.
In that sense, the Buddha is not harmed, and the Sangha is also not harmed.
What is left is the Dharma Jewel - the True Path and True Cessation. The
True Path and True Cessation cannot be harmed.
Since the Buddha, Dharma and Sangha do not experience unhappiness, or
neither can they be harmed, therefore it is inappropriate to get angry at
those who do things to harm the Buddha, Dharma and Sangha. Likewise, we
talk about the representation of the Buddha’s body, speech and mind,
whether it is a holy object like the statue, painting, scripture and stupa,
these are atomically established. They are matter and form. Even if these
holy objects are destroyed, the Buddha can never be harmed. So in those
situations, there are no reasons to be upset as it is possible for people
to get upset when they see others are destroying the holy objects.
There are also people who criticize or put down the Dharma. Even then there
is no justification and is inappropriate to be upset with those people.
When people engage in such destructive acts such as criticizing or put down
the Dharma and destroying holy objects, they accumulate so much negative
karma. So when we see people doing things like that, besides of not getting
upset or angry with these people, in fact we should have even more
compassion for them. It is completely appropriate to develop even more
care, concern and compassion for them. When we see others destroying the
holy objects, putting down the Dharma and so forth, we may get very upset,
isn’t it? The teachings are telling that it is inappropriate and wrong to
get upset. Actually, we shouldn’t get upset at all, but rather the teaching
is telling us that we should even have more compassion for those people.
Next is how it is likewise to be patience with the harm that is directed at
the people who matters to us.

|b” Likewise, it is reasonable to be patient with those who    |
|cause harm to those dear to oneself                           |


Verse 6.65
I should counteract anger towards those
Who harm my spiritual masters, relatives and so forth, and friends,
By seeing, as in the manner shown before,
That they arise from conditions.
The verse is saying that it is inappropriate for us to be upset or angry at
those who criticize or harm our gurus, our relatives such as our parents,
our love ones and friends. Why? Because there are reasons for these things
to happens such as the ripening of karma. These harms that are directed at
our loves ones, our relatives, our gurus, our friends and so forth are the
results of the coming together of various causes and conditions.

|2” Arresting it by means of the patience that pays no heed to |
|those who cause harm                                          |
|a” It is unreasonable to be furious only with animate beings  |
|[lit. those who have minds]                                   |
|b” The reasons fury is unreasonable                           |
|c” Reflecting on one’s own faults                             |
|d” Reflecting on the benefits of patience                     |


Next it is inappropriate to become angry only at sentient beings.

|a” It is unreasonable to be furious only with animate beings  |
|[lit. those who have minds]                                   |


Verse 6.66
If embodied creatures are harmed
By both those with mind and those without mind,
Why single out and begrudge only those with mind?
Therefore I should be patient with harm.
We are harmed by the combination of sources of harms which include sentient
beings and non-sentient beings. If there is somebody who is wielding a
weapon, then the sentient being who is wielding a weapon is a person with a
mind that is harming us. There are also other factors such as the four
elements; earth, water, fire and wind. We also receive harms from these
four elements. We only get upset at sentient beings, those with a mind, but
we don’t get upset with the elements. Both sentience and non-sentience are
the sources of harm and are equally responsible for causing us pains, why
are we only upset at one and not the other?
The verse is asking us why do we single out sentient beings only and get
upset with them and at the same time we don’t get upset with those non-
sentience sources of harms.

[BP1 Part 2 L12] When our loved ones are harmed by animate beings (i.e.
those with minds) and inanimate objects, such as the four elements (wind,
water, fire, and earth), we are upset only with the former. We patiently
accept the harm of the elements understanding that this is their nature.
But the animate and inanimate objects are equal in terms of harming our
loved ones. There is no reason to be angry only with animate beings.
Therefore, when our loved ones are being harmed by animate beings, we
should stop our anger from arising and cultivate patience.

|b” The reasons fury is unreasonable                           |


Verse 6.67
Should one person do harm out of confusion
And another is confused and gets angry,
Then who would be without fault?
And who would be at fault?
Many times people engage in activities that harm others such as stealing
and killing while being ignorant of the consequences of their actions that
they have to experience in the future in the form of suffering.
There are people who get upset when they experience harm from others while
being ignorant of the consequences of getting angry.
So there are people who are ignorant of the consequences of their actions
of harming others, and there are also people who are ignorant of the
consequences of getting angry at the people who harmed them. These two
types of people come under the influence of the mara of afflictions and
both are acting out of ignorance/afflictions. As such you cannot attribute
blame to one and not the other. Both are equally at faults - the person who
harms others while being ignorant of the consequences of his actions and
the other person who gets angry when he receive harm while being ignorant
of the consequences of getting angry. So if you want to attribute blame,
both are at faults. Essentially this verse is saying that there is no
justification to retaliate against any harm directed at one self.

|c” Reflecting on one’s own     |
|faults                         |


Verse 6.68  
Why did I previously commit those actions
Because of which others now cause harm?
If all are related to my actions
Why should I begrudge them?
Verse 6.69  
Having seen thus, no matter what,
I should strive in this way for what is meritorious,
That all will have
Loving thoughts towards each other.
Essentially when we see harm directed at our loves ones and the people who
matters to us, we have to remember and to understand that it is due to the
power of the karma i.e. the ripening of non virtues accumulated in the
past. As such, when the conditions come together, there is nothing you can
do as it is irreversible and it will happen. Since these experiences are
the results of karma, as such there is no justification to be upset with
those who caused harm to our love ones.
This is something that you have to think for yourself. When there are
situations where you see your loved ones or the people who matter to you
are harmed for whatever reasons, you have to remember that there is no
reason or no real justification for you to be upset. But rather, you can
use the opportunity to think “How wonderful it would be if all have love
towards one another. How wonderful it would be if I could have love towards
both my loved ones and the persons who are causing harm to my loved ones”.
These are advices for a person to develop love, compassion and bodhicitta.
In these situations when our loved ones are harmed, instead of reacting
with anger, we should develop love for both our loved ones and the people
who are harming our loved ones.
Next is striving to not let one’s virtue degenerate.

|d” Reflecting on the benefits of patience                     |
|(1) Making effort so that one’s virtue does not deteriorate   |
|(2) Accepting small sufferings will act to overcome the cause |
|for the sufferings of the hells                               |
|(3) It is reasonable to enjoy hardships that accomplish       |
|greater purposes                                              |

|(1) Making effort so that one’s virtue does not deteriorate   |


Verse 6.70
For example, if a fire in one house
Has moved into another house,
It is right to remove and get rid of straw and such things
That the fire will spread to.
Verse 6.71
Likewise when my mind is attached to something
And the fire of hatred spreads,
I should immediately get rid of it
For fear of my merit being burned.
If your neighbour’s house catches fire and you sensed that the fire will
soon spread to your house, and in that situation if you happen to have
things in your house which are flammable such as furniture and so forth
which you are emotionally attached to, and you realize “I better get rid of
all these things before my house catches fire.” You will throw them away as
you know that if you keep those things, your house will be going to burn
down completely. In that situation, you probably be happy to throw them
away quickly.
Likewise, when our loves ones and the people who matter to us are harmed,
they probably get very upset, and the fire of their anger will also be
blazing in their mind and consuming the merit that they have accumulated.
But if you also get upset when you see that they are harmed, then the fire
of anger will also burn in your heart and thereby also consume the merit
that you have accumulated.
The only reason why the fire of anger in the mind of your loved ones can
move from your loved ones’ minds into your mind and through that consumes
your merit is because of your attachment for them.
If you don’t have attachment for them, then there is no way you will be
angry when you see your loved ones suffer. Just like the example of your
neighbor’s house catches fire, if there is nothing that is flammable in
your house then the fire in your neighbour’s house will not be able to do
much damage to your house. The only reason why your house can be burn down
is if your house is filled with all kinds of flammable objects. If you do
throw those flammable objects away, then your house will not burn.
Likewise, if there is no attachment for your loved ones and the people who
matter to you, you would not be affected by their anger.
These are the ways to stop anger from arising in our minds. In this context
here, the way to stop anger is to remove attachment in our mind.
Next is purifying the causes for hell by tolerating small sufferings.

|(2) Accepting small sufferings will act to overcome the    |
|cause for the sufferings of the hells                      |
|(a) Example                                                |
|(b) Meaning                                                |

|(a) Example                                                |


Verse 6.72
Is it not excellent if a man condemned to death
Is released after having his hand cut off?
Is it not excellent if I am spared from hell
By way of human suffering?

|(b) Meaning                                                |


Verse 6.73
If I cannot endure
Even just this suffering of the present,
Then why do I not refrain from getting angry,
The cause of suffering in hell?
What did we just said earlier? We get upset a lot of times when our loved
ones are harmed. We get upset because of our attachment. So the solution is
to not have attachment.
Of course this is unacceptable for people: “How is it possible not to have
attachment? You ask me to give up attachment? That means you are asking me
to give up my emotional bond and the connection with these people?  In that
sense it is like separating me from them and making a clear distinction
that we are not connected. But that is something I cannot do. I cannot bear
to be separated from my loved ones. I cannot bear to be disconnected from
my loved ones. I cannot bear to not have the emotional bond with them. As
such, in order to be emotionally bonded and to have the connection,
obviously there must be some kind of desire/attachment for them. Therefore
I must have attachment and it is necessary. Therefore, it is alright and
justifiable for me to get upset because this is what I need. So when they
are harmed and I don’t like it, it is justifiable for me to get upset”.
This is what people think.
The pain of separation from your loved ones is relatively small compared to
the sufferings that you have to experience if you get upset for their sake.
If you practice patience and voluntarily accept the small suffering, the
inconvenience and discomfort that comes along with this sense of separation
feeling from your loved ones and because you are not attached to them, that
suffering is small. You should voluntarily put up with it because you are
saving yourself from the suffering of more samsara in the future; in
particular, you are saving yourself from great suffering of being born in
the hell realms which is a result of getting upset and acting out of anger.

We have to make a distinction between short term pain and long term pain.
It is about choosing short term pain and tolerate and putting up with short
term pain. Otherwise, then there is long term great pain.
Verse 6.73 is telling us that if we cannot tolerate the harms that we
experience or if we cannot tolerate the harms that are directed at our
loved ones, then how are we able to tolerate the sufferings of the lower
realms such as the sufferings of the hells in the future? How are we able
to tolerate the great sufferings of the hells if we claim “The current
suffering is too much, I cannot tolerate the harm done to me, and I cannot
tolerate the fact that my loved ones are being harmed?”
If you retaliate with anger then the question is “Will you be able to
tolerate the consequences of the act of retaliation which is primarily
driven by attachment?” It is because of being driven by attachment, you get
upset and then you retaliate. Then the consequences will be a rebirth in
the lower realms, and in particular the hell realms. Will you be able to
tolerate the results of following after anger or not?
As such, therefore, we have to turn away from the causes of the lower
realms which are essentially our afflictions like anger.

[Lamrim Chenmo, Vol. 2, pg. 175] Reflect well on the differences between
short-term and long-term suffering, thinking, “A man who is to be executed
is overjoyed when he is freed from execution by having merely his finger
cut off. How excellent it would be if similarly, by means of this slight
suffering of human hardship, I could permanently dispel the suffering of
limitless cyclic existence in general and in particular the suffering of
miserable rebirths such as the hells, etc.” If you do this well, you
produce fearless courage with respect to hardship.

|(3) It is reasonable to enjoy hardships that accomplish greater purposes       |
|(a) Feeling regret for how many bodies we have wasted in the past and still not|
|accomplished either our own or others’ welfares                                |
|(b) It is reasonable to enjoy accomplishing the welfare of all migrators by    |
|being patient with present hardships                                           |

|(a) Feeling regret for how many bodies we have wasted in the past and still not|
|accomplished either our own or others’ welfares                                |


Verse 6.74
For the sake of my desires
I experienced thousands [of eons] in hell,
But I enacted the purpose
Of neither others nor myself.
Verse 6.73 is something that we can think about whenever we think that we
cannot tolerate that person or the harm that is done.
Q&A
Student 1: Are there bodhisattvas who get angry but will not have their
roots of virtue destroyed and only delay in their realizations?
Answer: Postponement of the realisation of the path is a result of the
destruction of roots of virtue.
(Student 2 put up a discussion in relation to the question about at the
time of death whether a person can accumulate projecting karma and that
projecting karma can become actualizing karma or not – audio files 92mins
to 98min)
Student 3: When karma is about to be ripen, is it reversible or can it be
nullified (can it be stopped)?
Khen Rinpoche (in English): Possible. Can be reversible, can be stopped.
Student 3: If it can be stopped, then the whole point about nourishing with
craving and grasping can also be stopped. In other words, at the time of
nourishing with craving and grasping, there is a projecting karma that is
about to manifest. Since it can be stopped, it can be reversed. After that
or during the time, positive, virtuous and powerful mind manifest and it
deposits virtuous imprint in the causal period consciousness. A second set
of craving and grasping can nourish that particular karma. If the time the
karma can be reversed during the time of craving and grasping, then at that
time one generates virtuous faith, for example, and that leaves a powerful
imprint at the causal period consciousness. Because the earlier one has
been reversed, a second set of craving and grasping can nourish this
particular karma, is it possible? If that is the case then the whole thing
about nourishing at the time of death the karma can be changed at the time
of nourishing, it can be reversed.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): Yeah, I think so. Why not?
Student 3:  Then we have settled the issue.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): We have settled the issue?
Student 3: During the time of craving and grasping, a projecting karma is
being nourished. But that can be reversed. Is it possible to be reversed?
Khen Rinpoche (in English): I think so.
Student 3: At that time there can be a virtuous mind that leaves a powerful
imprint in the causal period consciousness. Immediately after that it can
be nourished by a second set of craving and grasping for a virtuous
projecting karma.
The previous one was perhaps a non-virtuous projecting karma.
The second one was perhaps a virtuous projecting karma.
In other words, at the time of dying, we are supposed to be born in the
hell, but because of it being reversed by this second set, we can be born
in a higher realm.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): Yeah. So you are saying at the time of death
you can create projecting karma and actualizing karma?
Student 3: When it is nourished by craving and grasping that becomes
actualising karma.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): At the time of death, we can create both?
Student 3: If the first set of projecting karma being nourished into
actualizing karma can reverse, then the question is whether it can be
reversed at the time of death?
Khen Rinpoche (in English): Yeah, I think so.
Student 3: If it can be reversed at the time of death, therefore at the
time of death, once it is reversed before we go unconscious, we have a
powerful faith that leaves an imprint on the consciousness that is
immediately nourished by craving and grasping. Then we have a good rebirth
due to a virtuous projecting karma.
Khen Rinpoche: According to the lower Abhidharma, Abidharmakosha by
Vasubandhu, once you are in the intermediate state of a particular realm,
that is irreversible. Once the intermediate state comes about, there is
nourishing of a former karma nourished by craving and grasping and once a
certain kind of intermediate state is established it is irreversible. Let’s
say once you are in the intermediate state of hell, you are definitely
going to hell. There is no way out about it; there’s no up, left, right but
you just go down.  But according to Asanga’s higher Abhidharma, Compendium
of Knowledge, it is said that even if the bardo is established and you have
entered into the intermediate state of a particular realm, but if very
strong virtue is accumulated for whatever reason, then that intermediate
state can be changed.
I think sometime in the past we have talked about this earlier. If we
follow the Compendium of Knowledge, which is higher abhidharma, that the
position that the intermediate state can be reversed, if the intermediate
state can be reversed, then it goes without saying that at the time of
craving and grasping, that karma - whatever it is being nourished - that
karma can be reversed. It can be reversed as in it can change to another
karma that is being nourished.
Student 4: Previously I was asking: “At the time of death, if a projecting
karma which is non-virtuous but at the same time if one has a single-
pointed faith to one’s guru, could that non-virtuous karma be changed?” I
remember the answer was that single-pointed faith was a condition, it is
not karma. I remember that non-virtuous projecting karma could not be
changed. Having said this now, when Student 3 was talking about if the
projecting karma which is non-virtuous being reversible for whatever the
reason, I would love to understand and learn how does that be reversible,
if say, a single-pointed faith is only a condition and not karma.
Ven Gyurme: The question wasn’t answered earlier. Do you create new
projecting karma at the time of death or not?
Student 4: I think I don’t have an absolute clear answer but by hearing
throughout the lesson, I guess you can.
Khen Rinpoche: At the time of death, with faith as a condition, then one
would be going to a lower realm. But due to the condition of faith, another
karma comes into play. It is not that the earlier non-virtuous karma has
transformed into a virtuous karma. No! It is not possible for a non-
virtuous karma to transform into a virtuous karma. That is not the meaning
when we say that karma has changed.
Student 4: Another new karma, virtuous karma replaces the previous non-
virtuous karma. Are you saying that?
Ven Gyurme: Some other karma comes into play. Is it previously accumulated
virtue or can you accumulate fresh virtuous projecting karma or not? That
was not answered.
Student 4: I think I’m not clear on that. In other words, at the time of
death, when one is having a non-virtuous projecting karma but having a
single-pointed faith, there is this non-virtuous karma somehow being
replaced by a fresh virtuous karma due to the condition of a single-pointed
faith to one’s guru. Hence, the rebirth will be a favourable one. Can I
understand that?
Khen Rinpoche (in English): Yeah.



































