Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Engaging in the Deeds of a Bodhisattva/lesson49.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:52:21.408875
================================================================================


Khen Rinpoche (In English): Last time you did the homework, so I just
choose one to be read out. She will read and you will just listen.
(A student read out the chosen homework)
Khen Rinpoche (In English): She read very quickly, so didn’t get the time
to think. Anyway, I am not sure whether everybody did (the homework) or
not, but most people did the homework. There is no marking for your
homework. What you did is already good enough. So don’t look for marks.
Just now she read very quickly so didn’t really get into that. Anyway,
there are just too many to read and we don’t have time. So later when you
take back (the homework) read what you have wrote. Anyway, it is good that
you did the homework.

Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds
For the power of relinquishment, there are:
   1. Temporary relinquishment
   2. Complete relinquishment

|d' The power of       |
|relinquishment        |
|1" Temporary          |
|relinquishment        |
|2" Complete           |
|relinquishment        |

|1" Temporary          |
|relinquishment        |


Verse 7.67 a, b
When my strength is related to degeneration,
I should leave whatever I am doing in order to return to it.
In the process of engaging in a particular virtue, sometimes one does get
tired physically or mentally exhausted. Also at times, one’s physical
health or physical strength may deteriorate. At those times, one should
take a break in order to restore one’s vitality or restoring one’s health
if one is sick. During the period of time when one is resting in order to
restore one’s physical and mental energy is called temporary
relinquishment.
Therefore temporary relinquishment is to prepare oneself to be able to re-
engage in that particular virtue again after one has rested.
[BP1 Part 2 L29]  We should always complete any virtuous activity that we
have started. However, if along the way, we fall ill or become extremely
worn out and our physical condition no longer allows us to continue, we
should rest awhile thinking, “I am only resting to regain my physical
strength. When I have recovered, I will complete the task at hand.” The
determination and thought to continue the task once we have recovered is
extremely important. Therefore, this is called periodic suspension or
temporary relinquishment.

|2" Complete           |
|relinquishment        |


Verse 7.67 c, d
If something is finished well, I should put it aside
With the wish for more and more later.
When it comes to engaging in virtue, there are so many different types of
virtues that one can engage in. Whatever it maybe, once one has completed
that practice well, then one stop doing that. One’s mind should then focus
on the next virtue that one is going to engage in.
Here complete relinquishment means relinquishing the earlier task of virtue
that one has already completed well. Then one put that aside and move on to
another virtues.
Since one has already completed that particular virtue, and for the purpose
of engaging in another virtue which is more exalted or better than the one
that one has just completed, in that sense it is called a complete
relinquishment of the virtue that has already completed.
[BP1 Part 2 L29]  In order to achieve the state of full enlightenment, we
need to engage in and accomplish many virtuous activities and practices.
Having completed a specific practice well, we should aim to engage in more
advanced practices and not be complacent or be content with what we have
accomplished. In order to start the new advanced practices, we have to
relinquish the preceding activities that we completed.
[Lamrim Chenmo, Vol. 2, pg. 201] Developing the power of relinquishment: If
you become physically or mentally fatigued from your perseverance, you must
rest for a while. Otherwise, you will become exhausted and very
disheartened, thereby later preventing your joyous perseverance.
Immediately after you have rested, persevere again, and when you have
completely finished your earlier activity, do not let this satisfy you. You
must joyously persevere at other, higher activities. The next task is
important, because if you consider each earlier good quality sufficient,
this will be a big obstacle to the attainment of many higher attributes.
There is a discussion on the need to rely on conscientiousness, mindfulness
and vigilance.

|ii) Devoting oneself to the practice of the conduct by  |
|means of mindfulness and alertness                      |
|1' Devoting oneself to conscientiousness                |
|2' Devoting oneself to mindfulness and alertness        |
|3' Not distinguishing a time of wrongdoing for          |
|mindfulness and alertness                               |
|4' One should overcome wrongdoing as soon as it arises  |
|5' One should make effort in reasonable activities      |

|1' Devoting oneself to           |
|conscientiousness                |


Verse 7.68
Just as a seasoned soldier engages
In a fencing battle with the enemy,
So shall I avoid the weapons of the afflictions
And attack the enemies that are the afflictions.
Due to the training and habituation of the seasoned fighters, they are
always prepared to defend themselves against being attacked by their
opponents during the fight. They have various means and ways to prevent
themselves from being hit by their opponents and also have means or ways at
their disposal to strike at their opponents. That is the characteristics of
a seasoned fighter. Likewise, we should be conscientious and to be careful
not to be harmed by the weapon of our afflictions. At the same time we
should also look out to vanquish or to attack our afflictions; which is the
enemy.
Next is the need to be mindful and vigilant.

|2' Devoting oneself to           |
|mindfulness and alertness        |


Verse 7.69
If someone dropped his sword during a battle,
He would quickly pick it up out of fear.
Likewise if I lose the weapon of mindfulness,
Afraid of hell, I should quickly retrieve it.
When people go to war and fight with swords, and for whatever reason they
may drop their swords onto the ground.  Out of fear of being killed in the
next moment, immediately they will retrieve the sword. Likewise, if our
mind become distracted and we lose our mindfulness on the virtuous object,
and remembering how we would end up in the lower realms such as the hells
because of accumulating non-virtue due to our afflictions, and motivated by
that fear, we should immediately hook our mental attention with mindfulness
and vigilance back to the virtuous object and firmly place our mind on
that.
The point is that driven by the fear of having to experience the
consequences of falling (to lower realms) due to afflictions, we hook our
mindfulness back and place it on a virtuous object.
Next is not giving an opportunity for the faults of degenerating one’s
mindfulness and vigilance to arise.

|3' Not distinguishing a time of wrongdoing for   |
|mindfulness and alertness                        |


Verse 7.70
Just as poison spreads throughout the body
In dependence upon the blood,
Likewise if it finds an opportunity
Misdeeds will permeate my mind.
Verse 7.71
Just as a man carrying a jar full of mustard oil
In the presence of someone wielding a sword
Who is being threatened that he will be killed if he spills it will be
frightened,
Likewise, those who have the modes of conduct should be attentive.
The example here is about somebody who is being poisoned. When the poison
enters into a person’s blood stream, it will soon permeate the entire body.
As a result, the person may die. Likewise, if we let our mind get
distracted by any kinds of objects, whatever it may be, afflictions will
arise and start to take hold of us. Then gradually it becomes stronger and
stronger to the point it will take away our chances of higher rebirth.  The
mind here refers to both our sense consciousness and our thought.
When the poison enters into the blood stream, initially it affects a small
area of the body and over time, it starts to permeate throughout the entire
body. When that happens then one’s life is in great danger as one may even
lose one’s life. Some poison act gradually. Our afflictions are like that.
Once the afflictions arise in the mind, it may seem small at that time.
However, if we don’t do anything about it, it gradually takes hold in our
mind and becomes very strong. That is when very strong non-virtue is
accumulated which will result in us having to go to lower realms.
Therefore, the verses here are talking about the problems that come with
letting our mindfulness and vigilance degenerate.
The next couple of verses talk about the method to tighten one’s
mindfulness.
Imagine if you are forced to carry a jar filled with water or oil on your
head and walk along a very slippery road. Then there is somebody watching
at you. If you were to spill even a drop of that oil or water, you will be
killed. Being driven by that fear, you will be very mindful as you walk
carrying that jar of oil or water.
Khen Rinpoche (English): The jar that is full of water or oil is not
covered and with its’ big mouth open. You can just imagine that.
So whoever is put in that situation would definitely walk with the greatest
care. If one claims to be a practitioner of dharma and has adopted whatever
vows and precepts and also if one has already taken on the promise to train
in the bodhisattva deeds, in essence the bodhisattva vows, then motivated
by the fear of having to go to the lower realms such as the hell realms and
motivated by the fear of having to continually circle in the three realms
of cyclic existence, then one has to mindful and conscientious about the
behavior of one’s body, speech and mind in every moment. So in reality that
is how it should be.
Therefore, through remembering one’s fear of suffering in the lower realms
such as the hell realms and the fear of cyclic existence would drive us to
be conscientious and mindful so as to not let our afflictions take hold of
us.
[Lamrim Chenmo, Vol. 2, pg. 203] What is more, when warriors are in a
battle, they strive from the beginning not to lose their sword; when by
chance they do drop it, they pick it up immediately. These two actions rest
on a fear of being killed that is not mere words. Likewise, those who
cultivate the path are afraid to lose the mindfulness that does not forget
what is to be adopted and what eliminated; even if they do lose it, they
immediately reapply it. These two actions are based on the development in
their minds of a real terror of falling into miserable realms as a result
of the pollution of infractions and faults that occur when mindfulness
lapses. This, in turn, depends on having made karma and its effects central
to their practice and then sustaining that approach. Those who fail to
develop the awareness that these points are profound instructions sever the
root of the good qualities ensuing from the practice that delights the
learned, the sacred foundation of the path.
Next is if a fault arises, then we need to put a stop to it right away.

|4' One should overcome wrongdoing as   |
|soon as it arises                      |


Verse 7.72
Therefore, just as I would hastily stand up
If a snake came into my lap,
Likewise if any sleep or indolence occur
I shall quickly turn them back.
Verse 7.73
Each time a misdeed occurs
I should deride myself,
And then contemplate for a long time
“No matter what, I shall not let this happen in the future.”
For whatever reasons if your head catches fire, you are not going to wait
but instead you will try to put out the fire immediately by whatever means.
Or if you are someone who is afraid of snakes and for whatever reason a
snake lands on your lap, without any delay you will stand up immediately
and you will be so frightened.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): So last time, when I was in monastery, when I
was young in Kopan, the door of our room cannot close totally and the wall
has a lot of holes. Sometimes, the real snake came inside the room and
sleep under the blanket. When we go to bed and open the blanket, the snake
is there, and we were very frightened. At that time when I was studying at
South India, there was one monk who was so scared of snake. So before the
class, we gather outside and everybody knew that he is scared of snake.
Then there was another monk who was in the same class found the snake skin.
Normally snake change its skin every year but I don’t know how they change
the skin. The snake threw away the skin so the skin is dead. Then the
monk’s friend brought the snake skin and held behind him and put the snake
skin on his neck.  He was so frightened and got so angry and went to beat
him. For me, I’m so scared of the frog. I mean I’m not scared that it will
bite but just find it very unpleasant. In the monastery, when we debate,
there were so many frogs at the debate ground and sometimes they can jump
on the lap. When they jump, I have to stand up.
The example here is not saying that when you are about to fall asleep, you
should suddenly just jump out of your bed and don’t sleep. That is not the
point. The point is there is right time for sleeping. Here we are talking
about a person who is practicing virtue. In the case of a person who is
practicing virtue, the entire day can be divided into meditation session
and post-meditative session.  Meditation session is when one is engaging in
the formal session. Any time out of that would be post-meditative session.
Therefore, the whole day is consisting of that.
So when it comes to engaging in virtue, we can divide the day into morning,
afternoon and night time. There is a time for rest because sleep is
necessary to restore the elements of one’s body. Then the rest of the time
should be used for something productive in the form of doing virtues and
something beneficial. So besides the proper sleeping time, the remaining of
the time is meant for practice; which is almost the entire day. During
those times which are meant for practice, there are times when one may feel
lazy and feel like sleeping while it is not the time for sleep and one
doesn’t feel like doing virtue while it is the time to engage in virtue. So
at that time, one should immediately snap oneself out from that situation
and remind oneself to wake up when having the desire to sleep. However,
being able to do this is not an easy feat. Why? Because you have to be
someone who can feel the sense of lost of not using your time productively
in engaging in virtue and something meaningful. You also have to be someone
who consistently is aware of the potential to be reborn in the lower realms
in next life. You have to have that fear. Until you are someone who are
able to have a feel for these things, then being able to react in such a
way is probably not possible.
So whenever you feel lazy or sleepy during the times when you are not
supposed to sleep or you don’t feel like engaging in some practice of
virtue, then you have to remember the suffering of the lower realms and the
suffering that you will experience in the future, and also to bring to mind
the faults of being in samsara. With these thoughts, you can turn your
minds towards virtue. With that then you make a very strong resolution not
to be lazy and to not fall asleep unnecessarily.
Here is an account of how a great translator of the path, Lotsawa Richen
Sangpo, practiced in one of his particular long retreat for 7 years. During
the retreat, he established a boundary by setting up boundary markers to
delineate one’s boundary from which one will not transgress i.e. one will
not cross over. He made three concentric circles as the three layers of
boundaries.
He generated the outermost boundary markers as dakas,dakinis and dharma
protectors. He made offerings to them and entreated them “May you punish me
if any afflictions were to arise in the course of my retreat.”
He generated the intermediate boundary marker as dharma protectors and
entreated them “May you annihilate me if I were to allow even just one
moment of selfish thought to arise in the course of my retreat.”
He then generated the innermost boundary markers as dakas, dakinis and
dharma protectors.  He made torma offerings and entreated them “May you
destroy me if any thought apprehending signs were to arise in the course of
my retreat.” On the basis of making these oath and promises he lived in the
retreat for 7 years.
The point is that one has to make a resolution from the depth of one’s
heart and to rely on mindfulness and vigilance to engage in virtue and do
not let the mind to come under the influence or control of afflictions. It
is helpful to make the resolution to last for certain period of time, such
as for a particular day, for example, “Today I am not going to let my mind
come under the control of affliction. I am just going to place my mind
firmly on virtue.”
Khen Rinpoche (in English): You can make your promises like: “If that
happened, I am not going to eat for three days.” Or “If I fall asleep
during the class…” - you decide on your punishment.  Just to give some
idea.
[Lamrim Chenmo, Vol. 2,pg.204] Furthermore, do not merely discontinue
faults, but actively feel displeasure at their having occurred. Contemplate
as follows, "Because I proceeded in this way in the past as well, I have
been wandering in cyclic existence up to now. In particular, it is
especially blameworthy that I have taken the bodhisattva vows and yet
continue with things that are incompatible with the vows' precepts." Become
inspired to henceforth restrain yourself, thinking, "From now on I shall
make sure that this fault never occurs." Frequently employ both these
attitudes.
So what should we do when we commit misdeeds?
Verse 7.73
Each time a misdeed occurs
I should deride myself,
And then contemplate for a long time
“No matter what, I shall not let this happen in the future.”
Although we do make resolution but at times when we fall short, misdeeds do
arise and we make mistakes. So what should we think?  When that happens, we
should deride ourselves and make a critical self-evaluation by having self-
conversation and by remembering “How I have been enduring with so many
problems and sufferings due to not controlling my mind and allow my mind
under the control of afflictions. If I will to continue like that, then the
story will not be any different. I, again, will face the same problem and
the same suffering.”
So here is a critical self-evaluation, literally we are deriding ourselves
by telling ourselves “I should not have done that as that is really no
good. I must not do that again.”
We have to think about that for a long time and after getting used to that
thinking we then make the resolution “I must not do this again”.  We also
need to purify the negatives that were accumulated through committing
misdeed. So we have to strive in purifying the negativities as well. As
said here that whenever any misdeed occurs, we should confess it
immediately and purify it through applying the four opponent powers.

|5' One should make effort in     |
|reasonable activities            |


Verse 7.74
“Likewise in all situations
I shall acquaint myself with mindfulness.”
With this cause I shall wish for
Encounters or appropriate actions.
This is an advice to rely on mindfulness in order to not let any misdeed
arise in the first place or in order to eliminate those that have already
arisen.
With this kind of motivation as in verse 7.74 behind one’s mind and by
relying on mindfulness, vigilance and conscientiousness, then one goes
about doing whatever is suitable and appropriate such as engaging in
whatever practice of virtues, be it a retreat, any recitations,
prostration, circumambulation and so forth. The point is that with the
intention to rely on mindfulness and vigilance with the purpose of not
letting faults arise or eliminating those faults that had already arisen,
then one engages in the activities such as receiving instructions and
teachings, relying on the Mahayana virtuous friends and so forth.
In this section, mindfulness, vigilance and conscientiousness are always
being emphasized. It is said that they are very important such that one’s
should sincerely and actively adopt mindfulness, vigilance and
conscientiousness. With that, one then engages in whatever actions that is
appropriate and suitable.

|iii) Accomplishing the conduct is within your |
|power                                         |
|1' Through pliancy of body and mind, one      |
|should even arise in virtue                   |
|2' Applying the analogy to the meaning        |

|1' Through pliancy of body and mind, one      |
|should even arise in virtue                   |


Verse 7.75
In order to have strength for all
I should recall before undertaking any action
The advice on conscientiousness thus,
And then rise with lightness.

[BP1 Part 2 L29] Before engaging in and in order to complete any virtuous
activities, we need to generate the power of joyous effort. We need
conscientiousness to do this. In order to develop conscientiousness, we
need to listen to and remember well the instructions for developing it.
When we engage in virtue, we should be able to do so easily, at any time.
Pliancy, refers to both physical and mental pliancy.
[Lamrim Chenmo, Vol. 2, pg. 206] The method for using joyous perseverance
to make the mind and body serviceable is the power of mastery. Shantideva
sets forth in the chapter on conscientiousness [in his Engaging in the
Bodhisattva Deeds the necessity of learning the bodhisattva trainings; the
extremely grave consequences if you do not train in these once you have
pledged to do so; how to regard the afflictions as the enemy; and the ways
to generate the courage that looks upon the hardship of battling the
afflictions as an ornament rather than as a burden. Meditate on these
before taking up the task of training in the bodhisattva deeds. Thus
stopping all the inhibitions that prevent you from using your body and mind
for virtuous activity, rise gladly to that task.

|2' Applying the analogy to the meaning        |


Verse 7.76
Just as the wind blowing back and forth
Controls a piece of cotton,
So shall I be mastered by enthusiasm,
And in this way I will accomplish all.
Prior to engaging in whatever virtues, we should prepare mentally to have
the ability and capacity for it.  So in order to be able to engage in that
virtue with strength and vigor, we have to remember all the instructions
for cultivating conscientiousness. There are so many advices on how to be
conscientious. There are instructions pertaining to:
- how to be conscientious in abandoning non-virtue,
- how to be conscientious in engaging in virtue,
- how to be conscientious in abandoning or dealing with afflictions.
There are so many instructions and we have to be mindful of these
instructions on conscientiousness.
Those who are able to be conscientious in abandoning non-virtue,
cultivating virtue, and in working with the afflictions in whatever
appropriate practice, it is said that they will be able to engage in those
practices very easily. So that is the meaning when we say “rise with
lightness.” They are able to do it with ease because they do it
enthusiastically and are very happy in doing it. Everywhere is unimpeded.
Likewise, if we have strong enthusiasm and joy for virtues then we can even
bring our body and speech under that positive influence.
So if we are enthusiastic and happy doing something in virtue, then it will
not be difficult to employ our body and speech in that endeavor as well.
Because we mentally are so happy doing it, and with this kind of enthusiasm
and joy, we would also be able to see that task to completion.
In Gyaltsab Je’s commentary, his final closing of statement to this chapter
is that we should strive in generating the joyous perseverance that can
overcome laziness. In order to do that, we have eliminate all the
discordant class i.e. things that hinders joyous perseverance. We also have
to generate the favorable conditions, which are the four powers, for the
development of joyous perseverance.
Gyaltsab Je’s says; “In order to cultivate joyous perseverance, you have to
eliminate its opposing factors.” What are the opposing factors? There are
two opposing factors:
1. Not engaging in virtue while one is clearly aware that one has the
  ability to do so i.e. knowing that one can do it but one doesn’t do it.
2. Thinking “I can’t do this. How can I ever do this?”
So these are the two opposing factors.
The first one “Not engaging in virtue although one knows that one is
capable of engaging in it.” That happens primarily due to procrastination
because one thinks “I still have time”. Or one is completely overwhelmed by
the attachment to ignoble activities. Essentially it is not doing virtue
while we know that we can do it due to procrastination or the laziness of
attachment to ignoble activities; literally attachment to bad activities.
How are we going to deal with the laziness of procrastination? The antidote
is to reflect and contemplate that we are not going to live forever and we
will die soon. After death, we will fall into the lower realms.  We also
have to remember that attaining such a rebirth of having all the conditions
for practice and having the freedom to do so is something very difficult to
achieve again.
How are we going to deal with the laziness of attachment to ignoble
activities i.e. attachment to the affairs of this life?  The antidote is to
reflect on how the precious dharma is the origin of infinite happiness in
this and in all the future lives. So that is one antidote. The other
antidote is to reflect on how all these meaningless things that we do in
life are distractions. They harm us even in this life and they are also the
origin or the source of many problems in our future lives.
How are we going to deal with despondency or discouragement thinking “I
can’t do this”?  In the first place, despondency or discouragement comes in
different forms:
- Thought thinking “I can’t attain all those infinite qualities of
  enlightenment or Buddha.”
- Thought thinking “I can’t do all these difficult bodhisattva practices
  such as I have to give up my body and sacrifice this and that. They are
  so challenging and difficult. How is it possible for me to do that?”
- Thought thinking “How can I put up with all the difficulties of the
  samsara? I have to deal with many challenges in the process of becoming a
  Buddha. In order to achieve all the qualities of the Buddha, I still have
  to be in samsara with so many challenges and difficulties. How can I bear
  with something like that?”
Anyway we have gone through all of these already.  So what is the antidote
to the thought thinking “I cannot become Buddha” or “How is it possible for
me to be a Buddha?” The antidote is to understand that those who are
already buddhas’ were not buddhas from the beginning. In the beginning,
before they were buddhas, they didn’t have all the qualities. They didn’t
abandon all the faults. They practice gradually and over time through
bearing hardships, they are able to become enlightened. So, if we were to
do likewise and willing to bear hardships, we will also become a Buddha.
As for the discouragement that comes from the thought thinking “I am unable
to practice all those difficult bodhisattvas deeds such as giving my head,
arms and legs”, the antidote is there is no need to worry at all because
those practices are not meant for beginners like us. When we are beginners,
this practice is difficult. Since we are beginner we don’t have to worry
about doing this practice. When we are the bodhisattvas superior, at that
time when we do this practice, it will not be a problem for us. At that
time, giving our body away is as easy as giving a bit of vegetable to
someone else. Why we get depressed for no reason?
As for the third form of discouragement with the thought thinking “I have
to stay in samsara for such a long time while doing all these practices.
That is too much and it is too difficult.”  The answer to that is “It is
not difficult at all because if you know how to do it, you will be filled
with joy.  Over time, even while in samsara, you will experience physical
and mental joy in doing these practices. Once you do these practices with a
happy mind, and even while you are in samsara, you will not be bothered and
it will not affect you. So what is there to worry?”

|b. The chapter's|
|name            |


The name of the chapter is Teaching Joyous Effort

------------------------------------------------End of Chapter 7 - ---------
---------------------------------------------------------

How to prepare for the exam

Exam date and time: 12, October, 2014 (Sunday) at 10am at ABC
I do understand that it will be difficult for most of you to read all seven
chapters in its entirety as a preparation for the exam. I've thought about
this. I am going to give you a set of sample questions. So you prepare for
the exam on the basis of this set of questions and 80% to 90% of the
questions in the exam will be somewhat connected or related to these sample
questions.
In the sample questions, there will be a section which requires you to
answer whether the statements made are true or false. How are you going to
study based on these sample questions? The point is not to merely have a
minor discussion on the questions whether it is true or false, and you are
happy with that. That is wrong. That is not the way to do it. Why is it
“true”? Why it is “false”? You must be able to give reasons for that.
On top of this, related to the statement, you should come out with another
example, by changing the subject of the statement, and you think about it
and then give the answer. This is how you should prepare for the exam. Do
you understand the instruction?
For example, the 1st question is: Our body is an object of abandonment,
because it arose from the ignorance belonging to the twelve links of
dependent origination.
It is not enough merely to ask someone whether this is true or false and
leave it as that. If you think that this is sufficient for your
preparation, you will not be able to pass the exam.
In this question, the subject of inquiry is "our body". So, after you have
answered true or false, with the reasons for your answer, you should then
substitute the subject by thinking, for example: Our mind is an object of
abandonment, because it arose from the ignorance belonging to the twelve
links of dependent origination. Since the subject has changed, does the
answer remains the same or not?
I am just giving an example on how to change the subject. I am not saying
that in the actual exam question, the “mind” instead of the “body” will be
the subject for the 1st question.  I am just highlighting how you should
think and learn.
What I wish from you is that, you should know the purpose of having these
sample questions. The point is for you to learn, think, analyze and then
discuss. Of course, you still have to take the exam, and it is not about
passing or failing. This is about educating yourself and it is about
learning.
The main thing is to build the material to learn and to educate oneself.
Having said that, it is also not right to do away with the exam as well
because if we don't have the exam, then most people will merely close the
text and that's it, and not going to look at the text again. So, no choice,
we have to have the exam.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): Do you get the idea?
When I say that, 80% to 90% of the questions in the exam will revolve
around these sample questions, I am not saying that you will get exactly
the same statements that you find here, that I am just changing the subject
with the remaining statements unchanged. Please keep in mind that this is
not the case. If you misunderstand what I am saying here, then there is the
danger that, I may end up receiving a lot of complains after the exam!
It is entirely possible that, perhaps there are maybe about 10% of the exam
questions that are not connected to what you find in these sample
questions.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): It is a possibility, but I am not sure. I have
not decided on the questions yet, so no idea yet. So, those who want to
take the exam, you can take the questions and study them. The whole point
is that you can study more.
I don’t think there will be anymore classes in September. In October,
perhaps we will have another two more sessions. I have not fully decided
what I will be going to talk about in those two sessions. For now, I am
thinking to do a simple introduction to tantra. But I have not decided yet.
As for now, that could be one of the topic.
















