Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Engaging in the Deeds of a Bodhisattva/lesson21.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:52:14.616010
================================================================================


Student: What is the measure or indication of having refuge in one’s mind?
Khen Rinpoche: When the entity of the refuge is discussed, what exactly the
refuge is? There are the two causes of refuge:
1. Having fear of the suffering of cyclic existence and the fear of
sufferings of the lower realms
2. Having the conviction that the Three Jewels have the ability and power
to protect one from those fears.
If you take refuge in the Buddha and having the real refuge means that you
have the conviction and the complete trust that the Buddha has the power to
protect you from those fears – the fear of the suffering of cyclic
existence and the fear of sufferings of the lower realms.  This kind of
conviction is similar to the conviction that a sick person has in a doctor.
When a sick person sees a doctor, the patient has so much trust in the
doctor and is willing to carry out all the instructions of the doctor. So
having refuge in the Buddha is similar to that. In that you have the
complete trust that the Buddha can protect you from these fears.
First you must have the fear of the sufferings of the lower realms; that is
the fear of going to the lower realms and suffers. On top of that, you have
the fear of suffering of cyclic existence. On the basis of having these
fears, then you have the faith, the conviction, and the trust in the
Buddha’s abilities to protect you from those fears. This faith arises from
the understanding and thinking; “I trust the Buddha can really protect me
from those fears”. That is the refuge in Buddha.
If you trust the enlightened one, the Buddha, and base on that, you would
be able to have refuge in his teachings, the Dharma. Similarly, you would
be able to have refuge and trust in the Sangha, those who follows his
teachings. When you say go for refuge to the Dharma, it means that you have
the conviction, the faith, and the trust in the Buddha’s words, the
teachings, because it was taught by the Buddha himself. So, if you have
faith in the Buddha, you would have faith in his teachings.
From this you would know whether you have refuge or not, whether you have
that faith or not; and whether it is stable or not. In your mind you know
that you have these fears, and you have this absolute trust that the Buddha
can protect you from that. When you have the trust and the faith, then that
is the sign you have the refuge.
Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds
|C Patience relies upon the|
|mind                      |
|1 The meaning             |
|2 The analogy             |
|3 Applying the analogy to |
|the meaning               |

|1 The meaning             |


Verse 5.12
Unruly sentient beings are like space;
All of them cannot possibly be overcome.
But if I overcome the mind of anger alone,
This will be equivalent to vanquishing all those foes.
This verse is saying that patience depends on the mind and patience arises
from the mind. When we talk about unruly sentient beings, they are
everywhere. Whenever there is space, there are sentient beings. As long as
there are sentient beings exist, there will necessarily be sentient beings
who will do harm.
The verse is saying that there is no way to eliminate all those sentient
beings that do harms upon others. There is no way you can eliminate them
and there is no way to destroy all of them. Even if you were to try, you
will not succeed.
The verse is saying that even though there are these sentient beings, but
if we will to overcome the mind of anger, that would be equivalent to
having vanquished or conquered or destroyed all the external enemies. There
is an analogy to explain that.

[BP1 L25] Patience is a mind of non-anger. When we meet with suffering,
harm or difficulties, it is the mind of non-anger, not getting upset about
such things.

|2 The analogy             |


Verse 5.13
Where could I possibly find enough leather
With which to cover the surface of the earth?
Having leather on just the soles of my shoes
Is equivalent to covering the earth with it.

[BP1 L25] This is analogous to what was stated earlier: “If I overcome the
mind of anger alone, this will be equivalent to vanquishing all those
foes.” If we want to protect our feet from thorns, we cannot possibly cover
the whole world with leather in order to stop our feet from being pricked.
Not only will we not be able to do this, chances are we probably will not
be able to find enough leather to cover the whole earth. Covering the soles
of one’s shoes is enough.

|3 Applying the analogy to |
|the meaning               |


Verse 5.14
Likewise it is not possible for me
To counteract things externally;
But should I counteract this mind of mine,
What is the need for counteracting others?
The verse is saying that there is no way that you can eliminate all the
external sources of harm even if you try. But if you can eliminate or
counteract the inner enemy of anger, then there is no need to counteract
the external sources of harm. It is mentioned in the sutra that if one
tames the anger, the external enemy will be pacified. If the anger is not
tamed, then the external enemies will increase. Cultivating patience is for
the sake of reducing the anger and pacifying it. Essentially, the practice
of patience is a practice of the mind.

|Joyous effort relies upon |
|the mind                  |


Verse 5.15
Although the result of generating a clear mind
Is Brahma and so forth,
The results along with body and speech will be
Weak in conduct, therefore it is not like that.
According to Gyaltsab Je, the  explanation  for  this  verse  is  this:  the
result  of  generating  the  mind  of  clear  joy  from  meditating  on  the
absorption of the first form realm is rebirth in the place of Brahma and  so
forth.

When one does not have such a strong mind, the result of the mind that
comes with the body and speech belongs to the class of behavior or actions
with less joy and one cannot be reborn in the first form realm. T and t.
Therefore the completion of joyous perseverance effort depends on the mind.
The meaning is this: We have talked about the four meditative
stabilizations of the form and formless realm.
The abodes of the 1st meditative stabilization/ concentration of the form
realm can be divided into three lands or abodes.
In order to be reborn as a form realm god in the 1st meditative
stabilization/ concentration of the form realm such as The Land of Brahma
and so forth, that rebirth must be preceded by meditating on a clear mind,
which is meditating on an actual concentration.
The point is that in order to be reborn in the 1st meditative
stabilization/ concentration of the form realms that must be preceded by a
realization of calm-abiding/ meditative serenity, quality of the mind.
Based on that, one must have gained an access to the meditative
stabilization.
Based on that, then one achieves an actual meditative stabilization/
concentration.
Basically all these qualities are all dependent on the mind.
Without a clear mind like calm-abiding, without having gained access to
meditative stabilization, and without having actualizing the actual
concentration, there is no way to be born in the form and formless realms
such as the Land of Brahma.
Without these mental qualities like these clear states of mind, other kind
of virtues that are the results from the practices of the body and speech
cannot result in that rebirth.
One can explain a clear mind here to mean cultivating love and compassion.
In short, they are the four immeasurables. It is through cultivating these
minds that one can be reborn in the Land of Brahma and so forth.
Without this joyous perseverance of the clear mind, one’s action of the
body and speech will be weak. As such one’s action of the body and speech
on their own cannot lead one to be born in the Land of Brahma and so forth.

You accumulate virtue with your body, speech and mind.
Enthusiasm is a mental quality. If there is strong enthusiasm for virtue,
then you really accumulate that virtuous karma. Due to the strong
enthusiasm for that activity you engage in it. It then leaves an imprint/
impression on the mind.
But in the absence of such a strong enthusiasm for virtue, even if you
carry out that action with your body and speech, I wonder what actually is
being accumulated? Here it says “You accumulate”, isn’t it?
If there is a strong enthusiasm for virtue and with that accompanying
strong enthusiasm, if you do actually accumulate virtue with your body and
speech, then there is something to be said about accumulating virtue with
the body and speech. Since that accumulation of virtue with the body and
speech is closely tied in with this strong enthusiasm, something could be
said about that you are accumulating something.
 But in the absence of enthusiasm for virtue, then what exactly is being
accumulated when you are just physically or verbally doing that action?
There is an explanation of how all qualities are very much dependent on the
mind.
When the entity of joyous perseverance is posited, what exactly is joyous
perseverance?

Joyous perseverance is a mind that has a virtuous object as its object of
observation. Focusing on this virtuous object of observation, the aspect of
joyous perseverance is a clear mind having enthusiasm for virtue.
A clear mind that is enthusiastic about whatever virtuous objects and that
is what joyous perseverance is focusing on.
In essence, the discussion in the context of this verse is that: in order
to be born in the form and formless realms, one must have a clear mind. As
explained earlier, without the quality of clear mind, it doesn’t matter
what virtue you can create with your body and speech, there is no way to be
born in those higher realms.

|Concentration relies on |
|the mind                |


Next is the meditative stabilization depends on the mind.
Verse 5.16
The Knower of Reality taught
That even if recitation and hardships
Are practiced for long periods of time,
They will be meaningless if the mind is distracted elsewhere.
You all know that in the process of carrying out whatever job, activities
or tasks that you undertake, if your mind is not concentrated and focused,
your heart is not there, and your mind is not there, then nothing much gets
accomplished. Even you may complete the task but it may not be a job that
is well done. This is quite clear from our own experiences.
The verse is saying that when doing our daily recitation, reciting mantras,
or undergoing austerities, putting up with hardships such as when doing the
Nyung-na, and if those practices are done with a distracted mind, then one
will not achieve anything that is greatly meaningful.
The verse is saying that regardless of how long you engage in those
activities, you may be doing that for a very long time, but during that
whole time if you are distracted then you will not achieve anything that is
greatly meaningful.
But if you look at the words literally, the teaching is telling you that no
matter what you do, as long as you do it with a distracted mind, then all
those practices including your daily prayers are meaningless.
Khen Rinpoche (spoke in English): I don’t know the expression in English
for this? I don’t know. If you ask some guy to do a job such as lifting,
and if the guy cannot do, then normally people will say the negative word;
“You are not a man”. You know what I am saying. You have this English
expression or something like that?
There are such expression “You are not a human being as you can't do this.
Are you a human? You can't even do that!” But of course the person that you
are referring to is obviously a human.
Likewise here, the verse is saying that if you practice all these hardships
and austerities for a long period of time with a distracted mind, then it
will be meaningless. Meaningless here doesn’t mean that there is absolutely
no benefit or absolutely no meaning. What it is driving at is that you will
not achieve anything that is greatly meaningful or really meaningful.
In short, without concentrated mind, without attention and focus, the
teaching is telling that you will not achieve your purpose and goal. But if
you can focus on what you are doing and do it single-pointedly, then you
will achieve your goals. So achieving your goals and purposes are dependent
on your mind.
Practices like our daily recitation and daily prayers are methods for us to
stabilize the mind. These practices must then become method to stabilize
and to focus the mind.
In the sutra, the Buddha says: “Oh bhikshu, austerities and prayers and so
forth that distract the mind to the desire realms do not have a result”.
This is saying that whatever practices that you are engaging in and
whatever virtuous activities of the body and speech have to be done without
a distracted mind. For if they are done with a distracted mind then they
will not bring about any great result.

|Wisdom relies on the|
|mind                |


Verse 5.17
Even those who wish to obtain happiness and overcome suffering
Will wander with no aim
If they do not comprehend the secret of the mind –
The principal Dharma
What is “the secret of the mind” as mentioned in this verse? There are ways
to explain this phrase – the secret of the mind. The dharma to be known,
the dharma to be learned, and dharma to be understood is none other than
the secret of the mind. The secret of the mind in this context is the mind
emptiness of truly existence.
If you take the secret of the mind to mean the mind emptiness of inherent
existence or emptiness of truly existence, why is it a secret? Because you
should not reveal the teachings of emptiness to unsuitable vessels whose
mind is not ripe for that understanding. As such, it is a secret of the
mind. This is one explanation.
The mind emptiness of inherent existence is a quality that every sentient
being has. As long as it is a sentient being, that sentient being has
consciousness. It is the ultimate nature of that consciousness to be empty
of existing inherently. Although this is the reality, however, most
sentient beings do not know the ultimate nature of the mind. They do not
realize the ultimate nature of the mind. As such, it remains a secret for
them.
The ultimate nature of all phenomena including one’s mind is the emptiness
of inherent existence. It is from this ultimate nature, this emptiness of
inherent existence, that all phenomena arise from. So all phenomena are
like the display of emptiness.
All the appearance of the phenomena is like reflection. Phenomena are like
the reflection and the mind is like the mirror. All phenomena are
appearances and reflection of the mind. All phenomena are creations of the
mind.
The verse is talking about the principal or primary Dharma which is the
ultimate nature of all phenomena. Every phenomenon including the mind is
empty of existing inherently. All phenomena are a display of emptiness and
all external objects are creations of the mind. The understanding of this
fact constitutes the principal Dharma.
Without realizing how all phenomena are the displays of emptiness, how
phenomena arise from emptiness and how all external phenomena are
projections/creations of the mind, one will not be able to achieve nirvana
and peace and one will not be able to achieve full enlightenment.
When the highest school, the Consequence Middle Way School (CMWS) talks
about external objects, it is not that they refute the external objects.
They do assert external object. It is just that they assert external
objects do not exist truly. Many a times when people hear the word
“external object” and when they think about external object, they think
that what external object is something that is separated from the mind, out
there existing from its own side. That is not what an external object means
according to CMWS.
We talked about external objects from the CMWS' point of view. They assert
external object but they assert that external objects do not exist truly.
They are not saying that the external objects are mind. They are just
saying that external objects are projections of the mind. External objects
are distinct entity from the mind.
Without realizing this secret of the mind, there is no nirvana, no
liberation and there is not omniscience. As such, one has to continue
circling in cyclic existence over and over again. In order to achieve
nirvana and omniscience, one has to understand and realize this secret of
the mind.
Having some understanding and reflecting on how phenomena are projections
of the mind, and how phenomena are the creation of the mind is very
helpful. One could relate this to the enemies. How the enemies are the
creations and projections of our own mind.
Like what we have seen before, the foundation of all the problems is this
apprehension of true existence. That is the self-ignorance. In the
perspective of this ignorant mind, whatever appear appears as truly
existent/ inherently existent. And we assent to the appearance and believe
in it. With that belief as the basis, then the incorrect mental attention
comes in and exaggerates the situation or the object – either exaggerating
or deprecating it. Based on these incorrect mental attention anger and
attachment arises.
On the basis of ignorance, we have the incorrect mental attention. Based on
that, then that is how the object of attachment arises, and that is how the
object of hatred arises as well.
Because of anger and attachment, then we create the enemy and object of
attachment. This understanding is helpful. It helps the mind. We understand
how this enemy and external object of attachment are the creations of the
mind - the creations of the incorrect mental attention. There is no enemy
from the side of that object, that person, or that situation. There is no
real beautiful, pleasant, and attractive object from the side of the
object. Rather it is a projection of the attachment.
It is very important to understand how everything is the display of the
mind. Everything is the projection of the mind. Like what we have discussed
earlier in the context of anger, the external enemy is a projection of
anger, which is a creation of anger. If there is no anger, there is no
enemy. Enemy comes into being because we are upset, or we don’t like it.
But if there is no anger, there is nothing appearing as an enemy. As such,
there is no enemy. Even if the person does something bad, because there is
no projection of enemy, it is like as if there is no enemy. From this, you
can see how the enemy is a projection/creation of the mind. If there is
anger there is enemy. If there is no anger, there is no labeling “enemy”
then one does not consider that as enemy.
Like attachment as well, the object of attachment is a projection of
attachment. Because one exaggerates the object, the object appears nice in
the view of the attachment. Therefore, in the view of the attachment, there
is an object of attachment. Therefore, there is this appearance of very
nice and so real. In the absence of the view of attachment, there will be
no attachment even though the object is there. Because there is no
attachment, that pleasant object has nothing to appear to.
Even wisdom is a quality. It is dependent on the mind. The wisdom here in
this context refers to wisdom realizing selflessness. The wisdom realizing
selflessness is dependent on the mind. Without this wisdom, there is no
nirvana, and there is no omniscience.
Debate Gestures
By now many of you may have seen how a debate session is conducted
traditionally in the monasteries such as Sera Je. The debate is carried out
with certain hand gestures including the clapping of hands.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): Many haven’t seen? You might think they are
doing some kung fu!
When people are debating, the challenger put his left hand out with the
palm facing upwards. He then raises his right hand and hit the right hand
onto his left hand.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): You must remember that. Tomorrow we need to
debate.
There is a symbolism behind that hand gestures by depending on what the
individual visualizes or thinks about.
The theory is this:
• On the palm of your left hand, you visualize and think that all the six
  types of migratory beings are there.
• Your raised right hand is the sword of wisdom.
• As your right hand goes down and claps, this symbolizes the sword of
  wisdom cuts, destroys and then eliminates the darkness of confusion or
  ignorance in the minds of the six types of migratory beings.
• Once you have done that your left hand then faces downward.
• Then you raise your right hand again with the palm facing towards you.
  What it symbolizes is that after you have eliminated the ignorance of the
  six types of migratory beings, you lead and guide them to enlightenment.
At the beginning of every debate session, what you hear when the hands are
clapped is that they are shouting “DHI” very loudly.
When you are debating for the very first time, you are supposed to recite
“OM AH RA PA TSA NA DHI” very quickly. But as you slam your hand down, you
recite “DHI” loudly.
The meaning of the syllables of the mantra AH, RA, PA and TSA

AH refer to phenomena are not being established by their own entities.
The syllable “AH” essentially is talking about emptiness. In the Perfection
of Wisdom Sutras, there are the extensive, middling, short and the
condensed versions. The condensed version is the Heart of the Perfection of
Wisdom Sutra. The most condensed version is the Perfection of Wisdom in one
letter “AH”.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): If you know the “AH”, that’s it!
RA means to all phenomena are devoid or separated or free from dust. Dust
here is taken to be true existence. This means that all phenomena are free
from true existence. Simply speaking, all phenomena are not truly existent.
PA refers to the ultimate, which is the emptiness of all phenomena.
TSA refers to no birth and no death. If we examine the ultimate nature of
all phenomena, ultimately there is no production and there is no
disintegration. As such, if you relate it to human being or sentient being,
ultimately there is no birth and ultimately there is no death.
NA – here it is explained to be free of name. I wonder what the explanation
is.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): I don’t know exactly what “free of name” means.
Free of label? Free of name? What does that mean?
It is merely labeled so not free? I’m not sure the explanation of that.
I wonder how you can explain the “NA” to be free of name or free from
naming or free from labeling.
Yes, all phenomena are established as mere name. But phenomena are not the
names.
Could that be the explanation of how all phenomena are free from names? I
don’t know.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): Could you say all phenomena is name? Or no?
It is said in CMWS that all phenomena exist as mere name. Does that mean
that all phenomena are names? If you can say that phenomena are not names,
then you could say that this would then be the meaning of free of names.
Student: Khen Rinpoche, can we use the term non-conceptual?
How Lama Tsongkhapa phrased it is that it is free from name. But the
question is: What exactly does it mean to be free from name? What is a
name?
Khen Rinpoche (in English): What is name?
What is a name? Is it a form? Is it consciousness? Or is it non-associated
compositional factor?
Of the three divisions of the functioning thing, is name consciousness,
form or non-associated compositional factor?
Khen Rinpoche (in English): Is name not form? I think the name is form, I
don’t know.
(Student response inaudible).
Khen Rinpoche (in English): So name is just a sound? Anyway doesn’t matter.
Whatever it is!
Right in the beginning when you enter into the debate, as you makes the
first clap you recite “OM AH RA PA TSA NA and end with DHI” quickly. This
is the whole explanation of emptiness.
• After DHI, it is followed by the prayer “May we come to realize the
  meaning of emptiness exactly as it is intended”.
Next you observe the non-objectifying the three circles, which mean:
- You carry out the debate focusing on yourself the debater as non-existing
inherently,
- The opponent that you are debating with does not exist inherently and
- The debate itself, the activity, does not exist inherently as well.
The intention/motivation behind doing this kind of analysis/debate is to
eliminate the darkness of confusion or ignorance in one’s and other’s mind,
primarily to eliminate the ignorance/confusion in one’s own mind. Of course
the effort for that is to realize the ultimate nature of reality.
Therefore, right from the beginning of one’s formal entry into this whole
exercise of dialectics/debate, starting from the first clap that you make,
you generate the intention to be able to arrive at and settle the view of
selflessness one day. Because it is only with that one’s confusion/darkness
of ignorance in one’s mind can be removed. One engages in such
dialectics/debates with the intention to be able to realize the ultimate
nature of reality, selflessness. Until this selflessness is realized, one
will just have to continue circling in samsara and suffer.
Anyway, that is the intention behind it. From the first day, you set that
kind of motivation. Ideally and theoretically that should be the mindset
all the time when you are engaging in such dialectics/ debates.
We are unable to continuously place the mind to focus on that intention. As
it always happens, many a time the mind is distracted and then there comes
to be a distinction between oneself as a challenger and the defender, there
is “you and me.” Then in the process one gets upset with one another in the
debate and sometimes it becomes a condition for one to become very arrogant
or very proud. This happens all the time.
In the course of engaging in such dialectics/debate, for as long as one can
maintain mindfulness on the fact that how everything does not exist
inherently, like oneself and the person you are discussing with, then that
helps.
The concentration and the focus help the mind not to be distracted and end
up in a state of anger or pride.
I guess that right from the very beginning when one is formally entering
into such dialectic/ debate, one is introduced to the purpose behind such
an exercise with a brief kind of stating the meaning of emptiness. In the
context here, it becomes important to have that thought of doing it
whenever engaging in discussion. The exercise is to help one another to
eliminate the darkness of ignorance/confusion. Otherwise, sometimes in the
discussion, people are not happy with one another’s answer or questions. If
it happens many times, then your discussion partner will become an enemy.
Of course such things do happen. Then it is like medicine transforming into
poison. As such the medicine which is transformed into poison will not be
able to cure. It would be ideal if we can maintain the understanding or
that feeling of emptiness of inherent existence during discussion. If not,
then as much as possible to have that in the back of the mind, the whole
point of the whole exercise is to help one another to eliminate the
ignorance.
Verse 5.17 is quite helpful if you can memorize it and think about it. Up
to this particular verse [verse 5.6 – 5.17] are explanations of how all the
faults and how all the positive qualities arise from the mind.
The conclusion is that since all the faults and all the qualities arise
from the mind, therefore it is essential to guard the mind.
Next section is about striving and guarding the mind. We will continue in
the next lesson.



























