Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Engaging in the Deeds of a Bodhisattva/lesson19.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:52:13.365513
================================================================================


As we have seen that it is mentioned in the text that afflictions arise
from the erroneous minds. As such, it is possible to eradicate the
afflictions and we have the capacity to destroy the afflictions. The way to
destroy the afflictions is to develop the wisdom realizing selflessness in
our own minds. The afflictions are not going to go away or disappear on
their own accord but it is through developing the wisdom realizing
selflessness that will enable us to destroy the afflictions. The wisdom
realizing selflessness destroys the afflictions and it is quite similar to
how illumination overcomes darkness. When the wisdom realizing selflessness
arises, the afflictions are pacified. So when the wisdom realizing
selflessness is developed, the afflictions ceased there and then. They do
not go elsewhere, but rather they dissolve into the clear light.
Because of our lack of wisdom and very weak state of mind, we are unable to
overcome or destroy the afflictions. If we are able to develop the wisdom
realizing selflessness, it is said that the afflictions will be destroyed
easily. When there is wisdom realizing selflessness, it will be easy to
overcome or to destroy the inner enemy of the afflictions. With the wisdom
realizing selflessness, destroying the inner afflictions will be a much
easier task than overcoming the outer enemy.
As in the last line of verse 4.46, “Although this is so, weak-minded, I
have been reduced to making no effort”.
Because we don’t have the wisdom realizing selflessness or because this
wisdom realizing selflessness is weak, therefore we are not able to
vanquish or to destroy the afflictions.
The next verse basically explains that the afflictions can be overcome
because the afflictions do not exist truly.

|3 If they are completely uprooted, there is absolutely no place that supports  |
|their existence and [thus] it is reasonable [to say] that they [can be]        |
|abandoned                                                                      |


In Gyaltsab Je’s commentary, he states that others may raise a qualm:
“There may be people who think “Since the afflictions are generated in
one’s own continuum, therefore they have to exist inherently. If so, how
the afflictions can be abandoned”.
There maybe people who think in such a way. Next verse is in response to
this qualm.
This is what we think. When we look at our own afflictions, the afflictions
look so real. It looks as if they always have been there, so real right
there and something very solid existing from its own side. Therefore, we
really wonder whether it is really possible to overcome it.
Verse 4.47  a,b
If these afflictions do not abide within objects,
Not in the collection of sense powers, between the two nor elsewhere,
Then where do they abide and how do they harm all migrating beings?
This is talking about how the afflictions are not inherently existent.
Here is an explanation of how we can reflect on the afflictions are not
being inherently existent when the afflictions such as anger or attachment
arise in our minds.
When an affliction such as attachment or anger arises strongly, we can
check whether the afflictions exist right from the side of the object of
anger or attachment or not. Does the affliction exist inherently right
there on either the enemy or the object of attachment?
Our afflictions do not exist inherently on the enemy. Neither does it exist
inherently on the loved ones. For example, if you talk about attachment,
attachment and desire does not exist inherently on the form that one is
attached to. The form that we are attracted to or the enemy that we are
upset with do not exist from their own side i.e. right from the side of the
object.
If the afflictions exist inherently on the object of attachment or object
of anger, then whoever comes into contact with the object would necessarily
have to generate attachment or anger. But the foe destroyers, when they
come into contact with form, they do not generate attachment from the form
that they perceive.
This is something to think about. If you talk about attachment, attachment
does not exist inherently from the side of the object that you are attached
to, let’s say our loved ones. Or anger does not exist inherently on the
enemy. It does not exist from the side of the enemy.
If you just examine on our own experience, when we are very upset with a
situation of somebody, the anger appears to exist in the object i.e. from
the side of the object. We never ever think it is coming from our side and
is made up by our mind.
Similarly, when we are attached to an object or to a person, again there is
this attachment, this energy coming from the side of the person or the
object. We never ever think; “It is coming from me, my mind”. This is how
we believe and this is how things appear to us experientially.
It is said in the teachings that afflictions such as attachment and anger
arise from incorrect mental attention.
Afflictions such as anger and attachment arise from incorrect mental
attention. If you investigate at the very root of this incorrect mental
attention, it is this innate belief and apprehension of inherent existence,
apprehension of true existence, something real right there.
How does attachment operate? In the view of this attachment, there is an
appearance of an inherent existent object of attachment, it is like a very
nice object or a nice person. Then the incorrect mental attention comes in
and basically exaggerates the object beyond what it actually is. From that,
there is very strong emotional involvement and very strong grasping.
Likewise in the view of anger, when an unpleasant situation occurs or an
unpleasant object appears, first there is an appearance of a truly
existent/inherently existent enemy or the unpleasant object. Then the
incorrect mental attention exaggerates the situation or the person beyond
what it actually is and that leads to very strong dislike.
This is how afflictions arise and this is how it works. The basis is always
an apprehension of inherent existence, apprehension of true existence. That
acting as a basis then you have incorrect mental attention that superimpose
the features and the characteristics onto that object of attachment or
anger beyond what it actually is. That mind reacts and then there is very
strong anger or strong attachment. From strong anger and strong attachment,
it leads us to accumulating karma. Then we have to experience all the
variety of problems and suffering of samsara.
For every single problem, your experience is a ripening result of the karma
that you have accumulated. Karma is accumulated, motivated and driven by
the afflictions. All the afflictions are based on the apprehension of true
existence, apprehension of inherent existence.
All the problems and sufferings come from karma and the afflictions. Of the
two, the afflictions are the principle cause. For it is said that if there
is no afflictions, even if there is the karma remaining, it will not be
able to give rise to its effects. So of the two, the afflictions are much
more powerful.
The very thing that can directly oppose this ignorance, the apprehension of
inherent existence, is the wisdom directly perceiving selflessness. When
the wisdom directly perceiving selflessness is generated, it renders
ignorance powerless in that henceforth one will not accumulate fresh
projecting karma.
In the Nagarjuna’s “Fundamental Root Treatise on Wisdom”, it says that the
problems and sufferings arise from karma and the afflictions. The
afflictions come from the incorrect mental attention. The root of all the
afflictions is ignorance, the apprehension of inherent existence. This
ignorance is ceased by emptiness.
So if you look at the process of how the afflictions arise, essentially
afflictions arise through our own incorrect mental attention, through the
root of being ignorant. Basically, it is coming from our own mind. That is
the reality but we don’t ever think that the affliction is made up by our
mind. We believe that it comes from the object, whether it is an object of
attachment or an unpleasant object. When we are very attached to an object,
we do so because we feel that there is something right there from the
object or coming from the side of the object. We never ever think it is a
projection of our mind. To us, it is coming right there from the very
pleasant object or the person. It is the same thing with anger. When we get
upset, we think that everything is coming from the side of the object;
completely right there from the side of the object. We never ever think it
is a projection of our mind. Never!
In short, the afflictions do not abide within objects, unlike what we
innately believe. When we get upset or very attached, we feel that there is
this energy, this feeling and this afflictions that is coming from the side
of the object - from the pleasant object or unpleasant object right there.
If the afflictions are coming from the side of the object like what we
innately believe, then it follows that whoever comes into contact with the
object will necessarily develop afflictions, whether it is attachment or
anger. But that is not the case.
When we are very attached to a person or an object, there is this
appearance and belief that everything pleasant about that object is coming
from the side of the object completely. Or when we are upset with the
situation or an object or a person, again all these unpleasant
characteristics or whatever we don’t like about the object or the person,
in our experience what we believe is that it is completely coming from the
side of the object. Nothing to do with our mind!
Although that is what we believe but the reality is that the afflictions do
not exist inherently within the objects. If the afflictions exist
inherently within the objects, then it absurdly follows that whoever comes
into contact with those objects will necessarily generate affliction. The
afflictions do not exist inherently within the objects. Neither do they
exist inherently within the sense powers. They do not exist also within the
mental sense powers, the consciousness.
The afflictions do not exist inherently. The afflictions do not abide
inherently within the sense powers. They do not abide inherently within the
consciousness (the mind). Why?
- If the afflictions are existing inherently within the sense powers, then
it absurdly follows that whenever the sense powers are in operation, then
one will necessarily be in an afflicted state, and there will always be
afflictions.
-If the afflictions are abiding inherently within the consciousness, then
it would absurdly follows that as long as there is a consciousness (the
mind), then there will always be afflictions manifest.
-If the affliction exists inherently within the sense powers then it
necessarily follows that whenever we see things, whenever we hear things,
those experiences are necessarily pervaded by afflictions. That will be the
entailment but that is not the case. It doesn’t mean that whenever we are
hearing something or whenever we are looking at something, it doesn’t mean
that there is necessarily an affliction.
If the afflictions exist inherently in the various sense powers and if the
afflictions inherently exist within the consciousness, that means whenever
these sense powers came into existence and whenever the consciousness
arises, the afflictions were there already from day one. If the afflictions
exist inherently, they have to exist in such a way. If they exist
inherently within the sense powers or exist inherently within the
consciousness, they would have to be one with the sense powers or one with
the consciousness. Then that will absurdly follows that arhats will have
afflictions because they have sense powers and they also have a mind.
The point is that it is wrong to believe or to think that the afflictions
are inherently one with the sense powers or one with the consciousness
because there will be many logical fallacies.
Although the afflictions do not exist inherently but when we look at our
afflictions, when we conceive and think of our afflictions, how do they
appear to us? They appear so real inherently existent. But just because
they appear to exist inherently, it doesn’t mean that they are inherently
existent.
The afflictions do not exist inherently within the objects. Neither do they
exist within the sense powers. What about somewhere in between the two?
The text is saying “the afflictions also do not exist in between those
two”.
If the afflictions are not inherently existent within the object or if the
afflictions are not inherently existent within the sense powers and it
cannot be found somewhere in between those two, does it mean that it is
somewhere else other than in between those two? Of course the answer is
also no. At the end of the day, the point is that the afflictions do not
exist inherently.
These afflictions that have been harming us since beginningless time up to
now are not inherently existent. If they are not inherently existent, again
how are we harmed by it?
If afflictions do not exist inherently within the object, do not exist
inherently within the sense powers, do not exist inherently between those
two, then how can inherently existent afflictions harm us? The inherently
existent afflictions cannot harm us because afflictions do not exist
inherently. As such, inherently existent afflictions cannot harm. Through
such a reflection then we deal with the afflictions when they arise. First
you suppress then to eliminate them from the root.
Next is how to deal with the afflictions by understanding that they exist
conventionally.
Verse 4.47 c,d
They are like an illusion. Thus I should dispel the fear within my heart
and strive for the sake of wisdom.
For no meaning, why am I harmed in hell and so forth?
We have to understand that the afflictions are like illusion. There isn’t
such a thing as inherently existent afflictions. Afflictions do not exist
inherently nevertheless they appear as inherently existent. They appear to
exist inherently. Therefore they are like an illusion.
By understanding all these, abandon the fear of not being able to abandon
the afflictions because of thinking that they are inherently existent.
Therefore, it is correct to strive in abandoning the afflictions through
developing wisdom.  If this is the case then why should I allow myself to
go to the hells and suffer there, now that I know that the afflictions can
be destroyed?
In short, we deal with the afflictions by reflecting on how they are not
inherently existent and reflecting on how they are liked illusion. The
teachings are saying that when afflictions arise, we should not follow
after the afflictions but rather that we should investigate why is this
affliction arising? What is its cause? How is it arising? What is it
arising from? Then we look for the very source, the origin, and the root of
the afflictions. It is through generating the wisdom realizing selflessness
that we are able to cut at the root of the afflictions. The teachings tell
us that once we are able to develop this wisdom realizing selflessness we
would be able to destroy the afflictions.

|Synopsis |


Verse 4.48
Therefore, having thought about this,
I should make effort for the sake of accomplishing the trainings explained.

If the doctor’s instructions are ignored,
How will a patient in need of treatment be cured by the medicines?
In all the earlier verses in this chapter, we were told to be conscientious
in guarding the bodhicitta that has been generated. We have been told to be
conscientious in guarding the training, isn’t it? In the first place we
were told to be conscientious to guard ourselves and to not let ourselves
be stained by the bodhisattva downfalls and the faults. But even if we are
stained by the downfalls and faults, we should confess and purify them.
Then there was this big section on being conscientious in guarding
ourselves against the afflictions. So, all of these were explained earlier.

We have to cultivate conscientiousness by reflecting on all the advices
given earlier in the chapter.
This verse is saying that just like a patient who is very sick would need
to follow the doctor’s advice, to take the medicine and the appropriate
treatment. Likewise, here we have to follow basically the advices given by
the Buddha with regards to being conscientious in our trainings.
In Gyaltsab Je’s commentary, he concluded the commentary for this chapter
by saying: the freedom from memory of faults increasing virtue without
degeneration, this depend with certainty on meditation on
conscientiousness. Therefore should those proficient always depends on
conscientiousness.

|The chapter’s|
|name         |


The chapter’s name is Teaching Conscientiousness

The Fifth Chapter: Guarding Alertness
Next chapter is Chapter on guarding vigilance. According to Gyaltsab Je’s
outline, it says: Explaining the way of trainings in morality by explaining
mindfulness and introspection (vigilance) - the method for keeping the
virtuous dharma pure.
This chapter essentially is an explanation of keeping ethical discipline.
It is an explanation of how to protect one’s ethical discipline and how to
keep it pure. One has to keep the ethical discipline pure with mindfulness
and introspection.
In order to achieve full enlightenment, it is necessary to enter and engage
in a path that is unmistaken and complete. If the path is mistaken, one
will not achieve the result. Similarly, if there are elements of the path
that are missing, which means the path is incomplete, the result would not
be achieved as well.
The teachings tell us that it is not sufficient to generate aspirational
bodhicitta, rather on the basis of after generate aspirational bodhicitta
one must take the bodhisattva vows and then engage in the trainings.
Otherwise, one will not achieve the result.
All the bodhisattvas’ trainings can be condensed into the six perfections.
When we say that the bodhisattvas need to train in the path that is
complete and unmistaken, that means the bodhisattvas have to practice the
bodhisattva deeds - the trainings - and in particular, these six
perfections. Of the six perfections, here in this chapter the perfection of
ethical discipline is the topic of discussion.

|Explaining the chapter’s material                                         |
|A An extensive explanation of the way to practice                         |
|B The conclusion, as it is necessary to put into practice the meaning     |
|without [leaving it on the level of] mere words                           |

|A An extensive explanation of the way to practice                              |
|1 The method for guarding the trainings: guarding the mind                     |
|2 The method for guarding the mind: guarding mindfulness and alertness         |
|3 The way to train in the conduct of guarding the mind by means of mindfulness |
|and alertness                                                                  |
|4 The branch or method of excellent trainings                                  |

|1 The method for guarding the trainings: guarding the mind                     |
|A By guarding the mind, one comes to guard all                                 |
|B The reasons for that                                                         |
|C Making effort in guarding the mind                                           |

|A By guarding the mind, one comes to guard all                                 |
|1 A brief presentation on the necessity of guarding the mind                   |
|2 The shortcomings of allowing the mind to degenerate                          |
|3 The benefits of guarding the mind                                            |


Following Gyaltsab Je’s outline, explaining the text or the body of this
chapter is covered in two points:
A Explaining extensively how to practice
B The conclusion by summary as one need to actually practice and just not
talking from the mouth.
A  Explaining extensively how to practice itself is covered in four points:
   1. Guarding the mind as method for guarding the trainings
   2. Guarding mindfulness and introspection as method for guarding the mind
   3. The action of guarding the mind with mindfulness and introspection
   4. The limb of perfecting the trainings
1   Guarding the mind as method for guarding the trainings consists of
three points:
   i. Protecting all by protecting the mind
  ii. The reason for that
 iii. Striving then in protecting the mind
i. Protecting all by protecting the mind, there are three points:
     a) Showing in brief that one needs to protect the mind
     b) The fault of the mind degenerating or degenerating the mind
     c) The benefits of protecting the mind
The point is that in order to guard the trainings one has to guard the
mind. Therefore, it is very important to guard and protect the mind.

|1 A brief presentation on the necessity of guarding the mind                   |


Verse 5.1
Those who wish to guard their trainings
Should very tightly guard their minds.
Those who do not guard their minds
Are unable to guard their trainings.
There are many trainings the bodhisattvas have to undertake. In order to
protect their trainings, they have to focus on guarding their minds. We
have to protect the minds from engaging in the erroneous objects. If the
mind is not protected against erroneous objects, and if we do not stop the
mind from following and engaging in erroneous objects then it will be very
difficult to protect the trainings. As such, therefore it is very important
to protect and to guard the mind.
Our minds are likened to an untamed elephant. How do you tame an untamed
elephant? You tie the untamed elephant with a very strong rope to a very
stable pillar. You check every now and then to see whether the elephant is
still tied to that strong pillar. Likewise, we guard our minds with the
rope of mindfulness and the guard of introspection. We have to protect our
minds from wandering off and engaging in erroneous objects. The way to
guard our minds in such a way is by relying on mindfulness and
introspection. The thought in our minds are likened to waves in an ocean.
They just come in waves after waves without any stopping. The thought that
arise are not stable and they don’t last very long time. They only exist
for a very short time and then replace by another one.
We have to guard our minds with mindfulness and introspection.
Mindfulness is the mental factor that does not allow the mind to forget the
virtuous object of observation.
We have to tie our mind with the rope of mindfulness to a virtuous object
of observation. It is mindfulness that stops the mind from forgetting this
chosen virtuous object of observation.
Mindfulness is that which does not allow the mind to forget what to engage
and what to discard. Mindfulness causes the mind to stay on that virtuous
object of observation without forgetting. This is how mindfulness protects
the mind.
Introspection (vigilance) is like the person who checks what are we up to,
what is our body, speech and mind up to, what is it doing? It is like
somebody checking. It is through introspection (vigilance) that we continue
to engage in mindfulness, and continue to apply mindfulness.
That is a brief explanation of how to guard one’s trainings. In short, one
guards the trainings by guarding the mind with mindfulness and
introspection.  If the mind degenerates, what happens?

|2 The shortcomings of allowing the  |
|mind to degenerate                  |


Verse 5.2
In this [world,] unsubdued and crazed elephants
Do not cause such harms
As the harms of Relentless Torment
Caused by the unleashed elephant of my mind.
Note: Relentless Torment - Avici Hells
If we let this unsubdued mind wander off and do whatever it likes, we will
end up accumulating negativities which then throw us into the hells. An
untamed mind leads to accumulating so many negativities which will then
lead us into the lower realms. This is something that an external untamed
elephant cannot do to us. For that reason, therefore we have to strive in
guarding or protecting the mind.
What are the benefits if we protect or guard our mind?

|3 The benefits of guarding the mind |
|A A brief presentation              |
|B An extensive explanation          |

|A A brief presentation              |


Verse 5.3
But if the elephant of my mind is tightly bound
Through all by the rope of mindfulness,
All fears will cease to exist
And all virtues will come into my hand.
Here the verse says that if we bind our minds tightly onto a virtuous
object of observation, we will protect our minds. It is said that if we are
able to bind our minds tightly onto a virtuous object of observation then
we will achieve easily a good rebirth as a human and god. We will easily
achieve happiness of liberation.
The teachings are saying that we need to guard minds with mindfulness and
introspection. If we can place our minds strongly on the virtuous object of
observation we will be able to acquire all virtues. If we are able to
acquire all virtues we will be able to acquire all the different kinds of
happiness and we will be able to overcome non-virtue and suffering. For it
is said in the sutra that the best thing is to subdue one’s minds. If we
subdue our minds, we achieve all happiness.
Lama Atisha said “If we subdue our minds, the external enemy cannot harm
but if one’s mind is non-subdued and if one’s mind moves and wanders off to
this erroneous object then we are harmed”. This is how external enemy as a
condition can harm us. If we let our mind wander onto erroneous objects,
the external enemy acts as a condition for the inner enemy,  the
afflictions, to arise. When the inner enemy of afflictions arises that
burns our mind. This is how our enemy destroys us. Therefore we have to
vanquish or subdue the inner enemy. This is the advice of Lama Atisha.
We may think “So what if I subdue my mind? Even if I subdue my mind but
there are so many external difficult conditions and there is no way that I
can protect myself against all of these. Therefore there is no way I can
completely free of fear even if I subdue my mind”.
The answer to that in is in the next verse.

[BP1 L25] When we bind our three doors of body, speech and mind with the
rope of mindfulness and tie them to a virtuous object of observation, we
will be freed of the fears of this life and all future lives. All the
qualities of the path and the qualities of the realisations of a person of
small,  medium and great capacity - in short, all virtues and excellences -
will come to us. What do we mean by tying up our three doors with
mindfulness and introspection? What are we tying them to? It means the
capability of the mind to keep focused on virtue. We can understand this
with the simple analogy of the crazy and unsubdued elephant. If we are able
to tie the elephant with an iron chain to a very strong pillar, there is no
way the elephant can harm us and we need not be afraid since we know that
it can no longer hurt us. In the same way, we need to tie up our minds and
keep them focussed very strongly and in a very stable way on a virtuous
object.

|B An extensive       |
|explanation          |


Verse 5.4
Tigers, lions, elephants, bears,
Snakes, and all my enemies,
The guardians who are hell beings,
Evil spirits and likewise cannibals,
Verse 5.5
Will all be bound
By binding this mind alone,
And will all be subdued
By subduing this mind alone.
Khen Rinpoche (In English): Okay that is the answer. You will find out.  We
stop here.
Q&A
Student 1:  Related to verse 4.47 that were explained, it is the
relationship between the afflictions and the objects. It is sounded like
there are two versions. One is when we see our object, we exaggerate its
qualities and attachment or aversion arises because we see the object is
inherently desirable or the object is inherently horrible.
It also seems to say that the affliction is somehow embedded in the object
itself. I can’t get my mind around that the affliction is somehow
inherently existence within the object. Maybe I didn’t understanding it
correctly.
Answer: In that verse, it is stated very clearly that these afflictions do
not abide within object. Essentially the meaning of the statement is that
the afflictions do not inherently abide within objects.
Student 1: But the incorrect mental attention is thinking that the
affliction exists in the object. Is that what we are saying here? I am a
bit confused about this.
Khen Rinpoche (In English): Which one you are confused in?
Student 1: The relationship between the afflictions and the objects.
Answer: This is an exercise to discover that the afflictions do not
inherently exist.
In order to discover they do not inherently exist, we have to discover
that:
- the afflictions do not inherently exist in the objects,
- the afflictions do not inherently exist in the sense powers or
- the afflictions do not inherently exist somewhere in between
That verse is saying that:
- the afflictions do not exist inherently within the objects,
- the afflictions do not exist inherently within the sense powers,
- the afflictions do not exist inherently somewhere in between,
- therefore the afflictions do not exist inherently at all
That is the meaning of the verse 4.47 (a,b) : If these afflictions do not
abide within objects, Not in the collection of sense powers, between the
two nor elsewhere
Khen Rinpoche (in English): That is the meaning of the verse. Then your
question is what?
Student 1: The commentary sounded as if that we exaggerate the qualities of
the objects that is the afflictions, that is what causes the afflictions to
arise.
Answer: That was an explanation on how the afflictions arise in our mind,
isn’t it?
Student 1: Yes. There is this conception from our side that thinks the
attachment exists within the object.
Khen Rinpoche (in English):  Do we think that or not?
Student 1: No. One doesn’t think the attachment is embedded in the object.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): Attachment is 100% coming from the object, you
don’t feel that? You feel it coming from your mind? You see that the
attachment is totally coming from the object, isn’t it? Giving this
attachment from the object, isn’t it?
Student 1: I see the qualities of the object.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): So, this gives the attachment? Who gives the
attachment?
Student 1: The attachment is arising in our mind.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): But who produce? 100% produced from the object,
isn’t it?
Student 1: Okay. I never think like that before.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): The strong attachment arise, you feel that it
is 100% attachment is giving from the object. When you are angry at the
person, also it is exactly like that. What you feel is “I am okay but this
person is giving 100% anger to me, from the object”. It is totally from the
object. You don’t feel that “my mind” made this, unhappy & angry, isn’t it?
The point is that the object makes your attachment 100%. Your minds don’t
think “I make the attachment”. What you feel is the object gives you the
100% your attachment, from the object side.

