Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Engaging in the Deeds of a Bodhisattva/lesson31.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:52:13.354837
================================================================================


Student: Is it correct to say that the anger of a lower bodhisattva towards
a higher bodhisattva destroys one great countless eons of merits, whereas
the anger for a higher bodhisattva towards a lower bodhisattva destroys one
hundred great eons of merits?
Khen Rinpoche: A non bodhisattva who gets angry at a bodhisattva, the non
bodhisattva’s anger will destroy the merit that he has accumulated over a
thousand eons.
If a lower bodhisattva gets angry at a higher bodhisattva, he destroys
merits accumulated over a hundred eons.
Student: So is the other way round.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): I said that in the last class, isn’t it?
Remember? I think I said that. Remember? This is what I thought I said.
Student: My understanding was that the lower bodhisattva has to start from
scratch.
Khen Rinpoche: I thought I also said that if a bodhisattva who has not
obtains a prediction of his enlightenment was to get angry at a bodhisattva
who has obtained a prediction of his enlightenment, then that bodhisattva
who got angry would have to train (the path) all over again.
It is mentioned clearly that in the case of the virtues that were
accumulated over a thousand eons and over a hundred eons being destroyed by
anger, the object of the anger has to be a bodhisattva.
I don’t remember exactly, but what I remember saying was that if a lower
bodhisattva was to get angry at a higher bodhisattva, then that lower
bodhisattva’s anger will destroy his merit that was accumulated over a
hundred eons. I have to check the text again. When we are talking about the
destruction of the merits accumulated a hundred eon, it is either the lower
bodhisattva or the higher bodhisattva. I have to check the text again.
Khen Rinpoche (in English):  I will check whether higher bodhisattva gets
angry at a lower bodhisattva destroys hundred eons of virtue or it is the
lower bodhisattva get angry at a higher bodhisattva destroys hundred eons.
I need to check. Last class I mentioned that lower angry at a higher one?
Student: No, it is the other way round. Higher bodhisattva to lower
bodhisattva destroys one hundred.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): Then that must be correct then.
Student: Then I have a qualm.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): I think that must be correct. What I said last
time must be correct.
Student: The reason was that it is one great countless eons for the Path of
Accumulation and Path of Preparation, the lower bodhisattva destroys, he
has to start from…..
Khen Rinpoche (in English): Last class I said that higher bodhisattva
towards a lower bodhisattva is one hundred?
Student: Lower bodhisattva towards higher bodhisattva is one.
Khen Rinpoche (in English):  Just now I asked lower bodhisattva to higher
bodhisattva, everyone said yes. I thought I said something like that. If I
said higher bodhisattva gets angry at a lower bodhisattva, hundred eons,
then makes a little bit sense. So what is your question?
Student: A non-bodhisattva getting angry a bodhisattva destroys over one
thousand great eons, whereas the higher bodhisattva getting angry with a
lower bodhisattva destroys more merits than a lower bodhisattva getting
angry at a higher bodhisattva (which is the merit of only one eon). What is
the logic?
[A higher bodhisattva gets angry at a lower bodhisattva destroys the merit
of over a hundred great eons]
Ven Gyurme: His qualm is: a bodhisattva on the Path of Accumulation gets
angry at a bodhisattva on the Path of Preparation he has to starts all over
again, and he destroys one eon of merits.
Khen Rinpoche:  Last time when I said one eon, that was just an explanation
of how that bodhisattva who has not obtained a prediction of enlightenment
has to train all over again. Delaying the achievement of the next path by
one more eon is not equivalent to having destroyed one countless great eon
worth of merits. Then you have to ask “Why?” That postponement of the
achievement of the path of preparation by one eon is just an easy
illustration to put the point across but that is not definitive. When a
lower bodhisattva who has not obtained a prediction of his enlightenment
gets angry at a higher bodhisattva who has obtained a prediction of
enlightenment, then the result would be that bodhisattva has to train
again. What is the meaning of to train again? It is mentioned clearly that
to train again doesn’t mean that that bodhisattva on the great Path of
Accumulation has to fall back to Mahayana small Path of Accumulation. What
it means is that his achievement of his next path is delayed.
Student: So still remains on the great Path of Accumulation?
Khen Rinpoche (in English):  Yes
Student: I see, because I thought the bodhisattva has to start from
scratch. Then the question is: if the higher bodhisattva, on the Path of
Preparation who gets angry at the lower bodhisattva on the Path of
Accumulation, destroys one hundred great eons worth of merits, will his
attainment also be delayed corresponding to the amount of merits that he
has destroyed such as one hundred great eons?
Khen Rinpoche:  It is not clear in the text. If we say that a higher
bodhisattva who gets angry at a lower bodhisattva, and his anger will
destroys the merits accumulated over a hundred eons, then perhaps one might
have to say that his achievement of the next level would be delayed by that
number of eons. Why? Because he has to accumulates that amount of merits.
Khen Rinpoche (in English):  Anyway the qualm never ends. Good to have
qualm. I am not sure. These are quite difficult to explain. I don’t know
exactly. I have mentioned that higher bodhisattva getting angry at a lower
bodhisattva then one hundred eons. I got you. Could be that I don’t know, I
need to check.
Regarding the three great countless eons, one great countless eons is made
up of many great eons.
Khen Rinpoche (in English):  Ven Gyurme thinks that one great countless
eons is just one eon. That is why he has the qualm.
Student: So countless great eon and one great eon is different?
Khen Rinpoche (in English):  Yeah, of course.
Student: One great eon is made up of 80 intermediate eons. That is
different from the one countless great eon?
Khen Rinpoche (in English):  Of course.
Student: How many is one countless great eon?
Ven Gyurme: Literally more than a few hundred billion great eons.
Khen Rinpoche: I don’t know how to count as you have to go from 1, 10, 100,
like this. You have to go ten times then you restart one great countless
eons. Up to ten or twenty times, I am not sure. Cannot fit in your
calculator.  I don’t know how to count also.

|A non-bodhisattva gets angry at a   |destruction of merit accumulated over a  |
|bodhisattva                         |thousand great eons                      |
|A higher level bodhisattva gets     |destruction of merit accumulated over a  |
|angry at a lower bodhisattva        |hundred great eons                       |
|A lower level bodhisattva who gets  |his achievement of the next path is      |
|angry at a higher bodhisattva       |delayed e.g. A bodhisattva on the great  |
|(A bodhisattva who has not received |Mahayana Path of Accumulation is due to  |
|prediction of his enlightenment were|enter the Mahayana Path of Preparation   |
|to get angry at a bodhisattva who   |gets angry at another bodhisattva who is |
|has received prediction of his      |already at the Path of Preparation,      |
|enlightenment)                      |instead of entering the Path of          |
|                                    |Preparation, his realization is delayed  |
|                                    |for an great eon and he has to retrain   |
|                                    |for this path all over again             |
|A non-bodhisattva gets angry at a   |destruction of merit that comes from     |
|non-bodhisattva                     |making a full prostration to a stupa (The|
|                                    |sutras say that however many atoms are   |
|                                    |covered by the body during such a        |
|                                    |prostration is equal to the number of    |
|                                    |times to be reborn as a Wheel Turning    |
|                                    |King).                                   |


Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds

|a) Arresting the causes of anger                              |
|i) The nature of the cause along with its disadvantages       |
|ii) Instructions on making effort in the methods for          |
|overcoming anger                                              |
|iii) The actual method for overcoming that                    |
|iv) Having examined in detail the causes that give rise to    |
|anger, making effort to abandon them                          |

|ii) Instructions on making effort in the methods for          |
|overcoming anger                                              |


Verse 6.8
Therefore I should totally destroy
The fuel of this enemy;
This enemy has no other function
Than that of causing me harm.
The cause of anger is mental unhappiness. Anger arises due to the buildups
of mental unhappiness. In the last lesson we saw how mental unhappiness is
likened to the food that builds up one’s physical strength, in that mental
unhappiness is the very fuel that makes anger arise and become very
powerful.
If somebody doesn’t eat, then his physical strength and health will
deteriorate. Likewise, if we cut away the mental unhappiness and remove it,
then anger would not have any strength. Therefore, what we have to do is to
cut away mental unhappiness, and to strive to stop mental happiness. Why?
Because mental unhappiness is the cause of anger. Mental unhappiness is the
very thing that leads to anger. If we do not stop mental unhappiness then
it will grow. When anger arises with hatred, then this anger will destroy
us in this life and in the future lives. Anger has no other functions than
to destroy us in such a way. Therefore, we have to strive in the method to
overcome the enemy of anger.
As to the actual method to counteract anger, there are two parts:
1. Why is it inappropriate to be mentally unhappy?
2.  The reason for that.

|iii) The actual method for overcoming |
|that                                  |
|1’ It is unreasonable to nurture      |
|displeasure                           |
|2’ The reasons for that               |

|1’ It is unreasonable to nurture      |
|displeasure                           |


Verse 6.9
Whatever befalls me,
I shall not disturb my mental joy.
Having been made unhappy, I shall not accomplish what I wish for
And my virtues will decline.
Whatever suffering or problems befall, one is to voluntarily accept it and
hold on to the oath/pledge to not be mentally disturbed or mentally unhappy
about the problems.
Vast majority of people has the view that if you do not retaliate when
harmed or if you voluntarily accepts the problem or if you are patience,
then you will lose.  People will look down on you. People will take
advantage of you and that will lead to more people harming you. They also
cause problem for you because they see that you can be taken advantage of.
Put aside practicing of patience, vast majority of people think that you
must retaliate, because without fighting back or retaliating, you will not
be able to protect yourself.
When people are in danger or when they face problems or harms from others,
they feel that it is necessary to put on a fierce demeanor i.e. they must
show that they are ready to fight and retaliate. Most people want to do
that because they think that is the way to protect themselves. They must do
it otherwise they will be taken advantage of.
Khen Rinpoche: Show your muscle. Somebody bully you then show your muscle.
When somebody is out to harm us or when they do something bad against us,
the usual reaction is that we don’t like it, and we are mentally unhappy.
But what does it do to our mind? When we become unhappy, the only result is
that we get disturbed, and the other party is still there. They don’t get
harm.
The usual reaction is that when somebody gives us a problem, we are
mentally unhappy, and we get disturbed. We then put on a fierce demeanor
wanting to retaliate or defend ourselves. However, if we look at it
superficially, by doing that it looks as if we are protecting ourselves. We
may have saved ourselves from that small problem but that is just
superficial. It looks as if we are protecting ourselves, and we feel we are
protecting ourselves, but when we analyze the meaning, we actually have
destroyed ourselves. This is because when the mental unhappiness builds up
in the mind, it becomes anger and hatred. When the anger in the mind
manifests, what it does is it burns up the merits that we have accumulated
over a very long period of time. Essentially, we are hurting and harming
ourselves. Although superficially, if we don’t think about it, it looks as
if we are actually protecting ourselves with the feeling “I have saved
myself.”
If we don’t think about it but just look at things superficially, it looks
as if there is some benefit of protecting ourselves. If we analyze the
actual result of retaliating, in which we get angry and act out of anger,
what it actually does is we are just hurting ourselves in the long run.
Therefore the text says, for that reason, therefore there is nothing
appropriate being unhappy about something.

|2’ The reasons for that                                        |


Verse 6.10
Why be unhappy about something
If it can be remedied?
And what is the use of being unhappy about something
If it cannot be remedied?
You become unhappy because of a particular situation or problem. There are
various factors and conditions that bring about your mental unhappiness.
Then the question should be:
Is there anything that can be done about it?
Can those conditions that bring about your unhappiness be removed?
Can you do something about it?
Verse 10 is saying that if something can be done about it, then there is
really nothing to be unhappy about. Even if there is nothing can be done
about it and you cannot change the conditions or the factors that have led
to your unhappiness, then all the more there is no reason to be unhappy;
what benefit is there?
For example, while walking alone you carrying a bag. Then you dropped the
bag and immediately you get upset.  Sometimes you do get upset with those
things. If you do use your brain and think about it, when you drop the bag,
all you have to do is to pick it up. Then the problem is solved. In this
case, there is something that can be done -you just need to pick up the
bag. But why do you get upset? In this case, since there is something that
can be done, just by just picking up the bag, then there is no reason to be
unhappy.
If the thing that you dropped happens to be your treasured mug which you
like it so much, not very expensive but pretty expensive, broken into
pieces. Of course you get upset and will be unhappy. In this case, as the
mug has already broken, is there anything you can do about the mug?
Nothing! If you do get upset, then what will happens? Your mind is unhappy.
You get very disturbed. But is it going to bring your mug back?
In short, whether the situation can be remedied or not, there is no reason
to be unhappy. If it can be remedied then there is really no reason to be
unhappy. But if it cannot be remedied there is also no reason to be unhappy
because there is no benefit. So whatever it is, there is no real,
appropriate, and logical reason to be unhappy. Being unhappy brings about
no benefit at all! What it brings is only further unhappiness. Basically we
are disturbing our mind and that is the only result.
If we think about it, this advice is profound and effective. Whenever we
see, read or hear something like this, we should understand that it is a
message for ourselves. We should not think that it is a general message for
everybody. That is one problem. When we read or hear something like this,
we just regard it as an ordinary lecture - “It is the lecture for the
public and is directed at somebody else. It is not for me”. If we look at
the advice with such kind of attitude then it will never benefit us.
Actually it is talking about us, and we should relate it to ourselves “It
is an advice for me.” Only then there will be benefit, and there could be
change.
While it is a completely different matter if you are faultless. If you
don’t have these problems, and you don’t have the faults that are mentioned
in the teachings, then it is a completely different matter. Then you can
think that it is meant for somebody else. But if you have those faults,
then you have to understand  that it is about you and it is for your own
mind.
Khen Rinpoche (spoke in English): Directed to me. For myself. If you don’t
have this problem, then of course -“Not for me, it is talking to somebody
else”. If you have the problem, always point to yourself “Is talking to me,
myself, others are good, I am the one”. Shantideva is talking that. Then
that is more effective. But most of time we don’t think that “It is just
talking about this guy.” Just hear, and relax.
Next is striving to abandon anger after having analyzed the cause of anger
in detail which has three parts:
i. Showing the general division of the objects of anger
ii. Stopping anger at undesirable actions
iii. Stopping anger, and not being angry with those things, person or
  situations that hinder the achievement of your own wishes and goals.

|iv) Having examined in detail the causes that give rise to      |
|anger, making effort to abandon them                            |
|1’ A general presentation of the divisions [of anger in terms   |
|of] the objects that give rise to anger                         |
|2’ Arresting fury towards that which brings unwanted things     |
|3’ Arresting fury towards that which hinders one’s desires      |

|1’ A general presentation of the divisions [of anger in terms   |
|of] the objects that give rise to anger                         |


Verse 6.11
For myself and for my friends
I do not want suffering, contempt,
Harsh words, and unpleasant talk;
But for my enemies it is the opposite.
As for the things or the objects that you can get angry at, some
commentaries talk about 24 different objects:
    - 12 things that you do not like
    - 12 things that obstruct you from achieving what you want
According to some commentaries there is a list of 24 things that we can get
upset with or can get angry at.
    - 12 things that you do not like – undesirable things such as suffering,
      pain etc.
    - 12 things that obstruct you from achieving what you want
The 12 undesirable situations or objects are:
   1. Four that pertains to ourselves
   2. Four that pertains to people who considered to be in our circles
      (include servant, friends, people that matter to us)
   3. Four that pertains to our enemies
Let’s look at the four situations or objects that pertain to ourselves and
affect us.
Essentially these have to do with the eight worldly dharmas.
We don’t like when:
   1. suffering happens
   2. we don’t get respect or material goods or possessions
   3. somebody says harsh words,says something nasty to us, or criticizes us
   4. we have a bad reputation, somebody talking behind our back
So these four things pertain to ourselves. When we come into contact with
these four situations then we become unhappy. They are the causes for
mental unhappiness. If this mental unhappiness left uncheck then it become
anger.
Next the four situations or objects that pertain to our circle, essentially
it is the same four things but just that when they happens to our people
who we consider to be in our circle then we become unhappy and get upset.
People who are in our circle include our parents, our partners, our
children, including our gurus.
We become unhappy and get upset when the people who we considered to be in
our circle:
   5. experience suffering
   6. do not receive respect or material gain
   7. are criticized or
   8. have bad reputation
When these four things happen to the people who we consider to be in our
circle and who matter to us, then we become unhappy and unease also. Of
course that unhappiness eventually becomes anger.
But when these four things happen to our enemies, we are very happy. If
there is anything that comes and prevent these four things from happening
to the enemies then we get upset at those things that prevented these four
things happen to our enemies.
So, these are the 12 undesirable situations or objects.
Then the other 12 are the desirable objects or situations in relation to
which we can get upset. They are the 12 situations or objects that we want.
If anybody or any situation is to come along and stop these 12 things or
obstruct these 12 desirable things then we get upset at the people or the
situation that obstruct the achievement of these twelve things.
   1. We want pleasure. We want to be happy. If there is anything that
      hinders or there is an obstacle to that we become unhappy with that
      obstacle.
   2. We want to be praised. If there is anything that obstructs us from
      being praised then we get upset at that obstruction.
   3. We want respect and material gains. If anything that obstructs us from
      achieving that we get upset at that obstruction.
   4. We want good reputation as well. We want people to talk good things
      about us. If there is anything that hinders and obstructs us from
      having a good reputation then we get upset at that obstruction.
So, these are the four obstructions that pertain to the things that we
want.
What we want are:
    ⇨ happiness, pleasure
    ⇨ to be praised
    ⇨ material gain and respect
    ⇨ good reputation for ourselves
So if anybody or any situation that obstruct us from achieving or
experiencing these four things then we get upset with those obstructions.
We also want people who are in our circle such as friends, relatives, loved
one, gurus to experience these four things. So, if there is anybody or any
situation that obstruct our circle of people from experiencing these
things, we also get upset.
But we do not want these four things to happen to our enemies. What
actually we want is the opposite of these four things. If there is anything
that prevents the opposite of these four from happening to our enemies then
we get upset.
In brief,
   1. There are 12 undesirable situations or objects
   2. There are the obstructions or hindrances to the 12 desirable
      situations or objects.
For each of these 12, there are
   1. Four that pertains to ourselves
   2. Four that pertains to our circle
   3. Four that pertains to our enemies
If we or our loved ones experience suffering which is undesirable we get
upset and angry. Therefore we need to meditate on the patience that accepts
suffering.
The first thing is to meditate on the patience that accepts suffering which
will be covered under five outlines:
1. Contemplating that we have not transcended the nature of contaminated
   suffering.
2. Contemplating the benefits of meditating on suffering
3. Contemplating how that is not difficult once we are habituated to it
4. The benefits of striving in abandoning the afflictions
5. An extensive explanation of the benefits of suffering

|2’ Arresting fury towards that which brings unwanted things        |
|a’ Arresting fury towards those who wrong you                      |
|b’ Arresting fury towards those who wrong those dear to oneself    |
|c’ Arresting fury towards those who do well by one’s enemies       |

|a’ Arresting fury towards those who wrong you                      |
|1” Being patient with those who would create suffering for you     |
|2” Being patient with those who would belittle you and so forth    |

|1” Being patient with those who would create suffering for you     |
|a” Cultivating the patience that accepts suffering                 |
|b” Cultivating the patience that is intent on dharma               |
|c” Cultivating the patience that pays no heed to those who cause   |
|harm                                                               |

|a” Cultivating the patience that accepts suffering                 |
|(1) Reflecting on the fact contaminated phenomena are not beyond   |
|being of the nature of suffering                                   |
|(2) Reflecting on the benefits of meditating on suffering          |
|(3) Reflecting on the fact that, if one is familiar [with such     |
|attitudes] they are not difficult to implement                     |
|(4) The benefits of making effort in abandoning the afflictions    |
|(5) An extensive explanation of the meditations on suffering       |

|(1) Reflecting on the fact contaminated phenomena are not beyond   |
|being of the nature of suffering                                   |


Verse 6.12 (a,b)
The causes of happiness occasionally occur,
Whereas the causes for suffering are very many.
It is the nature of being in samsara that the things we want do not happen
easily and do not come about easily. The causes of happiness that we are
looking for are not plenty. For example, what we want is happiness,
pleasure, praise, good reputation, material gain and respect. Although we
want them but the causes for us experiencing them are very few whereas the
opposite of these four - the things that we do not want - although we don’t
want them but they happen frequently. That is just the nature of being in
samsara.
So the causes for suffering are very many. It says here are “very many”.
That is the nature of samsara. As long as we are in samsara, causes of
suffering are very many and they just come without any choice. We don’t
have any control over it.
 • Why is it that the causes for happiness occasionally occur and very
   seldom?
 • Why is it that the causes for the suffering that we do not like?
 • Why there are so very many of them?
In order to explain these, we have to examine their causes.
While we are in samsara, all of us hardly engage or accumulate the causes
for happiness, hence lack of happiness.
All of us are engaging in negativities. We accumulate much more non-virtue
and negativities and hence we experience more problem and suffering. This
is the very nature of our existence in samsara. That is just its nature.
That is nothing that we can do about it. As long as we are in samsara,
definitely we are creating more non-virtue than virtue and hence more
problems. We experience more problems; so many more problems than
happiness. Is there anything we can do about it? Nothing much we can do
about it. This is because that is the very nature of samsara. That is why
there is samsara. There is nothing other to do than just to accept it.
Therefore cultivate patience with regards to accepting suffering.
They use the example of shit (excrement). Shit is shit and will never smell
nice.  I think Maitreya is using this example - shit is shit. There will
never come a day when shit will smell nice. They will never smell nice.
That is its very nature. Likewise, samsara is like that. It is the nature
of samsara. Once you are in it, it is only problem. You find only problem
and you can do nothing about it. If you happen to have to smell shit
without choice, you could be either very disturbed by it or you just have
to tell yourself; “Shit is shit, that is why it is smelly. What can I do
about it?”
Khen Rinpoche (in English): I thought that is a good example. I saw from
one of the text. Don’t have expectation. Living in samsara and we have so
much expectation “I want happiness. I want happiness all the time”. We
expect so much. Like expecting pooh to have good smell. Never happen like
this. I think meaning something like that.
Next is contemplating the benefits of mediating on suffering.

|(2) Reflecting on the benefits of meditating on suffering          |


Verse 6.12 (c,d)
Without suffering there is no definite emergence. (or renunciation)
Therefore, mind, you should stand firm.

Verse 6.13
If the followers of Durga and the people of Karnata
Endure the feelings of burns, cuts, and the like meaninglessly,
Then for the sake of liberation,
Why have I no courage?
We know how to think about or meditate on suffering. We don’t like
suffering. When we think of suffering we get disenchanted with suffering.
That is necessary to produce the thought of wanting to definitely emerge or
to get out of such a situation – samsara. On the basis of that we will
develop a wish to be liberated.
Aryadeva mentioned in his Four Hundreds Verses that if there is no
suffering, if we don’t think of suffering, if we don’t get disenchanted
with suffering, there is no way we are going to be liberated because we
will not work for freedom.
One master (not sure how to translate his name) said that if you possess a
stable disenchantment with cyclic existence/samsara then there is the peace
of nirvana. There is liberation for that person. On the other hand, if you
think highly of samsara then you will continue to circle over and over
again in samsara; that means there is no liberation for you.
Whether or not a person achieves nirvana or liberation depends on
suffering. So suffering must be the condition. Because of suffering acting
as a condition then if that person in dependence of suffering as a
condition is to generate a thought of definitely emergence, and wanting to
be free from suffering then that person can achieve freedom from suffering.
So, in order to achieve freedom or nirvana or liberation you must have
suffering as the condition. Therefore there is purpose and benefit in
thinking about or meditating on suffering.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): Therefore if you love liberation then you must
love the suffering. Something like that.
Therefore it says “Without suffering there is no renunciation, there is no
thought of definitely wanting to emerge or to free yourself from cyclic
existence of suffering. Therefore, mind, you should stand firm when
suffering occurs. Do not be disturbed by it, stand firm for there is
benefit.”
Here the teachings are saying that when suffering occurs the best thing is
to accept it and to be patience with it. We experience suffering because of
the ripening of non-virtuous karma which we accumulated in the past.
Sometimes we suffer, and we get into problem because of another person
involved. That person exists as the condition for us to suffer. We feel
that it is due to that person.
 Also sometimes when we practice the dharma, we also experience problem and
suffering. Whether we are experiencing a problem that is the result of
ripening of some non-virtuous karma that we accumulated in the past or
whether we are experiencing problem due to another person acting as a
condition for us to experience that suffering, in both cases that is
nothing much we can do about it. We cannot control it. It happens and it
just happens without any wish or control from our side. In those situations
that are nothing much we can do other than to accept and put up with. In
this situation, the teaching is telling us that we must voluntarily accept
the situation and the suffering, and to be able to bring it into our
practice; brings the experience of suffering into one’s own practice.
The thing to do is to voluntarily accept the situation and the problem and
to bring them into our practice. What if we refuse to accept the situation?
Let’s say we make the decision “I don’t want to accept the situation. I am
not going to put up with it. This is non-sense. No, I cannot accept it. Why
should I accept it?”  Then what will be the result of that course of
action? What will be the result? For sure we will be unhappy. Definitely we
will be unhappy and the unhappiness will boil over and become anger.
That is one thing. If we make a choice of not accepting the suffering, and
we don’t want to put up with it “Why should I put up with it?” and the
result is we become unhappy. Our mind gets very disturbed and then it boils
over and becomes anger. Secondly, sometimes due to not accepting the
situation, the suffering, and the problem, then we get disinterested in our
practice. We give up practice. We get discouraged and lose up. We just give
up and get disheartened. That refusal to accept and to put up with the
suffering becomes a huge obstacle to continue our practice.
If we do not mentally voluntarily accept the situation then there is a
problem. If we do not accept it as a problem, or if we do not want to put
up with it, or if we do not know how to accept it, we will be very unhappy
and upset. And this is in addition to the already existence problem.
By not accepting the situation, by being unhappy with the situation, the
original problem still remains and it will not go away on its own accord.
It still remains. So there is already a problem. By not accepting it we are
adding another problem on top of the problem. This additional problem is
mentally unhappiness. If we are mentally unhappy then we start to think of
all kinds of crazy ways and many thoughts arise. We get more and more
disturbed, more and more upset, and more and more angry. We are basically
adding on the additional mental suffering, worry, and anxiety onto the
already existence problem. This will make the whole situation even more
intolerable. Of course, when we reach that stage, there are two problems
now. Then to talk about how we are going to accept suffering it becomes
very difficult and too late.
Due to the ripening of the non-virtuous karma together with the gathering
of various conditions, problem arises. If we mentally accept the problem by
thinking “That is the nature of samsara. It is like that. There is nothing
I can do about it. This is just the nature of samsaric life. I will
mentally accept it and put up with it.” It is true that by mentally
accepting the problem and the suffering, it doesn’t make the problem go
away. The problem is still there. That is true. But at least, we are not
adding additional suffering on to ourselves. We are not making ourselves
unhappy.
The advice for us here is that when the problem arises and when there are
suffering, try not to be mentally disturbed. Do not let the suffering get
the better of us. Do not let the suffering to disturb us or overwhelm us.
We should not give ourselves additional problem. We should not let the
situation disturb our dharma practice. Rather we should use the situation
to enhance our practice. We should generate even more determination to
practice.
There are people who think “Because of practicing dharma therefore I got
problems.” If you don’t know how to think then it is really a problem, and
it will become very bad. What I say is this “For us to experience problem
due to dharma practice, it hardly happens. It is because we are not
practicing dharma”. If you experience problem because of your dharma
practice then it could be the sign that the dharma practice is really very
pure, only then you will experience the problem. It doesn’t mean that all
Buddhists, people who practice the dharma, who called themselves
practitioners, not all have problem.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): That means don’t worry. You come to class. You
come to puja. You get sick not about of that. So, don’t worry. You won’t
get that.
Those who practice the dharma purely and properly, yes they may experience
problems in the form of sicknesses, discomfort like headache, body ache,
sickness or whatever. For them, that is a purification because that
suffering is in place of the negativities that otherwise will cause them to
be born in the hells or the lower realms for very long period of time. Due
to their pure practice then the immeasurable amount of negativities will be
purified such that only a small amount is left which takes on the aspect of
problem in this life. For them, when they experience sickness and problem,
they are actually very happy.
So if any of you were to get sick, please don’t tell me that you got sick
because you practice the dharma. Just says that you got sick because of
your karma.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): I am hearing some people said “I read Diamond
Cutter Sutra then I have this problem”. Some people say that.

