Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Engaging in the Deeds of a Bodhisattva/lesson28.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:52:21.936217
================================================================================


Q&A
Student: As mentioned in the Lamrim Chenmo that at the time of death, due
to the attachment to a self, and the being has the thought “I am going to
cease to exist.” Because of this attachment to a self, craving for
embodiment arises. Is this attachment to a self the same as the attachment
that is an apprehension of true existence, which was mentioned previously
in the class? Are these two attachments different or are they the same?
Khen Rinpoche: Of the three mental poisons, attachment and anger have their
origins in ignorance. So ignorance is the basis or the condition for the
arising of anger and attachment. As to what ignorance is, there are two
interpretations - one is according to the logician Dharmakirti and one is
according to Chandrakirti.
According to Dharmakirti, ignorance is posited as mere unknowingness (or
merely not knowing).
Chandrakirti posits ignorance as something more than that. On top of not
knowing, it is the misapprehension of true existence.
In short, attachment arises due to an apprehension of true existence.
What I had said earlier was not a definitive position. I did not say if it
is attachment it is necessary ignorance, and if it is ignorance, it is
necessary attachment. Just wondering, as according to the Madhyamika
interpretation, is there something that is both an attachment and
ignorance? Is there ignorance which is attachment? Something to think
about:
    - is there an ignorance that is in the entity of attachment?
    - is there an attachment that is in the nature of ignorance?
Khen Rinpoche (in English): Can you think? Before Vesak day I said that.
You heard that?
What do you think was the point of me saying that before Vesak? Did you get
the point?
Khen Rinpoche (in English): Take Fong what is the point? Why did I bring
this issue then?
Student: It is because of the Hinayana viewpoint which said that attachment
of the desire realm is necessary non-virtuous, but in the Mahayana
viewpoint, this attachment of the desire realm is not necessary non-
virtuous. That is why this was mentioned. Because it is an attachment, that
is an apprehension of true existence. So to the Mahayana, the attachment of
the desire realm is not necessary non-virtuous.
Khen Rinpoche: Great, great.
This discussion was brought up when we were talking about the twelve links.
The first of the twelve links is ignorance. No matter which great treatises
you looked at, it is decisively mentioned that ignorance is unspecified -it
is neither virtuous nor non-virtuous. But the karma that is motivated by
ignorance can either be virtuous or non-virtuous.
According to Vasubandu’s Abhidharmakosa, with the exception of ignorance,
the view of the transitory collection and the view holding on to the
extreme, all the other afflictions are non-virtuous.
The qualm raised earlier was related to how craving and grasping nourishes
the projecting karma that was accumulated. The projecting karma that was
accumulated needs to be nourished or activated by craving and grasping. In
the case of a virtuous projecting karma, if craving and grasping is non-
virtuous, then it is kind of funny to have the activating or nourishing
agent being non-virtuous, but yet the thing that it nourishes is virtuous.
So that was basically the qualm.
As result of that qualm, if you look at it from the perspective of the
higher tenets, the Mahayana tenets, I wonder whether attachment is
necessary non-virtuous. Having said this, I am not at all implying
therefore there could be attachment that is virtuous.

Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds

|C Entering into higher and higher virtues and having examined whether|
|there is a purpose, acting upon it                                   |


Verse 5.83
The perfections such as generosity
Are progressively more exalted,
But for a little I should not forsake something greater.
Principally I should consider the welfare of others.
In the section of the six perfections in the Stages of the Path to
Enlightenment, we saw how it was stated that in term of the order of the
perfections, the latter are superior to the former as such that the latter
are exalted and has more benefits than the former. So if you were to
compare generosity and ethical discipline, ethical discipline is superior
and more exalted than generosity.
General speaking, if one were to choose, then one would have to choose
ethical discipline because it is more superior in terms of the order.
If one were to choose between two things, one will choose the more
important, better or the greater one. You will not forsake the greater for
the smaller or something that is less important. So generally speaking, if
one were to choose between generosity and ethical discipline, one will
choose ethical discipline; which is the better one.
Generally it is like that, but there can be exception in special situation
such that if one were to do something that will greatly benefit others,
then one will choose that option, because this fulfills the purpose of
oneself and also fulfill the purpose of others as the purpose and welfare
of others are more important than the purpose of oneself. So in the
situation if there is a greater purpose and more benefits to others in
making extensive giving, then it is alright to remain indifferent to
certain aspect of ethical discipline that are practiced for one’s own
purpose.
Another example of the exception could be this: If one is engaged in
meditation, but there are people who have come a long way to receive
teaching from you and they have great interest in receiving those
instructions from you. Since there is a greater purpose of benefiting
others, then in such situation, one should temporary suspense one’s
meditation and make the gift of dharma to those people, because there is a
greater purpose in benefiting others.
Generally speaking, if you were to weigh between generosity and meditative
stabilization/ concentration, the practice of meditative stabilization is
superior and much more important than generosity. In the case of someone
who holds the bodhisattva vows and is being requested to teach by people
who really have great interest, and if that person doesn’t teach when
requested, then there is a danger of committing one of the bodhisattva
downfalls of not giving the Dharma.
Verse 5.42
But if I am unable to do this when involved in fear or
Celebrations and the like, then I should relax.
Thus it has been taught that at times of giving,
You may be indifferent to ethics.
Verse 5.42 talks about being remaining indifferent to certain aspect of
ethical discipline when one is practicing generosity. We have to understand
that this verse speaks in the context of training the mind in proper
stages; that is in the context of somebody who has the ability to practice
generosity but at that moment may not be able to practice the very subtle
and fine details of the rules and regulation of ethical discipline. For
that person, he/she can remain indifferent to those subtle aspects of
ethical discipline.
With this verse, we have finished with the ethical discipline of gathering
virtuous dharma. Next is training in ethical discipline that accomplishes
the welfare of others; which is covered in four sections:
   1. Diligence in the welfare of others.
   2. Actions of gathering others without incurring a fault
   3. Protecting the minds of sentient beings
   4. Training in the action of not incurring faults.

|The way to train in the conduct of guarding the mind by     |
|means of mindfulness and alertness                          |
|A The way to train in the ethics of refraining from negative|
|actions                                                     |
|B The way to train in the ethics of gathering virtuous      |
|dharmas                                                     |
|C The way to train in the ethics of working for the benefit |
|of sentient beings                                          |

|C The way to train in the ethics of working for the benefit |
|of sentient beings                                          |
|1 Devoting oneself to the welfare of others                 |
|2 Conduct that gathers others without sullying (polluting)  |
|oneself with wrongdoing                                     |
|3 Looking after the minds of sentient beings                |
|4. Training in the conduct that is unsullied by wrongdoing  |

|1 Devoting oneself to the welfare of others                 |


Verse 5.84
When these are well understood,
I should always strive for the welfare of others.
The Far-Seeing Compassionate Ones have allowed
Those that were forbidden.
When one has understood well and abiding the trainings in the former two
ethics – the ethical discipline of restraint and the ethical discipline of
gathering virtuous dharma - on that basis one then moves on to the training
in the ethical discipline of accomplishing the welfare of others.
While abiding in the first two types of ethical discipline, and without
holding any consideration for oneself at all, or any self interest and self
cherishing thought, then one abides and trains in the ethical discipline of
accomplishing the welfare of others.
If one needs to work for the benefit and welfare of others, there are great
variety of things and actions i.e. many activities that one has to
undertake. But one might ask; “In the course of engaging in all these
activities to benefit others, wouldn’t there be a possibility of the danger
of being stained by a bodhisattva downfall?”  The answer to that is in
verse 5.84.
The greatly compassionate one, the Buddha, who sees well into the future
and who shows us how to accomplish the really highest long term happiness,
and he says that in order to accomplish the highest long term happiness,
one should abandon holding on to small happiness and happily take on the
suffering.
The Buddha has prohibited those who are working mainly for their own
purpose and mainly looking for their own self-interest, essentially those
of the Hinayana disposition who are only looking for their own liberation
from the cyclic existence. For the Hearers and Solitary Realizers, the
Buddha strictly prohibited them from committing the ten non-virtues. The
Buddha did not give any exceptions. But for those who are abiding in the
Mahayana, who really have no self –cherishing and self-interest, the Buddha
gave permission for these bodhisattvas to engage in the first seven non-
virtues - three of the body and four of the speech.
The exceptions given to the bodhisattvas, in that if there was a purpose
and benefit, they could engage in the first seven kinds of non-virtues, but
still there is no exception to the three of the mind - covetousness, malice
and wrong view. You have to understand that these exceptions were given by
the Buddha to the bodhisattvas.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): Not for us.
Next section discuss on how not to be stained by a bodhisattva downfall or
fault when one is working for the welfare of others with the example of the
difference between giving food and not giving food.

|2 Conduct that gathers others without sullying       |
|(polluting) oneself with wrongdoing                  |
|A Gathering through material generosity              |
|B Gathering through dharma                           |

|A Gathering through material generosity              |
|1 The difference between giving and not giving food  |
|and clothing                                         |
|2 Not causing harm to the body for the sake of minor |
|and/or difficult actions                             |
|3 Explaining the time and need for practicing the    |
|giving of body                                       |

|1 The difference between giving and not giving food  |
|and clothing                                         |


Verse 5.85
I should divide my food amongst those who have fallen into error,
Those without protection, and those abiding in modes of conduct,
And eat merely what is suitable for myself.
Except for the three robes I may give away all.
This is an advice that, if we have enough, we should give away food and
clothing to:
- people around us,
- people who come asking for it,
- people who are abiding in ethical discipline
- the animals
One keeps appropriate and suitable amount for one’s own consumption and
give the rest away. The amount of   food for one’s intake must be
appropriate. If one eat everything that comes along the way and then stuff
and gorge oneself that will become an obstacle to engage in virtue, because
the body becomes very heavy. On the other extreme, if one is not eating but
gives everything away, that also becomes an obstacle for one to continue
one’s practice. Therefore, one must take moderate and appropriate amount of
food.
In the case of the ordained people, if they have spare things like clothing
or some necessities, and if people ask for it, they should be given away.
With the exception of the three robes, the ordained people have to keep it
and cannot give it away. Otherwise it becomes an obstacle for continuing
living in the practice.
This discussion is in the context of benefiting or helping others. So if
one has spare possessions such as food, clothing and so forth, the advice
is to give it away.
Next is not harming the body for just small, inconsequential purpose of
action.
[BP1 L32] Verse 85 refers to the traditional custom of ordained persons
going out to receive alms. They are not supposed to eat everything that has
been offered. They have to divide what they get into four portions of which
they have to give: one portion to those who have fallen to the lower realms
e.g. animals; one portion to those without protection, which refers to
beggars, destitute and poor people; and one portion to fellow
practitioners. When one is in retreat, then one gives this to fellow
retreatants (the neighbours on one’s left and right). They then eat the
remaining portion.
Before eating the remaining portion, one should offer the food. With
proper, virtuous motivation, one should eat in moderation, neither too much
nor too little and adopt an appropriate diet in the sense of a correct
amount of food. One should not eat too much because then one’s body becomes
heavy and the mind is prone to sleepiness, which would be an obstacle for
virtue. If one eats too little, the body does not get enough nutrients,
which again becomes an obstacle. This is the advice for someone who wants
to practise and is interested in gathering virtue.
There are different thoughts that one should attempt to cultivate while
eating. Before one eats, one generates the motivation that one is eating
for the sake of the person who has offered the food; to accomplish the
purposes and wishes of the benefactor. When one is eating, one mentally
makes offerings to the living beings living in one’s body. We think, “By
giving you food now, in the future, when I become a buddha, may I give you
the Dharma”. We need to set a proper motivation for eating which is not
mixed with any of the three mental poisons. One eats with the thought,
“This is for the purpose of sustaining the body so that I can use it for
the practice of the Dharma. For this reason, I’m going to eat”. Since we
eat three, four or five times a day, it is important to set the proper
motivation, thinking that one is making this offering to all the beings
living in one’s body with a wish to give them Dharma when one becomes
enlightened. Then one eats with the thought of the food as the source of
sustenance for the body so that one can use it to practise the Dharma.
There is also a practice of eating yoga, done with the visualisation of
holding on to the divine pride of oneself as a deity, on which basis one
eats the food. But we do not have to discuss that here.
For the ordained, one may give away everything else except the three robes.
When one has more than one set of robes, one should give them away. When
one only has a single set of robes, even if someone asks for the robes, one
should not give them away. If one gave away the robes, it would create an
obstacle to continuing to live a celibate life. Likewise, when putting on
clothes one should have the correct virtuous motivation. Putting on clothes
should not be done out of attachment and so forth. One should think that
one puts on clothes to sustain the body, which is an important condition in
one’s pursuit of Dharma practice. The whole point of the ordained wearing
robes is as a reminder of the vows that they hold.

|2 Not causing harm to the body for the sake of minor|
|and/or difficult actions                            |


Verse 5.86
This body that is for practicing the sublime Dharma
Should not be harmed for only slight benefit.
If I behave in this way,
The wishes of all beings will be quickly fulfilled.
This verse is saying that the beginner bodhisattvas should protect their
body, and not give it away for insignificant purpose. They should protect
their body with appropriate amount of food and clothing without falling
into the two extremes.
The idea behind doing all these is that:
  • they can sustain themselves,
  • they can practice the Dharma,
  • they can accomplish the welfare of others and
  • they can dedicate whatever they have done to the welfare of others.
Training gradually in stages like this, then it will come a time when that
bodhisattva will be able to accomplish the temporal and ultimate goals of
all sentient beings.
Aryadeva in his Four Hundred Verses stated that:
   Although one views the body as an enemy, one would still have to protect
   it. If one lives for a long time while abiding in ethical discipline,
   great merits will arise from that.
This is again stating that when taking care of the body, one need to
protect the body without falling into the two extremes. While abiding in
that way, one protects one’s ethical discipline and one works for others.
Next explaining the time and the purpose or need for offering the body.

|3 Explaining the time and need for practicing the   |
|giving of body                                      |


Verse 5.87
Those whose attitude of compassion is impure
Should not give their body away.
No matter what, both in this and future lives,
They should give it as causes for fulfilling the great purpose.
“Those whose attitude of compassion is impure” refers to the bodhisattvas
who have not yet achieved the 1st ground (called Very Joyful). These
bodhisattvas should not give away their body, their limbs and so forth, but
rather they should protect the body which is a basis for them to practice.
It is taught and mentioned in the teaching that until one has achieved the
1st bodhisattva ground, one should not give away the body. Once one has
reached the 1st ground and onwards, it is alright to give away the body if
there is a purpose. The reason is that if one gives away the body when one
has not yet reached the 1st ground is because when one cut certain part of
one’s body to give away, the pain that one will experience may be a
condition for one to generate regret; “I shouldn’t have done this”. For the
bodhisattvas who have achieved the 1st bodhisattva ground and onwards,
there is no such danger. The bodhisattvas abiding on the 1st ground and
onwards are able to give their body without any regret. In fact they feel
very joyful when giving. Therefore it is alright for them to give.
Next is bringing sentient beings into one’s fold, into one’s influence
through gathering them through the Dharma.

|B Gathering through dharma                                              |
|1 Physical postures (which are) inappropriate for a listener to assume  |
|when the dharma is being explained                                      |
|2 Examining the features of the vessel’s thoughts                       |
|3 One should not treat [a person] who esteems the extensive like [one   |
|who feels an affinity towards] the inferior                             |

|1 Physical postures (which are) inappropriate for a listener to assume  |
|when the dharma is being explained                                      |


What kind of physical demeanor or postures that the listener should not
adopt when listening to the Dharma? To such people then it is said that we
should not teach the Dharma.
Verse 5.88
The Dharma should not be explained to those who lack respect,
To those who wrap cloth around their heads although they are not ill,
To those holding umbrellas, sticks, or weapons, and
To those with covered heads.
When listening to the teachings, in one’s mind one should have respect for
the teacher and the Dharma. Externally and physically one should also show
respect for the teacher and the Dharma. If the listener while listening to
the teaching does not have any mental respects for the teaching and the
teacher and externally do not abide in a respectful posture, then there is
no benefit at all in conducting that teaching.
This has to do with the listener. If one is in the position of the
listener, one should listen with the appropriate physical and mental
attitude. Mentally one must has respect for the Dharma, the instruction
itself and the teacher. Externally and physically, one also has to abide in
a respectful posture. Only then will the teaching that one hears will be
beneficial for the mind. Otherwise, it will not be beneficial for the mind.
It is for that reasons therefore there are such rules.
If the listener does not have respect for the teachings and as a result
does not have faith then there is a danger of that listener accumulating
the non-virtuous karma that will throw him/her into the lower realms. For
that reason, one should not teach to such people.
Unless one is sick, one should not be listening to the teaching while
wearing a cap or hat, or covering the head with a cloth. Instructors should
not teach such people including people who carry weapons into the teachings
or who are using umbrellas to cover their heads. These are not exhaustive.
These are interpreted or seen to be gestures of disrespect.
Just because someone holds an umbrella or covering his/her head and so
forth, it is not necessarily an indicative of disrespect. The point is that
one has to judge according to the time and situation; the environment and
the people one is talking. Are there any cultural differences? If those
actions are not a show of disrespect then it is fine. But if one assesses
it to be something disrespectful then the teacher has to consider.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): I’m not sure to the Chinese. When Tibetan go to
see the high lama and when they go for blessing they always take off the
hat.  They take off the hat and put like that (Khen Rinpoche showing the
gesture). They don’t go with the hat to receive blessing. You know why?
Because the hat blocks the blessing. SO it is better take out.  Therefore
take off the hat then go for blessing otherwise blessing doesn’t go inside
(the head). Just joking! I mean it is sort of respect. The highest thing
they have in the head is the hat, so must take out and bow down. It is some
kind of respect in the Tibetan culture. But Chinese, I’m not sure. They
take out hat?
(Students respond inaudible)
Khen Rinpoche (in English): I’m not sure. I mean different culture. I don’t
know.
There are other rules such as not teaching to people who are sitting on
thrones, not teaching to people who are seated higher than the instructor
and so forth. These are seen as disrespectful. However, in general, the
exception can be made if the listener is sick for whatever purpose in which
you can go against some of these rules. The main point is basically not
adopting disrespectful postures.
It is said in the teachings that one should listen with single-pointed
faith and respect. One should not deride the instructor, one should not
show pride by criticizing, deriding, making fun and so forth. One should
not listen with such attitudes for it will bring no benefit. The teachings
forbid us from teaching those who are disrespectful and who act in such
ways. Why? Because it does not being any benefit even if you teach,
therefore you are not permitted to teach such people.
Next is analyzing the motivation of the vessel.

|2 Examining the features of the  |
|vessel’s thoughts                |


Verse 5.89
The vast and profound should not be taught to lesser beings
Nor to a woman unaccompanied by a man.
Out of respect for the Dharmas of lesser and supreme beings as equal,
I should utilize all.
For those who are predisposed to the Hinayana like the Hearers and Solitary
Realizers, it is not suitable to teach them some of the Mahayana teachings
such as those various extensive explanations of the Paths and Grounds and
so forth because it will not be of great benefit to them. It is stated in
the Vinaya that an ordained person, for example an ordained monk, should
not teach dharma in an isolated place to a woman who is not accompanied by
a member of the opposite sex – a man. In the case of a nun, the thing is
pretty much the same, not suppose to teach the dharma to a man who is not
accompanied by somebody else in an isolated place.
It is also incorrect to consider the Mahayana dharma is better than the
Hinayana dharma; in the sense with the world view that there is something
better as in your mind you may feel that it is not so good to talk about
the Hinayana dharma or teach the Hinayana dharma. That is wrong.
The reason why there is the Mahayana dharma and the Hinayana dharma is to
do with the capacity of the trainees. But the dharma in itself, whether is
the Hinayana dharma or the Mahayana dharma, one should come to understand
and be able to explain that every teaching, Hinayana dharma or Mahayana
dharma, are methods for one to reach enlightenment. One should not view one
dharma as good and another as bad. All are paths that will help lead
sentient beings to full enlightenment. If one holds the views that there is
some dharma like the Hinayana dharma as bad, as not necessary for achieving
enlightenment and so forth, then one accumulates the very heavy negative
karma of abandoning the dharma.
You know that the food for a child and the food for an adult are different.
You cannot say one is better and the other is not good.  The food for the
child and food for the adult has their own purpose as it is accordance with
the needs of the person who eats it. So it is important to understand how
all the Buddha’s teachings will leads to enlightenment including the
Hinayana teachings. This is a very important point. Otherwise, if one holds
on to the idea that this dharma is good and that is not so good and lowly,
one will accumulates the very heavy negative karma of abandoning the
Dharma.
The Buddha mentioned in the sutras that the negative karma of abandoning
the dharma:
-  is heavier than destroying all the holy objects in this world
-  is heavier that killing arhats equaling in number to the sand grains in
the Ganges River.
Accumulating this heavy negative karma of abandoning the dharma happens
easily. One of the best ways to not accumulate such negative karma is to
educate oneself by learning the entire paths structure of the entire
teaching of the Buddha, the Hinayana, and the Mahayana including the Tantra
and knowing them clearly.
The heavy negative karma of abandoning the dharma is due to just not
knowing. Like here, if you are learning this text and there are many
advices given here. If one thinks “there are so many things here and it is
of no benefit as it doesn’t help me to achieve enlightenment” and if one
thinks about it, it becomes quite similar to abandoning the dharma.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): What do you think?
Therefore, we have to be extremely careful to not accumulate the heavy
negative karma of abandoning the dharma.
Next is do not lead those who have the wish for the great to the small.

|3 One should not treat [a person] who esteems the extensive like [one   |
|who feels an affinity towards] the inferior                             |


Verse 5.90
I should not connect the Dharma of a lesser being
To one who is a vessel for the vast Dharma.
I should not forsake the conduct,
Nor deceive by means of sutras or mantras.
If one teaches Hinayana dharma and connects the person who is sharp faculty
person of the Mahayana lineage to the Hinayana path then there is a danger
that one will commit a downfall of the bodhisattva vows.
Another example is that if you tell somebody who is abiding in the Mahayana
“you just focus on emptiness and when you realize emptiness then everything
will be fine. Forget about everything else. Don’t bother with the ethical
discipline or restraint. You don’t have to give up negativity”. If you say
all these then it is also very inappropriate.
Or if you say “You just focus on emptiness, you don’t have to train in the
other extensive deeds of the bodhisattvas,” then there is great danger as
well of committing a downfall.
If you tell those people who have the capacity to train in the vast and
profound aspects of the Mahayana and who are abiding correctly in their
training in the Mahayana; “It is so complicated, you don’t have to do all
these. Why you do so many things? You can just recite Diamond Cutter Sutra.
It is sufficient that you just recite this mantra of this sutra. You don’t
have to do all those things.” Saying such things is also wrong. That the
meaning of “Nor deceive by means of sutras or mantras.” If you say this you
are actually deceiving these practitioners.
If you really think about it, teaching the dharma is really not easy. It is
not an easy task to teach the Dharma. If you think about it, to teach the
dharma to others, you also have to know what others are thinking, what they
want, what are their inclination and their dispositions? It is difficult
because you can’t tell.
Next is guarding or protecting the minds of sentient beings and training in
the behavior or the action of not incurring faults.

|3 Looking after the minds of sentient beings and training in the  |
|conduct that is unsullied by wrongdoing                           |
|A An extensive explanation                                        |
|B Synopsis                                                        |


|A An extensive explanation                                        |
|1 Abandoning the faulty physical conduct and lack of faith in     |
|others                                                            |
|2 The way to act when the path and so forth are being taught      |
|3 The way to lie down                                             |

|1 Abandoning the faulty physical conduct and lack of faith in     |
|others                                                            |


Verse 5.91
When I spit or throw away a tooth-stick,
I should cover it up.
Also it is deplorable to urinate and so forth
In water or on land that is utilized.
Verse 5.92
When eating I should not fill my mouth,
Eat noisily or with my mouth wide open.
I should not sit with my legs outstretched
Nor rub my hands together.
Verse 5.93
I should not sit on mounts, upon beds,
Nor in the same room together with the women of others.
Having observed and inquired about
What causes non-faith in the world, I should abandon it.
Some of these things here may not occur in Singapore. Generally, the idea
is not to engage in those behaviors or actions that will cause others to
lose faith or that will disturb the minds of others or make others feel
uneasy.
Nowadays we have toothbrush, but during the ancient times in India, even
now, there are people who brush their teeth using branches from neem trees.
This is how they clean their mouth and teeth. It is not that there are
rubbish bins in ancient India in the past. There are no rubbish bins. When
one is done with the cleaning one will just throw the branch away anywhere.
Also, people spit or blow their nose anywhere and everywhere.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): In Singapore I saw some men doing that. They
blow their nose by closing one side of their nose and the snort just came
out straight.
One should not engage in these polluting activities in the presence of the
guru or in the temples or in places that are environmentally clean. Of
course, not urinating and defecating in places where people move about or
in the clean places or in the places like parks and so forth.
When eating, there are some people have their mouth wide open even before
the food reaches their mouth. Also there are some people who make a lot of
noise while eating.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): Also some people when they eat, they put too
much food in the mouth then got choke. Those are not good way to eat. Not
good behavior to eat. People think that is cool but it is not cool.
Here is the advice not to eat with so much attachment. There is also an
advice to regard food as medicine. When we take medicine, we don’t go to
the extreme of either not taking it or just taking very little of it or
going to the other extreme of just taking too much. In order for the
medicine to work, it must be in an appropriate amount. Likewise, if we
regard the food as medicine, one’s food intake should also be moderate i.e.
neither too much nor too little.
When eating, one should not eat with attachment or anger. If one eats with
the primary motivation of looking good, for the body to be strong and to
build muscles that is eating with attachment. Or if you think you want to
eat the food so that you can be physically strong to defeat your enemy in
the fight, then probably you are eating with anger. The point is that we
should eat with the motivation to sustain this body which is necessary for
the practicing the Dharma. Through that, one works for the welfare of
others and to benefit others.
When sitting down, one may sit with the legs fully stretch out, and at
times may be considered unglam, literally not beautiful.
I’m not sure what it means by “rub my hands together”.

Khen Rinpoche (in English): What is that? You understand? I don’t know.
Rubbing hands together. It is something to do with washing. Maybe washing
like this not correct (Khen Rinpoche showed the gesture). You have to wash
like that?  I’m not sure what’s that mean. I don’t know that one.
In general, ordained people should not sit on the mounts, beds or being in
the same place together with women.
In short, these are all advices for us to abandon those actions that are
considered by the people at large in a particular society to be culturally
offensive or things that are considered unglam or things that will disturb
the minds of others causing them to lose faith.
We will finish the rest of the chapter in the next lesson. Then we can
start on the Chapter 6 on Patience.
