Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Engaging in the Deeds of a Bodhisattva/lesson39.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:52:21.826650
================================================================================


Lamrim Meditation Program
For those of you who are in the Lamrim Meditation program, although you are
now meditating at the topic of human life of freedoms and endowments, and
death and impermanence, nevertheless you must not forget what you have
meditated on earlier - the topic on correctly devoting to the virtuous
friend which we have started with. On the daily basis, at least you must
remind yourself in an abbreviated way, either through reflecting on it or
through reading on the topic of guru devotion.
When you signed up for the program, it was a rule from the beginning that
you have to meditate on the relevant topics everyday without fail. That is
important. You have to work at that and you have to make sure that you do
it. I think there are some people who have broken that commitment but that
should not be the reason to discontinue the practice. Although you may miss
for 1 day or 2 days but nevertheless you should pick up the determination
to continue. Otherwise, what is there to do other than to continue? If you
do not continue just because you don’t do it for a day or two but just
allow it to carry on like that, then a day or two will become weeks and
months.
It is the same with coming to classes to continue with your education here.
 The same thing applies, isn’t it? After you have stopped coming for a
short while, then it is very easy to stop coming to class altogether.
Therefore, from your side, try to make sure that you continue your
learning.
Here we are dealing with the text “Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds”. In a
way it is not difficult and is quite easy to understand. It is quite
straightforward and is not really intellectually challenging. However,
there are many useful advices in the text. Even if you can’t manage all of
it, at least you can find something that is applicable, which are useful
and helpful to you. You then focus on those sections. On the basis of what
is being written in the text, you can reflect on those verses which you
find applicable to you, and then integrate it into your life. From my side,
I also find quite difficult to teach this text. If I were to give you just
some short explanation, we would be able to finish the text quite quickly.
For example, the next chapter on Joyous Perseverance, if we were to just go
through the verses in class and highlight some points here and there, we
could finish the chapter in two or three lessons. But I don’t see much
benefit in that because you probably will not able to understand much at
the end of it. On the other hand, if I were to explain in detail in each
and every single verse, then we will never ever finish. I also see some of
you are probably getting tired of studying this text as it appears to me
that some of you are getting sick of it.
It is like having to practice patience in studying the chapter on Patience,
because the chapter on Patience never ever seems to be finishing. If you
think about it, actually in reality, this text is an indispensable text for
real practice. Ideally, it is meant for integration into your life.  Every
single line that makes up those verses is an advice and is something that
you can practice on. Ideally, you need to have that kind of enthusiasm to
be able to really read and analyze each verse, think about it and try to
utilize the advice in those verses. Ideally it should be like that because
it is meant for practice. From your side, when you listen to the
explanation, you really have to focus and pay attention. From my side, I’m
just trying to explain the text in accordance with what Shantideva has
intended on the basis of some commentaries to this text. I’m not making it
up. So, if along the way, if you find some of my explanations perhaps
incorrect, you should raise it up in class so we can have some discussions.


Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds

|(b) If, because of the joy [one associates with them, praise and renown]  |
|were something to strive for, then it would be reasonable for all beings  |
|[who have that] to enjoy them [but they don’t]                            |
|(i) The actual                                                            |
|(ii) Dismissing the joy of praise for oneself as child’s play             |


In terms of the things that we like and the things that we don’t like, if
we can expand them, we can talk about the twelve situations or objects that
we desire, and the twelve situations or objects that we don’t desire.
With respect to the situations or objects that we desire, if there is
anything that interferes with the things that we want to happen to us, then
we get upset.  Of the many things that we desire, one of which is praise.
We like to be praised. Now we are at that particular section about why it
is inappropriate to be attached to praise. Having said that, perhaps one
may justify in wanting to be praised by saying “If I’m praised, it causes
happiness in others”.

|(i) The actual|


Verse 6.96
If I am happy due to his happiness,
Then I must act similarly towards all.
And if this were so then why am I unhappy
When others are happy due to joy?
You may think “When somebody praises me, that person who is praising me is
happy. For that reason, I’m also happy”.
We may justify our attachment to liking praise by saying “When somebody
praises me, the person who is praising me is happy doing so. I am happy for
him that he is happy”.
If that is what you think, then this argument should also be applied to the
situation when your enemy is praised.
Then according to your argument, when your enemy is praised, you have to
accept that the person who is praising your enemy is also happy doing so.
But when your enemy is praised, you don’t like it and you also don’t like
the person who is praising your enemy.
Going by this argument, if you really feel happy for the person who is
praising you because he/she is happy doing so, likewise, you should extend
that to the person who is praising your enemy or the people that you don’t
like.
[BP1Part 2 L15] When others (including our enemies) are happy being
praised, we should be happy seeing their happiness. The happiness of others
becomes the cause of our own happiness. This is how bodhisattvas think.
Therefore, we should be happy when good things happen to our enemies.
Next verse talks about how childish we are when we are praised. When
somebody praises us, we get so excited and happy, and that actually is a
very childish behavior.

|(ii) Dismissing the joy of praise for  |
|oneself as child’s play                |


Verse 6.97
Therefore the happiness that arises
From thinking, “I am being praised,”
Is thus incorrect;
It is only the behavior of the childish.
If we analyze the very nature or entity of what exactly is this praise that
we are so attached to, in fact, there is no essence in it and nothing
really meaningful with that. Because the praise that we are so attached to
has no slightest meaning or essence in it, therefore to be attached to
being praised is a behavior of a childish person.
What we like is praise and good reputation, and we are attached to it. As
such, if there is anybody that comes along and interferes with us being
praised or having good reputation, then we get very upset at those people.
[BP1Part 2 L15] (a) Sound of pleasant words directed at us have no
intention to praise us; and
(b) The happiness in the mind of our admirer cannot be shared or given to
us.
Thinking otherwise has been established as invalid. Since praise and fame
are made up of mere words, which have no essence, attachment to them is
akin to a child’s attachment to his sand castle.
The next section tells us that in fact, praise and reputation is not
something to be desired and beneficial, but rather is something that is
harmful.

|b” Reflecting on the benefits                                                  |
|(1) As that which acts to hinder praise and renown [also] arrests the lower    |
|realms, it is unreasonable to be furious with it                               |
|(2) As it is something that acts to liberate one from conditioned existence    |
|(samsara), it is unreasonable to be furious with it                            |

|(1) As that which acts to hinder praise and renown [also] arrests the lower    |
|realms, it is unreasonable to be furious with it                               |
|(a) Grasping after praise and renown(fame) leads to the development of all     |
|wrongdoing                                                                     |
|(b) That which acts to arrest that [also] arrests the lower realms             |

|(a) Grasping after praise and renown(fame) leads to the development of all     |
|wrongdoing                                                                     |


We like to be praised, and we like to have a good reputation. If anybody
comes along and interferes with that, we get very upset with that person.
In fact, this section is going to tell us that it is inappropriate to be
upset with the person who interferes with us being getting praised or
having good reputation.
Verse 6.98
Praise and the like distract me
And also destroy my disillusionment.
I start to envy those who have excellent qualities
And success is destroyed.
This verse is talking about the faults of being attached to the praise (but
not the faults of the praise) and the faults of being attached to good
reputation. Praise and good reputation are not necessarily helpful for a
real practitioner. From the perspective of a real practitioner, perhaps it
is better not to be attached to praise and a good reputation. Why? Because
when one is attached to praise and good reputation, then one starts to get
distracted. That would also lead to arrogance and developing of pride.
We are very attached to material gain, praise, good reputation and so
forth. How distracted we are in our lives is commensurate with how much
attachment we have for these things. The more we are attached to these
things, then the more time and effort we have to put in looking and running
after these things. That is how distractions happen. The more attachment we
have to fame, praise, good reputation, material gain and so forth, the more
distracted we become because we have to focus our time and efforts into
achieving these things.
Then we physically come under the control and the influence of the eight
worldly dharmas. As the eight worldly dharmas filled up our lives, then
there is no space and time left for the real dharma practice. The more we
are attached to the objects of desire or the objects of enjoyment, the less
disillusionment and disenchantment we will be able to generate with regards
to cyclic existence/samsara. Even if we do managed to develop some
disenchantment or some disillusionment with cyclic existence, and we are
able to see the truth of samsara, but because of the attachment to objects
of desire, even that small disillusionment or disenchantment that we have
generated to samsara will dissipate. The weaker our disillusionment and
disenchantment to cyclic existence is, the more difficulty we will
experience in subduing our mind through meditation. We will just find it
not being able to meditate. In the end, even just engaging in some virtue
with our body and speech will also becomes difficult.
Here the verse is also saying that being praised and having good reputation
is a condition that could cause us to start entertaining these negative
thoughts of competitiveness with those who have some qualities. When
jealousy suddenly creeps in, negative competitiveness creeps in.
Attachment to praise and good reputation could lead us into being jealous
of others who also have some good qualities. When jealousy creeps in, then
we are unable to bear the fact that there are others who also have good
qualities because we want to compete with them. We are unable to bear that
there are others who maybe better than us. When there is jealousy, then
anger comes into the picture as well. Then we get upset. Like what we have
covered earlier in the text, when anger arises, then we destroy happiness
in this life and our future lives.  Therefore, verse 6.98 is telling us the
faults of being attached to praise and good reputation.
Next verse talks about how the people who obstruct us from being praised
and having a good reputation are actually those who are stopping us from
going to the lower realms.

|(b) That which acts to arrest that [also] |
|arrests the lower realms                  |


Verse 6.99
Therefore, are not those who are closely involved
In destroying my praise and the like
Also engaged in protecting me
From falling into the unfortunate realms?
In verse 6.98, we saw the many faults that come from attachment to praise
and reputation.
As such, isn’t the person who is obstructing us from being praised and
having a good reputation actually protecting us from falling into the lower
realms? Isn’t that person stopping us from falling into the hells?
Isn’t it the case that the person who is stopping us from getting praise or
having a good reputation comes with the purpose and working very hard to
stop us from going to the lower realms? Isn’t that the person very kind?
In the earlier verse, we talked about many faults and the disadvantages of
being attached to praise and good reputation. Attachment to praise and good
reputation brings about so many problems which will lead us to the lower
realms. The effects of being attached to praise and a good reputation are
suffering, and it includes suffering in the lower realms. So, isn’t the
person who is stopping us from experiencing the effects of being attached
to praise and having a good reputation is stopping us from going to the
lower realm? If you analyze and really think about it, that is really the
case and that is the conclusion. The person who is obstructing and causing
us not to be praised and not have a good reputation is in fact not a harm-
doer, but rather someone who is very kind and is beneficial to us. So it is
completely inappropriate to be upset and to be angry with this person.
Rather, we should in fact repay the kindness of this person. So it is also
inappropriate to be upset and to be angry at the person who causes harm to
us in the sense of obstructing us from being praised and having a good
reputation because that person obstructing us is the one who liberates us
from samsara.

|2) As it is something that acts to liberate one from conditioned existence, it |
|is unreasonable inappropriate to be furious with it                            |
|(a) As that which hinders praise and so forth acts to liberate one from        |
|conditioned existence (samsara), it is unreasonable to be furious with it      |
|(b) As it is something that cuts the avenues of suffering, it is unreasonable  |
|inappropriate to be furious with it                                            |

|(a) As that which hinders praise and so forth acts to liberate one from        |
|conditioned existence (samsara), it is unreasonable to be furious with it      |


Verse 6.100
I who seek freedom
Do not need to be bound by material gain and honor.
So why should I be angry
With those who free me from this bondage?
If you are really someone who aspires to be free from every suffering from
the heart, then you don’t need additional chains that will bind you further
to cyclic existence. In that sense, you don’t need any more praise and good
reputation, for that will bind you further to samsara.
For someone who is really intent on achieving freedom from all sufferings
and liberation from cyclic existence, then the person who interferes with
that his achievement of fame, reputation and praise, is in fact his
liberator who is freeing him from the chains that binds him to samsara. As
such, there is no justification to be upset with the person who is causing
the harm. In fact, it is appropriate and suitable to like that person.
The essence of what we have covered so far here is that we have to change
our view of the harm-doer. Instead of seeing the person as a harm-doer, we
need to realize that the person is not a harm-doer, but rather, the person
who interrupts and comes to cause problems to our fame, reputation and
praise is someone very helpful. So these person who come and disrupt us
from achieving fame, reputation and praise, is someone who is closing the
door of suffering on us.

|(b) As it is something that cuts the avenues of suffering, it is unreasonable  |
|inappropriate to be furious with it                                            |


Verse 6.101
Why should I by angry
At the very doors that do not let me in,
Which are like buddhas bestowing blessings
To those who wish to enter the chamber of suffering?
When we talk about being patient or having patience or trying to develop
patience, the development of patience and cultivation of patience can only
happen in a situation that involves so called harm-doers or obstructers. It
is only because they exist, therefore, the cultivation of patience is
possible.
What I have just said is actually meant for a later section that will come
soon. So take note.
Being emotionally involved and attached to praise and good reputation is
that which open the door for us to enter into the lower realms. So being
attached to praise and good reputation is the same like being attached to
wanting to go into the lower realms and suffer. As such, the person who
harms our attachment to praise and good reputation is in some ways like the
Buddha actually coming personally right in front of us and then stopping us
from entering into that door that will lead us into the lower realms.
The person, who comes and hurts our attachment to our material gains,
praise, and good reputation, is like the one who closes the door to the
lower realms. As such, that person who we usually view as a harm-doer or
obstructer is in fact someone who is kind and helpful. Therefore, it is
inappropriate to be angry with that person.
Up to this section here in this chapter it deals with how we can work with
the eight worldly dharmas, in particular, with attachment to the twelve
desirable objects. Because of our attachment to these twelve desirable
situations or objects, we get upset when something comes along that stops
us from achieving those things. We have done with that.
So far we have dealt with the reasons why it is inappropriate for us to be
upset with those who interfere with us achieving the things that we are
attached to. Having said that, still we may think that there are situations
in which we are justified to be upset and angry. One of such possible
situation is feeling that we are justified to be upset with those who
interfere with us accumulating merit.

|2” It is unreasonable to be furious with that which |
|hinders merit                                       |
|a” It is unreasonable to be furious because merit   |
|has been hindered                                   |
|b” It is not a hindrance to merit                   |
|c” Reflecting on it as an object one ought to have  |
|respect for                                         |

|a” It is unreasonable to be furious because merit   |
|has been hindered                                   |
|(1) One should abide by the supreme austerity       |
|(2) If that acts as a hindrance, you yourself will  |
|become an obstacle to merit                         |

|(1) One should abide by the supreme austerity       |


Verse 6.102
Saying, “This hinders my merit,”
With him too it is incorrect to be angry.
If there is no fortitude similar to patience
Should I not abide in that?
People may think that if their livelihood or the source of material gain is
harmed, somehow their standard of living will also be harmed. They are
prevented from getting more resources or material gain and so they will not
be able to practice as much generosity as they would like to.
If somebody comes along and obstructs their business, they will feel that
“With less material gain, now I have less money to be generous, I have less
money to make offerings, and also I have less money to save to prepare for
my retreat in the future. This person is actually harming and stopping me
from doing my practice. I’m not unreasonable”.  So there are some
justifications for you to be upset. If this is what you think, then the
response to that is as followed.
In the beginning of this chapter, we have already sorted out the faults of
anger. We have also already sorted out the many benefits of patience. It is
patience that can overcome anger.  As said in one of the earlier verses
that there is no fortitude like patience and the practice of patience
brings about so many benefits. Of course the virtue that is associated with
the practice of patience is also very strong.
There is no fortitude like patience, and there is no virtue that is similar
to patience. Patience is really the antidote that can overcome anger. If
what you are really aspiring to is virtue/merit, then wouldn’t it be better
to abide in patience when somebody comes and interferes with your practice
of virtue since there is no better practice of virtue than the practice of
patience?
Do you get the point or not? The point is that people always justify being
upset in certain situations because their practice of virtue is being
interrupted.  Since we want virtue, and we like merit so much, then we
should abide in patience because that will give us the highest merit.

| (2) If that acts as a hindrance, you yourself will|
|become an obstacle to merit                        |


Verse 6.103
If by my own fault
I am not patient with this,
Then it is only I myself hindering
Involvement in the cause of merit.
If you are greatly upset and end up not practicing patience while there is
object there for you to practice patience, then it is you yourself who are
obstructing yourself from achieving the very strong virtue and merit that
comes from practicing patience. The person whom you usually think of as the
enemy that obstructs you from practicing virtue is in fact not an
obstruction to virtue.

|b” It is not a hindrance |
|to merit                 |
|(1) A general            |
|presentation             |
|(2) Establishing that by |
|an analogy               |

|(1) A general            |
|presentation             |


Verse 6.104
If without it something does not occur
And if with it, it does come to be,
Then since this would be the cause of it,
How can I call it “a hindrance”?
The existence of the enemy or the harmer is an indispensable cause and
condition for the practice of patience. For without the existence of the
enemy or the harmer, then one would not be able to practice patience. As
such, one will not be able to reap the benefits that come from practicing
patience.
This verse is saying that the enemy or the harmer is not an obstruction to
virtue. Rather, the person is very helpful for the practice of virtue, for
without the enemy or the harmer, there is no cause for the practice of
patience.

| (2) Establishing that by|
|an analogy               |


Verse 6.105
A beggar who came at the time
Was not a hindrance to generosity,
And I cannot say that those who give ordination
Are hindrances to becoming ordained.
Let’s say you really have something to give, and from your own side you
really want to practice generosity and you are enthusiastic about giving.
In that situation, if somebody such a beggar does come along and ask you
for something, you will not think the beggar as an obstacle or hindrance to
your practice of generosity.
For those who wish to be ordained, there is the requirement that the abbot
presiding over the ordination, the Acharya, need to be present in order for
the ordination to happen and to be valid. So for someone who wants to be
ordained, the Acharya is not an obstacle to getting ordained.
So, the point is that for someone who wants to gather virtue and merit
through the practice of patience, the enemy or the harmer is not an
obstacle. The essence of this section is that the enemy or the harmer who
obstructs us from accumulating merit is in fact not an obstructer.
The teaching state that we should put aside viewing enemy or harmer as
obstructions for us to accumulate merit. In fact, we should look upon them
with respect. Here the teaching state that the enemy or the harmer are in
fact special objects and are indeed rare.

|c” Reflecting on it as an object one ought to have|
|respect for                                       |
|(1) As it is something that acts to develop       |
|qualities, one should respect it                  |
|(2) Due to faith in the Teacher, one should       |
|respect it                                        |

|(1) As it is something that acts to develop       |
|qualities, one should respect it                  |
|(a) Its benefits for oneself are great            |
|(b) It is not reliant upon having reflected upon  |
|the qualities                                     |
|(c) Seeing it to be like the Teacher              |

|(a) Its benefits for oneself are great            |
|(i) The rarity of the special field               |
|(ii) It is reasonable to take joy in that         |
|(iii) It is reasonable to adopt the attitude that |
|it is beneficial                                  |

|(i) The rarity of the special field               |


Verse 6.106
There are indeed beggars in this world,
But rare are those who inflict harm;
If I have not harmed others
Few beings will cause me harm.
What do you think: Are there more beggars or more enemies?
Khen Rinpoche (in English): If somebody asks you: you have more beggars or
more enemies?
Student 1: More beggars.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): Why?
Student 1: I seldom harm people.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): Good.
For those who are the real practitioners of bodhicitta, I guess they find
it rare to encounter enemies.
In this context here we are talking about the real bodhisattvas. Because
the real bodhisattvas don’t harm others, generally speaking, they are
unlikely to have enemies or people looking to them for trouble. As such,
the enemy becomes a very rare object for the bodhisattvas, and they find it
rare to have objects to enable them to further their practice of patience.

For the bodhisattvas, enemies are rare. As such, it is difficult for them
to find objects or people or situations to enhance their practice of
patience. Generally, anything that is hard to come by in this world is
usually considered more precious. Since the enemies are rare, then it is
appropriate to like them.
[BP1 part 2 L16] I guess it must be easier for bodhisattvas to practise
generosity than to practise patience due to the rarity of the objects of
patience. Therefore, the virtue acquired through the practice of patience
is greater than the virtue acquired through the practice of generosity.
This goes with the outline, The rarity of the special field, where the
field refers to the object of patience.

|(ii) It is reasonable to  |
|take joy in that          |


Verse 6.107
Therefore, just like a treasure appearing in my house
Idly without me accomplishing it,
I should be happy at the enemy
For he assists me in my deeds of enlightenment.
In general the bodhisattvas have difficulty to find people to practice
patience with. If in the situation a rare treasure suddenly appears by
itself without any effort, then one should only feel happy because
something rare that one have been looking for all the time has suddenly
appeared on its own accord without one having to make any effort.  For
these bodhisattvas, because the enemy appears for them, so they are able to
really practice the perfection of patience and able to bring their practice
of perfection of patience to completion. For the bodhisattvas, the enemy is
really like a rare treasure.
Next it is appropriate to have the thought of benefiting the enemy.

|(iii) It is reasonable to adopt the      |
|attitude that it is beneficial           |


Verse 6.108
Because I am able to practice this,
He is worthy of being the very first to be given
The fruit of my patience,
For in this way he is the cause of it.
I guess this verse is kind of like a dedication of the merit. The existence
of the enemy is an indispensable condition for the practice of patience. If
one practices patience then one is able to accumulate the merit or virtue
of having practice patience, and then one will experience the benefits of
practicing patience.
Due to the practice of patience, whatever one achieves including
enlightenment, one dedicates that fruit of practice of patience to the
harmer or the enemy; who is the condition that enable one to practice
patience in the first place.
There is a story of two persons by the name of Lama Ser Kangpa? and Lama
Nga Thubten?. Lama Nga Thubten is the guru of Lama Ser Kangpa. Lama Nga
Thubten, who is a bandit chief, took all the material possessions belonging
to Lama Ser Kangpa, and as the result, Lama Ser Kangpa lost all his power,
prestige and wealth.
I guess, prior to being deprived and robbed of all his possessions, Lama
Ser Kangpa was someone who was powerful and had prestige and held some
positions in the society. Because he was deprived of his status in society,
all his power and wealth, he decided to go into isolation and live a life
of austerity. But it was because of going into isolation retreat, he was
able to really engage in pure dharma practice. As a result, he was able to
develop experiences of the path. This Lama Ser Kangpa was very appreciative
of this Lama Nga Thubten, and he regarded this Lama Nga Thubten as very
kind.
The point is that our usual view of the enemy or the harmer as bad and
unhelpful is not really correct if we really think about it. Rather than
viewing the enemy or the harmer as an obstructer to the practice of virtue,
in actual fact if we really know how to think about it, that person
actually is very helpful and is an essential condition for the practice of
virtue. In particular, if we really want to practice patience, then the
enemy or the harmer is really very helpful. As such, for people who have
accomplished the practice of patience, they will dedicate all the benefits
that they received and the merit that they have gained to that enemy.
Of course we will still object to this by saying; “Why should I respect the
enemy? He is not suitable for me to respect him. He is not worthy of me
paying homage and making offerings to him just because he is the condition
for me to practice patience. No, he is not because he doesn’t have the
intention to benefit me. He has no motivation whatsoever to help me to
practice patience. He has no whatsoever great motivation to benefit me
anyway. Why should I venerate him? Why should I respect him?”
The response to that is stated in Verse 6.109.
[BP1 part 2 L16] There was once a famous, wealthy and well-respected
spiritual master. One day, he was robbed of all his possessions. Because of
this, he generated renunciation and retreated to a mountain hermitage,
turning his back on all worldly activities. In his autobiography, he wrote,
“When someone asked me who my teacher was, my answer was, ‘It is that very
kind person who robbed me for he was the one who sent me up here into the
mountains’.”’
We should apply this perspective when we encounter problems. When we meet
with difficulties, we tend to focus on the negative aspects, thinking, “Why
me? Why am I sick? Why did he do this to me?” This only aggravates our
suffering. By seeing things differently, we can use such hardships to
complement, rather than see them as obstacles to our practice.
It may seem easier to practise when things are going well. But, at such
times, nothing gets done because we are so absorbed in pursuing fame,
honour and material possessions. As Buddhist practitioners, when we meet
with difficult situations, that is the time to apply whatever we have
learnt so that we can patiently accept the problems and suffering.
Otherwise, despite having studied and reflected on the teachings, in times
of crisis, those of us who claim to be Dharma practitioners may end up
worse off than ordinary people. We need to reflect on how to transform
adverse conditions into the path.
If we are determined to do so, we will be able to develop patience by
depending on our enemies. Since the enemy is the condition for us to
develop patience, it is appropriate to dedicate to him the very first
fruits of our practice (which comes from applying the various methods
outlined in the text). Therefore, as stated in the outline, it is
appropriate to adopt a positive attitude and to benefit our enemy.

|(b) It is not reliant upon having reflected upon the qualities                 |
|(i) It does not cease to be an object worthy of offerings just because one does|
|not have the attitude that it benefits oneself                                 |
|(ii) It does not cease to be an object worthy of offerings just because one has|
|the attitude that it is harmful to oneself                                     |
|(iii) Thus, as it acts as a focal condition for patience, it is worthy as [an  |
|object of] offerings                                                           |

|(i) It does not cease to be an object worthy of offerings just because one does|
|not have the attitude that it benefits oneself                                 |


Verse 6.109
OBJECTION: Why should this enemy be venerated,
Since he has no intention for me to practice patience?
RESPONSE: Then why venerate the sacred Dharma
That is a fit cause for practice?
We usually think “I need the enemy to practice patience, but nevertheless I
don’t have to venerate him. I don’t have to see him in that way. I don’t
have to venerate him. I don’t have to respect him. I don’t have to make
offerings to him because from his side, he doesn’t have any intention to
help me to practice patience. From his side, he doesn’t have any intention
to benefit me. Since he has no intention to benefit me, there is no reason
for me to venerate him and to make offerings to him.”
This is what we think. If that is what we think, then if we are asked:
“Should you respect the Dharma? Should you make offerings to the Dharma?”
We would probably say “Yes”.
But if you were asked: “But the Dharma doesn’t have any intention to
benefit you, isn’t it? The Dharma jewel, the True Path and True Cessation,
benefit you when you have it. But from the side of True Path and True
Cessation, they don’t have motivation to benefit and help you. If that is
the case, then why do you bother to venerate the Dharma?” So that is the
argument.
Of course we want to have the last say. We agree and say “Fine, but there
still a big difference. Yes, the Dharma may not have the intention to
benefit me, but at least it doesn’t have the intention to harm me. The
enemy, not only does he not have any intention to benefit me, he has all
the intention to harm me.”
Our objection is stated in Verse 6.110.
[BP1 part 2 L16] Qualm: Why should I venerate the enemy who has no
intention of helping me to develop my patience?
Reply: It follows then that the holy Dharma, which motivates us to develop
virtue, is not a worthy object of worship, since it too has no intention to
benefit us.
The holy Dharma is made up of the ultimate and conventional Dharma Jewels.
The ultimate Dharma Jewel refers to the true paths and true cessation while
the conventional Dharma Jewel consists of the 12 branches of scriptures.
The scriptures do not have any intention to benefit us because they are
physical form and not consciousness.
True cessation also has no intention to benefit us since it is an
uncomposed and, therefore, permanent phenomenon that does not possess a
mind. (Whatever is consciousness or intention is necessarily impermanent).
A person can ‘possess’ an intention, but we have to check if true paths
possess any intention to benefit or not. We may argue that ‘possess the
intention to benefit’ is in true paths’ nature; but we need to be clear as
to what this means.
In this context, the Dharma refers to the scriptures. Scriptures containing
the Buddha’s teachings may not possess any intention to benefit us yet they
are worthy of veneration because they are the Dharma. Therefore, the
intention to benefit is not a pre-requisite for an object to be worthy of
worship.

|(ii) It does not cease to be an object worthy of offerings just because one has|
|the attitude that it is harmful to oneself                                     |


Verse 6.110
OBJECTION: Since he intends to cause me harm,
He is not to be venerated.
RESPONSE: If, like a doctor, someone strives to benefit me
Then how can I practice patience?
The enemy is an object suitable to be venerated because he is an object of
observation for the cultivation of patience.

|(iii) Thus, as it acts as a focal condition for patience, it|
|is worthy as [an object of] offerings                       |


Verse 6.111
Thus since patience is produced
In dependence upon a very hateful mind,
He is a cause of patience,
Whereby he is worthy of veneration just like the sacred Dharma.
We cannot practice patience and we cannot bring the practice of patience to
completion in dependence upon somebody who has loving concerns for us. One
can only practice patience and bring the practice of patience to completion
in dependence upon someone who is harming us, i.e. someone who has harmful
intentions, and who is angry at us. Although the enemy does not have any
intention to benefit us, nevertheless, without the enemy as a cause and
condition, there is no way we can practice patience. There is no way we can
bring the practice of patience to completion. As such, he is worthy of
veneration.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): This patience chapter never finishes. I commit
to finish the patience chapter by Thursday. I have to commit otherwise I
never finish. Chapter seven, Joyous Perseverance, maybe I go as fast as
possible. Maybe just read the verses.
We like to be in various desirable situations and we like to have material
gain, fame, reputation and praise. In short, we are really attached to
these things and we are involved with the eight worldly dharmas. When we
get what we don’t want and we don’t get what we want, then we get mighty
upset. For most of us, our minds are usually disturbed on a daily basis
because of attachment to the things that we want and getting attached to
not liking the things that we don’t want. Because of that, every day there
is a lot of mental disturbance and upheavals and that causes us also to be
very unhappy and that leads to anger and so forth.
The many verses in this chapter tells us with reasons how it is actually
inappropriate and incorrect to be upset because of these things. What we
need to do is to look through these verses slowly, to think about it on our
own, and to reflect on it in order to be able to get the benefit.
As I have said earlier that the material we have covered so far is
intellectually not challenging at all. It is so straight forward. There is
nothing that we don’t understand. There isn’t any new word or terms or
terminology that we are not familiar with. It is easy to understand. The
only difficult thing is to put them into practice. We only have to practice
it. We just have to look at it on a regular basis by going through the
verses slowly, thinking about it and reflecting on it. We need to get
familiar with the ideas that are mentioned in this text and to familiarise
ourselves with these logical and correct ways of thinking.
There may be some people who are looking for intellectual challenge. If
this is so, they have got it wrong. Some people think that “This is an easy
text and there is nothing intellectually challenging.” Because it is easy,
as such their interest in the text and their determination to study it
becomes lesser. That is incorrect. The challenge here is not in
understanding the meaning. The point here is not about studying. The point
here is about practicing. The challenge here is to internalize what we have
learned through reflection. That is the challenge.
What is this particular section that we have just covered driving at? It is
trying to make a point, one consistent point; the point is that the harm
doer and the enemy is not an obstructer. In fact, he is your benefactor,
and somebody who is very kind and very useful for you. That is thesis that
we need to prove to our own minds. It is through constant reflection and
thinking about it over time that we move our minds slowly in that
direction, to change our own views of those people whom we don’t like in
our own lives, or the people who cause us problems. That is what we need to
do for ourselves.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): You are challenged for that?
There are many reasoning that we have seen so far such as the reasoning
that are put forth to challenge our old and familiar idea of seeing the
enemy as completely bad, and as an obstructer. We just have to follow after
these reasoning and familiarised ourselves with them so as to move our mind
away from the old way of looking at the enemy as an obstructer and towards
seeing that person as somebody very kind, beneficial, helpful and useful.
The great bodhisattva, Shantideva, has put up many reasoning to prove his
point that the enemy is not an obstructer but rather, the enemy is very
kind. We have to look at the argument that he has put forth. If you do
disagree and object to any of his arguments that the logic is brought
forth, you can always bring it up. That is what we need to look at, isn’t
it?
Khen Rinpoche (in English): Shantideva will answer?
































