Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Engaging in the Deeds of a Bodhisattva/Lesson7.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:52:12.841672
================================================================================


Many of the sufferings that we experience arise as a result of following
after the four erroneous conceptions. What are the four erroneous
conceptions?
The four erroneous conceptions are:
   1. Conceiving that which is impermanent to be permanent.
   2. Conceiving that which is unclean to be clean.
   3. Conceiving that which is in the nature of suffering to be happiness.
   4. Conceiving that which is selfless to have a self.
Many of our problems and unhappiness, especially the mental disturbance,
arises from following these four erroneous conceptions. In order to stop
these four erroneous conceptions, the Buddha taught the four close
placement of mindfulness.
Four close placements of mindfulness:
   1. Close placement of mindfulness of the body
   2. Close placement of mindfulness of the feelings
   3. Close placement of mindfulness of the mind
   4. Close placement of mindfulness of phenomena
When we look at the conception of that which is unclean to be clean, we
should relate that conception to how we view our bodies, and how we relate
to our bodies. In reality, our bodies are unclean and dirty by nature. The
mind that sees the reality of the body can reverse any erroneous conception
of it as being clean and pure. The purpose of seeing this reality of the
body is to overcome attachment for it. It is taught in the teachings that
we should look at how unclean and dirty our body is in terms of the three
times; past, present and future. We should bring to mind the source of this
body - from where and from what does this body come about. Looking at the
body at the present, by seeing how it is unclean and dirty by nature and
how in the future this body is what will become a corpse.
In order to see this nature of the body as being unclean and dirty by
nature, we have to reflect and think. By seeing how it is unclean and dirty
by nature, we will be able to put aside any attachment we have for our
bodies. A lot of times people accumulate all kinds of negativities because
of the attachment to their bodies. And this attachment often arises from
this erroneous conception of the body as being pure and clean.
While the body is indeed unclean and dirty by nature, the teachings never
ever suggest that one should neglect one’s body. The teachings never ever
suggest one should discard one’s body or one shouldn’t take good care of
it. Although the body is unclean and dirty by nature, it can be put to good
use. On the basis of this body, one can practice the dharma, one can
cultivate good heart and one can be of benefit to others. So it is wrong to
think that just because the body is unclean and dirty by nature or impure,
one should just neglect the body and not taking care of it. Just because
the nature of the body is such that it is unclean and dirty by nature, that
doesn’t mean that one should not take care of one’s personal hygiene by not
cleaning or washing it.
Khen Rinpoche (In English): Don’t do that.
This body can be useful if we use our body for something virtuous and to
benefit others. For that reason, we need to take care of the body. This
advice and instruction of looking at the unclean and impure nature of the
body is a method for us to work and deal with our attachment. This close
placement of mindfulness on the body is one of the methods to reduce our
attachment.
Although one’s body is by nature dirty and impure, taking care of one’s
body is like how some farmers collect and store the waste of their farm
animals. Animal waste is dirty, but because it can be put to good use, the
farmers keep it and use it, and at the same time they are not attached to
the animal waste.
Khen Rinpoche (In English): They take care anyway. For example, last time
when I was young and became a monk in Kopan. During Lama Yeshe’s time in
Kopan we don’t have many houses so a lot of empty land. We have to plant
vegetables such as plant cauliflower, cabbage, etc. At that time I have to
go to the farm to look after them.  That time Lama Yeshe taught us how to
go to the toilet septic tank and put the bucket in to collect the wastes -
all the pee, poop-poop and liquid inside the tank. So we go to the farm
with some buckets. That is where the cabbage, cauliflower etc grows. Lama
Yeshe told us not to put the waste on top (of the vegetables). He said “Dig
the soil a little bit and then put one scoop (of the waste) and then cover
it with soil”. After that the cauliflower grows very big.  If you put the
cow dung, the cauliflower grows this much, but if you put the human waste,
it grows much bigger.  When I was a kid, at that time we did that. Then
after, we eat that one.
Sometimes people misunderstand because they have the idea that the body is
in the nature of suffering and unclean, then they should neglect it. Of
course, that is not correct. We have to take care of our body. The whole
point is about working with the attachment for one’s body.
Then you have the close placement of mindfulness on feelings. That is a
method for us to overcome the erroneous conception conceiving of suffering
to be happiness.
Whenever we experience pleasant feeling, it may be very small to start off
with. We then immediately get emotionally attach and involve with the
feeling. We want to hold onto it and grasp at it. That is what most people
work for in their life. In order to achieve this feeling or to have this
feeling to arise, people do all kinds of thing to achieve the pleasant and
pleasurable feeling. When one’s pleasurable feeling subsides or ends, one
turn one’s attention to another pleasurable feeling and then run after it.
We have to do so much to achieve that same feeling. But if we analyze the
nature of those pleasurable feelings, first, they do not increase forever.
Second, they always end up giving suffering. So by seeing how our feelings
are in the nature of suffering, we can reduce or work with this erroneous
conception conceiving suffering to be happiness. Most of us are attached
and emotionally involved with our pleasurable feelings, n in the process we
accumulate non-virtues in order to experience that.
Then we have the close placement of mindfulness on the mind. That is
practiced to overcome the erroneous conception of permanence.
Then we have the close placement of mindfulness on phenomena. That is done
by seeing how all phenomena are lack a self. Such a reflection is to
overcome the erroneous conception of conceiving that which is selfless to
have a self.
These are the four close placement of mindfulness of the body, feelings,
mind and phenomena. This is the method to reduce and to work with our
attachment and grasping, because our attachment and grasping arises many
times due to these four erroneous conceptions.
|Close placement of mindfulness     |To overcome the erroneous conception of:|
|Close placement of mindfulness on  |Conceiving that which is unclean to be  |
|the body                           |clean                                   |
|Close placement of mindfulness on  |Conceiving that which is in the nature  |
|feelings                           |of suffering to be happiness.           |
|Close placement of mindfulness on  |Conceiving that which is impermanent to |
|the mind                           |be permanent.                           |
|Close placement of mindfulness on  |Conceiving that which is selfless to    |
|phenomena                          |have a self.                            |


Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds
We have finished with the benefits of the mind of enlightenment -
bodhicitta. This mind of enlightenment is very precious. This precious mind
arises due to the existence of suffering and sentient beings are tormented
by suffering. As we saw in the last lesson on how the instructions arise in
the teachings to regard sentient beings as teacher. Bodhicitta arises due
to sentient beings and sentient beings from their own side have the buddha
lineage/buddha nature. They also have the potential and chance to develop
this mind of enlightenment. For that reasons, we should try to respect
sentient beings and take care of them. This will come later in the text.
There is a verse which states “As much as one cherishes the Buddha, then
that much one should also cherish the sentient beings”. This verse talks
about this. There is an internal contradiction if we cherish the Buddhas
and make offerings to the Buddhas but not cherish the sentient beings.
If we reflect on the benefits of bodhicitta, one would find bodhicitta as
precious. If we find bodhicitta as precious then the advice is that we
should also find that the sentient beings from which the bodhicitta arises
to be precious. For that reason, we have to take care and cherish sentient
beings as much as possible, and not harm the sentient beings.
In order to adopt the mind of enlightenment:
- we must accumulate merit which is the favorable condition for adopting
bodhicitta and
- we need to purify our minds of the negativities which is the unfavorable
condition that obstructs the generation or adoption of such a mind.
It is said in the Great Treatise on the Stages of the Path to Enlightenment
that accumulating merit (which is the favorable condition) and purifying
negativities (which is the unfavourable condition) are the cooperative
conditions for the production of the path in one’s mind.
The cooperative conditions for generating the realizations in the mind are
accumulating merit and purifying the minds of negativities.
The substantial cause for producing the realizations in the mind is
sustaining the meditation on the respective topics of the Lam Rim.
This means to say that if you just sustain the meditation on the various
topics of the Stages of the Path to Enlightenment without accumulating
merit and without purifying the mind of obscuration (which are the
cooperative conditions), then the realizations will not arise in the mind.
As such, one cannot neglect the accumulating of merit and the purification
of the negativities. These two are indispensable.
Lama Tsongkhapa said in his Great Treatise on the Stages of the Path to
Enlightenment:
   When you hear the teachings, you don’t remember,
   When you reflect on the teachings, you don’t understand.
   When you meditate, you don’t produce any experience or realizations
   At such times when the mind is very weak, then one has to rely on the
   power of the merit field or the field of merit.
   This is a personal instruction.
This is what Lama Tsongkhapa said.  There is a need to accumulate merit and
to purify the mind of negativities in order to be able to generate
bodhicitta.
Nagarjuna has stated the need to accumulate a vast amount of merit in order
to generate bodhicitta.
Arya Asanga said that one needs to accumulate merit in order to make the
mind clear, and it is only when the mind is clear then bodhicitta can
arise.
So the point of accumulating merit through making offerings is to make the
mind clear and lucid.
Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds
Chapter two: Confessing Negativities

|Practicing the branches of preparation- prostration, offerings,|
|and going for refuge- and then confessing negativities- adverse|
|conditions- by means of the four powers                        |

|Offerings               |
|A The need to make      |
|offerings               |
|B The actual making of  |
|offerings               |

|A The need to make    |
|offerings             |


Verse 2.1
In order to uphold that precious mind
I make excellent offerings to the Tathagatas,
To the sacred Dharma, the stainless jewel, and
To the children of the buddhas, the oceans of excellent qualities.
“In order to uphold that precious mind” - this states the attitude that one
should have when making offerings. In this context here one should have the
thought “I’m going to make offerings so that I can generate bodhicitta”.
Many times the reason for people to make offerings is to put on a show or
done with arrogance or pride. There are also many times when people
actually make offerings it is made with a sense of not willing to part with
the offerings. They do make offering but there is this sense of clinging to
it and with miserliness. So, one should not make offerings with such
attitude. One should have the correct and pure motivation for making
offerings. The motivation here is to be able to develop on bodhicitta and
the bodhicitta is all about benefitting others.
With that as the motivation, the rest of the verses are basically
indicating the objects to whom one makes the offerings. The objects here
are the supreme objects - the supreme field of merit. One makes offerings
to the Buddhas, to the sacred Dharma and also to the bodhisattvas.
“I make excellent offerings to the Tathagatas” – “Tathagatas” is the One
Thus Gone, the Buddha.
If you remember from our previous discussion, when we talk about Buddha,
there is the truth body and the form body.
Then we make offerings to the Dharma as well. The Dharma here refers to the
true path and true cessation.
“To the children of the buddhas” - here the children of the buddhas are the
bodhisattvas; primarily we are talking about the bodhisattvas who abide on
the 1st ground and beyond. So essentially it is indicating the Sangha
Jewel.
I didn’t get to mention this before.
The Buddha Jewel can be divided into:
   1. Ultimate Buddha Jewel
   2. Conventional Buddha Jewel
The two form bodies are the conventional Buddha jewel.
The two truth bodies are the ultimate Buddha jewel.
The Dharma Jewel can be divided into:
   1. Ultimate Dharma Jewel
   2. Conventional Dharma Jewel
The ultimate Dharma Jewel is true path and true cessation.
The conventional Dharma Jewel refers to the twelve branches of scriptures.
When condensed, we can have the three scriptural collections.
The Sangha Jewel can also be divided into:
   1. Ultimate Sangha Jewel
   2. Conventional Sangha Jewel
One way of looking at it is that:
The ultimate Sangha Jewel refers to the true path and true cessation
The conventional Sangha Jewel refers to the Superiors being
These may be useful for future discussions.
When we talk about refuge, we can talk about:
   1. Ultimate refuge
   2. Conventional refuge
In this context when we talk about refuge, refuge here refers to the
objects of refuge.
So we can have the:
   1. Ultimate objects of refuge
   2. Conventional objects of refuge.
When we talk about the ultimate objects of refuge, we are talking about the
final objects of refuge.
This means that the ultimate object of refuge exist only on Buddha ground.
Conventional object of refuge or the temporal objects of refuge refer to
the true path and true cessations in the continuum of a sentient being.
With the pure attitude, one offers well to all these different objects of
refuge mentioned. Offering that is well done means offering with respect.

|             |ULTIMATE                               |CONVENTIONAL           |
|Buddha Jewel |1. Nature Truth body (emptiness of the |1. Complete Enjoyment  |
|             |enlightened mind)                      |Body                   |
|             |2. Wisdom Truth Body (omniscience of   |2. Supreme Emanation   |
|             |the Buddha’s mind)                     |body                   |
|Dharma Jewel |True paths  and true cessations        |12 branches of         |
|             |                                       |scriptural teachings   |
|             |                                       |When condensed, three  |
|             |                                       |scriptural collections |
|Sangha Jewel |True paths  and true cessations        |Superior being         |
|Object of    |Final objects of refuge (exist only on |True paths  and true   |
|Refuge       |Buddha ground)                         |cessations in the      |
|             |                                       |continuum of a sentient|
|             |                                       |being                  |


|The actual making of    |
|offerings               |
|1 Offering unowned      |
|substances              |
|2 Offering one’s own    |
|body                    |
|3 Mentally emanated     |
|offerings               |


As for the offering substances, there are many different offering
substances.

|1 Offering unowned       |
|substances               |


Verse 2.2
Whatever flowers and fruits there are
And whatever kinds of medicine,
Whatever jewels exist in this world,
And whatever clean refreshing waters;
Verse 2.3
Jewel mountains, and likewise,
Forest groves, quiet and joyful places,
Heavenly trees ornamented by and bedecked with flowers,
And trees with branches laden with good fruit;
Verse 2.4
Fragrances and incense of the realms of gods,
Wish-fulfilling trees and jewel trees,
Uncultivated harvests, and all ornaments
That are worthy to be offered;
Verse 2.5 a,b
Lakes and pools adorned with lotuses
And the beautiful cry of wild geese,
-  All the flowers that exist in the pure lands, in the realms of the
celestial beings, in the human world, in the naga world – and whatever you
can find, all the different kinds and species of flowers, and all the
flowers that I have mentioned here.
-Whatever kinds of medicines which are effective in curing different
illnesses and diseases, one takes them to mind and offer.
-Whatever jewels there are such as the wish-fulfilling jewels, which is
said to be able to fulfill all of one’s desires and needs, and the other
kinds of precious stones.
-Offering of all clean and refreshing waters that there are in the world.
This is said in the teachings to be one of the things to be offered.
There are certain types of water when drunk will harm one’s stomach and
throat.
There are certain kinds of water when drunk are helpful and is good for
one’s body and one’s health.
For example, there are certain kinds of water that possesses the eight
properties, and one should offer such kinds of water.
Now there are wide spread tradition of making water bowls offering. This is
originated from Tibet because of the abundant pure water that possesses
those eight properties which can be found almost everywhere in Tibet. Since
the water is so readily available and it is so clean and pure with all
those eight properties, it became very easy to accumulate merits by just
offering it. Offering water is something that is done without any kind of
clinging.
-Jewel mountains i.e. the whole mountains being made of something precious.
In the Abidharmakosha there is an explanation of the Mount Meru and how
Mount Meru is surrounded by these chains of golden mountains and these are
mountains are made of precious substances.
-Then offering all the forest groves that exist in the world. In our
context, probably we use the word “parks” that are beautified or adorned
with flowers and so forth.
-Then offering trees that are laden with fruits i.e. fruit trees.
-Then offering various kinds of fragrances and incenses such as sandalwood
and akaru (agarwood).
- Offering wish-fulfilling trees and jewel trees and those uncultivated
crops.
-Offering of lakes and pools that are adorned with lotuses and with swans
and geese
These are the various offering substances that are unowned and they exist
in the human world, in the celestial realms and in the pure lands. Wherever
they are maybe, one brings to mind all these various substances and then
one offers.

|How to offer   |
|them           |


Verse 2.5 (continue)
Everything unowned
Within the limitless spheres of space;
Verse 2.6
Taking these with my mind, I offer them
To the supreme beings, the Munis, as well as their Sons;
O holy objects of offering, Compassionate Ones,
Think mercifully of me and accept these offerings of mine.
These are all the lists of various offering substances that are unowned.
But whatever specific examples or specific objects you are thinking, for
example flowers that exist in the various places likes the god realms, the
pure land and the human worlds and whatever specific flower that you bring
to mind, you should think and visualize that the whole of space is filled
with numberless of these flowers and then you offer that.
There are the whole lists of unowned offering substances. Whatever offering
substances that you bring to mind, you should multiply that particular
offering substances thinking that is numberless and filling the whole of
space and then offer that; bringing all these different offering substances
to mind and then offers to the objects of refuges that were mentioned
earlier. I guess you can think that your offerings are accepted.
From your side you visualize numberless offering substances filling of the
whole space and then you offer with the thinking: “Please accept my
offerings.” Then you think your offerings are accepted.
|The reason one offers unowned     |
|substances                        |


Verse 2.7
Not having merit I am destitute
And I have no other gifts to offer.
Thus, O Protectors, you who think of others’ welfare,
Through your power accept these for my sake.
Here I guess Shantideva is talking about himself as not having enough
merits and therefore is very poor in term of external resources i.e. not
actually having all these various substances. As such “I offer these things
that are unowned, please may you accept it”.
|Offering one’s own   |
|body                 |


Verse 2.8
Eternally I shall offer all my bodies
To the Conquerors and their children.
Please accept me, you Supreme Heroes.
Respectfully shall I be your subject.
Verse 2.9
Through being completely under your care,
I shall not fear conditioned existence and shall benefit sentient beings;
I shall perfectly transcend my previous negativities
And henceforth shall commit no more.
“What I have is only my body, and I don’t have other things to offer. As
such I offer myself.  Please accept it”. Offering of one’s body is done
willingly, happily with faith and with respect. The point of offering the
body to the Buddhas and bodhisattvas is that one can accomplish their
wishes. It is said that by offering one’s body to the Buddhas and
bodhisattvas and thinking that they accept it, henceforth one uses one’s
body to work fearlessly for the welfare of others. After having offered
one’s body, one applies the attitudes of restraint by pledging that one
will not use the body that one has offered to accumulate negativities.
Offering one’s body to the Buddhas and bodhisattvas is said to be one the
best protections for oneself. After having offered one’s body, one
basically places oneself under the command and orders of the Buddhas and
bodhisattvas i.e. one literally becomes their servant and allows them to
use one’s body in whatever way to benefit the sentient beings. If you allow
yourself to be used in that way the Buddhas and bodhisattvas will always
protect you. As such that becomes the best protection for oneself. If you
really dedicate yourself to the Buddhas and bodhisattvas - dedicate one’s
body, speech and mind completely- then you will be under the influence and
control of the Buddhas and bodhisattvas. As such naturally you will
accumulate a lot of merits and purifies the negativities.
Q&A
Student 1: Verse 2.5 says “everything unowned within limitless spheres of
space.” Let’s says I want to offer all the offering substances that are
unowned in the ten billons world systems, and I don’t specifically think
what these offering substances are and I don’t visualize them, does that
offering count?
Khen Rinpoche: In general, if you think you offer everything exists in the
world without bringing to mind any specific object, it is not that you
don’t accumulate merits. You definitely accumulate merits. But if you do
bring to mind some specific offering substances while it is not yours,
there is this feeling of closeness or proximity in that. While it is not
yours but when you bring it to mind, it feels as if it is yours and belongs
to you. If you offer that, then that is some kind of emotional involvement
and feeling with that.
I think if you can bring these specific various offering substances and
have them as clearly as possible to your mind, you will have some kind of
emotional involvement with, that is, feeling it is kind of yours and then
you offer that. There is a kind of feeling that you get from offering.
There is an account of two people making aspirational prayers. One of them
really knows how to pray and he is able to think extensively and make very
extensive wishes and aspiration. But the other person, he doesn’t have the
ability and doesn’t really know how to think. He just thought; “Whatever he
is aspiring, whatever he is praying, I also prayed. May it happen as well”.
It is said that he also achieved the result of the prayer.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): Could be liked that also.
Student 1: Maybe not so fast?
Khen Rinpoche: Perhaps we just think “I just offer whatever there is in
this world”, perhaps there is this likelihood that you maybe actually
accumulate the merits of actually having offered all of that.
Student 1: If we just think “everything unowned”, does that also include
things that are not so good?
Khen Rinpoche (in English): But what the text discussed are all the good
one, yeah?
Student 1: It is not mentioned here, and it doesn’t mean it does not exist.
Is there a danger?
Khen Rinpoche: We only offer the good stuffs.
Student 1: If I forget to think that then maybe I offer bad things.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): You cannot think everything in the world. You
have to think everything that are good in the world then okay.
Student 2: Since there is no such thing as substantial existence, what is
the thing that is attached to the ego? Another question, through the
practice of uncovering the Buddha nature within all us is there is a risk
of the practice becomes a form of attachment? If yes, how do we avoid it?
Khen Rinpoche: While the nature of all phenomena is empty of existing
inherently, empty of existing truly and so forth, all phenomena have the
nature of emptiness. But because we don’t realize that there is an
apprehension - grasping at a person as a real self- then there is arising
of affliction such as pride and so forth. In the first place, if one
understands the ultimate nature of phenomena then there is no basis of such
an apprehension of self to arise. Attachment is not to be fostered but
rather attachment needs to be gotten rid of. The best method for overcoming
attachment is to meditate on the emptiness of inherently existence.
As for practice, whatever practice it may be called, or whatever practice
one is doing including studying the dharma, everything that the Buddha
taught is to overcome the afflictions. If it is a practice then it must
contribute to the destruction of the afflictions. While you are practicing
dharma, whether the practice becomes dharma depends on whether the
afflictions are harmed or not; at least a little bit. That is the criteria
in which you can judge whether whatever you do actually become dharma or
not. It has to hurt the afflictions. While one think that one is practicing
the dharma but if the practice does not contribute to the weakening or
lessening of the afflictions but rather it contributes to the increase in
the afflictions then the practice doesn’t become dharma. It only looks like
a practice but it is a counterfeit practice, and that is incorrect. Like
what I have mentioned earlier about the offering, one may make offerings.
One may give something but if one doesn’t know how to give then the act of
giving may actually become a show or a way of show off and becoming proud.
It is the same as studying the dharma. The whole point of studying the
dharma is that it must contribute to the lessening of afflictions. It must
hurt the afflictions. If learning dharma, instead of becoming an antidote
of afflictions, becomes a cause for competing with others, cause for
becoming arrogant, then that is the sign of not knowing what dharma is and
how to practice the dharma. That is why right at the beginning of The
Stages of the Path to Enlightenment it explains clearly how one should
learn the dharma. So, in the context of hearing the dharma, one should
listen through abandoning the three faults of the vessel and cultivate the
six ideas. Of the six ideas, there is this idea of one is a chronic patient
and the dharma is the medicine to the illness or sickness of the
afflictions.
Try to read the remaining verses of this chapter quickly. There is nothing
really important or critical in that sense that need detail explanation.
Extract from BP1L7: Some people might wonder why we could not just offer
the things that we own ourselves. Why do we have to offer unowned
substances? The reason is that since one has not created the roots of
virtue that comes from the practice of very powerful actions of generosity
in the past, therefore, at the present moment, one does not own excellent
substances – very pure and wonderful substances - that can be offered. We
are poor in these beautiful, excellent substances.
Since we do not possess such roots of virtue that enable us to own such
excellent offering substances, the only way we can offer them is to
visualize all those that are unowned by us and make offerings of them
instead. The only way is to visualise the unowned substances and holding
those substances in one’s mind and offer them to the buddhas and
bodhisattvas and request them to accept these offerings.
From the Buddha’s side, there is no need for any of these offerings as the
Buddha does not lack of any of this offering substances. Buddhas do not
have self- grasping and also do not have the attitude that “these things
belong to me and they are mine”. The whole purpose of making offerings is
to enable us to complete the accumulation of merit. Basically, visualize
extensively and then make unowned substances as offerings to the buddhas
and bodhisattvas. The practice of making unowned substance is actually
taught in the Sutra of the Clouds of Jewels.
One Year Meditation Program
For those of you who have signed up for the one year meditation program, I
think some of you have already started. Those of you who have not yet
started but have signed up please take notes that the start date is this
Sunday (2nd March 2014); which is the first day of the Tibetan New Year. If
you haven’t started, make sure you start on this Sunday. The commitment is
that you have to meditate for a minimum of 15-20 minutes daily for a year.
We are doing this exercise as a group or collective effort. So, if
everybody is to reflect on the same topic then it will be easier. As such
you should start with the topic of correctly relying on the virtuous
friend. We will set aside 3 months for that.
Meditating for 15 or 20 minutes goes by very quickly. For the first 10
minutes, what you should do is to go for refuge, generate bodhicitta and
then the four immeasurables. After that, you do the seven-branch worships
or the seven-limb practice. This is what you should do for the first 10
minutes.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): Next time don’t tell me that “10 minutes there
is not enough time and I cannot finish these four meditations”. You know
what I am saying? People say I don’t know what to meditate but there is
plenty to meditate. My point is here; 10 minutes you can do the seven-limb,
four immeasurables, bodhicitta and refuge. You meditate for 10 minutes, it
is not enough. Some people said “What to think for 10 minutes.” Many people
say “I don’t think what to think “, but there is plenty to think and 10
minutes is not enough. Those people who think “10 minutes is too long. I
don’t know what to meditate?” There is plenty of things. Those who think
not enough time then you make longer time, maybe 20 minutes for that. It is
up to you.
Then you bring to your mind your own guru. View him as inseparable from
Lama Tsongkhapa.
You reflect on the topic of correctly relying on the virtuous friend or
guru devotion. You can think of the whole subject of guru devotion in term
of five main points. What you have to think about is:
   1. The advantages of correctly relying on the virtuous friend
   2. The disadvantages of relying incorrectly on the virtuous friend
   3. The root training in faith
   4. Developing respect for him by remembering the kindness of the guru
   5. Devoting correctly in action
The whole guru devotion topic can be looked at in term of these five main
points/areas.
You ask yourself:
- What are the qualities that I have gained after I have relied on this
particular person as guru?
- What would have happened if I did not rely on this person?
On the first and second points, if you have time you should consult the
Lamrim literature where there is an extensive explanation of the many
benefits. There is a list of benefits or advantages of correctly relying on
the virtuous friend. There is also list of all the faults and disadvantages
of not relying correctly on the virtuous friend. Although there are lists
of advantages and disadvantages, you should take those that are effective
for your mind and that help you to see for yourself the benefits of relying
correctly and see for yourself the fault of rely incorrectly. The whole
point is to bring about a transformation in the mind that you actually can
feel it, taste it and experience it.
As for the third point, the root training in faith, it means training your
mind to look at the guru as Buddha, i.e. conceive the guru is the Buddha.
For this particular point, it is good to refer to the Lamrim text:
Liberation in the Palm of Your Hand (by Pabongka Rinpoche) where there is
an extensive discussion on guru devotion.
- Why you should look at the guru as Buddha?
- How you are able to do that?
- The actual way of looking at the guru as the Buddha and transforming the
mind into that.
So consult the Liberation in the Palm of Your Hand (by Pabongka Rinpoche).
On the fourth point, remembering the kindness of the guru, again there is
very good explanation in different sub-points in Liberation in the Palm of
Your Hand (by Pabongka Rinpoche). So whatever you are reflecting or
whatever you are going to analyze, you need to have a good grasp of the
material or subject matter. It is also good to situate the entire the
subject matter in term of main areas or what we called outlines. As I
mentioned earlier, you can look at the whole topic of guru devotions in
term of five main areas.
   1. The advantages of correctly relying on the virtuous friend
   2. The disadvantages of relying incorrectly on the virtuous friend
   3. The root training in faith
   4. Developing respect for him by remembering the kindness of the guru
   5. Devoting correctly in action
It is not possible to reflect on everything in one session, so you should
start with the benefits of relying correctly on the virtuous friend and
thinks about it for a couple of days. Then move on to the next one -
reflecting for a few days or week on the faults of relying incorrectly.
Then moving on to the next one: the actual training as mentioned in
Liberation in the Palm of Your Hand (by Pabongka Rinpoche) and those
reasons are to train the mind to see the guru as the Buddha and so forth.
So you divide the time on your own.

Medicine Buddha Retreat in Kopan (from October 16 to 23)
Leaving Singapore on 15 Oct and back to Singapore on 24 Oct.
Registration opening starting from now. Closing on April 1
Estimated cost: $1300 to $1400
