Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Engaging in the Deeds of a Bodhisattva/lesson44.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:52:17.095368
================================================================================


We have identified what exactly joyous perseverance is. We have also looked
at the discordant class of joyous perseverance which is essentially the
three types of laziness and some of the antidotes. We have finished with
that. Next is increasing the power of joyous perseverance which is the
antidote to laziness.

|2) How to undertake joyous effort                           |
|a) Abandoning that which is incongruous with joyous effort  |
|b) Increasing the strength of joyous effort- the antidote   |

|b) Increasing the strength of joyous effort- the antidote   |
|i) Increasing the strength of the conditions conducive to   |
|joyous effort                                               |
|ii) Devoting oneself to the practice of the conduct by means|
|of mindfulness and alertness                                |
|iii) Accomplishing the conduct is within your power         |

|i) Increasing the strength of the conditions conducive to   |
|joyous effort                                               |
|1' A brief presentation by means of identifying the four    |
|powers                                                      |
|2' An extensive explanation                                 |

|1' A brief presentation by means of identifying the four    |
|powers                                                      |


First there is a brief presentation on the four powers and they are the
favourable conditions for increasing joyous perseverance.
Verse 7.31
The army for the sake of accomplishing the welfare of sentient beings
Are interest*, steadfastness, joy, and relinquishment.
Interest* is developed through fear of suffering
And contemplating its benefits.
Verse 7.32
Thus I shall abandon its discordant classes
And make effort in order to increase joyous effort
Through the powers of interest, pride, joy, and relinquishment,
Diligence and mastery.
*Ven Gyurme translated “interest” as “aspiration”
Favourable conditions for generating joyous perseverance is said to be the
four powers:
   1. The power of aspiration
   2. The power of steadfastness
   3. The power of joy
   4. The power of relinquishment.
The power of aspiration literally is the power of belief, but in this
context here it is referring to aspiration. So it is translated as
aspiration - the power of aspiration. In this context here aspiration
refers to yearning - yearning for practice, yearning for the dharma. Such
yearning for the practice and yearning for the dharma is produced through
developing the faith of conviction in karma and its effect.
The power of steadfastness - The teachings advised us that prior to
undertaking any practice, we should carry out a thorough investigation to
see why we are doing it, whether we can actually do it, and whether we can
actually bring it to completion. The point is to develop a stable
aspiration for the practice, or literally we say we need to be steadfast.
The power of joy literally refers to the joy and the liking to whatever you
have decided to carry out whatever practices. So when you are engaging in
the practice, you do it with very strong yearning and without any wish to
stop doing it. The example that is given is of children playing games. When
the children are playing games, they never want to stop. They just want to
continue on and on. Likewise, when come to applying joyous perseverance,
whatever we are practicing, we should do it with a sense of joy and without
any wish to stop that practice.
The power of relinquishment - As I have said before that in the process of
applying joyous perseverance in engaging whatever practice or virtue, we do
get exhausted and tired at time. So it is important to take a rest with the
view of carrying on when one have rested. After one has rested one has to
continue with whatever one has set up to do.
“Thus I shall abandon its discordant classes” - the discordant classes of
joyous perseverance is laziness and there are three types of laziness. In
essence, there are people who can actually engage in virtue and they know
that they can engage in virtue, but nevertheless they don’t do it. That is
laziness of procrastination. There are some who want to do it, but they
feel that they are unable to do it. They feel hopeless and are discouraged
for whatever reasons. So that is a form of laziness, which is the laziness
of discouragement.
The last laziness is the laziness of being attached to inferior or ignoble
activities.
These are the discordant classes of joyous perseverance.
In order to develop joyous perseverance, we need to abandon the discordant
classes and we need to rely on the four powers which are the favorable
conditions for the generation and the increase of joyous perseverance.
In the process of engaging in whatever practice or virtue, the practice
must be done with mindfulness and vigilance. Then come a time when one
achieves a concentration which made one’s body and mind serviceable (i.e.
when one achieved the meditative serenity or calm abiding, one achieved
pliancy of the body and mind), the practitioner will be able to engage
effortlessly in the practice of virtue or dharma day and night. This is
because his body and mind have already been made serviceable.
Right from the very beginning of any practice or right from the beginning
of the cultivation of any virtue, you need to be thoroughly convinced of
the benefits of that practice that you are going to engage in. You need to
be thoroughly convinced of the benefits of that virtue that you hope to
cultivate in which you call it faith. It is a conviction or an
ascertainment with the understanding that is so beneficial. For example, if
someone hopes to actualize concentration, right from the beginning before
engaging in the practices that will help him to achieve that concentration
he must first understand thoroughly what concentration is. He must have
confidence and belief in the benefit of concentration. He must believe that
when he achieved that one day, these are the benefits and this is something
that he really wants. He needs that conviction and the confidence right
from the beginning.
With regards to whatever virtue that you want to cultivate and whatever
practices that you want to do, if you have that faith of conviction right
from the beginning and you are able to see what is in for you when you
actualized that practice, then that will form the basis for your yearning.
That faith, understanding and confidence in the benefit of the practice
will drives your aspiration and yearning for that practice. With the strong
heartfelt yearning to achieve whatever goal that you are aiming for, only
then you will start with the practice. It is only then you will joyously
persevere in the practice that will lead you to the goal. With the faith of
conviction which leads to strong yearning, and which then leads to the
start of actually engaging in joyous perseverance. Through the continuous
application of this joyous perseverance, in particular if that is applied
to achieving a single-pointedness of mind where you are aiming to achieve
concentration that makes your body and mind serviceable. So with the steady
application of joyous perseverance over time, that practitioner actually is
able to achieve the single-pointed concentration. From then onwards,
because that person body and mind is made serviceable, the person is never
tired of engaging in virtue and practice. Then it is just all the way up.
Such people will never find it difficult to engage in virtue day and night,
and they don’t experience tiredness. Within that single-pointed
concentration the practitioner goes on to cultivate wisdom; in particular
the wisdom that perceives the ultimate nature of reality - the wisdom
realizing selflessness - which is the antidote that will enable anybody to
cut the very root of all the problems - the root of samsara. So these are
the essential points.
Let us look at the discussion of aspiration in the context of the mind and
awareness; as in one of the earlier modules where we looked at the workings
of the consciousness. Within the study of mental factors, there are 51
mental factors, which are then divided into groups of different mental
factors. There is a group of mental factors which is called the five
objects ascertaining mental factors.
The first of the five objects ascertaining mental factors is the mental
factor of aspiration; which is essentially a mind that is yearning for a
chosen object, whatever the object may be. If we differentiate aspiration
and belief, then we do not take aspiration and belief to be the same mental
factor.
In the context of studying the mental factors, in the group of the object
ascertaining mental factors, the mental factor after aspiration is belief.
What is belief? Belief is essentially an ascertainment of whatever object
in question. It is essentially a valid cognition; that means it is a valid
establishment from one side i.e. one’s mind has gained certainty with
regards to that object “It is really like this and is not like that.” That
is why it is called belief.
What comes after belief? You have aspiration, belief, and then there is a
mental factor of mindfulness. What is mindfulness? Mindfulness is not
forgetting things of what you have belief in; not forgetting of what you
have ascertained through a valid cognizer i.e. whatever chosen object, you
have understood it correctly. It is not just a superficial understanding
but a thorough understanding of the chosen object, and you have thoroughly
ascertained it through a valid mind. That is belief. That meaning after you
have ascertained through belief, you are not supposed to forget it. You
cannot just forget it. You have to keep it in mind. So that is the purpose
of mindfulness and that is its function - not forgetting. Based on not
forgetting what you have ascertained earlier through a valid mind, and when
that mindfulness become strong you are able to focus the mind single-
pointedly on that object. Therefore, after mindfulness, there is a mental
factor of concentration.
Now out of the five ascertaining mental factors, you already have four
–aspiration, belief, mindfulness and concentration. The fifth ascertaining
mental factor is wisdom which is essentially a mind that is able to
distinguish or differentiate phenomena. There are many types of wisdom, but
the wisdom that is very important is the wisdom that directly perceives the
ultimate nature of reality - the wisdom that directly perceives
selflessness.
So these are the five object ascertaining mental factors. It is not
sufficient just to be able to list them, you have to understand them as it
is the working of your own mind. You have to understand how one leads to
the other starting with aspiration, then belief, mindfulness,
concentration, and wisdom. Therefore, verses 7.31 and 7.32 are the brief
presentation of the four powers.
Next is the extended explanation on these powers. First, there is the
explanation on the power of aspiration.

|2' An extensive explanation         |
|a’ The power of esteem              |
|b’ The power of stability           |
|c’ The power of joy                 |
|d’ The power of suspension          |

|a’ The power of esteem              |
|1" The esteemed object              |
|2" The effect                       |
|3" The cause for esteem             |
|4" Conclusion                       |

|1" The esteemed object              |
|a" Discarding wrongdoing            |
|b" Adopting qualities               |
|c" Examining the list of things to  |
|do and not to do                    |


Essentially verses 7.33 and 7.34 are telling us how it is actually
incorrect for us to not have any aspiration to overcome our faults.

|a" Discarding wrongdoing            |


Verse 7.33
I shall destroy
The boundless misdeeds of others and myself.
At that time each of these misdeeds
Will be exhausted in an ocean of eons.
Verse 7.34
But if within myself I do not perceive
Even a fraction of the endeavor for exhausting these misdeeds,
Then I have become an abode for boundless suffering;
Why does my heart not burst?
In the context here it says that someone who has taken the pledge to
achieve the state of full enlightenment/omniscience in order to accomplish
the benefits of all sentient beings. One has taken the bodhisattva vows,
one who has pledged to eliminate the flaws and misdeeds of all sentient
beings, and that includes eliminating one’s own faults and misdeeds.
That is the situation for someone who has taken on the pledge to achieve
omniscient in order to accomplish the welfare of all sentient beings which
involves eliminating the faults and misdeeds of every single sentient
beings including one self.  Actually the task of eliminating one’s own
afflictions and the afflictions of others, starting with our own
afflictions, is a long term task for there are many afflictive emotions.
There is a saying that there are 84000 afflictions. It is said that even to
eliminate one affliction will require many eons of effort. While that is
the case, the reality is that we do not even possess a fraction of the
effort or joyous perseverance that is needed to overcome the affliction.
Put aside the thought of having to eliminate the afflictions over a very
long period of time which we are talking about eons, but we don’t even
possess a fraction of the joyous perseverance that is needed to do that. So
we don’t possess a fraction of the joyous perseverance that we actually
need to overcome our faults, or our afflictions. As such, because of not
able to overcome our afflictive emotions, then it is certain that we are in
for boundless of problems and sufferings in the future. That is the
reality, and that is our situation. If we think about this, then the verse
is asking “Why is it that my heart has not broken?”  We have just laid out
the fact.
It is said that if you really think about this and if you really understand
the reality, it is mentioned in the teachings that you will probably find
it even difficult to breathe. We have to understand these two verses here
are meant for our own consumption in that we should use it to look at our
own mind and as a way to evaluate ourselves. It is about disciplining
ourselves and putting down ourselves in an appropriate way. Essentially, it
is to persuade ourselves to move our heart enough to starts to do something
about it. Not only we do not have the aspiration to overcome our faults, we
don’t even have any aspiration to acquire good qualities.
The next two verses talks about that. Again it is a way of evaluating
ourselves, and is a way of moving ourselves, and persuading ourselves to
develop interest and aspiration to acquire the good qualities.

|b" Adopting    |
|qualities      |


Verse 7.35*
I shall accomplish many
Excellent qualities for others and myself.
And I will acquaint myself
With each of these qualities through an ocean of eons
Verse 7.36
But I have never developed acquaintance
With even a fraction of these excellences,
How strange it is to make without purpose
This birth I have somehow found
Alternative translation by Ven Gyurme
Verse 7.35
I will accomplish numerous
Good qualities for myself and others.
To cultivate each good qualities
Requires an ocean of eons.
The context here is someone who has taken on the pledge to achieve the
state of full enlightenment in order to accomplish the welfare of all
sentient beings. This means that the person in question has taken a pledge
to achieve every single quality of enlightenment. The enlightenment or
omniscience that we are talking here is about a state of existence which
possesses numberless/limitless qualities.  And just to achieve one such
good quality, we require the collection of merits for many eons, without
talking about the rest of the limitless qualities. Put aside having to
achieve the collection of merit that is required for actualizing all these
numberless qualities, we have not even cultivated a fraction of the joyous
perseverance that is needed to accumulate the collection of merits in order
to achieve even just one good quality of enlightenment. We have not even
accomplished a fraction of the cause of even one good quality of
enlightenment.
“How strange” or how appalling it is to have wasted so far the human life
of freedom and endowment that one has obtained. Instead of having used it,
what one has done is procrastinating the accumulation of those causes to
enlightenment. In fact, the verse is saying “how strange” or how appalling
that is.
In Nagarjuna’s Precious Garland, there is a description of the merit that
is needed to achieve enlightenment. For example, how much merit do you need
to accumulate in order to achieve even just one hair pore of a Buddha?
If you think of a pore of the Buddha exalted body, how much merit is needed
to achieve that one pore of the Buddha exalted body? The merit required is
all the immeasurable merit of all sentient beings up to the level of the
Hearers and Solitary Realizer arhats combine and multiply by 10.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): Here it says how precious one pore of Buddha
is.
So that is the merit that is required to actualize one pore of the Buddha’s
exalted body. Buddha’s exalted body has numberless immeasurable pores. The
merit that is required to actualize all the immeasurable pores of the
Buddha’s exalted body multiplied by 100 times is the merit that is required
to actualize one of the 80 exemplifications (sometimes it is called minor
signs) of the Buddha’s exalted body. The major marks and the minor signs
technically are the signs and exemplifications.
There are 80 exemplifications (or the minor signs) such as the Buddha
having copper colored nails, red lip, black hair and so forth. These are
just some of the illustrations of some of the exemplifications of the
Buddha’s exalted body. So now you know how much merit is needed to
actualize each of those exemplifications. Those are the minor signs or
exemplifications.
Then there are major signs such as there are the image of a dharma chakra
on the Buddha’s palms and the sole of the Buddha’s feet as well. These are
the illustrations of some of the major signs of the Buddha’s exalted body.
What merit is required to actualize one of those major signs? The merit
that is required to actualize of one of those major signs is all the merit
there is required to actualize all the exemplifications multiplied by 100
times.
Then on the Buddha’s exalted body, there is this particular feature called
the treasure hair i.e. a curl hair that is slightly above the bridge of the
nose. How much merit is required to actualize that particular feature? The
merit that is acquired to actualize the treasure hair is the merit that is
required to actualize the 32 major signs multiplied by 1000 times.
There is Buddha’s crown protrusion and the merit that is required to
actualize the Buddha’s crown protrusion is the merit that is required to
actualize the treasure hair multiplied by 100,000 times.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): Haven’t finished.
The merit that is required to actualize the crown protrusion of the Buddha
multiplied by 100 times is the merit that would bring about the actualizing
of the Buddha’s exalted speech. Then the explanation stops there, and it
doesn’t goes on to mention the merit to actualize the exalted mind of the
Buddha.
Let’s say, can’t say for sure, the merit that is required to actualize the
Buddha’s exalted mind is the merit that is required to  actualize the
Buddha’s speech multiplied by, let’s say 100 times is actually a lot.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): What do you think? You are discouraged? Mui
Cheng said she is discouraged.
(Student’s response not audible)
Khen Rinpoche (in English): You are at the level of laziness.
[BP1 Part 2 L24] When developing bodhicitta, we also pledge to endow other
sentient beings and ourselves with liberation and enlightenment, for which
we need to acquire the infinite qualities of a buddha. To create the causes
to acquire just one of these qualities requires many eons and a lot of
effort. Presently, we are neither familiar nor acquainted with even a
fraction of these qualities. It is very meaningful for us to apply this
human life we have attained, endowed with leisure and opportunity and
extremely difficult to achieve, to acquiring buddha qualities. It is very
strange to squander this precious opportunity to benefit our present and
future lives. This advice is for us to cultivating joyous effort
perseverance. This verse is directed at our minds, asking us why we doing
this to ourselves when we should be working to acquire the infinite
qualities of the Buddha. Verses 7.33 and 7.34 are encouraging us to abandon
our faults. Verses 7.35 and 7.36 are urging us to acquire the infinite
qualities of the Buddha. We do both by depending on joyous effort.
The next two verses are kind of putting oneself down by highlighting to
ourselves that how come we did not generate the aspiration to practice the
dharma correctly and through that persuading ourselves to practice it and
to apply joyous perseverance in doing so.

|c" Examining the list of things  |
|to do and not to do              |


Verse 7.37
I have not made offerings to the Bhagavan,
I have not given the pleasure of great festivals,
I have not performed actions for the teachings,
I have not fulfilled the wishes of the poor,
Verse 7.38
I have not granted fearlessness to the frightened
And I have not given happiness to the wretched.
All I have given rise to are
The agonies in the mother’s womb and suffering.
Sometimes it is possible that people may feel that they have done a fair
bit thinking; “I am not the person that has been mentioned so far. I have
done a fair bit of practice.” While that is true but that kind of thinking
can sometimes stop the person from increasing his/her joyous perseverance.
At such a time one needs to remember these two verses.
Verse 7.37 is meant for personal reflection. It starts off with the example
saying “I have not make offerings to the Bhagavan”, we have not actually
sit down and made a proper mental offerings to the Buddha. Have we ever
made proper offerings through mental visualization? Have we even done it
properly once? Then when it comes to actually perform the offerings, have
we ever procured and actually setup good offerings? Have we made generous
offerings? Did we honor the sangha community with extensive offerings?
With regards to the scriptural dharma, the scriptural dharma consists of
three scriptural collections. Have we ever listened well to the teachings
on the three scriptural collections? Even you are someone who thinks that
you know quite a fair bit of the Buddha’s teachings, do you actually know
it very well or not? Have we ever actually learnt the scriptural dharma
properly? Even if you have learnt it do you actually know it well? Then
when it comes to putting those teachings into practice, do we even have the
practice of the three higher trainings? Do we have a good practice or do we
have any experience? Again this is something for personal reflection.
Probably the answer is No! We have not done any of these well or at all.
Have we fulfilled the wishes of the poor? There are so many people who are
in needs of help. Have we done anything for them or not? Put aside having
helped all of them, we have not even offered anything to these people.
Have we ever granted help or fearlessness to those who are frightened and
to those whose life are in danger? Have we save the life of others? For
example, when you walk down the road and saw some beautiful creatures or
sentient beings or insects were in some danger, many a time people will
just ignore it and it is almost like as if you didn’t even see it although
you saw it. You just continue to walk on and continue to do whatever you
do.
This is meant for personal reflection. It may appear that you are doing
some practice and may think that you are doing quite well, but when you
actually sit down and examine them honestly there is almost no practice
that you can point to that you can say you have done it well. As such, our
life has been wasted. It would seem that our coming into existence is
nothing more than for the purpose of causing pain and suffering to our
mother.
You must understand that you should use all these advices so far to
generate enthusiasm and strong aspiration to do better. You should not take
these advice as a mean to feel discourage or put yourself down. That is not
the point.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): Is benefit or harming advice? More
discouraging?
It is not appropriate to give up one’s aspiration for the dharma.

|2" The effect                          |
|a" It is unreasonable to abandon esteem|
|for the dharma                         |
|b" The reasons for that                |
|a" It is unreasonable to abandon esteem|
|for the dharma                         |


Verse 7.39
If in the past and even now
Such deprivation are arising
Because of my lack of interest in the Dharma,
Who would reject this interest in the Dharma?
Ven Gyurme: It should be “aspiration in the Dharma” as “interest in the
Dharma” is too weak.
Verse 7.39 is talking about how it is wrong to give up your aspiration. In
all our past lives because of lack of yearning or aspiration for the
dharma, we didn’t actualize it. Similarly, in this life because of lack of
real yearning for the dharma, we have not really practice it. As such, in
our past lives all the way till now we have only experienced the problem
and sufferings of cyclic existence/ samsara. It is mentioned in the
teaching that we are like dog looking at grass; just as a dog is not
interested in grass so even though we have met the dharma but we have no
yearning for it, and we don’t really want it.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): Yes? No? You have yearning?
We have to be honest with ourselves and honestly examine how we feel. Are
we really like the dog which looking at grass? How much of the dharma do we
really want? Do we want it or not? Do we yearn for it or not?  That is a
question that we all have to ask ourselves.
What is the essential point that this verse is driving at? For someone who
has the brain, who really can discriminate and very intelligent and at the
same time looking for real long term everlasting happiness, then that
person will never give up the dharma.
What is the reason behind the inappropriateness of giving up one’s
aspiration for the dharma? The reason is the Buddha, the Subduer, himself
has said that aspiration is the root of every class of virtue. I have
mentioned earlier that before you actually want to engage in anything, here
in this context, virtue or dharma or the cause of happiness, first you have
to be thoroughly convinced of the benefits. You must be thoroughly
convinced with the goal you are seeking and it must be heartfelt. Thorough
conviction is actually what we use the word faith.
Based on this faith of conviction then you yearn for that object, i.e. on
whatever you have faith in. It is only when you have this yearning does the
practice start because the yearning will start you off. Therefore, it is
says that aspiration, which is yearning, is the root of every class of
virtue.
- If you have a very strong aspiration or yearning for the dharma then you
  will become a strong and good practitioner.
- If your yearning for the dharma is kind of average then you will end up
  as average practitioner.
- If your yearning for the dharma is just below average or mediocre, you
  will end up as mediocre practitioner.
You must want the dharma from your heart, which we call it yearning or
aspiration. That kind of yearning for the dharma is not something that just
drops from the sky, i.e., most people are not born wanting the dharma from
their own side. That is not the case for most people. But without yearning,
you are not going to have joyous perseverance. You are not going to have
any virtue. The question now is: How do you produce this yearning? How do
you make yourself want the dharma? You have to start with education,
learning about the teachings, thinking about them and critically analyzing
the teachings. That is how you are going to start.
What is the cause of aspiration or this heartfelt yearning for the dharma?
What is the cause? How do you produce it? What is its root? Its root is
constant meditation on karma’s fruitional effect.
The way to produce yearning for the dharma is to reflect and understand
well the presentation of cause and effect and in particularly the karma and
its consequences. In particular, it is about understanding and finding this
conviction in that certain actions would definitely produce these results
and other actions would produce other kind of results. It is that faith of
conviction in that which the root of yearning for the dharma is.
Acquiring this faith of conviction in karma and its consequences is
therefore indispensable. Everything boils down to that. Whether one is able
to practice and practice it well or not, it all boils down to how much
conviction one has in karma and its effect. In order to develop that, one
has to really understand the working of karma and its consequences such as
the general characteristics of karma, karma is definite, karma is certain,
karma increases, one will not meet with the result of the karma that one
did not do and the result of the karma that one has done would not perish
on its own accord.
Gyaltsab Je says “If one has not ascertained and developed conviction in
the karma and its consequences then one has not found a realization of the
dharma that will please the Buddhas.”
We heard this teaching many times. We have heard it and we are still
hearing about it. But that hardly does anything, and that is not enough. We
have to sit down and meditate i.e. critically analyze until we gain a
conviction in it. We should ask ourselves “How much faith in karma do I
really have? Do I have any or not? How strong is it?”
Gyaltsab Je says in his commentary “Until we have developed the faith of
conviction in karma and its effects, until then we have not found a
realization of the dharma that will please the Buddhas.”
It is said that those people who go around claiming that they have realized
emptiness – the ultimate nature of reality - but yet at the same time when
you look at how they behave, they behave, act and talk as if the karma do
not exist. That is one of the signs that that person has not gotten it. He
has completely understand wrongly and has no realization whatsoever on
emptiness.
Actually the situation should be that, if you are talking about somebody
who has really a good understanding of the ultimate nature of reality –
emptiness of inherently existence - the stronger his understanding on
emptiness, the stronger his appreciation of cause and effect will become.
The meaning of emptiness is the meaning of dependent arising, in
particular, subtle dependent arising. Before you can hope to understand
subtle dependent arising, you first must understand the coarser level of
dependent arising. Without which there is no way you can understand subtle
dependent arising. Those people who claim that they have some understanding
of emptiness and have realized it but at the same time they don’t give any
consideration at all to karma and its consequences, then you should
understand that person has a completely wrong understanding of emptiness.
Q&A
Student: This is relates to verse 7.34 – 7.36 that is supposed to encourage
us to generate joyous effort by showing us the faults of the practice that
we have done. How to keep a proper balance - not putting oneself down so
much that one give up and at the same time not to be discouraged? How to
manage it on the emotional level because on the mental level it is easy to
understand?
Khen Rinpoche (in English): When you hear these three verses, you get so
much emotion? You really feel that?
It happens to some people that when they think about death and
impermanence, they become discouraged. There is never been the point or the
purpose behind meditating on death and impermanence. In fact if you
meditate on death and impermanence, it gives you strength and determination
such as “I must do something right now. I can do something about it and I
must start right now.” That should be the message that the people should
get when they look at death and impermanence. When you look at those verses
7.34, 7.35 and 7.36, you get the message of depression or the message of
hope?
The purpose and the end result of reflecting on our own death and
impermanence is to gives us strength and determination. It is a completely
different matter if we don’t know how to think about it or if we think
about it in a wrong way. If you think about it correctly then the result
that it gives you is really strength and determination.
The topic of meditating on death and impermanence is not directed at
everybody. This advice is directed and is meant for people who are
sincerely interested about their long term future. This advice is directed
at people who are looking much beyond this life. It is directed at people
who are seriously thinking about what is going to happen to them in their
future lives. It is also directed at people who are looking for something
better or something higher level order of happiness.
As in all Buddhist practice or whatever practices you undertake, it is not
a standalone. It is part of the units of an overarching practice and
everything is linked together. You must be able to situate within the
entire practice. It is not a standalone thing. At such, therefore there is
advice that one has to balance one’s reflection on death and impermanence
with the reflection on human life of freedom and endowments. For people who
get it wrongly will be depressed or discouraged because they think too much
of death and impermanence, then they have to balance that reflection with
reflection on this human life of freedom and endowments. That is mentioned
in the Lamrim.
You have to apply that understanding to this situation as well. You cannot
take these three verses out of context. You have to situate them within the
whole context. I don’t think just by looking at these three verses
superficially then one will get discourage or depress. I don’t think that
will really happen. But if you really think about it, in the earlier part
of the chapter, there is a discussion on how fortunate we are for having
this human life of freedom and endowments. If we work at it then there is
no reason why we cannot be enlightened and so forth. You have to combine
everything together and not look at it as standalone kind of piece of
advice.
It is the same as we are advised to work non-stop and continuously with
joyous perseverance like a flow of river.
When people take that piece of advice out of context then people will say
“Practice non-stop? I will sure die.” This is the thinking out of context.
If they know the whole picture, then they would know that there is the
power of relinquishment. So when you need to rest, you rest at the
appropriate time. If you understand the thing in the whole context, then
that should not be any problem and has no worries at all.

