Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Engaging in the Deeds of a Bodhisattva/lesson41.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:52:18.206615
================================================================================


We have finished with the chapter on Patience. In essence, that chapter
talks about the three types of patience.
1. The patience of disregarding the harm done to oneself.
2. The patience of voluntarily accepting suffering
3. The patience of certitude about the teachings
These are the three types of patience to meditate on. You have to be
familiar with the terminologies and the divisions such that you should be
able to express it or say it out.
[BP1 Part 2 L19] In essence, there are 3 types of patience:
(1) The patience that pays no heed to those who cause harm: It is very
difficult to engage in any virtue with very strong anger in our minds.
Unable to accomplish our own purposes, how are to work for the welfare of
others? Therefore, there is a need to cultivate this patience.
(2) The patience of voluntarily accepting suffering: When the problems we
experience are so intense and cause so much mental suffering, it becomes
impossible to engage in virtue. We neglect our Dharma practice. We need to
develop this kind of patience to cope with such circumstances.
(3) The patience that is intent on dharma: This is the antidote for those
whose interest in the Dharma and virtue is weak or those who give up their
practice when they encounter the slightest difficulty, thinking, “I don’t
want to study this text because it’s so difficult,” or “I’m not going to
follow karma because it’s so difficult.”
Whenever we experience problems or unhappiness and our minds are no longer
able to focus on our Dharma practice, it is important to investigate what
is causing these situations and work on cultivating the three types of
patience.
As a kind of revision with respect to the patience of disregarding the harm
done to oneself, there are many verses that talks about this particular
type of patience. You read through all those verses, and then think about
it. From those verses, choose two verses that do make sense to you, that
affect you, that touch you or that you find really beneficial. Then, in
writing, explain briefly the reasons for choosing these two verses and how
they are helpful to you.
Khen Rinpoche (In English): This is homework. You must write it down.
Everyone who signed up to study BP class must do and pass back to me. If
you have signed up, you want to study then you must write down and pass
back.
Likewise, do the same for the patience of voluntarily accepting suffering.
There are many verses that talk about that particular form of patience.
Pick up two verses that you really find them beneficial for your mind and
also briefly state the reasons of how they are beneficial for you. You have
to write it down.
As for the last form of patience, the patience of certitude about the
teachings, you choose one of the many verses that talk about this
particular form of patience.  Likewise you explain why you chose that
verse. The way to do this homework is to read through the chapter.
Choosing the verses and justifying your choice has to be a result of having
thought about it. Therefore you should think about it before you choose and
then write about it. Please submit your homework in the first week of
September.
Khen Rinpoche (In English): Don’t just pick out. This is not what I’m
looking for. This is a type of homework, so it is important.
During the discussion on the patience of disregarding the harm done to
oneself, there was the discussion on our usual reaction to the enemy, or
those we consider to be the enemy or those whom we consider to be harmful
to us. The usual perspective is to look at them as totally bad and
undesirable. The mind that has such a perspective is a mind that is very
disturbed; is not calm and is unhappy.
In the context of training our minds in the dharma, or practicing dharma,
having such a disturbed mind is said to be a big obstacle. It is said that
with such a kind of anger, our roots of virtue are destroyed. So it is very
harmful to us.  It has been said in the teachings that the sentient beings
whom we consider to be the enemy or harm-doer has been our mother
numberless times and with their kindness they have helped us to sustain in
the past for a very long time. If this thought is present and we bring that
to mind, then there is no room to be upset with that person.
In our discussion on the patience of voluntarily accepting suffering, in
the context of accomplishing virtue, there are times when we do experience
tiredness, pain or suffering. In the process of accomplishing virtue or
accomplishing something that is beneficial or doing practice, one
experiences all kinds of difficulties, physical hardship and so forth. To
some people, it could be an obstacle that they get discourage and give up.
The thing to remember is that as soon as we take on a body, and as soon as
the body comes into being, the causes and conditions for physical pain,
tiredness, suffering comes into being.
That is the very nature of our existence. That is the very nature of the
body. There is nothing much you can do about it. Even if you pray “May this
not happen” the prayers cannot do anything. Nothing can be done about this
fact. Rather than focusing on the pain, we should think of the benefits and
change the way we look at suffering by looking at the advantages of
suffering, and that were discussed. By thinking big, use the situation of
the pain and suffering, see how that situation actually is helpful to
achieving long term goals and everlasting happiness. So it is important to
view suffering in a positive way especially when suffering arises in the
course of accomplishing virtue in the practice. If not, then there is a
possibility or tendency for some people to get disheartened and
discouraged, and then they lose hope.  Of course, that will become an
impediment and an obstacle in continuation to one’s practice.
Not having faith in the dharma or not having enough stable faith in the
dharma is an obstacle to one’s dharma practice. In fact that is the biggest
obstacle. Not having stable conviction in the dharma is the biggest
obstacle to the practice. In particular, without conviction in the Three
Jewels, and without conviction in karma and its effects, it is quite
difficult to do any real practice. Therefore, it is absolutely very
important to continually thinking about the presentation of dependent
arising in terms of causality and with respect to karma and its effects
over and over again until one gains some conviction and ascertainment, in
particular, one has to think about subtle dependent arising i.e. everything
is dependently designated. One has to think about that deeply until one
gains conviction. Without understanding this, then there is no way to
really cut the root of all frustration, problems and suffering. When one
gets some understanding in a stable faith and conviction in the subtle
dependent arising, then I would think the patience of certitude about the
teachings will arise.
We took quite a bit of time to finish chapter 6 (Patience), nevertheless it
is an important chapter. If you were to distill the essence of chapter 6,
it is basically these three types of patience. The teachings tell us that
we should take the essence out of this human life of freedom and endowments
by cultivating or meditating on these three types of patience.
Khen Rinpoche (In English): Okay. Have completed the chapter on Patience.
No more patience now.  Now go to Joyous Effort.

Seventh Chapter: Teaching Joyous Effort
(Ven Gyurme: Instead of joyous effort, I’m choosing joyous perseverance as
the translation)
Chapter 7 is the chapter on Joyous Perseverance.
In Chapter 1, we looked at the benefits of the mind of enlightenment.
Chapter 2 is the chapter on confessing the negativities.
Chapter 3 is the practice of the preliminaries practice of accumulating
merit and purifying the negativities, and then one adopts bodhicitta
through a ritual. Here one is striving to develop the mind of enlightenment
that was not developed earlier or to generate the mind of enlightenment
that was not generated earlier.
Then the next three chapters are the chapters on Conscientiousness,
Introspection or Vigilance and Patience.
After generating the bodhicitta that was not generated earlier, then one
needs to prevent the bodhicitta (or the mind of enlightenment) that was
generated earlier from degenerating. Hence, in order for bodhicitta that
was generated earlier to not degenerate, one has to rely on
conscientiousness, to cultivate vigilance (or introspection) and meditate
on patience. It is not sufficient to prevent the mind of enlightenment that
was generated from degenerating. It is important to increase the mind of
enlightenment that was generated. Hence you have the chapter Joyous
Perseverance, chapter on Meditative Stabilization and the chapter on
Wisdom.
First, we have the verse that is an exhortation to undertake joyous
perseverance.
|3. Explaining the way to train in the remaining four        |
|perfections                                                 |
|A. The way to train in patience                             |
|B The way to train in joyous effort                         |
|C. The way to train in the absorptions included in the      |
|common and uncommon calm abidings                           |
|D. The way to train in wisdom - the nature of insight       |

|B The way to train in joyous effort                         |
|a Explaining the chapter’s material                         |
|b The chapter’s name                                        |

|a Explaining the chapter’s material                         |
|1) Imploring one in the need to undertake joyous effort     |
|2) How to undertake joyous effort                           |

|1) Imploring one in the need to undertake joyous effort     |
|a) The actual                                               |
|b) Identifying joyous effort                                |

|a) The actual                                               |


Verse 7.1
With patience I should undertake joyous perseverance;
Enlightenment will dwell in those who strive.
Just as there is no movement without wind,
So merit does not occur without joyous perseverance.
During our discussion on the Stages of the Path to Enlightenment, in the
section on the six perfections, it is stated very clearly that the practice
of the earlier perfections form the basis for the practice of the latter.
The practice of the latter perfections is very much dependent on the
practice of the former perfections.
We have to think “Why that is the case?” and see the rationale being it.
For example, in the practice of the perfection of generosity, when we
practice generosity, we have to give without grasping. The point is that
the practice of generosity is an antidote to attachment. So the practice of
giving has to be done without adherence, without holding on, or without
grasping onto whatever. In the practice of generosity, in general we talk
about dedicating or giving away one’s body, one’s roots of virtue and one’s
possessions.
Giving means giving without holding back, and don’t have that grasping,
which means that when one is practicing giving correctly the element of
grasping or attachment is not there. Without this adherence, without this
grasping, without this attachment to possessions, to the body and to the
roots of virtue, don’t you think is so much easier to practice ethical
discipline? It is easier to guard one’s ethical discipline or one’s ethics
if one doesn’t have very strong attachment to stuff. If one is able to
guard well one’s ethical discipline, then one will be able to meditate on
patience and one would find it easier to practice patience.
The person who really can strive in joyous perseverance is someone who has
stable and good practice of generosity, ethical discipline and patience. It
is on that basis of these three that one is really able to strive in joyous
perseverance.
Here in verse one, why do we need to strive to cultivate joyous
perseverance? The goal is the highest enlightenment. Highest enlightenment
can be achieved if one has joyous perseverance.
Just as there cannot be any movement without wind, one will not be able to
accumulate the collection of merit and wisdom without joyous perseverance.
In order to achieve the highest enlightenment, one needs to finish the
accumulation of the collection of merit and wisdom. So in order to
accumulate the collection of merit and wisdom, one needs joyous
perseverance.
Essentially verse 7.1 is an exhortation/imploring/persuading us to practice
in joyous perseverance. Why? Without joyous perseverance, the highest
enlightenment cannot be achieved. So if you want the highest enlightenment,
then you need joyous perseverance.
What exactly is joyous perseverance? What is its definition? What exactly
is the entity of joyous perseverance?
|b) Identifying joyous |
|effort                |


Verse 7.2 a
What is enthusiasm? It is enthusiasm about virtue.
What is enthusiasm? It is a mind that is enthusiastic about virtue.
[BP 1 Part 2 L20] Joyous effort is the mind that delights in virtue. The
effort we put into non-virtuous activities or activities that are neutral
by nature is not joyous effort. The virtuous activities engaged in by our
bodies and speeches are also not considered joyous effort. We usually think
that someone who does a lot of prayers, practices and prostrations and
works very hard at their commitments, as having a lot of joyous effort. But
this is not joyous effort. It is like giving the name of the cause to the
result.
In the Lamrim Chenmo, the division of joyous effort has three parts:
1. Armour-like joyous effort
2. Joyous effort of gathering virtue
3. Joyous effort of acting for the welfare of living beings
The Ornament for the Mahayana Sutras classifies four types of joyous effort
while the Compendium of Knowledge refers to five types of joyous effort.
The armour-like joyous effort is akin to soldiers putting on armour for
protection before going to war and refers to generating determination
before we engage in any virtuous activity.
When engaged in virtuous activities, we then apply the joyous effort of
gathering virtue, developing and maintaining delight, happiness in and the
sense of enthusiasm for those activities.
Irreversible joyous effort is the mind that delights in virtue and does not
get disheartened or disturbed regardless of whatever conditions may arise
when engaged in such virtue. This kind of joyous effort is essential for
bringing the virtuous activity to completion.
Question from student: What is the difference between joyous effort and the
patience that is intent on dharma?
Answer: They are different entities. Joyous effort is the mind that
delights in virtue, while the patience that is intent on dharma remains
undisturbed by any hardships that may arise. For example, one is
cultivating the patience that is intent on dharma. Reflecting on the law of
cause and effect, one concludes that that it is inappropriate to retaliate
when one is harmed. The mind is thus undisturbed by whatever condition one
faces, but that mind may not be enthusiastic about the situation.
Then, there is the joyous effort of non-complacency, which is a mind that
delights in virtue and is not satisfied with whatever has been achieved but
always aims for something higher, like the way a hungry yak* eats grass.
In order to bring our practice to completion, we need to have these four
kinds of joyous effort.
*The supreme beings of the past said that one should practise like a hungry
yak grazing. As a yak tugs at one clump of grass, its eye is already fixed
on the next. In the same way, before you finish one Dharma practice, tell
yourself that as soon as you have finished your present practice you will
start this or that new practice. (The Words of My Perfect Teacher by Patrul
Rinpoche, pg 246)
|2) How to undertake joyous effort              |
|a) Abandoning that which is incongruous with   |
|joyous effort                                  |
|b) Increasing the strength of joyous effort -  |
|the antidote                                   |

|a) Abandoning that which is incongruous with   |
|joyous effort                                  |
|i) Identifying that class of things that are   |
|incongruous [with joyous effort]               |
|ii) How to abandon those                       |

|i) Identifying that class of things that are   |
|incongruous [with joyous effort]               |


Verse 7.2 b,c,d
Its discordant classes should be explained.
They are laziness, adherence to what is negative,
And despising oneself out of despondency.
What are the discordant classes of joyous perseverance? Discordant classes
mean the opposite. Essentially the discordant class of joyous perseverance
is laziness.
There are three types of laziness (LRCM V2 page 187)
   1. Laziness of procrastination
   2. Attachment to ignoble activities
   3. Discouragement or self-contempt
[BP 1 Part 2 L20] There are three types of laziness
   1. the laziness that relishes idleness,
   2. the laziness that clings to unwholesome activities ,
   3. the laziness that is disheartened about virtue.
The laziness that relishes idleness is the laziness that delights in
inactivity, deriving pleasure in doing nothing, making one’s body and mind
unserviceable for any virtuous activities.
The laziness that clings to unwholesome activities refers to our attraction
to non-virtuous activities such as singing and dancing, etc.
The laziness that is disheartened about virtue refers to our disinterest in
virtue, discouraging oneself by thinking, “I can’t do this. It is too
difficult and beyond me.”
These are the three opposing factors to joyous effort and we must overcome
them in order to be able to apply joyous effort in our pursuit of full
enlightenment
The next verse talks about the first kind of laziness.

|ii) How to abandon those                          |
|1’ Abandoning the laziness that relishes the taste|
|of idleness                                       |
|2’ Abandoning the laziness that clings to         |
|unwholesome (ignoble) activities                  |
|3’ Abandoning the laziness that is disheartened   |
|about virtue                                      |

|1’ Abandoning the laziness that relishes the taste|
|of idleness                                       |
|a’ Examining the causes of laziness and abandoning|
|them                                              |
|b’ How to abandon them                            |

|a’ Examining the causes of laziness and abandoning|
|them                                              |


Verse 7.3
Because of relishing the pleasurable taste of indolence
And craving based on sleep,
From not being disillusioned with the suffering of cyclic existence,
Laziness grows very strong.
The laziness of procrastination is the typical laziness of just lazing
around. If you have this kind of laziness, you don’t start on anything
virtuous. One derives pleasure by just lazing around. One is just attached
to that state of lazing around of not doing anything, and within that
state, one doesn’t do any virtue or anything beneficial. Such a kind of
laziness usually arises due to being distracted to all kinds of things.
One of the causes of this form of laziness is distraction i.e. one can be
distracted by all kinds of things. Whatever activity or object that one is
distracted to, one engages in that activity and one focuses on that
situation or object. Then one derives pleasure and having the nice feeling
of being distracted to that thing. One is then attached to that particular
pleasure that causes laziness. Within that kind of situation, the mind is
distracted and is attached to the pleasure that comes from that
distraction. That mind will block one from thinking or engaging in virtue.
Another cause of this form of laziness is attachment to the pleasures of
sleep. If one is very much attached to the pleasures of sleep, and that
will lead to this kind of laziness. With attachment to the pleasure of
sleep, one also becomes attached to the bed and the pillow and literally,
one is glued onto the bed and pillow.
Khen Rinpoche (In English): So cannot separate from the bed and the pillow.

Another cause of this first type of laziness is an absence of any
disenchantment with samsara. Samsara being in the nature of suffering but
one doesn’t see that. With respect to samsaric happiness, instead of seeing
it in the nature of suffering, one sees it as pleasurable real happiness
and develops an emotional attachment to samsaric happiness. That leads to
this first kind of laziness which then blocks any virtue.
These are the three causes of the first type of laziness. When this form of
laziness arises, we become involved with it and stick to it; literally
being attach to this kind of laziness. Based on that, we tend to
procrastinate doing what is virtuous and with regards to practice, we will
think “I’ll do it later on,” so there is this procrastination that comes
in.
|The causes of laziness of           |
|procrastination                     |
|1. Distraction to situation or      |
|object                              |
|2. Attachment to the pleasures of   |
|sleep                               |
|3. Absence of any disenchantment    |
|with samsara                        |


This particular form of laziness affects all of us here without exception.
All of us have it because we are attracted to indolent activities;
basically all kinds of distractions. We are also attached to the pleasure
of sleep. We are not sick of samsara as well. As such, we always
procrastinate and postpone whatever virtue or practice. We are all guilty
of it. Well this is an important point. We are all guilty of it. We are all
affected by it. Then what is the solution? How can we turn things around?
How can we reverse this situation? The antidotes or the remedies will be
mentioned in the next couple of verses.
While it is important to eradicate the causes of laziness in order for
joyous perseverance to arise, that alone is not sufficient as you also need
the mind that is intent on the dharma. You really must want the dharma. You
really want it so much.  If you don’t want the dharma, if you don’t want
the practice, then it is very difficult for joyous perseverance to arise.
 If you want to have joyous perseverance, you must really want the dharma
so much. In order for you to really want the dharma so much, you first must
know what is in for you. You first must be convinced of what is in for you,
why and what the benefits are. You must be convinced of that point. Using
the learning of this particular text as an example, and if you really want
to listen, study and learn this particular text well, then you have to see
for yourself what is in for you, and what you stand to gain. You have to
see for yourself.  As in many things we do in life, before you really set
out to seek whatever you are looking for, you first must really want it. It
is only when you see the profit versus the loss, then you understand the
benefits of having something. Only then will you do something to seek it.
It is the same thing here with dharma practice. Here we are talking about
looking at ways to how to develop that strong desire for the dharma. It is
only when you have very strong thirst for the dharma, you really want it
from your heart, then you will have a strong aspiration for the dharma.
Aspiration here in the sense of thinking “This is something I must really
practice.” Not only are you seeking the dharma, but that strong desire and
the thirst for the dharma would then propel you to actually carry it out
and to do it. A strong thirst and interest and desire for the dharma will
propel you to actually do it. Not just having the intention, but to
actually seek it out and carry it out. That strong thirst for the dharma
will also be a cause for you to be able to continue in seeking whatever we
are seeking until we get it. That means to bring that task, job or practice
to completion. It is a heartfelt attitude.
You need to have that strong desire, and the thirst of wanting the dharma.
That will propel you to have joyous perseverance that propel you to
actually seek it out and work hard for it until you complete it. It doesn’t
mean that you have to bulldoze all your way without stop until you achieve
the goal. That is where the power of relinquishment comes in, in that we
must know how to recuperate in between to rest. That is where the power of
relinquishment comes in.
The power of relinquishment here means taking appropriate rest at the
appropriate time. It is a method to further enhance and increase one’s
joyous perseverance. If one doesn’t know how to apply the power of
relinquishment, or apply it incorrectly, then this power of relinquishment
instead of becoming a cause for the enhancement of one’s joyous
perseverance, it becomes a cause for one’s joyous perseverance to
degenerate.
We are all like that, isn’t it? Just take reading a book that you choose to
read as an example. You pick up a book, and at the beginning you get very
excited and have interest with it; “I’m going to read the book”. Then you
do actually get down to reading the book. You open the book and you read.
Later you feel tired and decided to take a rest. Then you close the book.
But that about it and the book is closed forever. You never look at it
again. This way of learning or practice will never get you anywhere. In
fact, it doesn’t contribute at all to joyous perseverance. One must have
that strong desire or aspiration to carry out the chosen task to
completion. If one has that kind of attitude, that attitude will also be
there when one is resting. When one is resting, one will never forgets what
one has set out to do. With that attitude, that rest will never become an
obstacle to the enhancement of one’s joyous perseverance.
Another crucial factor for one’s practice in the process of applying joyous
perseverance is one must be far-sighted. Far-sighted means having a long-
term view. That means you need to have roughly an idea what are you going
to do and how on earth you are going to do it. There needs to be a process
for doing it. You need to know “I need to do this first and must finish it
before I do the next thing because this is the foundation for the next step
and so on and so forth”.  You need to have an overview and long-term view
of things so you do things step by step. You cannot be wanting to do
everything at one time. If you do that you will not succeed.
1) You need to be far-sighted.
2) You need to have a very expansive view of things.
You need to view thing in wide angle in that you must feel and want to
acquire every quality, and not just think of small things. You must have
that courage and the mental space aspiring to want to finish achieving all
the good qualities. So be far-sighted, have long-term view, have an
expansive perspective, and wide-angle view of things
3) To keep a steady pace
You need do the practice in a sustained and composed way. This means not
doing thing in a messy manner by wanting to do everything, a bit here and a
bit there, not in a steady way. You keep a steady pace and deep down the
mind is engaging the practices in a very calm and composed manner and just
getting at it in a continuous flow of joyous perseverance.
Essentially the remedy to the first type of laziness that is presented in
this text here is the meditation on death and impermanence. The next couple
of verses talk about that. I would think that you could condense all of
these into the three roots that constitute the meditation on death and
impermanence:
   1. Death is certain
   2. The time of death is uncertain
   3. At the time of death nothing can benefit us except dharma.
|b’ How to abandon them                                               |
|1" Abandoning laziness by reflecting on the disadvantages of it in   |
|this life                                                            |
|2" Abandoning laziness by reflecting on the disadvantages of it in   |
|future lives                                                         |

|1" Abandoning laziness by reflecting on the disadvantages of it in   |
|this life                                                            |
|a" Explaining by means of an analogy that death will soon cause [this|
|body] to perish                                                      |
|b" As even you yourself are under the dominion of death, it is       |
|inappropriate to carry on as if you had time                         |
|c" You will be tormented by suffering if you do not make effort in   |
|virtue                                                               |

|a" Explaining by means of an analogy that death will soon cause [this|
|body] to perish                                                      |
|(1) It is clear to see that death causes [this body and life] to     |
|perish                                                               |
|(2) Explaining that by means of an analogy                           |

|(1) It is clear to see that death causes [this |
|body and life] to perish                       |


Verse 7.4
Enmeshed in the snare of disturbing conceptions,
You have entered the snare of birth.
Why are you still not aware
That you have gone into the mouth of the Lord of Death?
This is talking about the certainty of us dying.
[BP1 Part2 L21] This is the antidote for the first kind of laziness, the
laziness that is attached to the pleasurable taste of idleness. Fishermen
trap fish by luring them into the net. In the same way, our afflictions
have lured us into the snare of cyclic existence, which is made up of the
three realms. Once the fish are in the net, it is definite that they will
die. Similarly, once we enter the snare of cyclic existence, death is
certain. We are definitely going to enter the mouth of the Lord of Death.
Why are we not afraid? Understanding this, we should engage in virtue.
These verses are explained in terms of analogies in the outlines of other
commentaries but Gyaltsab Je explains them in relation to our direct daily
experience. In this life, death will definitely come. Many people died in
the past. Many more are dying in the present. Seeing death directly in this
way, why are we not afraid?

|(2) Explaining that by means of an analogy     |


Verse 7.5
Do you not see
That he is systematically slaughtering your species?
Any craving based on sleep
Is like a buffalo with a butcher.
That is also a reflection on the certainty of us having to die.
[BP1 Part2 L21] We have seen many deaths, yet we remain attracted to the
pleasurable taste of idleness and sleep without engaging in virtue. Such
behaviour is likened to a buffalo that lives near a butcher. Even as they
see other buffalos being slaughtered by the butcher, they still roam around
grazing happily and enjoying sleeping. We consider ourselves superior to
animals but on closer examination, we are no better than buffalos in this
respect. In fact, we are even more foolish than buffalos. They are
blameless because they do not know the Dharma and have no capacity to
critically analyse issues, whereas we have both Dharma knowledge and
critical ability yet we still behave like them.
Such advice should be used to move our minds towards engaging in virtue.
Whether this happens or not depends on whether we reflect on these points.
If we are happy remaining more foolish than buffalos, we can carry on as
before. But for those of us who accept past and future lives and wish to do
well in our future rebirths, it is our responsibility to motivate ourselves
to engage in virtue by reflecting on the advice given in this text. The
choice is ours.

|b" As even you yourself are under the dominion of death, it is           |
|inappropriate to carry on as if you had time                             |
|(1) As you yourself are under the dominion of the lord of death, you     |
|should not be lazy                                                       |
|(2) As death will come swiftly, make effort in virtue                    |
|(3) The time of death is no time to abandon laziness                     |
|(4) As death will come suddenly without your having been able to do all  |
|that you want, you should not be lazy                                    |

|(1) As you yourself are under the dominion of the lord of death, you     |
|should not be lazy                                                       |


Verse 7.6
While the Lord of Death is looking,
Having blocked off every route,
How can you enjoy eating?
And thus how can you enjoy sleep?
I don’t think you need an explanation on this. It is pretty
straightforward. If there is anything that you don’t understand, here it is
using some examples to illustrate how we all are certain to die. We should
apply the examples to our own lives, which mean that we are going to die.
Through reflecting on the certainty of our death, we tend to stop the first
type of laziness. But what I think is that, for all of us, the thing that
makes us procrastinates and to postpone our practice is the thought in our
minds believing that we are not going to die soon. If we really believe
deep inside us that we still have some time that we are not going to die
soon, then obviously we will postpone the practice. To counteract that,
then we should reflect on how the time of our death is uncertain.
[BP1 Part2 L21] Imagine that we are travelling along a road. All other
routes are blocked and we have no alternative other than this road.
Somewhere along this road, our enemy is waiting in ambush to kill us. In
the same way, death closes all other roads and we have no choice but to
walk towards death. The Lord of Death can take us at any time. This being
so, it is completely inappropriate to spend our lives in distractions such
as eating, sleep, etc. This outline is referring to us now and our present
situation. As long as we take rebirth in any of the three realms, under the
power of karma and afflictions, death is certain. Accumulating negative
karma leads us to a lower realm. When we accumulate virtue, we go to a
happy realm or can even achieve liberation and enlightenment. Therefore, we
must engage in virtue before death overcomes us.

|(2) As death will come swiftly, make effort in virtue                    |


Verse 7.7 a,b
For as long as death is quickly approaching,
Then I shall accumulate the collections.
 “For as long as death is quickly approaching, Then I shall accumulate the
collections.” Why do we need to accumulate the collections quickly right
now? Because our death is going to come soon. We have no idea when it will
happen. There is no certainty. Therefore we should start accumulating the
collections now.
People may understand that they will have to die one day. But due to not
really thinking about how their time of death is uncertain, many a times
people think that they will do the practice when near to the end of their
life. They even think that they would practice at the time of death.

|(3) The time of death is no time to   |
|abandon laziness                      |


Verse 7.7 c,d
Even if I were to abandon laziness then,
At that improper time what will be the use?
 “Even if I were to abandon laziness then,  At that improper time what will
be the use?” - Here it is saying that the time of our death is the wrong
time to give up laziness
The advice here is that the practice has to be done when one is alive and
healthy and when all the conditions are there. The dharma practice cannot
be left just to the day of death. If you have not done any practice before
and you only want to practice on the day of your own death, even if you
want to, you will not be able to do it.
[BP1 Part2 L21] Understanding that death is certain, we may still think,
however, “I still have some time. I can do it later.” This is not true,
because death can suddenly come. Before that happens, we have to ensure
that we have engaged in some virtue. There are many causes of death –
sicknesses, spirit harms and natural disasters, even the danger of nuclear
weapons. It is uncertain when these conditions will occur but it shows that
death can happen very quickly.

|(4) As death will come suddenly without your having been able to do all |
|that you want, you should not be lazy                                   |


Verse 7.8
When this has not been done, when this is initiated,
And when this is only half done,
Suddenly the Lord of Death will come.
And the thought will occur, “Oh no, I’m doomed!”
I guess this is related to how the time of our death is uncertain. This
verse is saying that the Lord of Death will strike us at any time. We could
die before we actually get down to doing any practice. Or death could
happen to us just after we have started the practice or doing something. Or
the Lord of Death could also visit us when we are just about halfway
through our practice or whatever we do. It is not as if he will visit us at
a fixed time. No! He could strike at any time. Because of that, this is how
that is related to the uncertainty of the time of our death.
By reflecting on the certainty of our death and how our impending death is
going to happen to us soon, and by remembering these points, we can then
reverse the first type of laziness.
[BP1 Part2 L21] We spend our whole life thinking, “I’m going to start on
this project.” When the project is underway death suddenly comes, not
waiting for us to finish our project. Death possesses great independence
and power as it can come at any time. When the Lord of Death suddenly
appears, we have so much regret and remorse, thinking, “I couldn’t do this.
I couldn’t finish that.”
As mentioned in the Lamrim, death is certain and the time of death is
uncertain. It can come suddenly, without fanfare or warning. Because of
this, we have to start on virtue right now. When we wake up in the morning,
it is good to remind ourselves of this. By reflecting on death and
impermanence, we persuade our minds to put aside some time for engaging in
virtue.
|c" You will be tormented by suffering if you do not make effort in|
|virtue                                                            |
|(1) At the time of death, you will be tormented with sorrow       |
|(2) If you do not pursue virtue from this moment forward, you will|
|not accomplish what is necessary                                  |

|(1) At the time of death, you will be tormented with sorrow       |


Verse 7.9
Their faces flowing with tears
And their eyes red and swollen with sorrow,
My relatives will finally lose hope
And I shall behold the faces of the messengers of Yama.

[BP1 Part2 L21] At the time of death, we experience great sorrow.
Surrounded by our loved ones and relatives, we realise that we cannot bring
them with us. Their eyes are red and swollen with tears as they realize we
are dying. We may also experience the fearful karmic appearance of the Lord
of Death or sometimes of our relatives and friends regardless of whether we
like it or not.

|(2) If you do not pursue virtue from this moment forward, you will|
|not accomplish what is necessary                                  |


Verse 7.10
Tormented by the memory of my negativities
And hearing the sounds of hell,
In terror I shall clothe my body in excrement.
What is the use of such a delirious state?
I guess these two verses are talking about is that at the time of our death
nothing is of any benefit to us except the dharma. At the time of our
death, our loved ones are of no use to us, our body is of no benefit and
our possessions are also of no benefit whatsoever. Essentially, nothing is
of any benefit except the dharma.
[BP1 Part2 L21] At the time of death, we may also be tormented by the
memories of our past negative actions. If we are going to be reborn in the
hells, we may start to hear the cries of the hell beings undergoing their
sufferings there. We will be so terrified that we will lose control of our
minds and bodily functions. Hence, “I shall clothe my body in excrement”.
At this point, it will be too late to do anything at all. Therefore, while
we still have control over our lives and the choice to engage in virtue, we
should start straightaway.
If we are unable to practice while we are still healthy and mentally
cognizant of things, i.e. when the mind is still clear, then at the time of
death we will not be able to practice because we will be overwhelmed and
tormented by worry, fear and suffering. So the point is that, by seeing
what is going to happen to us, then that should motivate us to abandon the
laziness.
Language wise, this is not a difficult text. The words are easy, and there
is nothing that we cannot understand. It is quite straightforward. The only
thing left for us to do is to sit down, think and reflect on it and apply
to own mind.
Here, we are talking about laziness. Laziness is something that affects
everybody without exception. Laziness blocks us from engaging in virtue and
what is beneficial. This is an essential point. We have to deal with our
laziness. We have to start engaging in virtue. In order to engage in
virtue, we have to get down into doing it.
We have to stop our laziness. What other way than to think about some of
these points. We have to look at whatever we have studied, think about it,
and reflect on it and then apply it to our lives.
Actually, when things are going well in life, when we have everything, and
when we feel good, dharma practice doesn’t get down. In fact, this is the
biggest obstacle for us. When life is going well, we are feeling good, and
that is the biggest obstacle. You don’t get any practice done because we
are satisfied with that and we think that is good, isn’t it? We are
attached to that state of situation. That is really one of the biggest
obstacles. The time for practice is when we are still healthy and in a
reasonable physical and mental state. That is the time for practice. If
practice is done in such a good state, then the practice will become good.

