Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Engaging in the Deeds of a Bodhisattva/lesson29.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:52:21.870046
================================================================================


Student: In the Lamrim Chenmo, it mentioned that attachment to a self at
the time of death does not occur among the non-returners, but it does not
mention about the stream enterers and once returners. Non-returners are
those who will never get reborn in the desire realm, why non-returners do
not have this attachment to a self at the time of death?  What makes them
so different from the stream-enterers and once-returners?
Khen Rinpoche (In English): For non-returners, they don’t have to come back
so they don’t need that attachment. You want to come back then you need
attachment. You don’t want to come back then you don’t need that attachment
Student: Do the non-returners still take rebirth to the former karma and
delusion?
Khen Rinpoche (In English): Non-returners mean they don’t need to come
back. You don’t want to come back to Singapore as you don’t need a visa.
Student: But do they take rebirth? If they still take rebirth, what makes
them so special?
Khen Rinpoche (In English): They don’t take rebirth in the desire realm.
Non-returner means they don’t come back to desire realm anymore. So they
don’t take rebirth in desire realm.
Student: Don’t take rebirth in the desire realm means will not take rebirth
with an attachment to a self?
Khen Rinpoche: In the presentation of the Hearers and Solitary Realizers,
there are four types of such persons:
   1. Stream enterers
   2. Once returners
   3. Non-returners and
   4. Foe destroyers.
The non-returners are those who will never ever be reborn again in the
desire realm due to karma and afflictions.
In the presentation of the Hinayana paths, there are the discussions of
these four kinds of superiors. Essentially they are all superiors.
According to the lower Abidharmakosha, stream enterers and once returners
are Hinayana superiors and have achieved the arya paths. Nevertheless, the
stream enterers and the once returners still have to take rebirths in the
desire realm. As for the non-returners, because they have abandoned the
manifest afflictions of the desire realm therefore they do not reborn in
the desire realm due to karma and afflictions. The point is that the non-
returners do not have the craving that will nourish that karma to be reborn
in the desire realm.

Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds

|A An extensive explanation                  |
|1 Abandoning the faulty physical conduct and|
|lack of faith in others                     |
|2 The way to act when the path and so forth |
|are being taught                            |
|3 The way to lie down                       |

|2 The way to act when the path and so forth |
|are being taught                            |


Verse 5.94
I should not give directions with one finger,
But instead indicate the way
Respectfully with also
All of my right arm.
Verse 5.95
Nor should I wildly wave my arms about;
Instead I should make my point
By uttering sounds with mild gestures and a snap of fingers.
Otherwise I shall lose control.
If someone were to ask you for direction, you should point out respectfully
to the person the correct direction not with just one finger but with
respectfully your right hand. The verse here is advising us to indicate the
direction with a respectful attitude both physically and verbally.
Khen Rinpoche (In English): I have one story when I was in Dharamsala. Have
I told you this before? I don’t know. A long time ago, maybe 1982, I was at
Tushita in Dharamsala and stayed there for two months doing called ??? in
Tibetan which you called it retreat. What kind of retreat? I am in the
retreat just memorizing the text day and night. I need to complete certain
text so I was memorizing the whole day.  I was there for two months around
December and January, and at that time was winter so it was quite cold
there. One of the mornings it was sunshine so I just came out from my room.
I sat outside of the gompa and just rest there because of the sunshine. I
just stayed there and rest at around eight something. Then there was one
English nun whom I know her before, brought a group of people, some Korean
or Chinese, I’m not sure, to Tushita. I was just sitting there under the
sun. She was bringing some people from the behind. I think she was looking
for Roger or someone. She asked me; “Where is Roger’s room”.  Because I
felt very cold and I don’t want to move myself and just sat down there as I
just want the sun.  Then I said (Khen Rinpoche showed the gesture of
pointing with his finger). As I can see the room because it is near, I just
pointed out that is the room. Then she got so mad and upset. “You must
stand and show me the way.” Because you really can see the room is just in
front so I just said “That is the room.” But somehow she was not pleased by
that. Of course, I’m not really helping. Also my problem because just feel
cold, I just want to relax. Then I just did like that (Khen Rinpoche:
showing the gesture of pointing with one finger). She become very upset and
become so much unhappy for long time. She did not want to talk and I also
didn’t talk. I didn’t want to so become like. After one or two months then
become ok, we become friend and we have dinner together. Sometimes we can
say it is part our action. Because I’m not really helping as I was just
sitting down there pointing. If you want to please a person, then you must
stand in a respectful way and maybe bow down. Of course then the person
will be extremely pleased. “Venerable, this is the way. Welcome to
Tushita”. What I didn’t do and this happened. Many people when you are
busy, you are stressed then some people asked you “Where is the toilet?” Of
course your action pointing with one finger is not really pleasant. When
you point with this (index) finger, there is something wrong. I don’t know
what this finger is. This finger is quite strong you know. When you are
angry, you point like that (gesturing with index finger) and not like that
(gesturing with thumb).  When you are angry you tend to point (with the
index” “you, you, you”. So the advice here is don’t point with one finger.
I don’t know the meaning of each finger, who make the meaning I’m not
sure.). This mean something, this mean something, this mean something, this
mean something (pointing to the fingers).  Who create this idea I don’t
know.
I don’t know whether it is good to tell or not good to tell, I’m not sure.
There was one time, my teacher, who is now 90 years old, came twice to
Singapore. I think one time I think Angela was cooking momo, you know
dumpling with the meat. As he does take meat so she cook there in my place
then offered to him. After that, she asked my teacher “How was the momo”.
Then my teacher was pointing like this (showing the middle finger). I don’t
know what does that mean. I don’t know. After that I asked her, she said
“This is not a good sign or something”. But my teacher doesn’t mean that.
What he meant was “It is not the best, not the worse, but is medium.”  Not
only one time. He keeps saying (by pointing the finger). Then she was
laughing. She said it is not good sign. He said nothing wrong. Who made
this thing? He mean not best, just medium. With the whole fingers is best.
You don’t have many different meaning. A whole finger is better to show
everything. With one finger, there is so many different meaning so better
not.

Essentially this verse is an advice to indicate the direction with
respectful physical and verbal attitude so as not to cause non faith in the
other person. Verse 5.95 also indicates that when you are showing
directions to people or trying to make a point, you should not be waving
your arm wildly and also not to speak too loudly. If there is a need to
perform certain hand gestures to indicate the way or to attract attention
and so forth, one can do it gently without moving the arms wildly and
waving. If there is a need, one can snap one’s fingers gently to attract
the attention.

Basically, if the person you are communicating with is within the earshot
distance, there is no need for you to shout or speak loudly. If you do so
then there is the possibility of causing some disturbance to others. Of
course it is a different matter if the person you are trying to communicate
with is far away.

Khen Rinpoche (In English): Basically, it is saying that “Don’t be kiasu”.
Sometimes you go to restaurant, some people they do nicely like that (raise
ther hand) but some people wave wildly and sometimes they shout and then
they put their hands together. If somebody sees your manner, it doesn’t
look nice as you act aggressive and strong. People don’t feel that you are
good. Then they do have negative mind “This person is like that.” That is
the idea.

In short, these are advices to stop people from becoming negative with
oneself. Also these indicated behaviors or actions can considered to be
unglam and not acceptable. The discussion here is in the context of advice
for the bodhisattvas. Bodhisattvas need to behave in such a way because if
they don’t, then there are people who may generate non faith and get
disturbed. Through that, those people will have to fall into the lower
realms.

Next is what to do when sleeping

|3 The way to lie down       |


Verse 5.96
Just as the Protector lay down to pass away
So should I lie in the desired direction,
And first of all with introspection
Make up my mind to quickly rise.
Here is an advice for one to lie down by adopting the posture of the Buddha
when he displayed the deed of passing away to parinirvana.  You should lie
on your right side and resting your head on your right hand. You lie
straight and place your left hand on your body. Usually somehow it seems a
little bit more uncomfortable if you were to lie on your right than if you
were to lie on your left side.
Khen Rinpoche (In English): I noticed myself like that. When I sleep this
way (on the left side), look more easy to fall asleep, look and more
comfortable. When I sleep this way (on the right side), not that
comfortable and a little bit uncomfortable there. Anyway, it seems like you
don’t feel relax if you lie on your right side.
Khen Rinpoche (In English): You feel that? No? According to the scientist,
because of the tummy is at this side. So when you sleep like that (on the
left side), your tummy is resting there and feel more comfortable. When you
sleep this side (on the right side), your tummy is a little bit
uncomfortable.
I guess because of that, therefore if we sleep lying on the right side and
do fall asleep it does make a difference as we are able to maintain the
mindfulness and vigilance as the sleep does not become too deep with
sinking feeling. If we were to lie on our left side, we will completely be
absorbed right in the sleep. It may be more comfortable by lying on our
left side and because it is so comfortable, the sleep becomes very heavy
and makes us very difficult to wake up. It is also said that such a posture
does land us to unpleasant dreams or nightmares.
If you were to adopt this practice of lying on your right side, and because
the sleep is not completely relax and will not be heavy, it will helps in
maintaining mindfulness and vigilance. Also may be fewer occurrences of bad
dreams.
The advice is that while you are lying down on the right side trying to
fall asleep, and for as long as you do not fall asleep, you should maintain
to manifest a virtuous state of mind and then let yourself to fall asleep
within the virtuous state of mind. At that time of falling asleep, you
should also apply mindfulness and vigilance to check whether any
afflictions do manifest. If any afflictions do manifest, then you should
try your best to remove them by making them to go away and then try to fall
asleep within the virtuous state of mind.
Also at the time of falling asleep, you should bring to mind an
illumination i.e. thinking of something bright and clear. This will helps
to not have very deep sleep. Prior to falling asleep, you also need to have
the attitude to manifest the thought of wanting to wake up early the next
morning.
We have seen in the module on Mind and Awareness that sleep is a changeable
mental factor. As such, if you are able to fall asleep within a virtuous
state of mind, then the entire sleep becomes virtuous.
When we try to fall asleep while adopting that posture of the Buddha that
demonstrated the deed of passing away into parinirvana, and think that was
how the Buddha had laid down when he passed away, then there is additional
benefit of remembering the Buddha. When we remember the Buddha, we
accumulate merit. Also it is said that if we are able to fall asleep while
remembering the Buddha, we will not be subject to any harms, including
harms from non human entities.
There is an advice of conflating the four major periods in one’s life into
a day:
   1. when we are born,
   2. when we grow up,
   3. when we are in adult ageing
   4. when there is death
These are the four major periods in our life. These four major periods can
be looked at from the perspective of one day.
Waking up in the early morning is like a child being born. When you wake up
and go to work doing all sorts of thing in the day, and that is the actual
main part of the working day.  That is like the rest of your adult life.
Then after a full day of work, you come back home. You are tired and
resting. That is like when you are old, and perhaps in retirement.
Khen Rinpoche (In English): Night time is your old age.
Then in the day when you are so tired, you just lie on the bed feeling too
tired to move. That is like an old person who is very sick on the verge of
death. As you fall asleep, the sense consciousnesses are all become dormant
and are dissolving. Only the mental consciousness is there. That is like
dying and then ending up dead.
During sleep, you have dreams. That state of dreaming is likened to one
being in the intermediate state after one has died.
Then the next mornings when you wake up, that is like taking on another new
rebirth and enter into a new life.
You can even look at one particular day in terms of being born, living
life, ageing and then dying. Waking up fresh on a new day is actually like
a new rebirth. Although you may feel that you are the same person and
everything is the same but actually yesterday has already passed, and the
person of today and the person of yesterday is actually a different person.
The time and everything is different although you feel that it is the same.

Death in the sense is like sleeping because when you fall asleep, the gross
elements and the gross consciousnesses are dissolved and become dormant. It
is not as if the stream of consciousness is cut. The stream of
consciousness is still there when you wake up the next day. Death is pretty
much like that. In that sense, perhaps there is nothing to fear about death
as dying is like going to sleep. In the time of dying, the grosser elements
and the grosser consciousness dissolve. What is left in the end is the
extremely subtle stream of consciousness which will move on to the next
existence. You don’t fear when we fall asleep. If you think about it in
such a way, perhaps there is nothing much to fear about death itself.  It
is not that you go out of existence at the time of death. There is nothing
to fear about death in itself. After death, depending on the virtue or non-
virtue that you have accumulated, you get either a good rebirth or a bad
rebirth. Depending on the kind of rebirth you get then there are all kinds
of happiness or sufferings that you have to endure. If you have lived your
life practicing the dharma or cultivating the good heart or engaging in
virtue, then there is nothing to fear about dying. If you have lived a life
like that then dying is like just falling asleep and then you get another
good rebirth. What you need to fear is having created non-virtue.
Next is the summary.

|Synopsis  |


Verse 5.97
From among the limitless deeds
Of a bodhisattva that have been taught,
I should certainly practice as much
Of this conduct that trains the mind.
In general if you look at the trainings for the bodhisattvas such as the
six perfections and the four ways of gathering sentient beings into one’s
fold, these trainings are really extensive and limitless. In short, they
are all instructions for modifying the behavior of one’s body, speech and
mind. Even if one cannot engage in all those limitless trainings for now,
one can train to modify one’s physical, verbal and mental behavior as it is
being taught here in this text.
Next, the method for making the trainings excellent or perfect I guess.

|The branch or method of      |
|excellent trainings          |
|A An extensive explanation   |
|B Conclusion                 |

|A An extensive explanation   |
|1 The cause for purifying the|
|trainings                    |
|2 The basis of the trainings |
|3 The specifics              |
|4 The basis one hears and    |
|reflects upon                |

|1 The cause for purifying the|
|trainings                    |


Verse 5.98
Three times by day and three times by night
I should recite The Sutra of the Three Heaps;
By relying upon the Victors and the mind of enlightenment
My remaining downfalls will be purified.
If one has taken the bodhisattva vow, one has to avoid committing the root
downfalls and the faults. If a root downfall occurs then one is supposed to
confess to a person who holds the bodhisattva vow. After confessing it, one
should retake the bodhisattva vow. If a bodhisattva root downfall has
occurred, one needs to retake the vow to revive the vow.
If a secondary transgression or fault occurs, here it says that you should
confess them through the recitation of The Sutra of the Three Heaps. The
Sutra of the Three Heaps is commonly known as “The Confession of the
Bodhisattva Downfall” or “The Confession to the 35 Buddhas”.
For The Sutra of the Three Heaps, what are the three heaps? They are:
   1. Confession
   2. Rejoicing
   3. Dedication
If one is doing The Confession to the 35 Buddhas one visualizes the 35
Buddhas. In their presence, one goes for refuge and generating bodhicitta,
and that constitute the power of foundation. In doing the practice, one
will be confessing one’s negativities and whatever downfalls and secondary
transgression that one has committed.

|2 The basis of the trainings |


Verse 5.99
Whatever I do on any occasion,
Whether in terms of myself or others,
I should make effort and learn
Whatever training has been taught for that occasion.
When bodhisattvas engage in activities to accomplish their own purpose or
the purposes of others, they have to do it through their body, speech and
mind. So all activities that are engaged with their body, speech and mind
should be in accord with what is being taught in this text.
As you have seen so far that there are many advices being given here in
this text pertaining to how and what kind of physical demeanor that one
should adopt, how one should speak, what kind of attitude and what kind of
thought that one should have.
Verse 5.100
There is no such thing as something
That is not learned by the Victors’ Children.
Thus if I am skilled in abiding in this way
Nothing will be non-meritorious.
Bodhisattvas work for the benefit of others. So in order to work for the
benefit of others, they have to know a lot things; in fact everything.
There is nothing that the bodhisattvas should not learn. It is taught that
the bodhisattvas have to know the Hearers’ path and Solitary Realizers’
path, and they have to meditate on the Hearers’ path and Solitary
Realizers’ path. The reason is that the bodhisattvas have to take care of
the welfare of those who are the Hearers’ and Solitary Realizers’ lineage.
In order to take care of such person and in order to help them, the
bodhisattvas have to know those paths before they can actually help the
Hearers and the Solitary Realizers.
The bodhisattvas have to work for the benefit of others so they need to
know everything that could possibly be known. They need to learn. Of course
they do so with mindfulness and vigilance. In fact, everything that the
bodhisattvas do, including moving around, waving their hands, gesturing and
so forth, everything is the cause for enlightenment. Everything is the
cause for accomplishing of the sentient beings’ welfare. As such,
everything the bodhisattvas do accumulate great merit. With mindfulness and
vigilance, the bodhisattvas are able to learn many things and be able to
use them to benefit the sentient beings. It is said that the bodhisattvas
are even able to transform things that are usually non-virtue into things
that are virtue.
In short, this verse is saying that because the bodhisattvas need to work
for the benefit of all sentient beings therefore they have to learn
everything.
Next is dedicating the virtue for the welfare of other sentient beings.

|3 The specifics                                      |
|A Dedicating virtues for the welfare of all sentient |
|beings                                               |
|B One should never discard the spiritual master and  |
|the trainings of the Mahayana                        |

|A Dedicating virtues for the welfare of all sentient |
|beings                                               |


Verse 5.101
Directly or indirectly, I should not do anything
Other than the welfare of sentient beings.
Solely for the welfare of sentient beings
I should dedicate all towards enlightenment.
Whether one is directly benefiting sentient beings through giving teachings
or material gifts or one is engaging in one’s daily prayers while one is in
retreat, whatever virtue that one accumulates need to be dedicated to the
welfare of sentient beings.
In term of striving, one is striving to accomplish only the welfare of
sentient beings. Likewise, that is reflected in one’s dedication as well.
When one dedicates one’s roots of virtue, one dedicates it for the welfare
of all sentient beings. One prays and one dedicates the roots of virtue to
the achievement of complete enlightenment so that one can accomplish the
welfare of sentient beings.
Next is the advice on relying on a Mahayana virtuous friend

|B One should never discard the spiritual master and  |
|the trainings of the Mahayana                        |


Verse 5.102
Never, even at the cost of my life,
Should I forsake a spiritual friend
Skilled in the meanings of the Mahayana
[Who abides in] the supreme modes of conduct of a bodhisattva.
In the Stages of the Path to Enlightenment, it is mentioned clearly the
qualification of a Mahayana virtuous friend. You should know well what the
qualifications of the Mahayana virtuous friend are. You also have to know
well the necessary qualifications of a suitable disciple or a student.
Now many of you are familiar with the topic of correctly devoting to the
virtuous friend. On the basis of knowing:
   1) The qualifications that the Mahayana virtuous friend should possess
   2) The qualifications that the suitable student must possess
   3) What are the benefits and what do you get if you rely correctly on
      such teacher
   4) What are the disadvantages you will experience if you make mistakes by
      giving up that relationship
   5) For the actual way of relying on the virtuous friends, there are:
        a. Reliance in thought
        b. Reliance in action
Because there are so much benefit and profit if you rely correctly on the
qualified Mahayana virtuous friend and because they are so many
disadvantages and problems that will ensue if we relying incorrectly on
that qualified Mahayana virtuous friend, therefore, here it is says “Never,
even at the cost of my life should I forsake a spiritual friend”.

|The basis one hears and     |
|reflects upon               |
|A Training in reliance upon |
|the sutras                  |
|B Training in reliance upon |
|the treatises               |

|A Training in reliance upon |
|the sutras                  |


Verse 5.103
I should train in devoting myself to my spiritual master
In the manner taught in The Biography of Shrisambhava.
This and other trainings spoken by the Buddha,
I should understand through reading the sutras.
Verse 5.104
I should read the sutras
Because it is in them that the practices appear.
To begin with, I should look at
The Sutra of Akashagarba.
 In the The Sutra of the Array of Stalks Array  there is an account of
Shrisambhava going to the bodhisattva Lobsang asking “How one should
relying on the virtuous friend?” The account is given in the The Sutra of
the Array of Stalks. In the sutra, it is mentioned that there are nine
attitudes of how a disciple should rely on the virtuous friend:
   1) Like a boat
   2) Like a mountain
   3) Like a dog
   4) Like a servant and so forth.
There are nine attitudes but I don’t remember everything
[Stages of the path L12] The nine attitudes are:
   1. The attitude which is like the dutiful child.
   2. The attitude which is like a diamond
   3. The attitude which is like the earth
   4. The attitude which is like the mountain
   5. The attitude which is like a worldly servant
   6. The attitude which is like a sweeper
   7. The attitude which is like a foundation
   8. The attitude which is like a dog
   9. The attitude which is like a boat
In what attitude one should rely on the virtuous friend? It should be like
a vajra as vajra is unshakable. When you rely on your virtuous friend, it
doesn’t matter what kind of condition you meet, and you never give up. In
the course of relying on the virtuous friend one may meet with challenges
and difficulties. Because of the certain condition you find it difficult,
and at those times, your attitude and your reliance on the virtuous friend
should be immovable like a mountain. Regardless of whatever condition, your
attitude is immovable and firm as a mountain. You don’t flicker and you
don’t change.
One’s attitude should be like a servant. Whatever work you are given, you
do it without negotiating. Then one should do whatever advice, jobs or
works given by the guru.
One should be like a dog. If you were to scold your dog, it doesn’t get
angry but it looks at you happily. It doesn’t get angry and it doesn’t
retaliate. Likewise when relying on the virtuous friend, you should not get
angry.
One should rely on a virtuous friend like an obedient child. An obedient
child follows exactly what the parents tell and advise them.
Verse 5.103 is indicating the kind the attitudes that you should train in
when relying on the virtuous friend. You should also clear about the
essential points of the training that you are going to engage in. You can
make yourself clear about these points by referring to the source - the
sutras.
Here the commentary is saying that those who have taken the bodhisattva
vow, one must definitely look at The Sutra of Akashagarba. The reason is
that after you have taken the bodhisattva vow, you have to know what the
root downfalls are and what the secondary transgressions are. The Sutra of
Akashagarba is clear on that.
Next is one should also rely on the treatises and commentaries.

|B Training in reliance    |
|upon the treatises        |


Verse 5.105
I should definitely look at
Compendium of Trainings again and again
Because what is to be constantly practiced
Is clearly and extensively shown there.

The Compendium of Trainings was composed by Shantideva himself. He advises
us to look at that text. Because that text is quite elaborate it is not
sufficient to look at it once. It is something that you have to look at
over and over again.
Verse 5.106
Alternatively I should sometimes look at
The condensed Compendium of Sutras.
Also, I should make an effort to look at
The second composed by Arya Nagarjuna.
 Shantideva advises that alternatively one can also look at his condensed
Compendium of Sutras. One should also look at the text with the same name
composed by Arya Nagarjuna.
Both Shantideva and Nagarjuna composed a text with the same name -
Compendium of Sutras. It seems that the one that is composed by Shantideva
is not translated into Tibetan language.

|Conclusion                |


Verse 5.107
I should do whatever
Is not forbidden in those [works].
I should impeccably practice whatever training I see
In order to guard the minds of worldly people.
[BP1 L33: One should impeccably put into action whatever is not forbidden
and taught in these treatises and sutras and refrain from that which is
forbidden in these texts. Why? We do this in order to protect or guard the
minds of worldly people.

|The conclusion, as it is necessary to put into practice the meaning without    |
|[leaving it on the level of] mere words, therefore the conclusion is:          |
|1 Mindfulness and alertness are required in all places of the training         |
|2 The actual meaning                                                           |

|1 Mindfulness and alertness are required in  |
|all places of the training                   |


Verse 5.108
The defining characteristic of introspection
In brief is only this:
To examine again and again
The states of my body and mind.

|2 The actual meaning                         |


Verse 5.109
Thus I shall put these into action with my body,
For what can be achieved by merely expressing words?
Will sick people be benefited
Merely by reading the medical texts?
Here it is saying that you should investigate with vigilance to see if the
behavior of your body, speech and mind are contrary to the bodhisattvas
training. You should also check whether you are coming under the control of
your afflictions. The point is to rely on mindfulness and vigilance and to
practice in that way.
The last verse of this chapter is saying that you should put all these
advices into practice with your body, speech and mind. If you don’t then
there is no benefit in just knowing the teachings, just as how a sick
person, somebody who is very sick, will not be recovered through merely
reading a medical journal.
In short, we have to examine whatever we do with our body, speech and mind
with mindfulness and vigilance and to weigh the benefit whether it is more
beneficial for others or not. Those who engage in activities that are more
beneficial for others are said to be the wise one.
The Arya Nagarjuna says that, despite extensive study and learning, if one
does not put the teachings into practice then one will be like a blind
person who is holding a butter lamp that is lit. Having all the
opportunities and the conditions to practice, then having knowing all the
dharma but not practicing it are like somebody who is sitting in a body of
water but still very thirsty.
In Je Rinpoche’s Lamrim Chenmo, Lama Tsongkhapa says clearly that in order
to practice the dharma you have to know the dharma. In order to know the
dharma, you have to hear it and learn it.  The point of learning the dharma
is so that you practice it.
In order to practice the dharma, you have to know the dharma. In order to
know the dharma then you educate yourself by learning. The point of
learning is to educate yourself to know, but the point of knowing is to
practice. That is what Je Rinpoche said. He also said that right from the
beginning when you listen to the dharma, you must understand clearly that
the whole point of learning, reflection, studying and practicing everything
is to subdue the mind so to deal with afflictions. Je Rinpoche said clearly
that if we don’t tame ourselves, there is no way, no basis, and no reason
to tame others. Therefore subdue yourself first.
Next lesson we will start with the topic on Patience.
