Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Engaging in the Deeds of a Bodhisattva/lesson8.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:52:21.859652
================================================================================


As I have said in the previous lesson, many of our problems and sufferings
arise from our four erroneous conceptions. The method to weaken these four
erroneous conceptions is the practice of the closed placement of
mindfulness.
The four closed placement of mindfulness are:
Closed placement of mindfulness of body
Closed placement of mindfulness of feeling
Closed placement of mindfulness of mind
Closed placement of mindfulness of phenomena

|Close placement of mindfulness  |To overcome the erroneous conception of:   |
|Close placement of mindfulness  |Conceiving that which is unclean to be     |
|on the body                     |clean                                      |
|Close placement of mindfulness  |Conceiving that which is in the nature of  |
|on feelings                     |suffering to be happiness.                 |
|Close placement of mindfulness  |Conceiving that which is impermanent to be |
|on the mind                     |permanent.                                 |
|Close placement of mindfulness  |Conceiving that which is selfless to have a|
|on phenomena                    |self.                                      |


If you look at the four features of impermanence, misery, selfless and
empty, then one can reflect and apply them to one’s contaminated body and
mind complex. One can reflect on:
-  how one’s body is by nature unclean,
-  how it is impermanent,
-  how it is in the nature of suffering
-  how it lacks a self
If you look at the very nature of your body, it is in the nature of
misery/suffering. No matter what you do to cherish and take care of your
body, from its own side, all it does is to give you problems and
sufferings.
If you look at your own experience in relation to the body that you cherish
so much, all it need is some small problem, or small harmful condition and
your body will starts to give you problems such as lots of pain. Although
you put in a lot of effort to take care of your body by giving it a lot of
food, clothing and so forth, but what is the level of pleasure or happiness
you get in return? The point is that the amount of resources and effort you
have put in cherishing your body so much are completely overwhelmed just by
a small harmful condition. Even though those efforts, time, and resources
that you have put in cannot protect your body even from a small harmful
condition, then this is a sign that the body that you have is in the nature
of misery/suffering. You just need a small harmful condition to experience
pain. Despite putting in so much time and resources into cherishing and
taking care of your body in order to have some pleasure, but from the side
of the body, the body doesn’t give you happiness or pleasure.
The source of the body is in the nature of suffering. It is the very basis
for all the problems - physical problems, pains, and physical suffering.
The reason why we have all these problems is because the basis to
experience the problem is there. As soon as we take on a body like this,
all it needs is a small condition to come along then suffering will arise
quickly and easily. This is one of the things behind the meaning of all
pervasive compounded suffering (or the suffering of conditionality).
We eat in order to alleviate the suffering of hunger. When we feel hungry,
it is unpleasant, and it is a kind of suffering. But this kind of suffering
cannot be removed because the body itself cannot remove this kind of
suffering. The body needs to rely on an external condition of food. The
body is in the nature of suffering, and it is not able to bestow pleasure
from its own side. In the case of the alleviating the suffering of hunger,
it is the external condition – food – which gives the pleasure that comes
from eating.  Although in this case, food is an external condition for
experiencing the pleasure that comes from eating, but there is a limit to
how much the food can do. This is because we just cannot go on eating. From
the side of the body, there is a limit to what the external favorable
condition can do to us in terms of experiencing pleasure. But when it comes
to the condition to produce suffering, the more the conditions for
suffering, the more suffering we will experience.
The body having the nature of suffering/misery because the more harmful
condition it is, the more suffering the body experiences. There is a limit
to how much pleasure the body can experience, even though there may be
abundance of favorable external conditions. So the pleasure that is derived
from these external conditions and after a while it stops and does not
increase. That is the feeling of pleasure.
It is taught that as a method to stop any attachment and grasping for the
body, the teaching advises us to meditate on:
- how the bodies are unclean,
- how it is impermanent,
- how it is in the nature of suffering, and
- how it lacks a self.
It is very important for us to continuously think about the Four Seals that
attest that particular doctrine is Buddhadharma. These four seals are very
powerful. The Four Seals are:
     1. All composed phenomena are impermanent
     2. All contaminate phenomena are misery
     3. All phenomena are empty and selfless
     4. Nirvana is peace
In the first turning of the wheel of the dharma, Buddha spoke on the Four
Noble Truths. He said “This is the true suffering, this is true origin,
this is true path, and this is true cessation”. We have to understand the
essence behind these Four Noble Truths.

Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds
|Mentally emanated         |
|offerings                 |
|A Surpassable offerings   |
|B Unsurpassable offerings |


We have finished with offering one’s body.
Next is making offerings that are mentally emanated, of which there are
surpassable offerings and unsurpassable offerings.
There are twelve kinds of surpassable offerings.
|A Surpassable offerings                       |
|1 Ablutions                                   |
|2 Clothing                                    |
|3 Ornaments                                   |
|4 Scents                                      |
|5 Flowers                                     |
|6 Incense                                     |
|7 Food                                        |
|8 Light                                       |
|9 Offering an inestimable palace              |
|10 Parasol                                    |
|11 Music                                      |
|12 An unbroken continuum of blessings in the  |
|form of offerings                             |

|1.  Ablutions                             |
|A Site for ablutions                      |
|B The way [to perform] the ablution       |
|ceremony                                  |
|C Towel (Drying the holy body)            |

|A Site for    |
|ablutions     |


Verse 2.10
To very sweetly scented bathing chambers
With brilliantly sparkling crystal floors
And exquisite pillars ablaze with gems,
Having canopies above aglow with pearls,
Before one offers ablution or bath, first one has to generate the bath
house. The bath house has to be visualized as very beautiful and pleasant.
It is anointed with sandalwood fragrance. It has a crystal floor, shining
with lights and so forth.
First you visualize very pleasant bath house. Next you offer a bath.

|B The way [to perform] the        |
|ablution ceremony                 |


Verse 2.11
I beseech the Tathagatas and their children
To come and bathe their bodies abundantly
From many jewelled vases filled with waters scented and enticing,
To the accompaniment of song and music.
In order to do the bath offering, one invites all the Buddhas and their
children to take their place inside the bath house. You visualize that they
have actually entered into the bath house. You offers the bath to the
Buddhas and their children with precious vases made from gold and so forth.
These vases are filled with scented water with beautiful flowers. The whole
bath offering is accompanies with sound and music.
One can actually visualize performing the actual bath offering by oneself.
If one is doing the bath offering in the context of tantra, then one
emanates from one’s heart various offering goddesses holding vases in their
hands, and they are the ones who offer the bath to the Tathagatas and their
children.
After the bath offering is done, then one visualizes that the water that
been offered flow into oneself and all the sentient beings in the six
realms purifying every one of their negativities and obscurations. In
particular one can visualize that these water flowing onto the local gods,
local spirits, and harm doers, and these waters pacify all their harmful
intentions. In the place of their harmful intentions, visualize these
harmful spirits and so forth develop bodhicitta.
What is the reason for offering ablution or bath to the Buddhas?  It is not
because the Buddhas’ exalted bodies are stained. The Buddhas bodies are
unstained. We do the practice of offering ablution in order to purify the
stains of our body, speech and mind in particular, we offer ablution in
order to purify the ordinary and impure appearances in our minds.

|C Drying the holy |
|body              |


Verse 2.12 ab
Let me dry their bodies with incomparable cloths,
Clean and well-anointed with scent,
After offering ablution, one visualizes drying their bodies with unequalled
cloths that is soft, clean and fragrant.
What do you do with the cloths that you used to wipe their bodies? What
about the old garments of the Tathagatas and their children? You visualize
them to dissolve into either yellow or red lights. These lights dissolve
into you at the points between the eyebrows. Then visualize that you see
all the qualities of the Buddhas.

|2.       |
|Clothing |


Verse 2.12 cd
And then may I present them
With fragrant well-dyed garments,
Verse 2.13 a
Manifold thin and soft clothes.
You offer garments after drying the bodies of the Tathagatas and their
children. In terms of the aspects of the bodies to whom we are offering
garments to:
- there are some bodies that are in the aspect of being devoid of
attachments, and
- there are some bodies that are in the aspect of having attachment.
- To the guests whose bodies are in the aspects of being devoid of
attachment, you offer the three robes of a monk.
- To the guests whose bodies are in the aspects of having attachments, you
offer various kinds of clothes that are expensive, pure, soft, and nice and
various designs and so forth.
You think that through offering these garments to the guests, all the
Tathagatas and their children, one is now clothed with the garments of
shame and embarrassment.
There is a difference between shame and embarrassment. Both are similar in
that the function to help us to refrain from non-virtue.
Shame is the mental factor that causes one to abstain from non virtue on
account of oneself.
Embarrassment is the mental factor that causes one to abstain from non-
virtue on account of others.
(BP1 Minds and Mental Factors)
Shame is an avoidance of misdeeds on account of oneself. Embarrassment is
an avoidance of misdeeds on account of others.
What is the difference between shame and embarrassment? Although both of
them are similar in terms of avoiding misconduct, shame is such that, when
one is about to engage in misconduct, one avoids it, thinking, “This is not
something I should do”. In the case of embarrassment, when one comes close
to engaging in misconduct, one avoids it on account of others, thinking,
“If others were to despise me [as a result of my engaging in misconduct],
this would not be fitting.” One avoids misconduct due to concern about the
displeasure of one’s gurus or teachers – the principal object [causing]
this avoidance. ...If shame and embarrassment are absent, one will be
unable to restrain oneself from any misconduct whatsoever, for, without
fear about the fruition from one’s own side, and lacking concern about the
displeasure of one’s gurus, teachers, and so forth, there will be no way to
cease misconduct.

|3 Ornaments|


Verse 2.13 bcd
I adorn with hundreds of this and that supreme ornaments
The aryas Samantabhadra, Manjugosha,
Avalokiteshvara, and so forth.


One offers ornaments to those who are in the aspects of having attachment.
There are many different kinds of ornaments such as ear-rings, necklaces,
bracelets, anklets, belts and so forth. All these different kinds of
ornaments are offered to those who are showing the aspects of attachment.
Example, as you can see in the thangka, Chenrezig has all these various
kind of ornaments. One also offers these to Samantabhadra, Manjugosha,
Avalokiteshavra and so forth, to the eight great close sons. One can also
offer to the Buddhas in aspect of the Enjoyment Body.
One prays and dedicates the act of offering ornaments so that one can
actualize the signs and exemplifications of the Buddha.

|4 Scents|


Verse 2.14
Like polishing pure, refined gold,
I anoint the bodies of the Lords of Subduers that blaze with light
With the choicest perfumes whose fragrance permeates
Throughout the billion worlds.
If it is related to tantra, one visualizes goddesses emanating from one’s
heart, and in their hand they hold vessel containing perfume or scented
water. They then anoint the bodies of the Tathagatas and their children.
After making this offering of anointment to the bodies of the Buddhas, one
prays to actualize this particular feature of the Buddha’s body in the
future i.e. having the body that is the color of refined gold.

|5       |
|Flowers |


Verse 2.15
And to the highest objects of giving, the Lords of Subduers,
I offer all enchanting, sweet smelling flowers,
Such as mandara, lotus, and utpala,
And beautiful, well-arranged garlands.
It is says that when one offers pleasant flowers like mandara, lotus,
utpala and so forth, because these flowers give off nice fragrant scent.
One should also offer flower garlands that are well arranged and beautiful.
When one offers loose flowers to those Buddhas in aspect of being free of
attachments, visualize that these loose flowers transform into a beautiful
celestial mansion, parasols and victory banners.
It is said that one offers the flower garlands to those who are in aspect
possessing attachments, for example the complete enjoyment body, one offers
these flower garlands directly to them.
After offering flowers, one can make the prayer and dedicate the merit
towards being able to actualize the realizations of the seven branches of
enlightenment:
   1. the branch of enlightenment that is correct mindfulness
   2. the branch of enlightenment that is a fine discrimination of phenomena
      directly realizing selflessness
   3. the branch of enlightenment that is effort
   4. the branch of enlightenment that is joy
   5. the branch of enlightenment that is pliancy
   6. the branch of enlightenment that is meditative stabilization
   7. the branch of enlightenment that is equanimity
It is taught in the commentary that after offering the flowers one
dedicates the merits and prays to be able actualize the realizations of the
Seven Branches of Enlightenment.
(BP1 L8) However, I cannot find any explanation in the commentary on what
is the connection between the practice of flower offerings and attaining
these seven branches of enlightenment. I think this may relate to the story
of when Shakyamuni Buddha was born, when he walked seven steps and after
each step, a flower appeared miraculously on the ground. In total, seven
flowers appeared. At the end of the seven steps, the Buddha said, “I am the
supreme one and I will teach the Dharma in this world.”
(BP1 Ornaments for Clear Realizations Lesson 20)
|The branch of            |                                                     |
|enlightenment that is .. |                                                     |
|1.correct mindfulness    |With mindfulness one will not be distracted by other |
|                         |objects.                                             |
|2. a fine discrimination |It is in the nature of a non-conceptual exalted      |
|of phenomena directly    |wisdom and is the main cause of achieving            |
|realizing selflessness   |enlightenment.                                       |
|3. effort                |This is also called the branch of definite emergence,|
|                         |for it is with effort that one distances oneself from|
|                         |the mundane levels and frees oneself from the state  |
|                         |of being an ordinary being.                          |
|4.  joy                  |The branch which benefits body and mind. It brings   |
|                         |joy                                                  |
|5. pliancy               |It is called the branch of basis without afflictive  |
|                         |emotions and since that is similar to pliancy (which |
|                         |makes the body and mind serviceable and able to      |
|                         |perform virtues due to overcoming the unserviceable  |
|                         |states of body and mind) this branch is condensed    |
|                         |into the branches that are without afflictive        |
|                         |emotions.                                            |
|6. meditative            |It is condensed into the branches that are without   |
|stabilization            |afflictive emotions because it is this meditative    |
|                         |stabilisation that destroys the afflictions. This is |
|                         |also called the branch of abiding without afflictive |
|                         |emotions.                                            |
|7. equanimity            |It is included within the branches without afflictive|
|                         |emotions because the entity of equanimity is abiding |
|                         |in a state of concentration that is not influenced by|
|                         |either the faults of laxity or excitement. With      |
|                         |equanimity one counteracts the unbalanced            |

|6 Incense |


Verse 2.16 a,b
I also offer clouds of incense
Whose pervasive sweet aroma steals away the mind.
One offers incense that is very fragrant. It is mentioned in some teachings
that you can visualize these billowing clouds of incense smoke goes out to
the ten directions, and these transform into the seven kinds of jewels. You
offer all of that to all the Buddhas.
One can also think that all the sufferings existing in your own continuum
and in the continuum of others are cleared away. One prays and dedicates
that due to the offering this incense, may one gain the ethical discipline
that is pleasing to all the Buddhas.

|7 Food|


Verse 2.16 cd
I offer to them the delicacies of the gods
With a variety of foods and drinks too.
One prays that through offering these pleasant and nice foods, may one
achieve the supreme fruit of concentration.

|8 Light |


Verse 2.17ab
I also offer them jewelled lamps
Arranged on golden lotus buds.
The container is made of precious substances and adorned with lotuses and
so forth. Inside those precious containers are shining jewels such as lapis
and sapphire. These jewels radiate lights that eliminate all the darkness
and filled the entire space with lights. Then you offers that.
When you are offering the candle light, although the candle light that you
are holding in your hand may be small, the teaching mentioned that you
should visualize:
- the container to be as huge as the three billion-fold world systems
- the wick is also very huge,
- the candle wax or the  butter is as huge as the entire ocean.
- the lights that come from this candle light fill the whole of space
Then you offer that.
Then you dedicates that the merit through offering the light eliminate all
the confusion of not knowing and to develop the mind that knows all
phenomena and the mind is to be filled with the illumination of wisdom.

|9 Offering an           |
|inestimable palace      |


Verse 2.17cd
Upon ground anointed with incense
I scatter loose pleasing flowers.

Verse 2.18
To those who have the nature of compassion
I offer inestimable palaces resounding with melodious praises,
Beautified by and blazing with hanging ornaments of gems of pearls
That adorn the infinite space.
One dedicates the merit of offering this inestimable mansion so that one
can actualize the great city of liberation.
(BP1 L9) The reason it is called an inestimable palace is because it is so
huge that it cannot fit into our minds. It is obviously very beautiful and
is made of different precious jewels. Inside this inestimable palace or
mansion, we should visualize many offering goddesses who hold in their
hands musical instruments making beautiful music and singing with beautiful
captivating voices. The different sides of the palace are adorned with
hanging jewels. Light rays of different colours are emitted from these
jewels that fill the entire space. In short, we visualize light rays coming
from the inestimable palace adorned with jewels filling the entire space.
We offer this to all the buddhas and bodhisattvas who are in the nature of
compassion. After offering this inestimable palace or mansion we pray: Due
to this merit, may I and all sentient beings proceed to the city of great
liberation. ‘Great liberation’ means the state of enlightenment or
buddhahood.

|10       |
|Parasol  |


Verse 2.19
Eternally shall I offer to the Lords of Subduers
Jeweled parasols with golden handles
And pleasing ornaments embellishing the rims,
Standing upright, their shapes beautiful to behold.
I think it is alright if you visualize offering goddesses emanating from
your heart and in their hands they hold these various beautiful parasols
and then offer to the Buddhas and bodhisattvas. Then you pray that due to
the offering of these parasols, may you be protected from the heat of
cyclic existence and the lower realms and may you come under the protection
of the Three Jewels.

|11 Music|


Verse 2.20
Besides those, may collections of offerings
Resounding with sweet pleasing music,
Clouds that appease the suffering of sentient beings,
Remain individually
As says in the commentary: “I also present the offering clouds of
instruments and pleasant melodies that clear away the sufferings of
sentient beings and satisfies them just by hearing it”.

|12 An unbroken continuum of blessings in the |
|form of offerings                            |


Verse 2.21
May a rain of flowers and gems
Descend continuously
Upon all the Dharma Jewels,
And upon the reliquaries and holy images.
One makes offerings to the Dharma Jewel. There is scriptural dharma jewel
and realizational dharma jewel.
-  The scriptural dharma jewel is the twelve branches of scriptures
together with the volumes of texts.
-  The realizational dharma jewel is essentially the qualities of
abandonment and the qualities of realizations in the continuum of Buddhas
and bodhisattvas.
Then you have reliquaries or stupas. There are many different kinds of
stupas such as the eight types of stupas. The holy images are basically the
representations of the Buddha’s body, whether it’s in the form of statue
and so forth.
Here one is thinking and contemplating on making these offerings
continuously. One makes these offerings continuously not only to the
Buddhas but also to the Dharma Jewel, and all the holy objects such as
stupas, statues and so forth. It is said that when making offerings, one’s
offerings should be as many as possible, and is pleasant, beautiful and of
good quality as much as possible. As such, therefore those offerings that
are mentally transformed and mentally emanated are very important.
This concludes the section on surpassable offerings.

|B Unsurpassable      |
|offerings            |


Verse 2.22
In the same way as Manjughosha and so forth
Have made offerings to the Victors,
Similarly do I bestow gifts upon the Tathagatas,
The Protectors, as well as their children.
The bodhisattvas abiding on the ten grounds are able to make many offerings
that are mentally emanated and transformed. Here one visualizes that one is
making that same kind of offerings. For example, when the bodhisattva
Samantabhadra makes offerings, he emanates innumerable rays of lights,
billions and billions, going out to those equal numbers of Buddha fields.
At the tip of each of those innumerable rays of lights are Samantabhadras
and from those Samantabhadras emanates again from their hearts innumerable
rays of lights again. At the tip of those light rays emanated by those
Samantabhadras are also Samantabhadras. Then from the heart of those
Samantabhadras again innumerable rays of lights are emanated. At the tips
of those light rays are all the various types of offerings, and then he
makes those offerings.
It is said that these great bodhisattvas make such extensive offerings
through their mental transformations. This verse is saying that we should
think like that when we are making such similar offerings.
When making the unsurpassable offerings we think we are making the
offerings in the way bodhisattva Samantabhadra is offering. It is also
taught that one’s meditation on love and bodhicitta are unsurpassable
offerings. So when you visualize that your roots of virtue transforming
into various offering substances, that offering then also become an
unsurpassable offering. All your activities of listening to the teachings,
studying the dharma, practicing, meditating and so forth can constitute as
unsurpassable offerings.
It is mentioned in The Stages of the Path to Enlightenment literature that
making mentally transformed offerings is supreme. I guess this is taught
from the perspective of those practitioners who are living a simple life.
It is said that one can accumulate lots of merit by making these mentally
transformed offerings. Sometimes when we make offerings of actual
substances it can be accompanied by arrogance, pride and
attachment/miserliness. In this text, Shantideva being a practitioner
living a very materially simple and contented life, he emphasizes mentally
transformed offerings for his particular lifestyle.
It is also mentioned in The Stages of the Path to Enlightenment literature
that making offerings is a supreme method to achieve enlightenment and also
a supreme method to help one actualize bodhicitta. It is taught that one
should not look down on the practice of making offerings. Rather, one
should familiarize oneself with the practice of making offerings and also
making mentally transformed offerings.
When we are making offerings that are mentally transformed, essentially you
just imagine whatever you are going to offer. Let’s say you are going to
offer some precious stones or precious jewels you visualize that in your
mind and have it appear clearly and then you offer that. It in itself is
not challenging and it is not an extremely difficult task, but you
accumulate a lot of merits.
When you are offering to the Buddhas, there are many different kinds of
offerings. Depending on what is mentioned in a particular prayer that you
are reciting, there are all these different verses on making offerings of
various offering substances. So whatever offering substances that are
mentioned, you bring that to the mind, visualize them and then you offer
it. This is what you have to think when you are reciting those verses on
making offerings. If you are able to do this, then you can easily
accumulate a huge amount of merit and purify your mind of obscurations.
This creates the cause to achieve enlightenment.
The bodhisattva on the 1st ground is able to emanate hundred bodies, and
with the hundred bodies he goes to a hundred Buddha pure lands and makes
offerings. The bodhisattva on the 2nd ground is able to emanate a thousand
bodies, and he goes to a thousand Buddha pure lands and makes offerings.
For those bodhisattvas who are on the 10th ground, they are able to emanate
bodies equal to the innumerable Buddha fields, literally billions, and then
they make offerings. If these bodhisattvas on the grounds have to make such
offerings, then it goes without saying that we need to put in more effort
into making offerings since we only have one body.
It is mentioned in The Stages of the Path to Enlightenment literature,
which we have already gone through, that there is something called the
power of the merit field; the power of holy objects. It is said that when
one makes offerings, any offerings, to the merit field or to the holy
objects, it doesn’t matter what kind of motivations you make the offerings
with, it doesn’t matter whether you dedicate the merit that you accumulate
through making the offerings to enlightenment or not, it is said that all
those offerings that you made to the merit field and holy objects
automatically become a cause for full enlightenment. This is the exception.
This is due to the power of merit field. Such an opportunity exists for us
to seize. Therefore, whenever you have an opportunity, when you make
offerings to the merit field or to holy objects, even though you may have
something small in your head, but like what I have said earlier, you could
visualize making extensive offerings, then you can easily accumulate a lot
of merits.
So far we have read these many verses of making offerings. It is usually
pertain to making surpassable and unsurpassable offerings including
offering one’s body. If you have time you can just recite these verses
slowly and visualize accordingly. Through that you can accumulate a lot of
merits.

Q&A
Question: You mentioned that impermanence in samsara is caused by karma and
delusions. Can I say that impermanence in samsara is not caused by these
two causes alone? Because the blessings of the Buddha cause virtuous
thoughts in sentient beings mind. Such impermanence in samsara is also
caused by the enlightened activities of the Buddha. Is the virtuous thought
that is caused by the enlightened activities of the Buddha samsara or not?
Khen Rinpoche (in English): Are you asking whether the virtuous thoughts
are samsara or not? In the first place ww don’t know what is samsara? Last
time I asked “What samsara is”.
Answer: First we have to pinpoint and figure out what constitutes samsara.
As for virtue, it is not that if it is virtue it is necessarily not
included in the twelve links of dependent origination. For there are many
projecting karmas and actualizing factors included in the twelve links.
There are many virtuous projecting karmas and virtuous actualizing factors
that are included in the twelve links. For example, the projecting karma
for human rebirth and projecting karma for god, these are virtuous but
nevertheless included in the twelve links. Such a virtuous projecting karma
is propelled by ignorance that is included in the twelve links. The
virtuous projecting karma for a human is a virtuous projecting karma but it
is motivated and propelled by the ignorance that is included in the twelve
links. Is the virtuous karma in our continuum is included in samsara or
not? Is it samsara or not? What is samsara?
Khen Rinpoche (in English): Think.
Question: Pertaining to lesson 6, you did mention that bodhicitta is mind
generation, mind generation is bodhicitta, and they are the same. I agree
with you with respect to bodhisattva, they are the same. However, is it
correct to say that with respect to Buddha, mind generation is not
necessarily bodhicitta? Because if you look at the boundary of mind
generation and bodhicitta:
- bodhicitta exists from the Path of Accumulation up to the end of the
continuum of sentient beings
- whereas mind generation exists from the Path of Accumulation up to the
Buddha ground.
That means on the Buddha ground, Buddha has mind generation but does not
have bodhicitta. If Buddha has mind generation and does not have bodhicitta
that means mind generation is not necessarily bodhicitta. Am I right to say
that?
Khen Rinpoche (in English): Correct.
Answer: In Sanskrit bodhicitta has a connotation; it can mean Mahayana mind
generation. In Tibetan it is ?? literally is Mahayana mind generation. But
when you translate that ?? into English you cannot translate it as
bodhicitta. You have to say Mahayana mind generation. In English mind of
enlightenment (bodhicitta) and mind generation, are different words.
Question: You said we need three conditions to achieve the perfect human
rebirth. One of it is the practice of pure morality must be complemented
with the practices of the other perfections. In The Foundation of All Good
Qualities, there is a verse that reads “Clearly recognizing that I will not
achieve enlightenment by developing bodhicitta without practicing the three
types of morality, please bless me to practise the bodhisattva vows with
great energy”. Is this pure morality that we need to achieve the precious
human rebirth is the same as these three types of morality that is
mentioned in The Foundation of All Good Qualities?
Answer: I don’t think you can link it in that way because the verse in The
Foundation of All Good Qualities which says “even if I develop bodhicitta
and I don’t practise the three types of morality I will not achieve
enlightenment.” The three types of morality here refer to the bodhisattva
ethics. The pure morality that is one of the conditions for achieving a
human life of freedoms and endowments is primarily referring to guarding
well the ethical discipline of abandoning the ten non-virtues.
Eight types of stupas (extract from Rigpawiki.org)
1. The Lotus Blossom Stupa of the Buddha's Birth - The Lotus  Blossom  Stupa
symbolizes the birth of Siddhartha, the man who would later be known as  the
Buddha. The steps of the stupa are round and decorated with lotus petals.
2. The Enlightenment Stupa -After sitting in meditation for 49 days under  a
tree at Bodhgaya, Siddhartha attained enlightenment and understood the  true
nature of all things.  He  realized  that,  like  him,  all  beings  without
exception have the same potential for enlightenment,  the  “buddha  nature’.
The steps of the stupa are rectangular and undecorated.
3. The Stupa of Turning the Wheel of Dharma  -  This  stupa  represents  the
point at which the Buddha began to 'turn the wheel of the Dharma,  to  teach
the path to enlightenment to  others.  Also  known  as  the  Stupa  of  Many
Doorways, the steps are adorned with doorways  symbolizing  the  opening  of
the doors of the Dharma.
4. The Great Miracle Stupa -This stupa commemorates the Buddha’s display  of
miracles  at  Shravasti,  where  he  was  challenged  to   demonstrate   his
realization. The Buddha responded by performing a  different  miracle  every
day for 15 days. Each of the four steps, in  each  of  the  four  directions
have central extensions.
5. The Stupa of the Descent from  Tushita  Heaven  -  The  Buddha's  mother,
Mayadevi, was reborn in a celestial realm  called  the  Tushita  Heaven.  To
repay her kindness, the Buddha spent three months there and taught  her  the
path to enlightenment.
This stupa represents the Buddha’s  return  from  the  celestial  realms  in
order to continue teaching the people of northern India. Each  side  of  the
stupa has a stairway in the centre of the four steps.
6.  The  Stupa  of  Reconciliation  -This  stupa  symbolizes  the   Buddha’s
reuniting of his  monastic  followers  after  they  had  become  divided  by
disagreement. The steps are octagonal with eight corners and eight sides.
7. The All-Victorious Stupa - This stupa symbolizes the  Buddha’s  agreement
to extend his life by three months, after one of his followers  had  pleaded
with him not to pass away. The steps of the stupa are round.
8. The Parinirvana Stupa -  This  stupa  marks  the  Buddha’s  passing  into
nirvana, a state of true peace which is beyond death.
With his final words, the Buddha urged  his  followers  to  be  diligent  in
their efforts to attain enlightenment. Lying on his  right  side  and  in  a
state of profound meditation, he left the world  and  passed  into  nirvana.
There are no steps in this stupa, the vase rests directly on the throne.
