Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Engaging in the Deeds of a Bodhisattva/lesson47.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:52:18.084395
================================================================================


Q&A
Student 1: A superior bodhisattva who has realized emptiness directly has
overcome intellectually acquired obscuration. In his mind, there is a still
innate affliction. Is that a mind that is afflicted with innate afflictive
obscuration true suffering? Does such mind have pervasive suffering?
Khen Rinpoche (in English): What are you really trying to ask? I didn’t get
it.  Because you said mind, there are so many minds.
Student 1: The mind of a superior bodhisattva
Khen Rinpoche (in English): Understand. Buddha has so many minds, which
mind you trying to. What is your difficulty in your question?
Student 1: In short, a mind of a superior bodhisattva who has entered the
Path of Seeing…
Khen Rinpoche (in English): So you are saying that mind is true suffering?
Is that your question?
Student 1: Yes.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): You are saying the superior bodhisattva mind is
true suffering? You are asking that? If you ask that, then it is a big
question. I don’t know what you are trying to ask. Is your mind true
suffering?
Student 1: The superior bodhisattva has overcome intellectually acquired
afflictions but still inflicted with innate afflictive obscuration. He is
still in samsara because his mind is still inflicted with innate afflictive
obscuration. Does such a mind still have pervasive suffering?
Khen Rinpoche (in English): I don’t know what you really asking.
Student 2: We are trying to figure out where is the boundary of the
pervasive suffering*.  To me it seems that it is only at 8th ground onwards
that sentient beings would not have pervasive suffering. But she seems to
say that once a person has attained the Path of Seeing, there is no all
pervasive suffering. We are wondering where the boundary of the pervasive
suffering is?
*Suffering is explained at three different levels:
1. The suffering of suffering - refers to the obvious kinds of suffering
  like physical pain, which we can readily identify as suffering.
2. The suffering of change - involves the experiences and sensations which
  we usually identify as pleasurable, but are in fact suffering, because if
  we pursue them, eventually they will only lead to boredom and
  dissatisfaction. Their essential nature is suffering.
3. The pervasive suffering of conditioning - refers to the aggregates which
  all of us living in the cycle of existence possess, and which act as the
  basis for us to undergo all these different types of suffering. For as
  long as we are not free from these aggregates of body and mind produced
  by contaminated actions, we will always have the potential to suffer.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): Where is the boundary of true suffering?
Student 2: Is true suffering the same as pervasive suffering? That is also
another question.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): Yeah, can say that. The question is that?
Student 2:  Where is the boundary? When does one overcome this pervasive
suffering?
Khen Rinpoche (in English): Somebody give the answer; the senior ones.
Where is the boundary?
Student 3: I guess that once a bodhisattva has reached the stage when he no
longer returns back to samsara, like a non-returner, I think that is the
end of his pervasive suffering.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): Non-returner bodhisattva? What did you said?
Non-returner what?
Student 3: There is a stage for arhats when they are non-returner or once
returner. I don’t know whether there is such a stage for bodhisattvas.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): You said arhat return or no return, you cannot
differentiate?
Student 3: That is my mistake. A non-returner means he doesn’t come back to
samsara anymore; that is his last life. I think that is the end of the
pervasive suffering for a non-returner arhat. But I don’t know about
bodhisattvas though - at what stage it is the end of pervasive suffering?
Khen Rinpoche (in English): Why you think non-returner has no more true
suffering?
Student 3: Having to return means you acquire the aggregates of suffering.
So if you are non-returner, that is the boundary where after that you do
not have pervasive suffering.
Khen Rinpoche (In English): Okay correct. What is the meaning or definition
of true suffering?
At the same time you must listen. When you ask somebody, how you ask the
question, listen because I’m asking you different ways. Now you have to
explain to me what is true suffering? You already accept that when you have
achieved non-returner, there is no true suffering. Before that, he has
(true suffering) because he take rebirth. What is true suffering? You still
don’t know?
Student 3: It seems to imply that it has got to do more with the mind than
the body. Are you saying that true suffering has to do more with the mind
than the body?
[BP2 M1 L49]The true suffering refers to the contaminated/appropriated
physical and mental aggregates. These aggregates are by nature impermanent
and arose from karma and afflictions. Therefore they are in the nature of
suffering. As long as we continue to acquire and are not free from the
contaminated physical and mental aggregates, we will continue to experience
suffering.
Khen Rinpoche (In English): You just give me that what is the true
suffering? You give some kind of idea. Of course not many people understand
what Student 3 is talking about the non-returner. For those who understand,
what Student 3 has said is correct of not? When you have achieved non-
returner stage, you don’t have true suffering. You agree with that? Senior
one, maybe new ones don’t know. Are all the seniors meditating?
Student 4: I don’t really have much of response because first of all I
don’t think that there is such a thing as a non-returner bodhisattva. I
think it only applies to only Solitary Realizers and Hearers. For the
category of bodhisattvas, I don’t really recall ever having studied non-
returner bodhisattvas. The term doesn’t seem to apply.  If you are asking
whether the body of a Buddha is true sufferings, is the mind of a Buddha
true sufferings, I cannot answer those questions. But I can only think that
a true suffering is the appropriation of physical and mental aggregates.
Usually we think of that as the nature of true sufferings, and I may be
wrong. As long as we have the appropriated physical and mental aggregates,
I’m not sure whether that is true suffering.
Khen Rinpoche (in English):  Just go with Student 3’s idea, what he has
said, is it correct or not? Just answer for that. If you say you don’t
agree, then give me your reason. If you agree, then give your reason. Just
go direct otherwise take long time.
Student 5: I disagree, because I think the aggregate of the non-returner is
still true suffering because due to the cause of the body is inherited from
that very lifetime from his father and mother. Therefore the body is still
true suffering.
Khen Rinpoche (in English):  You mean human body must be true suffering?
Student 5: Yes.
Khen Rinpoche (in English):  Are you saying that human body comes from the
father and mother must be true suffering? Your idea is that or? Answer
directly.
Student 5: What is the definition of human?
Khen Rinpoche (In English):  Now I’m asking and you have to answer. Is the
human body necessarily true suffering?
Student 5: Yes.
Khen Rinpoche (in English):  Is Buddha Shakyamuni’s body true suffering?
Student 5: No.
Khen Rinpoche (in English):  His body is human body, isn’t it?
Student 5: Yes.
Khen Rinpoche (in English):  Then sit down.
Khen Rinpoche (In English):  Student 3 said non-returner doesn’t have true
suffering. You accept with that or not? Just answer – Yes or No.
Student 6: No I don’t agree. Non-returner means he is not going to come
back for another rebirth but the current body that he has is still a human
body, so it is appropriated/contaminated aggregates;  unlike the case of
the Buddha.
Khen Rinpoche (in English):  Why his body is true suffering? Now give
reason.
Student 6:  His body is true suffering because it is still the result of
karma and afflictions, because when he comes out from his mother’s womb,
his not non-returner yet.
Khen Rinpoche (in English):  When this person become arhat, is his body is
still true suffering or not?
Student 6:  Yes.
Khen Rinpoche (in English):  So arhat has not abandoned true suffering?
Student 6: If I follow my argument, I would have to say no.
Khen Rinpoche (in English):  The arhat not free from true suffering?
Student 6: No
Khen Rinpoche (in English):  The arhat still has suffering.
Student 6: I would have to say no. Arhat is liberated and is free of his
afflictions. Is he free from his suffering and coming back for another
uncontrolled rebirth? I’m not sure. I have not thought it through.
Khen Rinpoche (in English):  Arhat still take rebirth, you are not sure?
I’m surprised.  What she has said some part is correct, some part is not
correct. Next student, just answer for that one. Same time everybody must
listen. When you discuss, how you really discuss throughout long period of
time. Sometime we just discuss, ask one question, one person answer, and
after that you have nothing to say. Finish. It doesn’t end there if you
have to ask in different ways. So there is more questions, then longer
discussion.
Student 7: Once the non-returner steps on the nail, he experiences pain.
Khen Rinpoche (in English):  So the non-returner has true suffering. His
body is true suffering? Because?
Student 7: Due to contaminated/appropriated physical aggregate. When he
steps on a nail, he experiences pain.
Khen Rinpoche (in English):  So the arhat also has true suffering?
Student 7: Yes. His body is contaminated physical body. Once he abandons
that at the end of his life, and this being his last life and when he
enters into nirvana then there won’t be any.
Khen Rinpoche (in English):  When you achieved arhat, you reach the peace
of nirvana? Nirvana means free from true suffering, the cause of the
suffering, entering the path, then achieve peace of nirvana. You know the 4
noble truths? They are true origin, true suffering, true path, and true
cessation. So when you achieve nirvana, that means you have abandoned true
suffering, and the cause of the suffering, isn’t it? So that means arhat
abandons true suffering, and the cause of the suffering, isn’t it? So arhat
doesn’t have that, isn’t it? That means arhat doesn’t have true suffering,
isn’t it?
Student 7: But there were accounts of arhats experiencing headaches and
when he steps on a nail, he experiences pain.
Khen Rinpoche (in English):  So that means arhat have not abandon true
suffering. Are you saying that?
Student 7: I have difficulty reconciling these two, what can we just said
and the accounts of him having headaches in his body.
Khen Rinpoche (in English):  What you mean I understood but your answer is
what? Arhat abandons true suffering or he has not abandon true suffering?
Student 7: By that account, you have to say that he has abandoned true
suffering but ….
Khen Rinpoche (in English):  Now the question is what is your answer? Arhat
abandons true suffering?
Student 7: Yes.
Khen Rinpoche (in English):  That means arhat doesn’t have true suffering?
Student 7: He has abandoned true suffering but…
Khen Rinpoche (in English):  He has abandoned true suffering so that means
he doesn’t have true suffering.
Student 7: What about the imprints?
Khen Rinpoche (in English):  Don’t ask me question. I’m asking you.
Student 7: He has abandoned true suffering but he has not abandon imprints.
Khen Rinpoche (in English):  So he has abandoned true suffering, he don’t
have true suffering.
Student 7: But he has imprints. No true suffering but still have imprints
of true suffering.
Khen Rinpoche (in English):  Must go one by one. Arhat doesn’t have true
suffering.
Student 7: Yes, he has no true suffering but he has imprints.
Khen Rinpoche (in English):  Arhat doesn’t have true suffering. Are you
saying that? Because he abandons true suffering so arhat doesn’t have true
suffering isn’t it?
Student 7: This part is difficult to reconcile.
Khen Rinpoche (in English):  Abandon that means don’t have.
Student 7: He has abandoned the mind but I’m not sure about the body,
because the body is still the results of contaminated action. At the time
when his mind reached the stage of foe-destroyer, his body, due to
imprints, still has to experience (suffering). Now it is difficult to
reconcile whether he has abandoned true suffering but the body itself is
still a result of true suffering.
Khen Rinpoche (in English):  The conclusion is? What are you going to say
if somebody ask you; “Arhat abandons true suffering or not?”
Student 7: Yes
Khen Rinpoche (in English):  You have to say “yes”. That means arhat
doesn’t have true suffering?
Student 7: No. Not necessarily so.
Khen Rinpoche (in English):  Arhat doesn’t have true suffering, you accept
that isn’t it? He has abandoned true suffering and the second question is
“He doesn’t have true suffering.” You agree to that?
Student 7: No, he has.
Khen Rinpoche (in English):   That means he have not abandon.
Student 7: He has abandoned true suffering but he still have the experience
of true suffering.
Khen Rinpoche (In English):  If he has, then how can he abandoned? What you
mean abandon?
Student 7: Because true suffering is defined as both contaminated
appropriated physical and mental aggregates. For the physical part, it is
very difficult to reconcile. That one I’m not sure. For bodhisattvas on the
1st ground do not experience both physical and mental suffering - for the
physical part, due to having abandoned all negativities. Not sure about the
arhats because we have not had lessons on twenty sanghas.
Khen Rinpoche (In English):  What?
Student 7: We have not had lessons on arhat in detail.
Khen Rinpoche (in English):  Next student, do you agree with what Student 3
has said? Non-returner doesn’t have true suffering because he doesn’t take
rebirth again in samsara.
Student 8: No, I disagree. He still has ignorance.
Khen Rinpoche (in English):  So once you have ignorance that means
necessarily have true suffering? You saying that?
Student 8: Yes.
Khen Rinpoche (in English):  So that means arya bodhisattva have also true
suffering?
Student 8:  Yes.
Khen Rinpoche (in English):  I think we just completed one of the lesson
somewhere there that even if you cut his body this and that, no mental and
no physical …. After achieving Path of Seeing, that body totally changes.
It becomes a mental body. Maitreya has mentioned in one of the  text that
when you have achieved Path of Seeing you don’t have true suffering, and
also you don’t have ageing and dying. All these don’t exist when you
achieve arya bodhisattva. I’m wondering when you achieve the Path of
Seeing, bodhisattvas don’t age or die and don’t get sick. Even if your body
is cut, there is no pain like that. It is clear that arya bodhisattva don’t
have true suffering. According to you, his body is true suffering because
he has ignorance.
Student 8: I wasn’t thinking about his body per se. I was thinking of him
having ignorance, therefore he still has true suffering.
Khen Rinpoche (in English):  Why the non-returner body is true suffering?
Student 8: If you are talking about the body itself then….
Khen Rinpoche (in English):  You cannot say he has ignorance isn’t it? That
reason is not correct.
Student 8: If you are talking about the body, then it is a different thing.
Just now I was thinking in terms of him having true suffering.
Khen Rinpoche (in English):  Because he have true suffering what is your
reason?
Student 8: If it is just talking about him having true suffering then I
would say that he still have ignorance, therefore he still has true
suffering. The reason is because ignorance is contaminated phenomena and a
contaminated phenomenon is misery. Therefore if he still has ignorance, he
will still have misery, he still has true suffering.
Khen Rinpoche (in English):  Same thing, arya bodhisattvas have ignorance?
Student 8: That’s why I said arya bodhisattvas still have true suffering.
He may not suffer physical or mental pain but he still has true suffering.
Khen Rinpoche (in English):  What kind of suffering he has?
Student 8: Because he still has contaminated phenomena so he will still
have true suffering.
Khen Rinpoche (in English):  His body is totally changed after he has
reached the Path of Seeing.
Student 8: But his mind still has ignorance and out of the five aggregates,
one of them is ignorance. There is a mental factor of ignorance, so he is
not totally free from contaminated phenomena.
Khen Rinpoche (in English):  But he don’t experience anything what.
Student 8: Yeah, that is feeling, that is experiencing but in terms of the
phenomena of it being contaminated phenomena, there will still be true
suffering isn’t it. Because he still has a mental factor or ignorance in
his continuum.
Khen Rinpoche (in English):  Then what Maitreya Buddha said is not correct?
This is what I remember before 30 years old. We have to memorize.
Student 8: I’m just presenting another view, that’s all. Everyone says that
they have suffering, I’m just presenting.
Ven Gyurme: This is the view. The reality is arya bodhisattvas don’t have
(true suffering). They have abandoned sickness, death, ageing.
Student 8: How do you explain to say that he still has ignorance? Ignorance
is contaminated phenomena, and as such, it is a cause of suffering. How do
we explain that? I’ve no qualm about it being scriptural authority.
Khen Rinpoche: In the first place, positing the boundary of contaminated
and non-contaminated itself is complicated because it depends on which
tenet.
Student 8: How do you explain that he still has contaminated phenomena and
yet does not have true suffering?
Ven Gyurme : Is true suffering and samsara synonymous?
Khen Rinpoche (in English):  I don’t know. I think I have mentioned in the
previous basic program but not in this class. This time I’m not sure.
The contaminated/appropriated aggregates that arise from karma and
afflictions are posited as true suffering. As to what defines contaminated
phenomenon, different tenets have their own assertions. In general, we
could say that any phenomenon that arises from karma and afflictions is
contaminated. The physical body in the continuum of Hinayana Superiors in
particular the stream enterers, once returners and non-returners, you could
say there are necessarily true suffering.
For the physical aggregates of the foe-destroyers, there are instances
where such physical aggregates are true suffering but there are also
instances where it is not true suffering. For example, if a person becomes
an arhat without discarding the previous physical aggregates which he had
when he was a non-returner, and on the basis of that physical basis, his
physical aggregates would be an instance of true suffering since he hasn’t
discarded it yet. According to the Hinayana tenets, such individuals have
achieved nirvana with remainder. Once they have achieved the nirvana
without remainder, then the physical aggregates in his continuum will not
be true suffering.
The difference between the nirvana with remainder and nirvana without
remainder is made on the basis whether that individual possesses the
contaminated physical aggregates or not. Of course, this is the assertion
of the Autonomy Middle Way School. The Prasangika has a different take on
this.
As all of you have already studied tenets, how do Prasangika posit nirvana
with remainder or nirvana without remainder?
Student 9: According to the Prasangika, an arhat with remainder is when he
is out of meditative equipoise directly realizing emptiness. Arhat without
remainder is when he is in direct meditative equipoise realizing emptiness.
Khen Rinpoche: When he is in meditative equipoise focusing on emptiness,
what is it that is not remaining? When he gets out of the meditative
equipoise, what is the remainder? You have to explain with remainder and
without remainder as the meaning has to go with the word.
Student 9: An arhat with remainder is when he is out of meditative
equipoise and his mind…
Khen Rinpoche (in English):  What is the remainder? When he comes out of
meditation, remain what?
Student 9: He has the remainder of seeing appearance of true existence.
While in meditative equipoise, he has no such an appearance.
Khen Rinpoche (in English):  Short is enough; very good. You say too long
then is not good. Because he remains with true appearance. That is enough.
In essence, this is how the Prasangika posited that when arhat in
meditative equipoise directly perceives emptiness, there is no appearance
of true existence, but when they are out of the meditative equipoise then
there is the appearance of true existence. So that is what remains.
It is clear that body in the continuum of those who have achieved nirvana
with remainder are true suffering and the body in the continuum of those
who have achieved nirvana without remainder are not true suffering.
It is also clearly mentioned in the text that ordinary beings who are
reborn in Pureland such as Amitabha’s Pureland, although the body that they
have is the body in the continuum of an ordinary being but nevertheless it
is not true suffering. Likewise, there are also arhats abiding in Pureland.
So their physical aggregates in their continuum are not true suffering. It
is said that there is no suffering in Sukhavati which is Amitabha Buddha’s
Pureland.
As mentioned earlier in V7.27 ab:
Due to having abandoned negativities there is no suffering
And due to skill there is no unhappiness.
These two lines of 7.27ab are spoken in the context of bodhisattva
superiors.
For those who have achieved nirvana with remainder, since they have true
suffering so we can’t say that they have abandoned it. That is why there
are accounts of such individual who experienced headaches and pain.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): As mentioned arhats also have headaches.
Arhat have achieved liberation - freedom from samsara - as such you have to
say that arhat have abandoned samsara. Because they are arhats, you have to
say they have liberated themselves from cyclic existence.
Question: Is true suffering synonymous with samsara or not? Obviously you
can’t say it is.
The pervasion works only in that “If there is samsara it is true suffering.
But if it is true suffering, it is not necessary samsara.”
This may be quite difficult to understand. How come if it is samsara it is
necessary true suffering, but if it is true suffering, it is not necessary
samsara. Therefore you have to use some illustration.
For example the physical aggregates in the continuum of an arhat, in
particular an arhat who has achieved nirvana with remainder, so that is
true suffering.
Then there is another question: What is samsara? What is the boundary? What
is the definition?
Foe-destroyer is arhat. Have arhat completely abandoned all the twelve
links of dependent arising?
We say that arhats have already freed themselves from samsara/cyclic
existence. Do you agree on that?  Are you confident to say that arhats are
liberated from samsara?
Khen Rinpoche (in English): You still have doubt that arhat is not freed
from samsara. No doubt.
As such, they have cut themselves out of the twelve links?
You say ‘Yes”, so in their continuum, they will not have the projected
results and the actualized results.
The arhats don’t have the six sources? No aging? No dying? No feeling?
Student 10: Experiencing the results of the last cycle of the twelve links.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): So it means it is still experiencing, isn’t it?
That means he has twelve links, isn’t it? Last result hasn’t complete
because you said experiencing the last cycle.
Student 10: The arhat experiencing the results of the last cycle.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): That means he has. He doesn’t have in the last
cycle.
Student 10: Last projected cycle.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): So he has.
Student 10: After that, he doesn’t.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): After what?
Student 10:  After that he will not suffer another cycle of twelve links.
Khen Rinpoche: Before arhat, then after arhat?
Student 10: After arhat, he will not have.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): Of course, I agreed with that. During the arhat
have?
Student 10: Yeah, his experience the last twelve links.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): So during the arhat he is not freed from the
twelve links?
Student 10: That is why he is with remainder.
Khen Rinpoche (in English):  What are you talking about?
Student 10:  That is why he is still having nirvana with remainder.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): Now are you saying that arhat remain in
samsara?
Student 10:  As you said that arhat have true suffering, but they are out
of samsara.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): Yes.
Student 10: So there is true suffering because they are suffering. They
have the old bodies which came from before and that goes to aging and
suffering, but they are not subject to a new cycle of rebirth. So they are
out of the twelve links. They have old bodies from the previous rebirth so
that is suffering.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): So arhat is not really freed from the twelve
links?
tudent 10:  I meant they are in-between. I think you know what I meant.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): I don’t what you meant.
Student 10: I have a question. When we see Shakyamuni Buddha and our own
guru, Lama Zopa Rinpoche, whom we see as Buddha suffer, is it they have
true suffering but are not in samsara?
Ven Gyurme: Buddha is true suffering?
Khen Rinpoche (in English):You are now on 2nd round of Basic Program.
We have looked at this quite a fair bit when we were studying tenets.
Depend on which tenets perspective you take, according to the Hinayana
tenets, essentially the physical body of Buddha is true suffering because
it is in the same continuum of the body that he had when he was on the Path
of Preparation. According to the Hinayana’s tenets, one’s progress from the
Path of Preparation up to the Path of No-more-learning is in one sitting.
That is how Buddha became enlightened. As such because the body is the same
continuum of that old body it is posited as true suffering. From these
lower tenets perspective, enlightenment or Buddhahood is posited mainly
from the perspective of the Buddha’s mind.
But the Mahayana tenets explanation on the Buddha is much more profound. In
short, Buddha doesn’t have true suffering. Buddha physical body is not true
suffering. Buddha’s body is Buddha. In the Mahayana tenets there is the
presentation of the four bodies, namely:
   1. The Nature body
   2. The Wisdom Truth body (wisdom body)
   3. The Enjoyment body
   4. The Emanation body
Such assertion of the four bodies is not found in the Hinayana tenets
As to the question as to whether your virtuous friends have true suffering
or not, earlier in this text there is a discussion of how the bodhisattva
superior when they give away their body, even if they were to cut the body
into pieces, they don’t experienced any pain or suffering. It is said there
is no physical and mental suffering. In fact it is said that they
experience so much joy. We are just talking about bodhisattva superiors.
If in reality your virtuous friend happens is a Buddha, if you perceived
suffering then that is just an appearance. In reality there is no
suffering. According to the Mahayana tenets, Buddhas don’t die, but
nevertheless they show the appearance of passing away into parinirvana just
like what Shakyamuni Buddha did. He was just showing an aspect of passing
away. In Shakyamuni Buddha’s life story he went through so many hardships
in his practice and then he achieved enlightenment under the bodhi tree and
so forth. According to the Mahayana tenets, these are just displaying the
deeds. In fact, he already had achieved enlightenment long time ago. In the
fortunate eon of this world, of the thousand buddhas that were sent, he is
the fourth one and he already had achieved enlightenment way before. All
these are just a display.
Shakyamuni Buddha did not newly achieved enlightenment. Likewise the future
Buddha, Maitreya Buddha, who is the fifth out of the thousand buddhas, has
already achieved enlightenment, but when he descends on this earth, he will
show the aspect of being born, growing up, practicing of austerities and
then he will show the aspect of achieving enlightenment and so forth. He
will show the aspect of passing away as well. All these will be just
displays and  just showing the aspects.
If your virtuous friends or your gurus in reality is a buddha and if you
see that he/she is suffering that is just an appearance and is not real
suffering. If your virtuous friend in reality is an ordinary being and not
a buddha, when you see suffering, then he/she is suffering. As it is said,
whatever appears to us is not certain and is not definite. So whatever
appears to you is not necessary the truth.
The seventh Dalai Lama, Kelsang Gyatso says: “All the phenomena of samsara
and nirvana are fabrication of one’s conceptual thought. They are not truly
existent.”
As such do not cling on to everything as being truly existent but rather
look at everything as empty.
As to whether someone is really suffering or not, whether guru or whoever
you see is suffering or not, it depends. One way of looking at it is to
look at it at the perspective of different tenets.  You also have to
understand that there are cases that bodhisattva superiors don’t
experienced physical suffering because they have abandoned negatives. The
point here is that whatever appear is not certain. Just because we see
somebody is suffering, that doesn’t mean he/she is suffering.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): I am answering you. You understand now?
Khen Rinpoche (in English): You are falling asleep? No, must wake up. In
discussion your mind must wake up. What they are talking doesn’t matter as
it is not for me. Don’t shut down your brain. Be active. Why he said that?
Why he said that? Must ask.
As said in the Maitreya’s Uttaratantra (Sublime continuum) there is no
aging and sickness for bodhisattvas superiors and they also don’t die. As
such bodhisattva superiors don’t have suffering, they don’t have physical
suffering, and they don’t have mental suffering.  When somebody becomes a
bodhisattva superior, he acquired a body in the nature of mind.
Ven Gyurme: Normally it is translated as mental body.
This is complicated and you have to think about it. It is said that when
you become a bodhisattva superior, you acquired this body that is in the
nature of mind - a mental body.
The question is that bodhisattva was on the Path of Preparation and prior
to that, he has the ordinary body. During the transition when he crosses
over to the Path of Seeing, does the old body that he had needed to die?
Does it need to be discarded? Or it changes in nature i.e. it transforms
for whatever reason.
If you say that they have this mental body, what is the substantial cause
of this mental body (or the body in the nature of mind)?
When one become the bodhisattva superior, he acquires the body in the
nature of mind or mental body. This mental body goes all the way up right
to the end of the mental continuum of a sentient being i.e. right up to the
last moment as a sentient being - as the last moment of a non-buddha.  This
mental body is said to arise from the level of the predisposition of
ignorance together with the uncontaminated karma. This exists all the way
up to the end of the mental continuum of being a sentient being. When this
individual becomes a Buddha, then his body is completely a different story.
This mental body goes all the way up to the end of a continuum of a
sentient being. But when he had achieved enlightenment, this form body is
something else. From the perspective of Mahayana tantra, what is the
substantial cause of the form body of Buddha?  According to the perspective
of Mahayana tantra, just prior to achieving enlightenment, the body in the
continuum of a sentient being cannot be the substantial cause of the Buddha
form body. Why? Because this mental body of that bodhisattva arose from the
level of the predisposition of ignorance. As such, it cannot be posited as
the substantial cause of form body of Buddha.
As such, from the perspective of tantra, the sutra explanation of achieving
the form body of Buddha is inadequate. Therefore when one analyses in
detail of tantra, in particular the highest yoga tantra, the conclusion
here is that the substantial cause of Buddhahood, including Buddha’s form
body has to be the extremely subtle wind and mind. Such an explanation is
only found in the highest yoga tantra.
When one’s investigate deeply, what is exactly the substantial cause of
enlightenment? There must be something within each individual. They talked
about Buddha lineage (Buddha nature). There must be something within each
individual that an individual already possesses which continues up to
enlightenment. It cannot be fabricated. In deep analysis, what is that?
Combining this analysis with the question: What exactly is the substantial
cause of enlightenment? What are the substantial causes of the Buddha’s
mind and Buddha body?
If you considered all these things together, then you looked at the
explanation of tantra. That really brings up the extraordinary
characteristics and features of tantra. If you think about it, one
definitely can gain trust and conviction in the validity of the Mahayana
tantra.
If we start from how the Hinayana tenet explains it, when they talked about
enlightenment, they are only able to talk about enlightenment from the
perspective of the Buddha mind but they don’t know how to explain why
Buddha has suffering? They say Buddha has true suffering and the Buddha’s
body not Buddha. They don’t know how to do it. Then we go on to Mahayana
sutra. There is an explanation of the four bodies. Mahayana sutra does talk
about certain things as being the cause, or certain things that will
transforms in the Buddha body. Although there is an explanation but if you
will to analyze deeply in their explanation as to whether that is adequate
or not, or what exactly is the substantial cause of Buddha’s form body,
then you will find that it is also inadequate in explaining that. That is
where the Mahayana tantric explanation comes in. They all fit very nicely.
Even if we just look at reincarnation of what moves on from life to life,
of course there is an explanation in Hinayana and Mahayana sutra. But the
tantric explanation is extremely different i.e. qualitatively very
different. All Buddhist talk about something moves from life to life. What
is it that moves from life to life? The body doesn’t move but the mind
moves. But when you examine in detail, all consciousnesses move to next
life? Sense consciousness? Mental consciousness? Within the category of
mental consciousness, there are so many different kinds of mental
consciousness - contaminated, uncontaminated, subtle, gross and so forth.
Although there are explanations in sutra but when you looked at the tantric
explanation of extremely subtle mind and wind and how that moves from life
to life, then one can see also the profundity of tantra.
The point is tantra is something extremely precious and very profound. We
will get to look a little bit of tantra in more details in one of the
module. So it is very profound. Contrary to what most people think, people
think “Vajrayana or tantra is about doing ritual, reciting mantra, reciting
sadhana and so forth. It is not all. There is nothing to do with that. That
is not the real deal. That is not the essence. When you look at the tantric
explanation starting from the explanation of reality, what is our body and
mind, the different levels, what exactly moves from life to life, what
exactly moves on to enlightenment, what is the substantial cause of
enlightenment, these are all the finer points found in tantra. As such, it
is very important to study and to understand what tantra really is. It is
extremely important. Of course, in the first place you need to have very
strong yearning to understand tantra. It is very important. If we can make
a connection in the future and study and learn it, and come to understand a
little bit about it then we placed very positive imprints in our mind.
Student 11: Is the substantial cause for a superior bodhisattva necessary
level of predisposition of ignorance? If that is the case, how does one
posit the mental body of the first grounder - as he enters into the Path of
Seeing, from an ordinary path, his body is of a body of ordinary being?
Ven Gyurme: What is the substantial cause of the mental body?
Student 11: Also if you couldn’t find the substantial cause, does it mean
that there is no mental body existing?
Ven Gyurme: Is it an existence or not?
Student 11:  Yeah, that means there is no existence of these in the pure
land.
Ven Gyurme: It is an existence, it exist. It is not an assertion. So there
are mental bodies.
The bodhisattva superior has mental body. Right from the sutra perspective,
the mental body arises from the level of the predisposition of ignorance.
The next question is: What exactly is the levels of the predisposition of
ignorance or the subtle obscuration to the omniscience?
Student 11:  If there are levels of predisposition, it will under the
category of non-associated compositional factor. If that is the case, then
how can that be substantial cause for mind? Also what is the substantial
cause for form - the body?
Form cannot act as a substantial cause for consciousness. Consciousness
cannot act as a substantial cause for form. But non-associated
compositional factor can act as a substantial cause to both form and
consciousness.
For example, someone is taking rebirth from the formless realm into the
form realm. How are you going to posit the substantial cause?  Form cannot
act as a substantial cause for consciousness. Consciousness cannot act as a
substantial cause for form. But one would have to say that non-associated
compositional factor can act as the substantial cause for form and
consciousness. As for form, form cannot act as a substantial cause for
consciousness. That is clear. Consciousness cannot act as a substantial
cause for form. That is clear. This was mentioned by Dharmakirti in the
Commentary of Valid Cognition.
You can see that there are so many unanswered questions and so many qualms
by just using the example of samsara. We always think samsara is easy. What
exactly samsara is? What is the boundary? What is the definition? Then we
got stuck.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): Myself also don’t know exactly what is samsara?
Student 11: I got more confused now.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): If you are confused then I faint…
Student 11: As the Student 2 asked: What is the boundary of pervasive
suffering? It pervades true suffering or it pervades samsara? Because now
we have established that the boundaries of  true suffering and samsara is
different, then there is this term called suffering of conditionality or
pervasive suffering which will pervades true suffering or samsara.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): What is your question now? You are asking the
boundaries or what?
Student 11: Boundaries. Pervasive suffering will follow samsara or follow
true suffering?
Khen Rinpoche: I already told you earlier that “Samsara is necessary true
suffering but true suffering is not necessarily samsara.” So what is the
boundary of true suffering? The boundary is from ordinary being up to
arhat.
Student 11: Ok.
Ven Gyurme: Up to arhat.
Student 11: Arhat without remainder? Or with remainder?
Khen Rinpoche (in English): Alamak! I already explained how to
differentiate between the remainder and no remainder.
I already explained earlier that if you don’t have the contaminated
aggregates you don’t have anything remaining.  So if you have remainder,
then what is remaining?
Student 11: The projected effects of the twelve links. For higher school is
the…
Khen Rinpoche (in English):  Twelve links is different question. Twelve
links is my different question.
Arhat who has achieved nirvana with remainder has true suffering. Anyway
the boundary of true suffering is ordinary sentient beings up to arhat.
Khen Rinpoche (in English):  I have answered your question. What is the
boundary? That is the boundary.
Student 11: In your explanation about the mental body, if the mental body
doesn’t die, how do you explain in the Lamrim Chenmo, that has this
statement?
A superior that has overcome the ignorance of the twelve links still take
rebirth due to their karma previously accumulated if their mental body
doesn’t die. If the superior bodhisattva is still taking rebirth, then we
will have the case of someone who has no true sufferings but in samsara.
Ven Gyurme: Yeah, he says samsara.
Student 11: Seems to me that true suffering has a bigger pervasion then
samsara.
Ven Gyurme: Basically you are saying that bodhisattva superior have to die
before they take rebirth.
Student 11: What is the entity that takes rebirth of the superior
bodhisattva if he has a mental body that doesn’t die?
Hearers and Solitary Realizer do take rebirth in samsara. They do not
accumulate fresh projecting karma, but they take rebirth in samsara due to
previously accumulated karma.
Bodhisattva superiors do not take rebirth due to karma and afflictions.
Bodhisattva superiors do not die due to karma and afflictions.  The
bodhisattvas superior do not experience death arising from karma and
afflictions but they undergo the inconceivable transference of death.
Khen Rinpoche (in English):  Ok that’s it. I do not know how they go off.
If you have finished your homework, then pass that after class.















































