Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Engaging in the Deeds of a Bodhisattva/lesson48.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:52:21.655836
================================================================================


The 12 links of dependent origination is an explanation of how one circles
in samsara/cyclic existence. As such, if it is any of the 12 links of
dependent origination then it is necessarily included within samsara.
Anything that is not samsara or not included in samsara will not be part of
the 12 links of dependent origination.
Having said this, can we be absolutely sure about this? Can we say with a
decisive confidence “Yes, this is the case”? Somebody may ask you this
simple question: “In the continuum of a superior, how many of the 12 links
of dependent origination are there”?  What are you going to say?”
Khen Rinpoche (in English): Are you able to say that?
Ven Gyurme: Are you able to give an answer right away?  If any how many?
Khen Rinpoche (in English): Say any number, how many? Some say 10, some say
11. Okay, you think about it. We will answer this next time. You need to
think about this question. Next time, give answer such as this have and
this don’t have. Then you have to give me the reason. Don’t have because of
this, and have because of this, must have reasons. You say 10 or 11 or 12,
whatever you say. Which don’t have, why?
The arhats, the foe destroyers, do not have any of the 12 links of
dependent origination because they are liberated from samsara. Because any
of the 12 links must necessarily be included within samsara or it is
necessarily in samsara, as such in the continuum of a foe destroyer, there
aren’t any of the 12 links of dependent origination as he has already
liberated from the cyclic existence.
If you were asked the question: “In the case of a superior how many of the
12 links of dependent origination are there in his continuum?”
In the first place are there any or not?
If not then what are the reasons for saying no?
If there are, then how many? One or more? What are your reasons for saying
this?

Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds
In the discussion on the power of steadfastness, there is the cultivation
of the three types of pride:
   1. The pride about action
   2. The pride about ability
   3. The pride about the afflictions.
The pride about action is:
- a mind that doesn’t expect any help from others,
- a mind that doesn’t expect any involvement from others,
- a mind that doesn’t rely on others when it comes to accomplishing a
particular practice or virtue,
- a mind thinking “ I shall do this alone”.
The pride about ability is a confidence with the thought thinking “I can do
this”.
“This” refers to either vanquishing the afflictions and/or accomplishing
the welfare of others.
The pride about afflictions is a very strong determination and courage:
- is a mind which determines to not let the afflictions take hold in one’s
mind,
- is a mind to never give in to the afflictions
- is a mind that thinks “I will vanquish you, I will destroy you”.
This is how you should understand these three types of pride:
   1. The pride about action
   2. The pride about ability
   3. The pride about the afflictions.
Of the three types of pride, now we are at the third one: the pride about
the afflictions.

|(c) Being proud of the afflictions                |
|(i) One should develop the strength of the        |
|antidotes to the afflictions                      |
|(ii) One should act so as not to fall under their |
|power even in the slightest                       |
|(iii) One should develop a special intention to   |
|stabilize the antidotes                           |

|(i) One should develop the strength of the        |
|antidotes to the afflictions                      |


Verse 7.60
When amidst a class of afflictions,
I shall be persistent with them in a thousand ways;
Like a lion among foxes and the like,
I will not be injured by the host of afflictions.
The outline here says that one should generate the strength or the force of
the antidotes against the afflictions.
It is said that in the situations whereby there are many objects of desire
around such as if you are happened to be among the objects of attachment or
desire, in the case of a man meeting with women, or in the case of women
meeting with man, or when meeting with objects of anger such as harm-doers
and so forth, in those situation then one must really focus and discipline
the mind. In those situations, one must generate the force of the antidotes
and not to let the afflictions to take hold of your minds.
It is said that the lion being a very strong animal can never be harmed or
disturbed by other animals around such as foxes and so forth. You should
likewise act in such a way that whatever situations or circumstances you
may be in, you should not let the afflictions to take hold of you.
There are so many methods or antidotes that are prescribed for dealing with
the afflictions. There are so many advices pertaining to how you should
react when you meet with objects of desire or objects of hatred/anger.
There are so many methods and antidotes. There are even techniques for
transforming adverse external circumstances into favorable conditions for
furthering the path in one’s mind. It is said that at the minimum,
especially in particular for beginners, maybe one should physically
distance oneself from those situations. That is why there is such a thing
as going into isolation, in particular for those who really want to develop
meditative stabilization and some level of concentration.
When you are going into physical isolation, at least you are isolating
yourself from many of the external conditions or circumstances that may
provoke the arising of the afflictions in the mind. When you pull yourself
out of these situations, the chances or opportunities for you getting
involve with the afflictions become much lesser. Of course it is not that
when you go into isolation you are totally free from all the afflictions,
but it is just that the chances or opportunities for following after the
afflictions are very much reduced.
In reality actually what should be done is that you really have to go into
isolation so that you cut yourself away from all the external circumstances
or situations that may provoke the arising of the afflictions. But going
into isolation is not just for that. Within the situation when there are
much lesser opportunities to get upset and to be attached and so forth, one
then applies the antidote to gain stability and to subdue the mind. Until
when one have gained stability and one’s mind is somewhat subdued, only
then if one so-called works for others or to accomplish the welfare of
others, then it will be beneficial. It will also be done properly and
correctly.
If one is really able to go into isolation and for retreat to subdue the
mind, and when one is stable and doing things to benefit others, only then
others will benefit and oneself also benefit. Otherwise, in the name of
benefiting others, you say you do this and do that, maybe you do it wanting
to benefit others, but even then nothing much could come out of it. When
you do not have the experience or realization, and in the name of helping
others, in the process you disturb others and your mind get disturbed.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): I think I have mentioned this before. There is
one Geshe who went to some place in New Zealand. He mentioned the
difficulty when he was there. People complains and not happy. Whatever you
say, people say back. He gave so many advices but in the end people keep on
complaining this and that. Then he told me “The people are driving me
crazy”. I forgot exactly what he said. Then I said “You are there to help
these crazy people.  He said “That’s the idea. That’s my job to help these
people but somehow they make me crazy.” I forgot exactly what he said. It
is like that.
As it is always being emphasized on how important it is to cultivate the
remedies or the antidotes to the afflictions in order to deal with them. If
not, when one is under the control or under the influence of the
afflictions then benefiting others is difficult. It is said that we should
not even fall under even the slight influence of the afflictions.

|(ii) One should act so as not to fall under    |
|their power even in the slightest              |


Verse 7.61
Just as men will guard their eyes
In the occurrence of great danger,
Likewise I shall not come under the power of the afflictions,
Even when danger occurs.
It is said that when we human beings meet with a situation where there is a
danger of being harmed physically somehow we instinctively will protect
ourselves, especially when we cherish our sight a lot i.e. cherish the
ability to see. As such, we take great care not to let harm come to our
eyes. Likewise, we should also take care not to let ourselves fall under
the control of the afflictions.
In some commentaries, alternative analogy is given where it says “Just like
how the eyes cannot see taste”, literally means cannot experience taste.
The point is that while it is said that regardless of what the external
situation is, no matter what kind of unpleasant experience we may be going
through, whatever discomfort or suffering or pain we are going through,
regardless of the experience, we should not let the mind come under the
control of the afflictions. But rather, always focus the mind on any virtue
-antidote to the afflictions - and have the mind fix on whatever experience
we may be going through such as discomfort, pain or whatever suffering.
Just like the eye sense power is needed to produce the eye consciousness,
but because by depending on the eye sense power, the eye consciousness can
only perceive visual form. So in dependence on the eye sense power, the eye
sense consciousness cannot perceive other things like smell, taste, sound
and so forth.
Just like how the eye consciousness can only perceives visual form and not
anything else such as taste, likewise if you apply to the meaning, whatever
circumstances you may be in, whatever experience of pain, suffering, or
discomfort, just focus the mind on virtues – on the class of antidotes and
not the afflictions.
It is said that this is mentioned in some Indian text, instead of the first
two lines “Just as men will guard their eyes. In the occurrence of great
danger”
Next the outline say one should generate the extraordinary or the special
intention to generate a stable antidote to the afflictions.

|(iii) One should develop a special intention to stabilize the antidotes        |


Verse 7.62
It would be better for me to be burned,
To be killed, or to have my head cut off,
Rather than bowing down
To the enemy of afflictions.
Likewise in all situations
I should do nothing other than what is fit.
The outline says generating an extraordinary intention. What is this
extraordinary intention? Here the text says it is easy and not such a big
deal to lose one’s life, but letting ourselves come under the control of
the afflictions is not so simple, because it has consequences.
Here this is an advice that from the very onset to project the will or the
intention to never succumb to the afflictions.
In the Vinaya Sutra, the Buddha advised the gelong - the fully ordained
monks - “To lose one’s life is easy and is not such a big deal, but to die
with degenerated ethical disciplines is a big deal and is not so simple.
Why? To lose your life simply means that your life has come to an end. But
to die with corrupted ethical disciplines means you will have to experience
the fruitional effect of sufferings for many hundreds of thousands of eons.

The import of the statement that the Buddha had said in the Vinaya Sutra is
pretty much the same as what the verse 7.62 is saying i.e. to lose one’s
life is not such a big deal but to come under the control or to succumb to
our afflictions is much more serious.
“Likewise all situations I should do nothing other than what is fit” means
one should only cultivate virtuous intention or virtuous karma and never
cultivate non-virtue at all.
With that we finish the power of steadfastness. Next is the power of joy.
The outline says that one should strive in virtue without expectation of
the result.
|c’ The power of joy                                                            |
|1" Making effort in virtue without considering the fully ripened effect        |
|2" Accomplishing virtue by mentally engaging the effect                        |
|3" The way to apply oneself with the power of joy                              |

|1" Making effort in virtue without considering the fully ripened effect        |


Verse 7.63
Just like those who desire the pleasurable result of play,
This [bodhisattva] adheres
To whatever task he may do.
He is not satiated by it; it makes him happy.
When people play games, they may just play for the fun of it. When people
games they are not necessary looking for rewards or with the expectation of
getting something in return. There are many games that people play just for
the joy of playing it. Likewise when the bodhisattvas work for sentient
beings or when the bodhisattvas engage in the bodhisattva’s deeds such as
the six perfections, they do it happily and they enjoy it. While the
bodhisattvas engage in the practice of the perfections and the
bodhisattva’s deeds of benefitting others, they are happy. They thoroughly
enjoy it. They never think that it is enough and they just want to do more.
Just like when people play games, they enjoy it so much and just don’t want
to stop.
What kind of lesson we can draw from this for ourselves? What I guess is
that whatever virtue we are engaging in or whatever thing we do in order to
help others, forget about the results, forget about how people will react
and forget about whether people will be benefitted or not. The point is
just to enjoy the very fact that we are doing virtue and to enjoy the very
fact that we are doing something to benefit others regardless whether they
are benefitted or not. It doesn’t matter. Just enjoy very act of engaging
virtue or the act of doing something to benefit others.
Well this happens to us, isn’t it? When we do things to benefit other, we
may be doing something that will actually benefit others but yet behind the
mind we are actually looking for some acknowledgement as to whether the
person is actually acknowledging our presence or saying thank you or smile
at us. When those things do not happen then we will get disturbed.
If we give something to a beggar who is a blind, I would think that most of
the time we don’t expect anything in return. We are not expecting the blind
beggar to see us and say “Thank you.” We just give happily with no
expectation. This is very obvious from our own experience. We can tell that
there is a huge difference between when we are engaging in virtue or when
we are doing something to benefit others without any expectation, and when
we doing something to benefit others or doing virtue with great hope and
expectation. Emotionally there is a big difference.
This verse comes under the outline which says we should strive in virtue
without having any expectation of the result.
The next outline says accomplishing virtue by keeping the result in mind.

|2" Accomplishing virtue by mentally    |
|engaging the effect                    |


Verse 7.64
Although people work in order to be happy,
It is uncertain whether or not they will be happy;
But how can those whose work itself is happiness
Find happiness without doing the work?
Verse 7.65
If I am not satiated by desirable objects,
Which are like honey smeared upon a razor’s edge,
Then why am I satiated by merit
Which is ripening and pacification in happiness?
In this world of ours, everyone works so hard for the sake of something
such as money. We work so hard in our job or in doing business. At the end
of the day, that goal that we are looking for is something; perhaps money.
Everybody is looking for happiness.  That is what drives people in their
work “I want to strive up the career for myself.  I am going to do
business. When I do well in my job or when I do well in my business, I have
a lot of money and that would give me happiness.”  So, that is the goal.
But many a time, one can see that despite the best of intention and no
matter how hard one tries somehow and many of the times, one doesn’t
achieve one’s aim.
The point here is that everybody works with the hope that they will get
something in return such as money. Everybody work so hard in all kind of
ways in order to achieve this bliss, pleasure and happiness. Having said
that, no matter what one does still there is no absolute guarantee that one
will achieve those goals.
When the bodhisattvas work for sentient beings, they are so happy in doing
it. They practice the bodhisattva’s deeds like generosity, guard their
ethical disciplines and so forth. They work very hard in doing so, and
whatever they do it guaranteed to bring about happiness. As such, what is
the point and what is the use of following after the non-virtue then.
The point is that all of us look for happiness. But why are we trying so
hard in doing things that do not guaranteed to bring us happiness? Why are
we not doing those things that are guaranteed to bring us happiness? By
putting our efforts into activities that do not guaranteed to bring us
happiness and success is like tasting the honey that is smeared on a very
sharp knife. That what we sometimes do; trying to taste something that is
tasty on the edge of a sharp knife. When we taste the honey in such a way,
we do get some pleasure but the harm is greater than the pleasure that we
may experience. That is why some people end up having their tongue cut.
For us, when we meet with attractive sense objects such as beautiful forms,
pleasant sound, nice smell, taste and touch and for a short moment, we do
experience pleasure with these objects. Immediately we feel good and we
cling on to that pleasurable experience and not wanting to let it go. As we
are not satisfied with it, we want more of it. That is how we react. That
is how we behave instinctively and emotionally.
So whenever we meet with all these pleasurable and desirable objects like
form, sound, smell, taste and touch, we get bliss up. When we come into
contact with these objects there is some pleasure and bliss, we get
emotionally attached to the experience. We cannot let go. Not only we don’t
want to let go, we want to experience it over and over again. We cannot
stop ourselves and we cannot satisfy ourselves. When we come into contact
with these objects of desire then this kind of pleasure arise. That is what
we called as the worldly pleasure, samsaric pleasure or contaminated
pleasure.
It is the nature of those pleasures that do not last. The experience
doesn’t last forever and it also doesn’t increase indefinitely. It cannot
increase indefinitely. Basically, there is a lot of diminishing return. The
experience becomes less and less satisfying. When that feeling set in then
we get bored. Our mind turns our attention to some other objects to give us
that pleasure. Again we have the same experience. It last for a while and
it doesn’t increase forever. Then we get bored again and then move on to
another object. That is what we called the samsaric happiness or worldly
happiness or contaminated happiness.
Despite the fact that the nature of all our pleasure that we experience are
contaminated and they don’t last and also cannot increase indefinitely,
when we get bored we turn our attention to something else. We never ever
get satisfied. In the end, those experiences in fact transform into
dissatisfaction and suffering. That is the nature of all the pleasure that
we experience.
Despite this, we still want it and we still work for it continuously day in
and out. We only aim for. So, if that is the case, if we are striving
continuously just to get this kind of pleasure then how come are we not
striving likewise in virtue, in the causes and the practice that will
definitely bring about happiness in the long run and good rebirth,
liberation, and enlightenment?  Why are we not similarly engaging
continuously in the bodhisattva’s practices and accumulating the collection
of merit and wisdom?
Next is the way of relating this to the power of joy.

|3" The way to apply oneself with |
|the power of joy                 |


Verse 7.66
Thus in order to complete this task,
I shall engage in it
Just as an elephant tormented at midday
Enters into a lake.
Here the context talks about the practices of the bodhisattvas, how they
act when they engage in virtue and when they benefit sentient beings. They
are just like the elephants which gladly and enthusiastically charge and
enter into a pond or lake on a very hot day and get bliss out. Likewise, it
is said that is the kind of attitude the bodhisattvas have when they engage
in virtue and benefit the sentient beings.
The point is that whatever virtue or practice that we are going to engage
in, if we know the essential point of why we are doing it and what is in
for us, we are convinced of the benefits, we have that kind of
understanding then when we do the practice we will be happy doing it. We
will be so happy in doing it. Because we are happy in doing it we will be
then able to complete the task.
This applies to everything that we do in life. Whatever we do, we may set
up to do something.  We can only complete the task if we are a happy
person. If we are happy doing it then whatever that job or the task maybe,
we will probably finish it. So that is why it is very important to do
things with a very happy mind.
Verse 7.63 comes under the outline which says one should strive in the
virtue without expectation of the result.
The next two verses, 7.64 and 7.65, coming under the outline that says one
should accomplish the virtue by keeping the result in the mind.
Is there an internal contradiction here or not? You have to think about it.

We probably finish chapter seven on Tuesday.
We are going to do tsog offerings because it is tsog day. It also happens
to be the third anniversary of passing of Khensur Rinpoche Lama Lhundrup. I
guess many people here have some connection with him. You can use the
opportunity to pray for his reincarnation to be found quickly.






































