Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Engaging in the Deeds of a Bodhisattva/lesson38.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:52:21.738800
================================================================================


Recently we have been looking at how we should be happy when our enemies or
the person that we don’t like are happy when they are praised, or when they
receive some material gains. Last week we talked about the section of how
we should tolerate when we see the people that we don’t like or our enemies
are doing well or when they are happy or when they achieved some material
gain or when they achieved good reputation. We should not be intolerant. We
should not feel a sense of unhappiness. In particular, if we are someone
who has taken the oath and pledge to achieve the state of full
enlightenment (omniscience) in order to accomplish the welfare of sentient
beings and yet at the same time we cannot even be happy when our enemy
achieved just a little bit of happiness, then there is a big internal
contradiction. For a person who is not able to be happy with the small
happiness that the enemies is experiencing, then it is said that this
person would have no chance and no way of developing bodhicitta. So it is
inappropriate to be jealous of our enemies or the people that we don’t like
when they achieved some material gains.

|b” Reflecting on how there is nothing to not want [in that]           |
|(1) It is unreasonable to feel jealousy for the material gain of      |
|others                                                                |
|(2) It is unreasonable to discard one’s own qualities                 |
|(3) While it is right to feel sorrow for one’s own negativities, it is|
|not right to be jealous of others’ virtues                            |

|(1) It is unreasonable to feel jealousy for the material gain of      |
|others                                                                |


Verse 6.84
Whether he obtains it from him
Or whether it remains in the benefactor’s house,
In either case you shall get nothing.
What is the use whether he is given something or not?
Imagine a situation that you are with your enemy or the person that you
don’t like, and someone comes along and makes a gift to your enemy, but you
don’t get anything. How do you react?
In such a situation if you find yourself get upset with the enemy for
getting something that you don’t get, and you also get upset at the giver,
how are you to think? The advice is given in verse 6.84.
It doesn’t matter what the giver gives to your enemy; it can be gold, money
or some object. Whether the giver gives it to your enemy, or whether the
giver keeps it at home, at the end of the day, you are not getting
anything. In reality there is no real difference whether your enemy
receives something from the giver or not, you are not going to get
anything. But you get angry when the giver gives it to the enemy.
If the giver doesn’t give it to the enemy, then you are not angry? Whether
the giver gives it to the enemy or keeps it at home, you still will not get
anything. Logically, there is no reason for you to be upset at the enemy
for receiving the thing from the giver and there is also no reason to get
upset at the giver.
The point is that at the end of the day, it doesn’t matter whether the
giver gives it to the enemy or not, you are not getting anything. Therefore
there is no purpose in getting upset at the giver or the enemy who received
the gift from the giver, because you will still not get anything. Hence
there is no reason to be upset. In that situation, wouldn’t it be better to
stay calm, relax, and not to be disturbed?

|(2) It is unreasonable to discard one’s |
|own qualities                           |


Verse 6.85
So why do I throw away my good qualities,
Merit and faith?
Tell me, why am I not angry
For not holding what will be gain?
You get upset with the enemy for receiving something from the giver and you
also get upset with the giver. But what is the source of that unhappiness?
If you look inside, you are upset in that situation because you want that
thing. It is only because you did not get that thing, then you become
upset.
You get upset when your enemy or the people that you don’t like receive
gifts. So it boils down that you are having the desire for gaining the
material object or the possession. Because you have that desire, and when
you don’t get what you desire, then of course you get upset. If what you
want is the material gain, then getting upset and angry with your enemy for
receiving gift and getting upset at the giver for giving your enemy the
gift is not the way to achieve your desire.
If you get angry at the giver and the enemy for receiving the gift, in the
process you are destroying your merit. In fact it is the obstacle for
getting what you want and in this case here is material gain. So, basically
getting upset with the enemy for receiving the gifts, and also getting
upset at the giver is not the way to achieve your own goal of wanting to
get something, because getting upset is only an obstacle.  When you get
upset, you will look bad and you will behave in a way that causes others to
dislike you. You also destroy your merit. These are all obstacles if what
you want is material gain. If you want material gain, then you have to work
at the causes for receiving material gains such as increasing your stock of
merits, engaging in an acceptable behavior that would lead you to receiving
gifts from others, living a life with ethical discipline and so forth. If
that is what you want, then these are the causes for you to receive
material gains. But this is not to say that therefore you should behave
well, you should live life ethically, and you should increase your merits
to get material gain. Here you have to understand that this is not an
advice to encourage you to look for material gains. That is not the point.
The point here is that if you get upset primarily because you don’t get the
gift but the enemy gets it.
This verse is telling you that that is not the way to get the material
gains. This verse is trying to pinpoint that ultimately you are responsible
for not getting what you want. It is you yourself because when you see
others doing well, especially the enemy getting something and you don’t get
anything, your usual response is to be upset. You then get upset and angry
with the enemy and also get angry at the giver. In so doing, you destroy
your merits and externally your behavior becomes a bit unacceptable to
others. All your behaviors and your destruction of your own merits is the
cause of you not getting anything in the end. So rather than getting angry
at the giver and at the enemy for receiving things, and if you really want
to get upset, then you should be upset at yourself because you are at
fault.  That is the point. It is not about if you want material gain then
you should put on a good show, live an ethical way of life and so forth.

|(3) While it is right to feel sorrow for one’s own negativities, it is |
|not right to be jealous of others’ virtues                             |


Verse 6.86
Not only do you not have any sorrow
For having committed negativities,
Do you wish to compete with others
Who have created merit?
Having said this, sometimes in a situation when the enemy or the people
that you don’t like get something but you don’t get what they get, then you
get upset, you may think; “If he gets something and I don’t get anything, I
will be upset and angry. It will be really good if he doesn’t get anything
as well. If he doesn’t get anything, then I am okay. Just as I don’t get
anything and if he doesn’t get anything, then I am okay with that, and I
have no issues. I won't get upset with the enemy as long as he doesn’t get
anything. If I don’t get anything then he shouldn’t get anything. If he
doesn’t get anything, I am fine with it and it is fair.”
If you think like that, then you have to understand that the result of you
not getting anything is of your own doing because of not knowing what to
adopt and what to discard, not having created the cause, and not having
accumulated the causes and the merits to receive the material gain, but
rather you get upset and engage in all kinds of negativities.
That is actually quite a sad situation. We should be sad at our own
situation because of not having created the cause but instead having
created negativities. Instead of being sad with our own limited situation,
we don’t examine ourselves, but at the same time we want to compete with
others, in the sense of competing with someone who has created the cause.
Why the person is receiving material gain? This is because due to having
practiced ethical discipline and having accumulated the causes, that is why
he/she is receiving something now. So that person has the cause for
receiving it. But we are not sad with our own limited situation. At the
same time, we want to compete with others who have created the cause and
merit to receive the material gain. So why are we doing that?
The text is telling us to ask ourselves why are we competing (in a negative
sense) with those who have merits. If we really want to compete with those
who have the merit, then we should be competing in terms of being wise and
skilled in knowing what to adopt and what to discard.  We have to be wise
and skilled in guarding our ethical discipline and in accumulating merits.
In the past few lessons, we did talk about the twelve desirable objects and
the twelve undesirable objects. In the twelve undesirable objects in
relation to oneself and in relation to the people who matters to us –
friends, relatives, loves ones etc -, we have finished with the undesirable
objects.
Now we are going to start with the twelve desirable objects. If there is
anything that hinders us or our love ones from getting the twelve desirable
objects then we get angry and upset. What are we going to do in those
situations? How do we practice patience?
If we talk about the twelve desired objects in relation to our enemy, we
want our enemy to suffer and we want bad things to happen to the enemy, we
want them to have bad reputation, to be unhappy, poor, deprived and so
forth. If there is anything that interferes with that, then we get upset.
We want our enemies to be unhappy. What we want is something bad happens to
the enemy. That is what we want. If there is anything that stops or hinders
our enemy from getting harm in whatever way, we don’t like it.

|3’ Arresting fury towards that which hinders one’s desires                     |
|a’ It is unreasonable to be impatient with that which hinders the harm destined|
|for one’s enemies                                                              |
|1” Disliking enemies is of no benefit to oneself                               |
|2” Enemies are not harmed by your developing ill will                          |
|3” It harms oneself                                                            |
|b’ It is unreasonable to be impatient with that which hinders the benefit      |
|directed towards oneself and one’s interests                                   |

|a’ It is unreasonable to be impatient with that which hinders the harm destined|
|for one’s enemies                                                              |
|1” Disliking enemies is of no benefit to oneself                               |
|2” Enemies are not harmed by your developing ill will                          |
|3” It harms oneself                                                            |

|1” Disliking enemies is of no benefit to oneself                               |


Verse 6.87ab
Even if your enemy is not joyful,
What is there for you to be joyful about?
If our enemy receives any of these four things - has good reputation, is
praised, receives material gains or is happy - then we don’t like. We like
it when they don’t have it. So if anybody is to come and stop them from not
having material gain, then we like it. We want them to suffer, and if
anybody who comes along and stop them from suffering, we don’t like it.
The verse is asking us “If the enemy suffers, what is there for you to be
happy about?”
When we see the people that we don’t like get into trouble, big or small
trouble, or they die, or something bad happened to them and they suffer,
then we feel that they deserve it and that is something should have
happened to them. We feel good and happy. That is called a completely
distorted rejoicing. Here the teaching is asking us “What real benefits do
you get from having that kind of distorted rejoicing?” So it is said here
that not only there isn’t any benefit, in fact there is only harm; we
receive harm. In reality our malice or ill-will towards the enemy would not
ever harm the enemy.

|2” Enemies are not harmed by your developing ill will  |


Verse 6.87cd
Your mind merely wishing
Did not cause him to be harmed.
There are times when we really feel like that. This happens. When we really
don’t like someone or when we hate someone, we mentally wish something bad
to befall on them or wish them to die or wish them to be hurt or suffer.
Sometimes we even verbalize our wish and saying thing like “You just go and
die.” The teaching is saying “Just by verbalizing or thinking or having
malice does not do any damage as you intent to the enemy.”
We think like that and we say things to that effect. But at the end of the
day, it does nothing whatsoever to the enemy. We don’t actually damage the
enemy, but we actually harmed ourselves. It is inappropriate to be happy
when our enemy or the people that we don’t like are suffering.
|3” It harms oneself                                    |
|a” It is unreasonable to enjoy the harm that befalls   |
|your enemy                                             |
|b” If one holds onto that joy, it will become a cause  |
|of great suffering for oneself                         |

|a” It is unreasonable to enjoy the harm that befalls   |
|your enemy                                             |


Verse 6.88ab
Even if his suffering is established due to your wish,
What is there for you to be joyful about?
We think “May this person die. May he suffers. May something bad befall on
him.” Sometime we even verbalize these things to the effect. It is called
perverted wish or prayer. But in reality these things only harm us and they
cannot do anything to the enemy. It doesn’t really damage the enemy in any
way. Even our bad intention or the words that we say can actually have an
effect on the enemy, even if our enemy does get harmed as a result, the
text is saying “What is there for you to be joyful about even if you do
achieve your wish?”
If we actually hold on to this kind of happiness; we feel happy when our
enemy suffers,  it will be a cause for ourselves to suffer in the future.

|b” If one holds onto that joy, it will become a cause  |
|of great suffering for oneself                         |


Verse 6.88cd
OPINION: I shall be satisfied.
RESPONSE: How could there be anything more ravaging than that?
Verse 6.89
Having been held by this unbearable and sharp hook
Cast by the fisherman of the afflictions,
It is certain that I shall be cooked
In the pots of sentient beings’ hell by the hell guardians.
We may object to the argument that there is no benefit for us if we are
happy when the enemy suffers.
We think there is benefit “I feel good. Before I die, he must suffer, and
when he suffers I feel good. Because I feel good and that is the benefit I
get.”
Then the verse says “If you happen to think like that, then what is the
answer to that?”
If you think like that, then you have to understand that such way of
thinking will only cause you to suffer and end up a loser not only in the
future lives but even in this life. By feeling satisfied because of your
enemy is suffering is the cause for you to suffer in this life and the
future lives. That is the greatest lost.
As we have seen in the previous verse that by wishing the enemy to suffer
will not cause him to suffer. In fact we are causing ourselves to suffer in
this life and in the future lives. In reality, the enemy does not suffer.
If you happen to be someone who has taken the bodhisattva vows and a
practitioner of bodhicitta entertaining these kinds of thoughts, it will
lead you committing bodhisattva root downfalls. When you die, you will go
to the lower realms; in fact to the hell realms. When you end up in the
hell realms, you will have to experience great sufferings.
If you think with such negative thoughts, then you are just like a fish
caught by the fisherman with the hook goes into the mouth and suffer
unbearable pain. Likewise, when you are caught by the fisherman of anger,
and the anger induces malice which causes you to accumulate very strong
negative karma that will throw you into the hell realms and you will be
cooked in those boiling cauldrons in hells.
When motivated by anger, we entertain ill-will or malice wishing to harm
the other person. Remember about our discussion in the previous lesson in
regards to covetousness. Here if we apply that discussion to ill-will,
there will be the motivation, the performance, and the culmination.
Let’s look at the development of ill-will:
- First there arises the thought “I want to harm that person” or “I wish
that person harm.” That is the motivation phase.
- When that thought becomes stronger, then you enter the performance phase.
- When you feel good about wanting that person to suffer “How wonderful if
this person suffers. May everything bad happen to him,” and you feel that
satisfaction. Perhaps we can posit this mental satisfaction to be the
culmination of malice.
- If you have the motivation, the performance and the culmination, then
karma is accumulated. The fruitional effect of that karma would be rebirth
in the lower realms such as the hells. You should know that a karma that is
accumulated is a karma whose result you will definitely experience. That is
something you should know. In this example, the fruitional effect of such
karma is a rebirth in hells.
From this discussion we can see that if we have this kind of ill-will
towards an enemy and can feel good about having the ill-will, and even if
you feel good, in reality your goal is not achieved because the enemy does
not get harmed. Just by you wishing him harm does not get him harmed in
anyway. But we do get harmed. We will be harmed in a terrible way by having
to suffer in the hells. Actually we suffer the greatest loss.
As such, the last two lines of verse 6.88 and verse 6.89 comes under the
outline which says; “If you grasp or hold on to this distorted and
perverted happiness it will only become a cause for great suffering for
yourself.” We have to understand this and we have to think about it until
we develop an ascertainment. Based on that, we have to restrain ourselves
from this kind of thinking.
Next is about why it is inappropriate to be intolerant or to be impatient
when obstacles arise to obstruct oneself or the people who matter to us
from receiving good things, praise, material gain and so forth.
We embrace the eight worldly dharmas. We want the eight worldly dharmas. We
want it for ourselves and we also want it for the people who matter to us.
When something or somebody comes along to obstruct us or our loved ones or
the people who matter to us from embracing these eight worldly dharmas or
from receiving and experiencing these worldly dharmas, we get upset. We
will upset with the situation or the person interferes with that. We want
praise and good reputation. When anything or anybody comes along to
interfere with that then we get upset. In that situation, how should we
deal with it?  First, there is no need for praise and reputation.

|b’ It is unreasonable to be impatient with that which hinders the benefit  |
|directed towards oneself and one’s interests                               |
|1” It is unreasonable to be furious with that which hinders mundane        |
|interests                                                                  |
|2” It is unreasonable to be furious with that which hinders merit          |

|1” It is unreasonable to be furious with that which hinders mundane        |
|interests                                                                  |
|a” It is unreasonable to be furious with that which hinders one’s own      |
|praise and renown                                                          |
|b” Reflecting on the benefits                                              |

|a” It is unreasonable to be furious with that which hinders|
|one’s own praise and renown                                |
|(1) There is no need for just praise and renown            |
|(2) It is unreasonable to seek merely mental joy           |
|(3) Grasping for merely that is erroneous                  |
|(4) The reasons is it erroneous                            |


|(1) There is no need for just praise|
|and renown                          |


Verse 6.90
The honor of praise and fame
Will turn into neither merit nor life;
It will turn into neither strength nor freedom from sickness for me,
And also will not transform into physical happiness.
Verse 6.91 a,b,
If I were to understand my welfare,
What is there in them that is my welfare?
We like praise, we want to be well known, and we want to have a good
reputation but the words of praise, being well-known and having good
reputation cannot become a cause for our happiness in the future lives.
Even in this life, the words of praise and having good reputation will not
make us live longer as it can never act as a cause for longevity. Also it
will not confer on us physical strength. Praise and good reputation cannot
protect us from sickness as well. It cannot confer on us bodily pleasure.
When we eat food or when we drink, at least we get some kind of bodily
pleasure and pleasant feeling. The food and drink also sustains our body.
It might not be a very big deal but at least we still get some pleasure.
But we cannot even obtain this small pleasure from the words of praise and
having good reputation. So those who are really wise and experts in
accomplishing their own goals and their own happiness know that praise and
reputation is of no bearing whatsoever. It does not do anything good, and
there is no benefit at all.
We hear all these but inside us we still object, isn’t it? We may accept;
“Yeah, there is no benefit in the future lives, there is no benefit in
strengthening my body, it doesn’t protect me from sickness, it doesn’t give
me bodily pleasure and pleasant feeling.” But this doesn’t mean that there
is no benefit. We feel there are benefits. Why? Because we feel good and
that is all that matters.
“All that matters is when I am praised and when I have a good reputation. I
feel good. How can you tell me there is no benefit?  There is benefit. If
anybody were to stop or obstruct me from being praised or cause me to not
have a good reputation then there are reasons for me to get upset, because
he/she is stopping me from feeling good.”
In Gyaltsab Je’s commentary, the answer to this way of thinking is
classified under the outline which says; “It is inappropriate to have such
a mere mental happiness as your goal” and that goes with the last two lines
of verse 6.91.

|(2) It is unreasonable to seek   |
|merely mental joy                |


Verse 6.91c,d
If I desire just mental happiness,
Then I should devote myself to gambling and so forth, and also drinking.
“If I desire just mental happiness” then the answer is “Then I should
devote myself to gambling and so forth, and also drinking”. We see the
reasons that we come up with to counter the argument that was thrown at us.
We say “Yeah, I accept that there is no benefit in the future lives, it
doesn’t make me stronger physically and so forth.” But still we counter by
saying “I feel good, that is all that matters. I am happy and I want that.”

Now Shantideva is taking in that reason that we have thrown in “I feel
good, and that is enough.” Shantideva says; “Feeling good is all that is
enough and is your only reason, and if feeling good can justify anything,
then why don’t you gamble? Why don’t you drink?” Normally a lot of people
find drinking and gambling are not beneficial, isn’t it? Drinking and
gambling do harm.
If going by our reason “I want to feel good from being praised and if
somebody obstructs me I will be angry. It is justified because I feel
happy.” So if you feel happy then by extension you should also feel happy
when you drink and gamble.
The essential point is: Our reason for wanting to be praise and having good
reputation is because we feel good. That is the only reason. Basically we
are also saying that feeling good can even justify doing those things that
are usually not good; those that are usually not permissible to do so.
[BP1 Part 2 L15] Objection: Praise, fame, and honour may not bring any
pleasure or benefit to my body, but they do give me mental happiness.
Therefore, I will be angry with those who ruin my praise and fame.
Reply: If your goal in life is merely to seek short-lived mental happiness,
you may as well indulge in gambling, drinking or sex, etc., the prohibited
activities of those holding the individual liberation vows of ordained
persons. It is inappropriate to pursue such temporary happiness as your
ultimate goal.
Next verse is under the sub-outline which says “There is no need for mere
praise and reputation.”

|(3) Grasping for merely that is         |
|erroneous                               |
|(a) There is no need for just praise and|
|renown                                  |
|(b) To dislike the loss of praise and   |
|renown is childish                      |

|(a) There is no need for just praise and|
|renown                                  |


Verse 6.92
If for the sake of fame
I lose my wealth or get myself killed,
What can mere words do then?
Once I am dead, to whom will they give pleasure?
There are some people who give but are looking for reputation. They want to
be known to everybody and the world that they are so generous. So there are
people who really give but motivated by the desire for wanting to be known
to be generous.
Then there are also people who want to be famous to be known as a hero.
They go around fighting and waging wars. Of course when they go and fight,
they may lose their life.
When that happens, who or what does it benefit with all these words of
praise and reputation? It doesn’t bring any benefit to the body, and it
also doesn’t bring any real benefit to the mind.
Next is the dislikes the degeneration in one’s reputation and so forth is
similar to acting like a child.

|(b) To dislike the loss of praise and   |
|renown is childish                      |


Verse 6.93
When their sandcastles collapse,
Children howl in despair;
Likewise when my praise and reputation decline
My mind becomes like a child.
Here it says that if we really sit down and think well, we can see that we
are like children. The example here is of children building sand castles.
When the children build sand castles, they put in a lot of effort. After
they have formed the rough structure of the castle they feel very happy.
Then for whatever reason if that sand castle collapses, the children will
experience great distress. They will just cry and cry.
The teaching is saying that we are pretty much like that. We want to be
praised. We want affirmation and recognition from others. But when there is
a decline in our reputation, we are like the children, because we are very
disturbed. It doesn’t take much praise to get us lifted off the ground.
Just a little bit of praise will start to make us float and feel very
happy. But when there is a slight decline in affirmation or recognition
from others or slight decline in reputation, we feel terrible. We feel so
bad and lose our self-worth. As such, we are likened to children who cry
when their sand castle collapses.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): So don’t cry when the sand castle collapses.
Next is inappropriate to be attached to that by which one is praised.
|(4) The reasons it is erroneous                                             |
|(a) It is unreasonable to be attached to the joy one feels for praise of    |
|oneself                                                                     |
|(b) If, because of the joy [one associates with them, praise and renown]    |
|were something to strive for, then it would be reasonable for all beings    |
|[who have that] to enjoy them [but they don’t]                              |

|(a) It is unreasonable to be attached to the joy one|
|feels for praise of oneself                         |


Verse 6.94
Since short-lived sounds are without mind,
They cannot possibly think of praising me.
It makes others happy,
That fame is counted as a cause of joy.
Verse 6.95
Whether this praise is directed at myself or someone else
How shall I be benefited by others’ joy?
Since that joy is theirs alone
I shall not obtain even a part of it.
We like people who praise us. Whoever does anything to make us happy
through praising, we not only like that but we also cling to it “This
person is very good.”
Here we are asked to look at ourselves and our minds, what are we attached
to?
 • Are we attached to the words of praise?
 • Are we attached to the person’s mind that feels happy when he/she is
   praising us?
When the person is praising us, it seems like he/she is happy doing so. So
are we attached to his words of praise or are we attached to the person’s
mind feeling happy when he/she is praising us?
We look at the words of praise and the words are essentially the sound that
we are hearing. Since words is sound, as such words are non-sentient and
don’t have a mind. As such, the words don’t have any intention or the
thought to make us happy. If we are not attached to the sound because sound
doesn’t have mind, as such sound on its own does not have any intention to
benefit us; “Fine, I’m not attached to sound.”  Then let’s assume that the
person who is praising us is happy doing so. Is there a possibility of us
being attached to that fact that the person is happy praising us?  Assuming
we are attached to the person who is praising us is happy, then the
response to that is: “That person is happy praising you but what has his
happiness got to do with you? It is none of your business!  Will his
happiness make you happy?”
If that person is really happy praising us, then that is his business. He
experiences it but there is no way we can partake of that happiness. There
is no way he can even share a portion of that happiness in the sense of
giving it to us.
You have to remember that here there are these two lines of arguments to
substantiate the fact that there is no reason for us to be attached to the
praise and reputation. We are attached to fame and reputation and we like
to hear good words and nice words.
The enquiry is “What are we attached to? Are we attached to the sound? Is
there anything good? What is it good?” So it is not the sound.
“Are we clinging on to the person’s mind that experiencing happiness when
praising us?”
That can’t be the case because that person feeling happy has nothing to do
with us. He/she can feel happy praising us but his/her happiness cannot be
transferred to us.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): Correct or no? I don’t know also.
What do you think of the verses 6.94 and 6.95?
Here we are trying to prove that there is no reason whatsoever for us to be
attached to the praise and having good reputation. But we are not because
we feel happy.
Here is question to ask ourselves “What exactly are we attached to?”
We obviously know we are attached to. Or perhaps we are not very sure what
exactly we are attached to. So we are listing the possibilities.
Are we attached to the words? If it is not the words then it has to be
something else.
In this case, this something else is the mind of the person who is praising
you.
Of course, not just the mind, the mind that feels happy when he/she praises
you.
So you see the logic?
Obviously we know we are attached and we don’t have to analyze that.
What we are analyzing is “What are we attached to?”
There are the words of praise that come from the person who is praising
you. The words are essentially the sound.
Are we attached to the sound?
Or are we attached to the person?
When we say we are attached to the person there must be something within
the person that we are attached to.
That person’s mind has the intention to praise you and his/her mind feels
happy when praising us. Is that what we are attached to?
Anyway, the point is that we are not attached to the sound because there is
no reason to be attached to the sound. It is inappropriate to be attached
to the sound. Neither is it appropriate to be attached to the mind of the
person who is praising us. Even if the person is happy praising us, we
cannot partake of that person’s happiness because that person cannot share
his/her happiness with us. As such, there is no benefit to be attached to
the praise and the good reputation.
Student: It could be referring to the attachment to the other person’s
approval and affirmation of us.
Ven Gyurme: That is what we think, right?
(Student responds inaudible)
Ven Gyurme: Basically we like the person. The Student was saying “Could it
be due to we are being attached to the person’s recognition of us?”
Basically, because the person who is praising us essentially thinks that we
are right, and affirming us that we are right. We are more attached to
that. We are not attached to the person’s mind. We don’t care whether he is
happy or not. That’s what I think.
Student: When he approved us, he has a happy mind.
Ven Gyurme: But we don’t care whether he is happy or not.
Student: We care about his approval.
Ven Gyurme: Yes, we care about his approval.
Student: That is a happy mind, isn’t it?
Ven Gyurme: If we care about his happy mind then it follows that whenever
you are praised you will be happy. Not true. That is what I think.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): What? Somebody praise you the person doesn’t
feel happy?
Ven Gyurme: No, the person feels happy but we don’t care. I don’t care
whether he is happy or not. I only care he is praising me.
(Student respond is inaudible)
Khen Rinpoche (in English): He like you so that is why you like him?
Ven Gyurme: I don’t care whether he is happy or not. He likes me I like
him. That is why.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): When the person praises you, you think the
person is good and his heart is good. Of course you think the person is
good.
Ven Gyurme: But when the enemy praises me, I don’t think the enemy is good
but I like.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): In the first place, the enemy won’t praise you.
The enemy only criticizes you. They don’t praise you.
Ven Gyurme: Sometimes they do. Sometimes they do it out of bad motivation.
They want something from you. But you know they want something from you.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): That doesn’t become praise to you. When you
know that, the praise doesn’t become praise to you. Praising becomes un-
praising.
(Student respond is inaudible)
Ven Gyurme: But we don’t have to be flattered right? We don’t care. We like
to be flattered right?
Khen Rinpoche (in English): The problem is when you heard that, then you
don’t like that, and that doesn’t mean you don’t like the praising. When
enemy praise you it is not really praising, you already know that and you
are already unhappy. You know the person is criticizing you indirectly and
you don’t think he is praising you.
Ven Gyurme: But we still like that because if the enemy praise me in front
of other people, I look good. I know he is doing it but I look good but
other people don’t know. That is what we think.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): I don’t think so. If you don’t know the person
is really praising you or not then maybe you feel happy. If your mind is
already thinking the person is not really praising from his heart, only
from the mouth then I don’t think so you will feel happy. It is not true
why you do that. Anyway I have no idea.

In Praise of Dependent Arising
(Teaching during the prayer for Khen Rinpoche's teacher, ex-abbot of Sera
Je Monastery, Khensur Losang Tsering (also known as Gen Losang), passed
away on Tuesday 1 July 2014.on 03 July 2014)

At the end of this text called “In Praise of Dependent Arising”, Lama
Tsongkhapa dedicates the merits of having composed the text in such a way.
Due to the kindness of my lamas,
I have met the teachings of the greatest of teachers.
I dedicate this virtue, therefore, for every living being
to be nourished by true spiritual friends.
He dedicates the merits that he had accumulated for composing this text to
every sentient being to be taken care or be guided by true spiritual
friends or gurus. This shows the importance of correctly relying on
virtuous friend or guru devotion. In short, whether we develop any
realizations or experiences of the path or not depends on how one devotes
to the virtuous friend. This is an extremely important point.
In my case, I have studied for about 17-18 years and whatever little
appreciation of the Buddhist philosophy that I have and whatever little
interest and understanding I have is really dependent on my teacher, Gen
Losangla.
My main philosophy teacher Gen Losangla was very well known for being very
expert in using reasoning to show the students the profundity, the depth,
the real deep meaning of those different philosophical subjects. Gen
Losangla was famous for that. Of course Gen Losangla was someone whom His
Holiness the Dalai Lama himself appreciated and praised.
Gen Losangla taught in Sera Je for very long time. He had to teach classes
of various levels every day. As there are many classes a day, he will start
from 8 o’clock in the morning and finish about 5 o’clock in the evening. In
between, he hardly had any time to eat, perhaps, maybe for about half an
hour. The rest of the time was just teaching the various classes. The
classes could go on for one hour, two hours or at times could go on for
three or four hours if he felt the class was really enjoyable and was going
well especially when there was a really good discussion going on. He spent
many years of his life doing this. So he is definitely someone who had
offered great service to the Buddha’s teachings.
Gen Losangla not only did he study, but he was able to impart knowledge to
many others. In so doing, he also was able to help bring about many
students who themselves became very skilled, knowledgeable and experts in
Buddhist philosophy. You could say his dharma activities in this life has
now culminated and has been brought to completion. He passed away at the
age of 92.
When Gen Losangla was alive, he would always tell us that he doesn’t want
to live beyond the age of 85. He will always say this to people. When he
was around the age of 85, he had an audience with His Holiness and His
Holiness told him to project the intention and the will to live to the age
of 90. His Holiness told him “I am projecting the intention and the will to
live to the age of 108, so you project the will and intention to live to
the age of 90.” This is what His Holiness told Gen Losangla and now Gen
Losangla has passed away at the age of 92.
I do not know much about the Buddhadharma, and whatever little I know, I
always remember that it is only due to the kindness of Gen Losangla. There
were many times there were difficult points in the teachings that I
couldn’t really come to a decisive understanding or conclusion, and after
which I would go to Gen Losangla. He would then help me to gain a very
decisive understanding to able to remove the doubts. This happens many
times and those were the occasions that really made me very happy. I was
really inspired and caused me to have real faith in him.
The next verse of dedication which Lama Tsongkhapa himself wrote is:
I pray that the teachings of he who is solely benevolent
remain unscattered by the winds of false views until the end of time,
and with faith in the Buddha gained from understanding
their essential nature, may they pervade forever.
This particular dedication prayer is essentially what Lama Tsongkhapa is
praying is he is wishing that may the entire world be pervaded with people
who have found real faith in the Buddha’s teachings, the faith that comes
from having analyzed and having come to a decisive understanding.
He is praying for the world to be filled with such people. So this is
essential that there are people in this world who know the Buddha’s
teachings correctly as it is, purely. There is a danger that the teachings
of the Buddha get distorted. When distortion sets in, degenerations sets
in, then people come up and invent their own explanations and give their
own mistaken interpretation. This is said to be a great source of harm. It
harms the teachings of the Buddha and it harms the welfare of sentient
beings. So it becomes very important for there to be people in the world
who have the correct understanding of the Buddha’s teachings without any
distortion and without any degeneration.
We should also pray, like what Lama Tsongkhapa himself did, that we
ourselves become someone who has faith in the teachings of the Buddha, and
the faith that comes from knowing and understanding the teachings. We
should pray that we ourselves become a person like that.
Then Lama Tsongkhapa continues by saying:
In all my births, even at the cost of my life,
may I never falter nor shrink from working
for the wonderful doctrine of the mighty Buddha,
who showed clearly the nature of dependent arising
This is a prayer to be able to uphold the pure and correct teachings of the
Buddha in all the future lifetimes without any considerations for one’s
body and one’s life, i.e. to have the attitude of willing to sacrifice and
also not to give in to laziness but to work hard at preserving and
spreading the teachings  of Buddha. In particular here, the very essence
and the heart of the entire Buddhadharma is the view of reality; the
interdependent nature of reality. Dependent arising is the very crux of the
entire Buddhadharma. One is to wish that one be able to preserve, uphold
and to spread this to sentient beings.
In a way, the prayer is telling us that we should remember this all the
time of not to be lazy in upholding the Buddhadharma.
Then Lama Tsongkhapa continues with:
In all my births, even at the cost of my life,
may I never falter nor shrink from working
for the wonderful doctrine of the mighty Buddha,
who showed clearly the nature of dependent arising
The earlier verse is talking about upholding and preserving the dharma.
This verse is talking about spreading and causing the dharma to flourish.
Here the verse is helping us to generate the aspiration/the wish to be able
to spread these teachings and in particular those wonderful teachings on
dependent arising; especially the subtle details on subtle dependent
arising. In whatever way we have to think day and night how we can spread
these teachings in the hearts of the sentient beings.
Then the last one:
When I pursue these endeavors wholeheartedly and sincerely,
may I be supported constantly by Brahma, Indra, Mahakala,
the four guardians of the world, and all other protectors.
In upholding and spreading the Buddha’s teachings, one will meet with a
host of challenges and obstacles. Here he is making a plea to all the
powerful one and the dharma protectors to eliminate all the obstacles and
adversities to these endeavors.
Many of you don’t know Gen Losangla personally. I know some of you who have
met him and had established a connection with him but many of you don’t
know him. In his case, his job is done. His dharma activities have come to
culmination. On our side, what we need to do is to aspire to create the
merit and to dedicate it for ourselves to be able to become a spiritual
master, a virtuous friend to others, and having qualities like Gen Losangla
and the other virtuous friends.  We also pray and aspire that we ourselves
be able to preserve and spread the teachings of the Buddha like them.
We will recite the seven branch worship from the Shantideva’s text,
essentially on chapter 2 and chapter 3. After that we will then recite the
praise of Buddha which is called “In Praise of Dependent Arising”.
We first bring to mind, whether the objects of refuge or the field of
merit, essentially bring to mind the Buddha, Dharma, Sangha abiding in the
space in front of us. After that, we will perform the seven-branch worship
starting with the branch of offering in chapter 2. We recite that slowly
while giving us some time to think about the verses that we are reciting.
(Recitation of Chapter 2 and 3 of Shantideva’s “Engaging in the Deeds of a
Bodhisattva”)
We looked at the seven-branch worship and you have an idea of how to do the
practice. Sometimes when you have time, you can recite these verses
starting from beginning of chapter 2 up to the end of the seven-branch
worship:
Verse 3.7
Thus by the virtue accumulated
Through all that I have done,
May all the suffering of all sentient beings
Be dispelled.
Up to that verse is the preliminary for generating or adopting bodhicitta
through a ritual. Then the subsequent verses go all the way up to just
before the actual adoption of bodhicitta, i.e. up to verse 3.22.
Verse 3.22
Likewise, until all attain nirvana,
May I also be the source of sustenance
For all the realms of sentient beings
That reach unto the ends of space.
If one has time, one can recite these verses mindfully and slowly, and then
thinking about them.
We will recite “In Praise of Dependent Arising”. This text makes a
difference to accumulating merits and also purifying the mind of
obscuration. This text is an exposition on subtle dependent arising.
I think I have mentioned to you in the past that it is mentioned in the
sutra:
Whoever sees dependent arising sees the Dharma.
Whoever sees the Dharma sees the Tathagata.
“Whoever sees dependent arising sees the Dharma” - in this context here the
dependent arising is the coarse dependent arising – dependent arising at
the level of causality - such as causes produce effects, effects are
dependent on their causes. By understanding dependent arising at the level
of causality we have to apply that to the happiness that we are looking for
and the suffering that we want to avoid. The happiness that we want to
achieve and the suffering that we want to avoid is not a creation of
somebody else, there is no creator. Rather we are responsible for all our
own experiences; be it happiness or sufferings. As such, on the basis of
dependent arising on the level of causality, then karma and its
consequences come into the picture. On the basis of dependent arising on
the level of causality, one comes to understand karma. When one comes to
develop a conviction in the karma then one comes to understand or see the
Dharma.
Through the understanding of dependent arising at the level of causality
then one comes to appreciate the working of karma and its consequences.
Once one have the faith of conviction in that, then one see the Dharma. On
the basis of having faith of conviction in karma then one discards or
abandons non-virtue, one cultivates virtues and one will be able to easily
accumulate mass of merits. Through that one comes to see the Buddha. So,
one way of explaining how one comes to see the Buddha is this.
When we talk about the Tathagata (One Thus Gone), the Buddha is embodied in
the two kayas: the truth body and the form body. Through having a lot of
merits one is able to see the form bodies that are manifested in all kinds
of aspects to work for the benefits of the sentient beings. With merits one
is able to see such form bodies. So, that is one way of explaining it.
If we take dependent arising here not to refer to the coarse dependent
arising but refer to the subtle dependent arising, in terms of how each and
every phenomena exist as merely dependently designated, how everything
exists in mere name, how everything is merely designated, and through
seeing that one sees the Dharma.
Through understanding and knowing dependent arising at the subtle level, in
terms of how everything is merely designated, everything is dependently
designated, one then comes to understand subtle emptiness. It is through
that understanding then one gradually comes to see the Buddha – the
Tathagata. In this case it is seeing the truth body.
This text “In Praise of Dependent Arising” is a praise of Buddha composed
by Lama Tsongkhapa. Lama Tsongkhapa praised Buddha by way of the Buddha’s
teaching of dependent origination. The Buddha is not someone who just to
tell us how to overcome this problem of life. The Buddha is someone who
shows us exactly what is the foundation or the root of all the problems and
difficulties. He helps us to discover what the root is and then help us
uproot it. Of course, the Buddha did so through his explanation expounding
on the nature of reality via dependent arising. Lama Tsongkhapa saw this
quality that was unique only to the Buddha. The Buddha is the only founder
who expounded on this nature of reality using dependent arising. Lama
Tsongkhapa himself studied hard and examined thoroughly the Buddha’s
teachings. He critically analyzed them and thought about it. After having
reflected and ascertained the teachings, he put it into practice and then
he saw the truth for himself - the truth of what the Buddha said. That
helps him developed this really unshakeable faith in the Buddha because he
experienced for himself the truth of what the Buddha has been saying all
along. It was with this unshakeable faith in the Buddha that Lama
Tsongkhapa then composed this text “In Praise of Dependent Arising”.
Lama Tsongkhapa saw how important it is to have people who have found
genuine conviction in the Buddha’s teachings through the process of deep
analysis in the thinking. He saw that was important to produce people like
that and to have many people like that, literally fill the world as he
mentioned in one of the dedication verses.
Anyway, as we recite the text, we will come to the part where all the
dedication verses are, which essentially towards the end of the text. Just
now I have explained a little bit about the various dedications. So as we
read the text slowly and when we come to those sections, we should also
aspire in the way like what Lama Tsongkhapa did - to pray and to hope for
that to happen to ourselves as well.
(Recitation of “In Praise of Dependent Arising”)
This very path of dependent arising,
the reason for seeing your words as unparalleled,
generates conviction in the validity of other teachings.
The Buddha was the unparalleled teacher. His word was unparalleled. Here
“unparalleled” literally means there is no comparison, not even the
slightest. There is no competitor and no comparison at all. Why? Because of
his explanation of the nature of reality through dependent arising. If we
look at his explanation of the nature of reality through dependent arising,
this is something that doesn’t require blind faith at all. It is something
that is just obvious. It is just an expression of the reality. If we think
about it, it can be substantiated with reasoning and also with experience.
First, we gain an ascertainment of this core of the teachings – the
teaching of dependent arising. When we gain an ascertainment of this crux,
it is through this then we can slowly come to gain faith and conviction in
the other more obscure teachings like all the various qualities of the
Paths and Grounds; all those immeasurable things. This is what Lama
Tsongkhapa is saying “generates conviction in the validity of other
teachings.”
Having seen the truth, you taught it.
Those following you will leave all troubles far behind,
for they will cut to the root of every fault.
First, we look at the explanation of dependent arising and through gaining
ascertainment in that we have to follow that teaching. Then whoever is able
to follow this and ascertain this dependent arising as the Buddha taught it
would be able to free themselves from all the problems and sufferings. Why?
Because it is only through this understanding of this dependent arising
that anybody can really get down to the very root of all their problems.
Those, however, outside your teachings,
though they practice long and hard,
are those who beckon back faults,
for they are welded to views of self.
For those who do not understand dependent arising or who stray away from
dependent arising or who are outside the Buddhadharma, even though they can
try very hard for day and night and are very sincere in their practice,
what do they get in return?  What they get return is just more and more
faults - recycling faults, beckon back faults. They are just attracting
faults with more and more mistakes. Why? Because ultimately whatever
doctrines or whatever practice they are doing is essentially still based on
adhering to the self, or grasping at the self tightly.
It is saying that no matter what practice, if the doctrine or the
philosophy or the practice you are doing, if it is not according to the
reality as it is or if it is not based on understanding things as they are
or how things are dependently originated then no matter what practices will
only contribute to an increase of the afflictions, for they strengthen the
affliction, they harden the affliction; especially the self-grasping,
rather than decreasing it.
Ah! When the wise see the difference,
how could they not revere you
from the very depths of their hearts!
Here Lama Tsongkhapa is saying that those who are wise, those who see what
the Buddha has taught, especially they see the truth behind dependent
arising “Things are really like that. That is the nature of reality”, then
they really see the huge difference between Buddha - our founder - and
whoever we can talk about. There is no comparison whatsoever. We can see
that he is the only one standing out. As such, people who are able to see
that, then it go without saying they will naturally have this faith in the
Buddha from the depth of their heart naturally.
What need to talk of many teachings!
The simplest conviction in just a single part
brings on the greatest of joy!
Alas! My mind is ruined by ignorance!
For so long have I gone for refuge
to this great store of meritorious qualities,
yet not a single one do I possess.
As yet, however, my life has not slipped
between the jaws of the Lord of Death
and, having a modicum of faith in you,
I do consider myself fortunate.
All the words of this text are really wonderful, it is very special and it
is very precious. It is good if you can read this text every now and then.
In short, Lama Tsongkhapa is expressing his fortune, he feels how
fortunately and how lucky he is to be able to have a chance just to hear
about dependent arising, to study and to learn about it and to think about
it.

(The text “In Praise of Dependent Arising” can be downloaded with this
link: http://www.fpmtabc.org/download/teaching/geshe-
chonyi/bp/BodhisattvaDeeds1/Reference%20material/)
