Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Engaging in the Deeds of a Bodhisattva/lesson27.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:52:12.900613
================================================================================


Q&A
Student 1: This question relates to the practice itself. The verses in the
Shantideva’s text describe how a bodhisattva should discipline his
thoughts, his speech and his actions. Can the actual practice itself, the
actual training of the mind, be found in the four placement of mindfulness
on the body, feelings, mind and phenomena? Will the meditation on the four
placement of mindfulness on body, feelings, mind and phenomena lead us to
be able to actually put them into practice when we are out there facing the
actual situation?
Khen Rinpoche: Chapter 5 is essentially a chapter on mindfulness and
vigilance. In order to generate mindfulness and vigilance, you need a
method. The examples that Student 1 brought up are the methods to develop
that kind of mindfulness. When developing mindfulness, one can do it on the
basis of the four close placement of mindfulness, starting with close
placement of mindfulness on the body, then on the feelings, then the mind
and then on the phenomena.
When we practice the close placement of mindfulness on the body that
involves being mindful in one’s physical and verbal behavior i.e. the kind
of posture and physical demeanor that one is adopting, how you speak to
others and also checking the activities that you undertake, whether those
activities are harmful to others or not and so forth.
The four close placement of mindfulness are the methods to develop
mindfulness. Whatever mindfulness and vigilance that one develops through
this, one has to be able to practically bring over into one’s daily life
when one goes about carrying out whatever activities.
We are not short of instructions. We have heard so many instructions. We do
know many teachings. The problem is that we do not have many experience of
it. We have not put it into practice on the constant basis. Ideally, before
helping anyone and to benefit others, of course we first have to listen to
the teachings, internalize it, understand it, and then we have to
familiarize it with our mind through constant practice. We have to do it in
physical isolation in a retreat. Only when we gain some experience then we
are in the position to help others. Therefore, as Je Rinpoche says in the
Lamrim, without subduing our own mind, there is no basis and there is no
way of helping others. There is no way of subduing others. Ideally, that is
how it should be but we are not like that. We talk about the dharma, we
listen to the dharma and we know the dharma, but we don’t practice them and
at the same time we want to go and help others.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): Not helping, but creating more problems. Go to
talk to people when one is not subdued. How to really subdue and calm down
other people? Not possible. Just now Geok Hua talked about Mui Cheng’s
mother subdued story. It is like that for everyone. Now here, we just hear
the teaching, and just learning the theory. I don’t know when we are going
to the isolation place. I’m not sure also. I’m not sure when we are going
to the isolated place.
It is not just learning the theory. It is not that there is no benefit.
There is benefit in learning the theory because of having heard the theory
then at a later point in time at least we can remember “There is such a
thing. I shouldn’t be doing this or I should be doing this.” So there is
that kind of benefit.
Student 2: Relating to lesson 25, it is said that people or being who are
born in the Pureland, by the virtue of being born there, they would have
five super knowledges and automatically they would have calm abiding. So
prior to be born in the Pureland, must they have this quality of already
achieving the five super knowledges and calm abiding?
Khen Rinpoche: No need. Otherwise the number of people going to the
Pureland would be pretty small. What I have mentioned in one of the earlier
classes about calm abiding is what happens when one is already there. It
doesn’t necessarily have to happen prior to going into the Pureland. I’m
not sure whether everybody who is born into the Pureland will achieve calm
abiding, perhaps to those who are of the Mahayana lineage. Those of the
Mahayana lineage seem to automatically have calm abiding when born into the
Pureland due to the power of the Pureland i.e. the power of the place and
the environment which one is born in.
In Je Rinpoche’s explanation on the qualities of Amitabha Pureland, he
mentioned that those of the Mahayana lineage achieve the five super
knowledges when they are born in the pureland. I wonder if everybody who is
born in the Pureland will actually achieve those automatically.
Student 2: In relating to the 12 links, at the time of death, if one has
single-pointedly faith and thinking of one’s guru; “Guru, please help me. I
am dying. I am going into non-existence.” Being ordinary, obviously it is
grasping and craving. Would this single-pointed faith to the guru be called
craving and grasping since it is virtuous, or it is still craving and
grasping which is not virtuous? Is grasping on the guru and craving for the
guru to help being considered non-virtuous? Would that be actualizing karma
as well? Is it due to the power of the object that propels one into good
rebirth because of single-pointedly focusing in one’s guru? Or is it the
actualizing karma?
Khen Rinpoche: In short, the single-pointed faith in your own guru is not
attachment, rather it is faith. But this single-pointed faith in your guru
at the time of death is a condition for one of the virtues that you have
accumulated in the past to ripen. So your single-pointed faith in your guru
at the time of death itself is not the cause of your next good rebirth,
rather it is a condition. It itself is not karma but it is a condition for
one of the virtues that you must have already accumulated in the past to
ripen.
Student 2: So the actualizing karma would still be something else. This is
just a condition.
Khen Rinpoche: Yeah
Student 3: After being a Buddhist for over ten years, whatever things I do,
99 % of my motivation is to be loved and to be respected, which is non-
virtuous. So according to Shantideva’s standard, I should remain like a
piece of wood. Should I? Being ordinary person, we are using dharma to
solve relationship problems, to overcome our depression, to overcome our
illnesses etc. We have not given up this life with the eight worldly
concerns.  Now we are studying this Shantideva’s text about the bodhisattva
practice, and a bodhisattva is someone who has calm abiding and has
generated bodhicitta. But based on my conversation with some older
students, there seem to be two mindsets:
   1. Feel disheartened because the mind still grasp at this life even
      though having listened to the dharma for so many years.
   2. Feel disheartened because one still doing things that should not be
      done in accordance with the bodhisattvas’ way of life. Instead of
      being inspired by the teaching in this text, I’m like using the
      teachings to beat myself up. How do I stop doing that? How can I adopt
      an attitude that I can be benefitted from the teaching of this text?
Khen Rinpoche (In English): Why you said beating by the teaching? You are
beaten by the teachings? Teaching become cane for you for over 10years?
Quite a suffering! Quite miserable over 10 over years! So long! Sorry about
that. I think there are some verses to answer to that.
Right at the beginning of the Lamrim, there are advices on how one should
listen to the teachings. The example of a sick patient is often given. If
the patient is sick and he knows that he is sick. The patient goes around
to various doctors asking for opinions and advices. But after getting all
the advice and medicine, the patient just stores the medicines up without
taking it. That is like people who listen to many teachings but they feel
that the many teachings they listen to become a burden for them. When that
happens, it is a clear sign that the person did not practice on whatever
teachings they have received. Then one gets this idea that it is a burden.
Whatever teachings we have heard and whatever teachings we have studied, we
need to analyze the teachings. We need to think about it until we get the
taste of it. We need to taste the teachings through reflection. Until we
get that experience, and until we have tasted the teachings, then it is
like what the teachings says, “All the teachings become like a burden.”
Whether it is taking initiations and whatever vows we have kept, we will
feel all these are like a burden.
There are some who have a lot of faith. That is very helpful as well on
whether it is single-pointed faith in the guru or in the guru’s advice and
speech, or single-pointed conviction in the workings of karma and its
effects. When one has such conviction and faith in the guru’s speech,
guru’s advice and/or karma, then it just makes a positive different in the
mind. We won’t find these teachings or advices a burden, but are
inspirational. If we doesn’t have this faith and on top of that if we don’t
have any experience, and we have not tasted the teachings through
critically thinking about them and analyzing them, then the dharma for us
will feel like a burden.
Later on in the text, you will see that there is a verse that mentions that
when you practice the dharma, you have to do it from your own side. You
should not be practicing dharma because other people are doing so and then
you just follow. You are just a follower. No, that is wrong. But rather,
you have to see the point for yourself and you voluntarily and happily do
it from your own side. That is how the dharma to be practiced.
The goal and motivation is so important. Right at the beginning of the
Lamrim, before the actual subject matter is discussed, we are taught on how
to actually listen and teach the dharma. There is a very extensive
explanation on this. It all depends on your motivation and what you are
looking for. When we are listening to the teachings, we are taught to
abandon the three faults of a vessel and we have to cultivate the six
attitudes. These are extremely important. It has to start with that. For
us, we don’t even get that right from the beginning, then of course, it is
going to be difficult.
It is true that most of the teachings we have learned about and have heard
are way beyond us and are things that we don’t have the ability to train it
anyway. Nevertheless, we have to see the purpose: how they fit into the
grand scheme of things, what is the purpose, what is their goal etc. From
our own side, we must not see the dharma as a burden. That is important.
The things we cannot train in now are the things that we can aspire to be
able to train in the future is by making aspirational prayers.
The main problem for us is our bad habits coupled with our laziness. We are
not bothered to think about what is going to happen to us in our future
lives. We are just thinking about this life. Because of this, we are stuck.
It is not that we don’t know the dharma. It is not that we don’t have the
ability to practice the dharma. We have. We are stuck because of our bad
habits coupled with laziness and procrastination. We are just primarily
interested in this life and not bother about our next life.
In Tibetan, the people who are only concerned about the affairs of this
life are called “su-dong-wan??”. Literally means those who just focusing on
this side (this life) and not looking on the other side (next life). There
is this group of people. If you do analyze further, there is some people
who are not just looking at this life, they don’t even think about
tomorrow. All their concern is about what they see right now. There are
people who are just happy with whatever happens today. They are just
concerned about today. They don’t really care about what will happen
tomorrow. To them; “I am just going to spend my day like that. I am happy
just for today. It is all that matters”. Many are like that!
Having faith is also very important. There is a quotation that says “Faith
is the procreator of all the qualities, and all virtues”. So without faith,
there is no hope. There is no way you can cultivate white virtue and white
dharma.
So what Student 3 has said is exactly the truth. That is the reality and
that is the situation. To be able to actually practice the transformational
dharma that can actually move our minds is very difficult. To be able to
make our practice to become a practice which is pure is very difficult.
Therefore, it has been emphasized so many times in the teachings which have
clearly explained what the boundary between dharma and non-dharma is, and
what the sign of somebody who is practicing the dharma is. If it is an
antidote to the afflictions, it is dharma. Anything that is done that can
hurt the afflictions is dharma. So anybody who is practicing that, they are
harming their afflictions. Then overtime the mind becoming more subdued and
pacified. Then that is a real sign that the person is a real dharma
practitioner.
On the other hand, one thinks that one is a dharma practitioner, and one
proclaims that one is a dharma practitioner but whatever one does, whether
it is studying, hearing, meditating, reflecting or practicing the dharma,
in the end what all these things does are to increase the afflictions, then
that person is not a dharma practitioner at all. He has the appearance of a
dharma practitioner and he looks like a dharma practitioner but in reality
he is not a practitioner at all. So this is a case whereby the person is
practicing the dharma but that practice does not become dharma. This is a
case of a medicine becoming a poison. The medicine, which is meant to heal,
becomes poison. Then there is nothing can be done. Most of us are like
that. Many teachings, rather than benefiting us, we make it into poison.
Khen Rinpoche (In English): Become poison, become painful, become a burden.
Therefore it is really important that we just have to try to make sure from
the beginning, we don’t end up like that. That is why Je Rinpoche in his
Lam Rim Chen Mo, right at the beginning, there is all these extensive
discussions and explanations of how we should actually learn the teachings
and listen to the dharma. That is why when we do our practice according to
the Stages of the Path to Enlightenment, we are told to adjust our
motivation right from the beginning when we actually receiving the
teachings and hearing the teachings. There is this explanation of how we
should listen to the teachings, and immediately right after that, there is
a topic on correctly relying on a virtuous friend, which is essentially
talking about faith. So we have to set the motivation at the beginning,
then throwing in our faith, and right after that, there is an exhortation,
imploring, and persuading our mind to practice the dharma by reflecting on
the topic of human life of freedom and endowments, identifying what it is,
what are the great meaningful objectives we can achieve with it and also
how extremely difficult it is to have such an opportunity. When we think of
these topics in that way according to the stages as in the outline and then
going to the topic of human life of freedom and endowments, all you will
experience is happiness. Just to be able to listen to the teachings, you
feel happy because you realize the preciousness and its rarity. That is why
that if we train our mind according to the Stages of the Path to
Enlightenment, I don’t think we will feel the dharma will become a burden,
which includes the Shantideva’s text.
When we see these teachings, and if we know how to think, it only increases
our faith and our appreciation of the teachings and also strengthens our
determination. As what the Student 3 has pointed out, in essence what we
need is analytical meditation. Hearing the teachings and studying the
teaching alone would not prevent the dharma from appearing as a burden to
us. No way! But if we meditate or critically analyze the topics through
analytical meditation, starting with the topic of correctly relying on the
virtuous friend, then the topic of human life of freedom and endowments and
then death and impermanence, with that experience you will not feel the
dharma is the burden. So this is the heart summary.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): There are so many summaries in one heart.
If you want to know what is the solution to all these problems, including
stopping you from feeling the dharma is a burden, the heart solution is
that you need to reflect and engage in analytical meditation on the Lamrim.
Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds

|5 The benefits of acting in a way |
|that others enjoy                 |


Verse 5.77
All initiatives are a source of joy
That would be rare even if it could be bought with money.
Therefore, the excellent qualities causing others [joy]
Causes the enjoyment of the happiness of joy.
Verse 5.78
I shall suffer no losses in this life
And in future lives shall find great happiness.
But misdeeds will make me unhappy and bring suffering,
And in future lives I shall find great suffering.
If we really think about it, whatever we do, whether we are doing it for
ourselves or we are doing for others, what are exactly we seeking? At the
end of the day, we are seeking happiness, joy and satisfaction inside.
For the bodhisattvas, whatever they do with their body, speech and mind,
every single thing they do is only to make others happy. This is what the
bodhisattvas do. Their goal is to make everyone happy. They do everything
with their body, speech and mind to achieve that. Bodhisattvas do
everything to make others happy. When others are made happy and
incidentally, they themselves are so satisfied. The bodhisattvas are so
happy and will experience so much peace and happiness inside. Such a
situation to be able to have this kind of happiness in others and oneself
is said to be priceless, so priceless that you can’t buy it.
When we see others are doing well, they are accumulating merits, engaging
in virtue, have many qualities, have many enjoyments, have pleasant or good
physical appearances, whatever good things they possess and good things
that happen to them, if we can rejoice in them then we ourselves will also
feel real happiness in the heart.
Here the teaching it telling us the very special kind of joy and happiness
that we will feel for ourselves when we truly rejoice in the good things of
others - in their qualities, in their virtues, their possessions and their
enjoyments, we will feel this great satisfaction and happiness. In
rejoicing in the good things of others will not cause our own possessions,
whatever we desire and whatever we have to degenerate by the way. When
rejoicing, we have no jealousy. We are not jealous of good things of
others. As such, we have great peace in our heart. As the result, our mind
is able to remain very calm, very steady and very happy. Also in the future
lives we would get good rebirths.
Instead of rejoicing, when we see others doing better than us, having
better look than us, having more possessions than us, having more qualities
than us, rather than rejoicing, we feel jealous or we get upset and get
angry “why him and not me?” and we develop this sense of negative
competitiveness wanting to compete with that person, what it does is in
this life is that you will be a very unhappy person. You are disturbed, you
are unhappy, and you cannot remain calm. It is said that you will also
accumulate the karma to have sufferings in the future lives.
The example of this verse here is not a burden, right?  This is not
something that is very heavy we have to carry and then feel very miserable
about carrying it and practicing it. It is just an observation of reality.
If we see somebody who is doing better than us - more wealth, better
looking, more virtue, more whatever - if we don’t rejoice but we feel
jealous, what does it do to us? We become very miserable and very unhappy,
isn’t it?  However, if we feel happy and able to think that this person is
experiencing the fruitional effect of his/her own virtue that he/she
accumulated in the past, and if you can feel happy, then the mind is calm.
With that kind of attitude it is easier to make friends with the person.
Otherwise, we become very miserable and very unhappy and very difficult to
make friends with that person. This is obvious, isn’t it? Is this knowledge
a burden? Actually all these are wonderful advices in the teachings. Just
like what you see here in the Shantideva’s text, they are not a burden.
Just because we don’t do it, we are ignorant, we are blinded and we don’t
want to do it. If we do it then there is benefit.
In short, these two verses are saying that when we see the good things of
others, don’t be jealous because it is pointless and meaningless.
Next is being skillful in the action of the three doors.

|Being knowledgeable about performing       |
|actions of the three doors                 |
|1 How to act when speaking                 |
|2 How to act when viewing                  |
|3 Connecting oneself solely with virtuous  |
|karma                                      |

|1 How to act when speaking                 |


Verse 5.79
When talking I should speak from my heart and on what is related.
Making the meaning clear and the speech pleasing.
I should abandon attachment or hatred,
And speak in gentle tones appropriately.
Here it is saying that if somebody will to asks you a question then one
should answer sincerely, speak sincerely and speak agreeably that fits with
the person’s mind.
We have to speak coherently such that whatever we say in the earlier part
of the conversation has to be connected with whatever we say in the later
part of the conversation. They have to be coherent and make sense. If the
head and the tail of the conversation has not connection then there is a
contradiction. If you speak contradicting yourself then the person is not
going to believe you. You have to speak clearly and speak in a way that is
easily understood by the other person.
The verse is also saying that you should speak without motivation of strong
attachment for your own side, for your own position or whatever is relating
to you, and also, not to have hatred or anger towards someone else.
About the tone, the tone has to be gentle. We are also advised that the
length of one’s reply or conversation should be appropriate, that means not
too long or not too short. There are some people when you talk to, they
start speaking to you and never stop, after a while the listener will
become get tired. On other extreme, when you talk to some people, you ask
them, they will just give you a one word reply. As to what is an
appropriate length of the conversation, this is something you have to
figure out. You have to look at the person’s expression to whom you are
talking to.
Next, how to act while one looks.

|2 How to act when    |
|viewing              |


Verse 5.80
When beholding someone with my eyes,
Thinking, “I shall attain buddhahood
By depending upon this being,”
I should look at him candidly with love.
Here the teachings are telling us to look upon the person with affection.
We can remind ourselves that the person, the sentient beings, that we see
is the object upon which we will generate bodhicitta, and in relation for
whom that we are going to practice the six perfections and also for whom I
am going to achieve enlightenment.
The teachings state that we have to look at sentient beings like how a
mother looks upon her child with affection. So the motivation is love.
Basically the engagement has to be a straightforward, an honest engagement
without any deceit or guile.

|3 Connecting oneself solely with virtuous karma                    |
|A Giving to the special fields for giving                          |
|B Virtuous karma occurs through its own power                      |
|C Entering into higher and higher virtues and having examined      |
|whether there is a purpose, acting upon it                         |

|A Giving to the special fields  |
|for giving                      |


Verse 5.81
Always being motivated by affection
Or being motivated by the antidotes,
In the fields of excellent qualities, benefit, and suffering,
Great virtues will come about.
When giving to the special fields of generosity there is a characteristic
or feature of time to be considered, in that one has to do it all the time.

 • The feature of time is indicated by the word ‘always’, that means always
   doing it continually.
 • The feature of the attitude is indicated by the word ‘affection’, which
   means to have strong love and affection or faith. Essentially the
   feature of the attitude here refers to very strong aspiration.
 • The feature of the antidote means whatever practice you are doing, for
   example, if you are practicing generosity, then all the effort that you
   put into practicing generosity must become an antidote to your
   miserliness. Similarly, if you are practicing ethical disciplines, your
   practice of ethical disciplines must be an antidote to the ethical
   disciplines’ discordant class.
Here it is said that whatever practice you are doing, using generosity as
an example, your practice of generosity must become an antidote to
miserliness.
Then the practice of ethical disciplines must be an antidote to the ethical
disciplines’ discordant class. In simple English, it must act as antidote
to the opposite of ethical disciplines.
In the case of giving, in relation to the fields of excellent qualities,
one makes offering. The fields of excellent qualities refer to the Buddha,
the Dharma and the Sangha.
 • Giving to the fields of excellent qualities rather than making offering
   to the fields of excellent qualities.
 • Giving to the fields of benefit primarily refers to one’s parents.
 • Giving to the fields of suffering refers to those sentient beings who
   are suffering.
To these various objects by giving we accumulate great virtue.
There are couples of things that make virtue strong and powerful.
 • The feature of time - if we engage in the similar or the same kind of
   virtue continually over and over again, that makes the virtue very
   strong.
 • The motivation or the attitude - if the attitude behind the virtue is
   virtuous and is very strong from the depth of the heart when one does it
   and that makes the virtue very powerful.
 • If the virtue is directed at special objects or powerful objects such as
   fields of excellent qualities, benefit and so forth then the virtue
   created will also very strong.
 • If the virtue that we create becomes an antidote to the various
   afflictions or become antidote of the opposite of that particular virtue
   then that also makes the virtue very powerful.
However, the opposite is also true as some of these features are also true
for non-virtue:
 • If we engage in non-virtue all the time continually then the non-virtue
   is going to be very strong.
 • If we engage in the non-virtue motivated from the heart by the very
   strong affliction or strong intention to engage in that non-virtue then
   that also make the non-virtue very strong.
Next is creating one’s virtuous karma under one’s own power or out of one’s
own power.

|B Virtuous karma occurs through   |
|its own power                     |


Verse 5.82
I should always perform actions
Endowed with skill and joy. *
In all actions
I should not depend upon anyone else.
*(Ven Gyurme translated as “with skill and faith”)
When we engage in virtue, we should do it from our own side and based on an
understanding of the situation in reality and not do something out of
wanting to imitate somebody else’s. When we see somebody doing then we do,
trying to copy and follow the person’s example, then we are not going to
achieve anything meaningful.
Whatever practice, for example, generating bodhicitta, the practice of the
six perfections and so forth, that practice has to be based on the thorough
understanding of the reality, and the nature of things: what is the virtue,
what makes the virtue powerful, what kind of motivation should I have, how
should I have it and so forth. We have to know the reality and the
situation as it is. Then at the end after the practice how should we
dedicate the merits and what is it for and so forth. So, the practice has
to be done with the understanding of all these things from one’s own side.
We cannot be doing the practice by just copying i.e. when we see somebody
doing then we just follow suit.
Whatever practice we want to undertake, we first have to know exactly what
are we doing and how are we going about doing it.  We need to know exactly
all the essential points. We have to first gain the faith in the practice -
the faith that comes from understanding. Then we engage in it. After that
we should engage in the practice wholeheartedly from the heart. We have to
do the practice wholeheartedly based on an understanding and to do it
continually.
When we engage in virtue, we have to do it from our own side without
needing someone to prompt us or to encourage us or to persuade us. Creating
virtue shouldn’t be like doing a job in such a way that you are waiting
there for a task.
Before any practice you have to know:
 • What exactly you are going to do
 • How you are going to do
 • You know the essential point
 • You believe in it.
Then you will see exactly; “This is this. It is like that. It is good. It
is like that”. Then naturally you will have enthusiasm. Then you want to do
it from your own side. You won’t need anybody to tell you to do it.
You have to engage in the virtue wholeheartedly from your own side, and
wanting to do it without having someone to persuade you to do it. When you
actually get down to do it, you don’t outsource it to somebody else such as
“I am going to engage in prostration” and you get somebody to do
prostration for you. Or you get somebody to offer your water bowls for you.
If you cannot do it for whatever reason then that is a different matter.
Otherwise we have to do it ourselves. That is meaning of the last sentence
of the verse: “I should not depend upon anyone else.” We have to do it
ourselves and not ask somebody to do it on our behalf.

|C Entering into higher and higher virtues and having examined whether|
|there is a purpose, acting upon it                                   |


The next one is extremely complicated.
Verse 5.83
The perfections such as generosity
Are progressively more exalted,
But for a little I should not forsake something greater.
Principally I should consider the welfare of others.
I will talk about this in the next lesson. There seem to be an internal
contradiction between verses 5.83 and 5.42.
Verse 5.42
But if I am unable to do this when involved in fear or
Celebrations and the like, then I should relax.
Thus it has been taught that at times of giving,
You may be indifferent to ethics.
Verse 5.42 talks about leaving the practice of ethical disciplines in
equanimity if you are primarily focusing on generosity. So that was this
discussion.




