Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Engaging in the Deeds of a Bodhisattva/lesson3.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:52:14.725605
================================================================================


Encouraging [the reader] to take the essence from this basis of leisures
and endowments
In the last lesson we looked at verse 1.4.
Verse 1.4
The leisures and endowments are very hard to find.
Since they accomplish the purposes of beings,
If I do not accomplish benefit upon this,
How will I acquire this in the future?
This is an exhortation to extract the essence from the human life of
freedoms and endowments. When one reflect on the difficulties of obtaining
the human life of freedoms and endowments:
- one can reflect on the difficulties in term of the difficulties in
actualizing the causes for such a rebirth
- one can reflects on the difficulties from the view point of its nature
- one can also reflect on these  through analogies
The text is saying that now having found this human life of freedoms and
endowments, which is very difficult to find, and once found it then one has
to use it. In the context of this text you are ask to extract the essence
from the human life of freedoms and endowments by practicing on meditating
on bodhicitta. The text is saying that if one wishes to meditate on
bodhicitta, one actually does have the basis – the body- to do it.
As I have mentioned that whether to practice dharma or even to cultivates
the mind of enlightenment/bodhicitta, it is much easier to do so on the
basis of this human life of freedoms and endowments. The basis of this
human life of freedoms and endowments is an ideal basis for such practices.
In the previous lesson we saw how in order to obtain such an ideal basis
for the practice of the dharma, with this human life of freedoms and
endowments with the 18 qualities, one has to actualize its causes.
The causes for such a perfect human rebirth is said to be:
- having practice pure morality
- complemented with the practices of generosity and so forth, and
- completed with making stainless pure prayers.
In order to actualize such an ideal basis in the future for the practice of
dharma one must actualize its causes; without which one will not obtain
such an opportunity again.
In order to practice the dharma we first must have the means of survival
such as food and other necessary articles that will sustain our life.
Without which then it is very difficult to practice the dharma. Having
enjoyment in life and having these articles sustaining our life comes about
through the practice of generosity.
In order to achieve a specific result one must first create the correct
cause because there must concordant between the cause and the result. There
are couples of things that are necessary for survival such food, shelter
and so forth. Even if you have all these you will still need good health.
If you don’t have good health then it is very difficult for you to practice
the dharma. Good health is the result of having practice ethical discipline
in the past. If you wish to obtain a good body with good health in the
future lives, then you have to actualize the cause. The cause is to have
practice ethical discipline.
On top of having a good body, good health and all the necessary objects of
enjoyment for sustaining life, and in order to carry out one’s practice one
will need good companion and helpers; literally in Tibetan is to have good
entourage; basically good helpers or people who help you. This is also very
important. The cause of having good helpers and good dharma friends and not
non-virtuous friends is to practice patience. If there is a need to have
companion who are helpful to you in your practice in the future then you
have to actualize its cause; which is the practice of patience.
Even if you have all these three things - you have the means of survival,
you have suitable body with good health and you have a circle of companions
and precious helpers - this doesn’t necessary guarantee or mean that you
will practice the dharma. In order to practice the dharma you first must
take delight in it i.e. you must want to do it. From your side you must
have the enthusiasm and delight. The cause for this is joyous perseverance.

It becomes challenging and difficult if we lack any of these four favorable
conditions. When you do not have the means of survival, you don’t have
anything to eat, you don’t have things to keep you alive, you don’t have
good health, you don’t have good helpers, companions or assistants and if
you don’t take delight in virtue and with no enthusiasm for practicing the
dharma then the dharma practice will become very difficult.
If you see the point and wanting to experience these four favorable
conditions in the future lives then you have to create the causes by
practicing generosity, guarding one’s ethical discipline, cultivate
patience and strive in joyous perseverance.
Even if one has these four conditions - you have all the good things that
ensure your survival, you have good health, you have people who can help
and assist you, you take delight in virtue - but if you are unable to keep
your mind focus on virtue and don’t have the single-pointedness
(concentration) and determination keeping align with virtue, then
somebody’s favorable conditions can actually become a condition for you to
generate afflictions. That is the case for a lot of people, isn’t it? For
example, you have all the favorable conditions but a lot of time these
favorable conditions become a cause for generation of negative emotion.
Here when we talk about single-pointedness it is that single-pointedness
focus on the very intent on virtue. Without that single-pointedness, then a
lot of times the other conditions do actually become a cause for the
generation of afflictions for the mind wanting to practice virtue.
Without wisdom it can also be difficult. We need the intelligence that
discriminate and differentiate between what we need to follow after,
cultivate and pursue and we also need to know what are the things that we
need to discard. Without this kind of wisdom, for example, one will not
think of the future and one will just concentrate on the present here and
there. One will just focus on this life, the enjoyment of this life and the
happiness of this life without thinking of the future and without thinking
of creating the causes for the future happiness. When we live our life in
such a way, then we don’t create the causes for the future happiness and at
the same time we will be just depleting whatever we have accumulated in the
past. So the discriminating wisdom then becomes indispensible as well.
Without such a discriminating wisdom, while one is depleting and using up
all the enjoyment that was the result of the practices that one had done in
the past and without doing the practice to create the causes for the future
happiness, then when all virtue is depleted that will be followed by the
start of suffering. Thinking along this line, it become clear that one
needs to have reasonable practice of the six perfections - generosity,
ethic, patience, joyous perseverance, some form of concentration, and some
kind of wisdom- with reasonable and certain amount of practice in these
things in order to be able to do a good and reasonable practice of dharma.
Even if one has all these conditions and one does all these practices, the
minimum motivation has to be turning away from attachment to the happiness
of this life. So that is the minimum. This must be the driving force of the
motivation behind all these practices. That is the minimum. Otherwise,
again it becomes difficult.
All I have just said was already covered when we look at the Lamrim – the
Stages of the Path to Enlightenment. The point is that while we have
already obtained this human life of freedoms and endowments and while we
still have it, we need to extract the essence of it and make use of it.
We could use verse 1.4 to recite and reflect on. We could use it to
persuade ourselves to practice the dharma. We could use this verse for
recitation, to reflect on it and then remind ourselves over and over again
to extract the meaning out of this human life. If you don’t do this then I
guess it will not be easy to transform your mind and to change yourself.
Next is instructing that it is appropriate to abandon non-virtue and to
accomplish virtue.
Verse 1.5
Just as a flash of lightning brightly illuminates
For an instant within the clouds on a dark night,
Likewise in this world, through the might of the Buddha,
Merit and intelligence occasionally occur for once.
Verse 1.6 a,b
Hence virtue is perpetually feeble,
Although we have obtained a human life of freedoms and endowments as
suitable basis for practicing the dharma however the desire to practice the
pure dharma arises very infrequently. Even if it arise, it only last for
very short time just like a flash of lightning in the dark.
*(BP1 Lesson 3) “Just as a flash of lightning on a dark, cloudy night” –
night, as opposed to day; dark night refers to the night when we don’t see
the moon and the sky is covered with clouds. When there is a flash of
lightning in such a night, in that instant, one might be able to see the
forms of the buildings that are being illuminated by the lightning. The
night refers to the time where the sun of the Buddha’s wisdom is not
shining. Dark refers to the ignorance regarding what is to be abandoned and
what is to be cultivated. Clouds that obscure the sky is like the three
mental poisons in our mind.
Our non-virtuous state of mind are very strong and powerful that last for
long time; just like the night sky that is completely covered by thick
clouds. The text is saying that our desire to engage in virtue and practice
the dharma arises very infrequently and it is very difficult. Even if they
do arise, it only last for very short time. So, first is to have it to
arise. Using that as a basis we should seek to expand the duration of those
virtuous thoughts.
The text in the teaching says that such virtuous thought that arise in our
mind are said to be due to the enlightened influence of the buddhas and due
to the power one’s merit. So you need to cultivate faith in the dharma,
aspiration for the dharma and belief in the dharma. In particular, here in
this context, we need to develop a belief in the Mahayana dharma. This
belief in the Mahayana dharma is the basis for developing bodhicitta. It is
said that for those who have vast and extensive belief in the Mahayana
dharma, one will receive the blessing of all the Buddhas. Those who receive
the blessing of all the Buddhas are the one who receives the blessing to
actualize bodhicitta.
It is mentioned in one commentary that it is very important to strive in
cultivating and developing this belief in the Mahayana for it is the basis
for bodhicitta. So it is advised to cultivate this belief in the Mahayana
dharma on the basis of having found this human life of freedoms and
endowments.
We know from our own experience that how difficult it is for virtue thought
to arise. Even if they do, it doesn’t last for long time. The commentary is
saying that whatever virtuous thought that arise we should try not to lose
it. We should try to retain the continuity of those thoughts and try to
increase those thoughts. Basically, there is this advice to cultivate this
belief in the Mahayana dharma. By doing this one will be establishing the
foundation for developing bodhicitta.
The next few verses are the explanation of the benefits of bodhicitta.  Of
the many benefits of bodhicitta, the first is that bodhicitta has the power
to destroy all negativities and accomplish all virtues.

|The benefits of bodhicitta has the potential to destroy all        |
|negativities and accomplish all virtues                            |
|A Destroying great negativities                                    |
|B The potential to accomplish supreme bliss                        |
|C The potential to accomplish whatever one wishes                  |


On the first one, we look at how bodhicitta has the power to destroy great
negativities.
Verse 1.6 b,c,d
The great power of negativities, horrible.
Except for a mind of complete enlightenment
By what other virtue will it be overcome?
I did mention briefly before that there are two types of bodhicitta. More
of that will come later.
The two types of bodhicitta are:
   1. Conventional bodhicitta
   2. Ultimate bodhicitta
Here the bodhicitta that we primarily talks about now is the conventional
bodhicitta. So we primarily are talking about the benefits of the
conventional bodhicitta.
One of the benefits of this conventional bodhicitta is that it has a great
power to destroy all negativities.
In the commentaries, it is said that even if one accumulate non-virtue that
will cause one to be reborn in the hell and if one manages to develop
bodhicitta then this bodhicitta will continue to, literally the word is,
suppress or outshine or overwhelm that heavy negativities. In comparison,
that negatives become small when we compare the power of that negativities
to the power of bodhicitta.
Let us think about this: Why is that when bodhicitta arises it can
overwhelm, suppress and outshine even those very heavy negativities karma?
If bodhicitta does arise and when it is generated one accumulates a huge
amount of merit. You could say that the merit will be measureless and
limitless. That makes even those very heavy negative karmas small in
comparison.
I guess when one generates bodhicitta, one accumulates very powerful
virtue. In that sense, the non-virtue almost becomes powerless. Here when
we are talking about the benefits of bodhicitta, this particular benefit is
primarily related to conventional bodhicitta.
Another benefit of bodhicitta is that when it is generated, it can
accomplish supreme virtue.
Verse 1.7
All the Lords of Subduers who have contemplated for many eons
Have seen it to be beneficial;
For by it the immeasurable masses of beings
Will easily attain the supreme happiness.
The buddhas have thought about it for a very very long time and had seen
that what really is the most beneficial thing for the sentient beings is
bodhicitta. The buddhas see that bodhicitta is like a seed with which the
immeasurable number of sentient beings can achieve happiness. So bodhicitta
is like the seed for all the numberless sentient beings to achieve the
supreme happiness.
The third benefit of bodhicitta is that it can accomplish one’s wishes.
Verse 1.8
Those who wish to destroy the multitudes of sufferings of existence,
Those who wish to dispel the unhappiness of sentient beings,
And those who wish to enjoy multitudes of happiness,
Should never forsake the mind of enlightenment.
“Those who wish to destroy the multitudes of suffering of existence” -
there are those who practice the path that is shared with the path of the
person of small capacity and the path of person of medium capacity. Even
those people who want to destroy the sufferings of samsara should meditate
on bodhicitta
Those who cultivate the path of the person of great capacity, in order to
dispel the unhappiness in sentient beings should also meditate on
bodhicitta.
“Those who wish to destroy the multitudes of sufferings of existence” – we
can relate that to the persons training in the path that is shared with the
person of small and medium capacity.
“Those who wish to dispel the unhappiness of sentient beings” - we can
relate that to the persons of great capacity.
“And those who wish to enjoy multitudes of happiness” - the happiness here
refers to the happiness of being human beings or gods - the happiness of
good rebirth. Here primarily you can relate that to the persons of small
capacity or those who are training their minds in the path that is shared
with the person of small capacity. Even such people should also meditate on
bodhicitta.
Or you could just say simply that:
-  those who wish to destroy the multitudes of sufferings of samsara should
meditate on bodhicitta.
-  those people who have the wish to dispel the unhappiness and sufferings
of sentient beings should also meditate on bodhicitta.
- those who are looking for a good rebirth either as human being or worldly
gods/celestial beings should also practice bodhicitta and should never
forsake it.
In general, just to get out of samsara or just to achieve a good rebirth as
a human being and god, you don’t need to develop bodhicitta. But the point
here is that if one actualizes bodhicitta, all those goals will be
achieved. The teaching is telling us that when we meditate on bodhicitta,
all these different goals will be achieved easily. Here, this is an advice
that primarily talking from the perspective of the practice of the
Mahayana.
Then the next benefit of bodhicitta is that one becomes special in name and
in meaning.
Khen Rinpoche (spoke in English): Special name. Anybody wants a special
name? Then you know what to do.
Verse 1.9
When the mind of enlightenment(bodhicitta) is generated, in that moment,
Those wretched ones fettered in the jail of cyclic existence
Will be called “Child of the Sugatas,”
And will become objects of reverence by the humans and gods of the world.
When bodhicitta is developed and when it arises in one’s mind, one
obtains/acquires a special name and the name is “Child of the Sugatas”.
On top of becoming special in name, one becomes special in meaning in that
one becomes the object of reverence of the humans and the celestial beings.
Here we are still talking about an ordinary person, the sentient being who
generates bodhicitta initially. He is still an ordinary being in cyclic
existence. Whatever he/she maybe, it can even be an animal, but once
bodhicitta arises in the mind, then that being becomes a special object.
Here we are talking about an ordinary being who develops bodhicitta for the
first time initially. When bodhicitta arises, that being is still an
ordinary being, and that person does not have any special or exalted
qualities or abandonments or realizations. But nevertheless, he becomes a
Child of the Sugatas, a special object because of bodhicitta. So when one
actualizes bodhicitta, then one becomes special in name and in meaning.
Next is an explanation of the benefits of bodhicitta through various
analogies.

|Explaining the benefits by means of an analogy      |
|A An analogy of the inferior becoming the supreme   |
|B An analogy of the difficulty in obtaining it and  |
|its great value                                     |
|C An analogy of an inexhaustible effect and [an     |
|effect that] is magnified                           |
|D An analogy of the potential for being protected   |
|from great fear                                     |
|E An analogy of destroying negativities without     |
|difficulty                                          |
|F The way benefits are taught in the sutras         |


Now is an analogy of how the lesser becomes supreme.
Verse 1.10
Like the supreme gold-making elixir,
It takes the unclean body and transforms it
Into the priceless jewel, a Victor’s body.
Therefore, firmly seize this so-called “mind of enlightenment.”
Just like the analogy of the small amount of gold transforming elixir i.e.
that it can transform a lot of iron into gold. Likewise bodhicitta is that
which can transform unclean body (unclean in terms of its cause and in
terms of its nature) into the exalted body of the Buddha.
We are not saying that once bodhicitta arises in the mind, then the actual
unclean physical body transforms into the buddha’s exalted body. Of course
that is not possible. What it means is that when bodhicitta arises, from
then on, on the basis having this unclean body one can achieve
enlightenment.
From the perspective of sutra:
- it is the factor of method, which primarily refers to bodhicitta, is
responsible for achieving the form body, the rupakaya.
- it is the factor of wisdom, which primarily refers to the wisdom directly
perceiving emptiness, is responsible for achieving the truth body, the
dharmakaya.
If you look at the sutra, the sutric explanation of the substantial cause
for achieving the form body of Buddha, and then upon deep analysis, you
will find that it is inadequate. A detailed explanation of the actual
substantial cause of the Buddha’s form body can only be found in tantra.
Next is an analogy for its rarity and preciousness.
Verse 1.11
Since the sole helmsmen of migrating beings, the limitless mind,
Has upon thorough investigation seen its preciousness,
All beings wishing to be free from the abodes of migration,
Firmly seize this precious mind of enlightenment.
I guess the example would be like how the captain of a boat can lead a
group of people to locate for treasures in the middle of the ocean. You
need a captain who can lead people to the correct place and enable them to
retrieve treasures from the ocean. Likewise, the Buddhas have seen that
bodhicitta is the best thing for accomplishing the welfare of the sentient
beings. So bodhicitta is priceless for it can lead sentient beings out of
all suffering. Therefore one should always hold on to bodhicitta.
Next is an analogy of the unending and increasing result.
Verse 1.12
All other virtues are like the plantain tree,
For after bearing fruit they will be exhausted.
But the tree of the mind of enlightenment will constantly bear fruit,
Whereby it is inexhaustible and flourishes more and more.
The text is saying that if we want to have unceasing virtues, i.e. the
virtues that always increase and is constantly increasing, then we should
meditate on bodhicitta.
It is said that if one has bodhicitta, one’s virtue will always increase
like some of those trees that constantly bear fruit, that is, it just goes
on continuously producing fruit. That is an analogy of how bodhicitta
causes one’s virtue always to increase.
So virtues that are not conjoined with bodhicitta are likened to plantain
tree. Such trees are said to only produce fruit once. After they produce
the fruit, that tree dies. It doesn’t produce anymore fruit. So virtues
that are not conjoined with bodhicitta are said to be like plantain tree.
So such is said to be the benefits of bodhicitta in that once bodhicitta
arises in one’s mind, one’s virtue would be unceasing and will increase
just on and on and on.
Usually at the end of a particular activity, we dedicate the merits that
are accumulated. If we dedicate the merit conjoin with bodhicitta, then it
will be a cause for the merit to increase more and more.
Here we are just talking about the benefits of bodhicitta in general. There
is so much to be discussed about the virtues that are conjoined with
bodhicitta. Whether the virtues that are conjoined with bodhicitta are
necessarily unceasing or not, there is much to be discussed. I think there
were some discussions on this topic in the previous module and the
materials are already there. We have covered this. You can read if you
like, and if you have questions pertaining to this, you could always raise
it up in class.
Next is an analogy for the ability of bodhicitta to rescue from great
danger.
Verse 1.13
Like depending on a hero when greatly afraid,
Even if I may have committed very terrible negativities,
I shall be swiftly liberated in dependence upon it.
Why then do those who have the imprints not depend on it?
It is said that the best method for purifying heavy negativities such as
the five immediate karmas and so forth is by generating bodhicitta. So it
is like having to travel on a very dangerous road and if you have someone
who is competent and brave to go ahead, then you will be less fearful.
Likewise, if one develops bodhicitta, then there is no need to be fear of
those heavy negativities that one has already accumulated. For it is said
that even those extremely heavy negative karmas such as the five immediate
actions i.e. those five extremely heavy negative karmas can be purified.

*(BP1 Lesson 4) There are different classifications of karma or actions –
there is karma whose effects will be experienced very quickly and there is
karma whose effects will not be experienced that quickly.
By generating bodhicitta, it can even completely purify those powerful
negativities that can give rise to effects very quickly. (To completely
purify a negative action means that one will not experience the fruitional
result of the negative action, i.e. one will not be born in the lower
realm.)
Next is an analogy for how bodhicitta destroys negativities effortlessly.
Verse 1.14 a,b
Just like the fire at the end of time,
In an instant it certainly burns up the great negativities.
In the Buddha’s teaching, there is a presentation of how the world system
comes into being and how it will go out of existence. When a particular
world system undergoes disintegration and destruction, that destruction
will be caused by a fire. And during that destruction, all the abodes from
the first concentration and below will be destroyed by this fire at the end
of the eon. The power of bodhicitta in destroying negativities is likened
to such a fire that will destroy the world at the end of its existence.
Then what is the difference between the earlier benefit where it was
mentioned that bodhicitta can completely overwhelm and outshine the
negativities created and this particular benefit where it says that
bodhicitta destroys the negativities in an instant?
That is something to think about. The earlier benefit in that when
bodhicitta arises in one’s mind, that bodhicitta outshines or overwhelms
all the negativities. Of course it is an explanation of bodhicitta in
general but does it apply to every instance of bodhicitta or all kinds of
bodhicitta?
If you remember the discussion on the paths and grounds, when the
bodhisattva achieves the forbearance level of the path of preparation he
achieves the confidence of never ever falling back in the lower realms
again. Could we apply this benefit that bodhicitta overwhelms all the
negativities? Earlier it was explained that the negativities refer to those
that will throw us into lower realms. Could we then apply that benefit to
specifically mean the gaining that confidence of not falling into lower
realms when one achieves the forbearance level of the path of preparation?

*(BP1 Lesson 4) “According to the Buddhist cosmology, at the end of an age
when the world would be destroyed, destruction happens in stages – first,
the world will be attacked by fire, then water, followed by wind. At the
beginning of the force of destruction during the end of this world, seven
suns will arise and will burn up everything in samsara up to the form realm
of the first concentration – the realm, the environment and the beings
there will be completely destroyed. The form realm of the second
concentration will be destroyed by water. The form realm of the third
concentration will be destroyed by wind. The form realm of the fourth
concentration and the remaining four realms of the formless realm will
remain as they are.
Just like the fiery conflagration at the end of this age that will burn
everything in the form realm of the 1st concentration with no remainder,
when one generates bodhicitta, the generated bodhicitta will consume all
the great wrong doings that includes all the negativities that will throw
us into the lower realms.
Next is how the benefits are explained in the sutras.
Verse 1.14 c,d
Its unfathomable benefits were explained
To Sudhana by the wise Protector Maitreya.
In the Arrays of Stalks Sutra, Maitreya explained to Sudhana that
bodhicitta:
- is the seed of all the teachings of budhha
- is like a fuel because bodhicitta increases the white dharmas of all the
migrating beings
- is like the noble vase because it perfectly accomplishes all thoughts and
all wishes.

[Stephen Batchelor’s text page 169]
O Noble Son, the awakening mind is like the seed of all the buddhas’
qualities. Since it increases the wholesome qualities of all beings it is
like a field; since it supports each and every creature, it is like the
earth; since it perfectly severs all poverty, it is like the god of wealth;
since it affords complete protection to all bodhisattvas, it is like a
father; since it perfectly accomplishes all aims, it is like the king of
wish-fulfilling gems; since it completely fulfills all intentions, it is
like anauspicious vase...O Noble Son, the awakening mind is endowed with
such excellent virtues asthese as well as limitless other benefits.
These are the benefits of bodhicitta. As said in the teachings that when
bodhicitta arises in the mind:
- one is able to finish the accumulation of merit easily
- one is able to purify the negativities easily
- one is able to accomplish effortlessly the aims of oneself and aims of
welfare of others.
And with bodhicitta, one becomes impervious; one will not be easily
affected by the problems and obstacles.
In essence, Shantideva says that:
- if you want to be free from samsara, meditate on bodhicitta
- if you want to free others from their suffering and unhappiness, then you
need to meditate on bodhicitta
- if you want to get a good rebirth as a human of celestial being, you
should also meditate on bodhicitta.
So basically, if one has bodhicitta, one accomplishes all the goals. It is
with bodhicitta that you finish the accumulation of merit easily. One is
able to purify one’s negativities easily. When bodhicitta arises, then one
will not face with any obstacles, because when bodhicitta arises, there is
no more self cherishing. Since self cherishing is the source of all the
problems and all the obstacles, so in the absence of self cherishing, there
will not be any obstacles. Because of self cherishing, you don’t accomplish
your own goals and you cannot accomplish the welfare of others. So if self
cherishing is destroyed, then you will be able to accomplish your own
purposes and the welfare of others effortlessly.
Anyway, I don’t know how really to give you a good explanation but you read
the text and think about it. The point is that you have to generate the
belief in bodhicitta. When you have the belief in bodhicitta, then you have
aspiration and faith in bodhicitta. And it is that aspiration for
bodhicitta that will kick start ones practice to cultivate and meditate on
bodhicitta.
Q&A
Student:  I just want to clarify that the way conventional bodhicitta
suppress negativity. Does it means that it reduce or actually remove the
conditions of negative karma from ripening, and not that it cause the
negative karma to become like a burned seed?
Khen Rinpoche: There is the benefit that is mentioned that negativities are
outshined or overwhelmed by bodhicitta. When bodhicitta arises, it
outshines the negativities. So it is kind of like renders the negativities
powerless. But whether the seed of negativity is removed or not is a
different question. If you think of the example of how in a bright day, the
moon is always there in the sky, but because the sun is up there and it is
so bright that you cannot see the moon even though the moon is there. The
sun completely outshines the moon. So it is similar here. Whether the seed
of the negative karma is rendered ineffective or powerless, is something
that we need to think about. The seed of the non-virtue that causes rebirth
in the lower realms probably only rendered powerless upon achieving the
forbearance level of the Mahayana path of preparation. So when we think
about this particular benefit of bodhicitta outshining the negativities,
does it mean outshining negativities in terms of rendering the seed of the
non-virtues powerless? Or it means just rendering it or preventing or not
allowing the result to arise?


