Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Engaging in the Deeds of a Bodhisattva/lesson40.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:52:18.153552
================================================================================


Last lesson we saw how patience cannot be developed in relation to a person
who is kind and always benefitting us. That person cannot be the object for
the development of patience. Rather, the object for the development of
patience has to be someone who has a hateful mind or someone who is upset
and angry with us or someone who wishes to harm us or someone who harms us.
That person has to exist before any patience can be cultivated. As such,
the harmer or the enemy is an indispensable condition and cause for the
development of patience. As such, just as we would respect and venerate the
Dharma, likewise the teachings is telling us that we should also venerate
the enemy because the enemy is just like the Dharma, is an indispensable
cause for us to accumulate virtue. Because the enemy is an indispensable
cause for the development of patience, it doesn’t matter whether that enemy
or the harmer has the intention to benefit us or not. Regardless of that,
since the enemy or the harmer is an indispensable cause for the development
of our own patience, therefore he/she is worthy of veneration just like the
Dharma. The Dharma does benefit us, and likewise the Dharma doesn’t have
any intention to benefit us.
Next is an explanation of why we should consider the enemy or the harmer to
be special and exalted and why we should view the enemy like the Buddha.

|(c) Seeing it to be like the Teacher                         |
|(i) An extensive explanation                                 |
|(ii) Synopsis                                                |

|(i) An extensive explanation                                 |
|(1’) The scriptures teach that sentient beings and Buddhas   |
|are comparable fields of merit                               |
|(2’) Establishing that by reason                             |
|(3’) Abandoning objections                                   |


In essence, the following section talks about how sentient beings are
precious and why we should respect sentient beings. Of the various reasons,
one of which is that sentient beings are like a merit field for us. That is
one reason for respecting sentient beings. The other reason for respecting
the sentient beings is that when we do so, we please all the buddhas and
bodhisattvas.  Another reason is that any help or benefit that is extended
to the sentient beings from our side brings about great positive results in
the future and any harm that we inflict on other sentient beings will bring
about great suffering results for ourselves in the future. So, by analyzing
and distinguishing well, the consequences of both harming others and
benefitting others, then that is another way to cultivate our respect for
sentient beings.

|(1’) The scriptures teach that sentient beings and Buddhas   |
|are comparable fields of merit                               |


In verse 6.112 a,b
Therefore the Muni taught
The field of sentient beings and the so-called “field of Victors.”
Essentially, the Buddha said that both sentient beings and the buddhas are
equal in being a merit field i.e. are equal in being the objects in
relation to whom we can collect merit.
In one sutra, the Buddha said that the field of sentient beings is the
field of the buddhas. From the field of the buddhas, the Buddhadharma is
obtained, so it will be unsuitable to mistreat them. That is what the
Buddha had said. Following this is establishing what we have just said with
reasoning.
[BP1 Part 2 L17] The Buddha said in the Sutra of Pure (Perfect) Prayer that
to attain the state of full enlightenment which perfectly fulfils the two
purposes, we need to depend on the field of sentient beings and the buddha-
field.
The field of sentient beings is the cause for achieving the state of full
enlightenment. Since we need to depend on it in order to develop the four
immeasurables and meditate on love and compassion, it is perfect for
fulfilling the two purposes.
The buddha-field is also a necessary cause for us to achieve the state of
full enlightenment. Since we need to go for refuge to the buddhas in order
to achieve enlightenment, the buddha-field fulfils the purposes of
ourselves and others.
The buddhas and sentient beings are therefore comparable in terms of both
of them being necessary causes for us to achieve enlightenment.
An alternative interpretation of what the Buddha said in this sutra is that
the field of sentient beings is the buddha-field. The buddha-field is the
basis upon which we achieve enlightenment. Since sentient beings are the
causes for us to achieve enlightenment, the field of sentient beings itself
is the buddha-field.

|(2’) Establishing that by reason                                               |
|(a’) One attains the final object of desire by having faith in Buddhas and     |
|sentient beings                                                                |
|(b’) As having faith in both is comparable in terms of attaining Buddhahood, it|
|is unreasonable to discard one and embrace the other                           |

|(a’) One attains the final object of desire by having faith|
|in Buddhas and sentient beings                             |


Verse 6.112 c,d
Many who have pleased them
Have thereby reached perfection.

Many have become buddhas, and many have achieved the fulfillment of the two
purposes through cultivating and generating love and compassion for
sentient beings. As such, this is a reason for us to respect sentient
beings.
[BP1 Part 2 L17] “The final object of desire,” (in the outline) refers to
buddhahood. Many people have achieved enlightenment through generating love
and compassion that pleased many sentient beings and through practicing
Buddhadharma, which made the buddhas happy.

|(b’) As having faith in both is comparable in terms of attaining Buddhahood, it|
|is unreasonable to discard one and embrace the other                           |


Verse 6.113
A buddha’s qualities are accomplished
From sentient beings and the Victors alike,
So what kind of system is it that
I do not respect sentient beings in the same way I respect the Victors?
The achievement of the various qualities of enlightenment such as ten
powers, and the four fearlessnesses come about in dependence upon both the
buddhas and the sentient beings. If that is the case, the teachings are
questioning us why is it that on one hand we venerate the buddhas,
prostrate to them, cherish them and make offerings to them, but on the
other end, we do not do likewise to the sentient beings. We do not respect
sentient beings. Why is it that we act in such a way since both are equal
in being the object in relation to which we must depend on in order to
achieve the qualities of enlightenment? As such, the teachings say that
such behavior of neglecting the sentient beings, and not respecting them
and at the same time respecting the buddhas and so forth is a behavior that
is discordant with one another.
We probably have qualms. For example, we may accept that sentient beings
and the buddhas are equal in being of a field of merit. However, the
buddhas and sentient beings are vastly different in that the buddhas have
all the qualities, and the buddhas do not have any fault. This is not the
case for sentient beings. Sentient beings are essentially full of faults.
As such, it is only suitable to venerate and make offerings to the buddhas
and not to sentient beings. So we may have such qualms. The answer to that
is in verse 6.114
[BP1 Part 2 L17] The four fearlessnesses of a Buddha are:-
  1 fearlessness in revealing the Dharma of renunciation
  2 fearlessness in revealing the Dharma of overcoming obstructions
  3 fearlessness in revealing the Dharma of excellent abandonment and
  4 the fearlessness in revealing the Dharma of excellent realizations
The ten powers of a tathagata:
  (1) knowing what is possible and what is not possible,
  (2) knowing the results of actions,
  (3) knowing the aspirations of men,
  (4) knowing the elements,
  (5) knowing the higher and lower powers of men,
  (6) knowing the path that leads everywhere,
  (7) knowing the origin of kleshas, which leads to meditation, liberation,
  samadhi, and equanimity,
  (8) knowing previous lives,
  (9) the knowledge of transference and death,
  (10) knowing that the defilements are exhausted.

|(3’) Abandoning objections                                                     |
|(a’) Rejecting [the position that holds] that it is invalid to cultivate equal |
|faith in objects that are not equal in terms of their qualities                |
|(b’) The greatness of faith in both: It is reasonable to cultivate equal faith |
|[on the basis that] they are comparable [in terms of                           |
|their ability to act as] causes for Buddhahood                                 |
|(c’) It is reasonable to have faith because there is unlimited merit in making |
|offerings to sentient beings who possess only a                                |
|fraction of the qualities of a Buddha                                          |

|(a’) Rejecting [the position that holds] that it is invalid to cultivate equal |
|faith in objects that are not equal in terms of their qualities                |


Verse 6.114
They are not similar in the excellent qualities of their intentions
But in the results.
Sentient beings also have excellent qualities
And they are therefore equal.
Whatever we have said so far is not claiming that the buddhas and the
sentient beings are equal in terms of qualities. Of course, that is not the
case that the buddhas and sentient beings are equal in terms of qualities.
But in terms of being the causes for achieving the final fruit of
enlightenment, they are equal. Since we need to depend on both the buddhas
and the sentient beings in order to achieve our desired results of full
enlightenment, as such we also have to respect the sentient beings.

|(b’) The greatness of faith in both: It is reasonable to cultivate equal faith |
|[on the basis that] they are comparable [in terms of                           |
|their ability to act as] causes for Buddhahood                                 |


Verse 6.115
Whatever veneration of one with a loving mind
Is the greatness of sentient beings.
Whatever merit of faith in the buddhas
Is the greatness of buddhas.
Verse 6.116 a,b
Therefore, they are asserted to be equal
In the share they have in establishing a buddha’s qualities.
If someone who is cultivating love and has entered into the meditative
equipoise concentrating on love, when that person arises from that
concentration on love and if we were to venerate and make offerings to this
person, it is said that we would accumulate a vast amount of merit. The
merit that we collect in relation to the offering to that person is so
powerful that it can bear fruit even in this life. Why such created merit
is so powerful? That amount of merit that we collect in relation to making
offerings to a person who has achieved the concentration of love is so
great because of sentient beings are the objects of observation of that
person’s love.
From our side, when we make offerings to the buddhas out of faith, whether
it is putting our palms together in veneration or offering just a single
flower or even a drop of water, it is said that the merit accumulated is so
great that it will continues all the way up to our achievement of full
enlightenment. The merit is so great also because of our faith. In the
first place, we made offerings because of faith in the Buddha.
Because of faith, we venerate the buddhas through prostration, making
offerings and so forth and we accumulate so much merit. Such merit is said
to last all the way to enlightenment. As we make the offerings out of
faith, the result that we get is very powerful because of the object of our
veneration and offering is the Buddha. So in this case the Buddha is the
object that enables us to accumulate that much merit.
In the earlier example, we can accumulate so much merit as well when we
make offerings to someone who has the concentration of love because of
sentient beings. So, in the first example, we accumulate that amount of
merit in dependence upon the sentient beings, while in the second example,
we accumulate that much merit in dependence upon the Buddha.
The point is that in order achieve the state of full enlightenment, which
is our ultimate goal, we need one of the causes for the achievement and of
that which is sentient beings. So besides the buddhas, we need to depend
upon the sentient beings. Since in that sense sentient beings are equal to
the buddhas in being the necessary condition and cause for us to achieve
full enlightenment. Therefore, it is correct to be equally respectful to
the sentient beings.

|(c’) It is reasonable to have faith because there is unlimited merit in making |
|offerings to sentient beings who possess only a                                |
|fraction of the qualities of a Buddha                                          |


Verse 6.116 c,d
They are not equal with the buddhas
Who are boundless oceans of excellence.
Verse 6.117
Even if the three realms were offered
For the sake of venerating
Some person in whom a mere share of the good qualities
Of the unique Assembly of Supreme Excellent Qualities appears, it would be
little.
In terms of qualities, the buddhas and sentient beings are not equal. The
buddhas have boundless oceans of qualities. That is true. Although sentient
beings are not equal to the buddhas in terms of qualities, the sentient
beings do have some portion of qualities that the buddhas possess.
It is said that, for the sake of venerating sentient beings, even if we
were to offer the entire three realms to one sentient being that have some
mere portion of qualities of what the buddhas have, even the three realms
is not a sufficient offering to make.

|(ii)        |
|Synopsis    |


Verse 6.118
Thus since sentient beings have a share
In giving rise to the supreme qualities of the buddhas,
It is correct to venerate sentient beings
Due to similarity through just these.
[BP1 Part 2 L17] In summary, the buddhas and sentient beings may not be
equal in terms of qualities, but they are equal in being causes for us to
achieve enlightenment. Since this is so, it is appropriate for us to
venerate sentient beings.
The next section talks about how we should be respectful to the sentient
beings if we really have faith in the Buddha. I guess one of the main ways
to repay the kindness of the buddhas is to respect or to cherish sentient
beings.

|(2) Due to faith in the Teacher, one should respect it          |
|(a) One should respect [the Teacher] because he acted as if all |
|sentient beings were his only child                             |
|(b) Thus, this shows in brief that we should respect sentient   |
|beings as well                                                  |

|(a) One should respect [the Teacher] because he acted as if all |
|sentient beings were his only child                             |
|(i) Accomplishing the principal method required of Buddhas      |
|(ii) Confessing previous displeasing actions                    |
|(iii) Refraining from [allowing negativities] to arise in the   |
|future                                                          |

|(i) Accomplishing the principal method required of Buddhas                     |
|(1’) [Showing respect and cherishing other beings is] identified as the        |
|principal method for repaying the kindness of the Buddhas in light of what they|
|have done                                                                      |
|(2’) Establishing that                                                         |

|(1’) [Showing respect and cherishing other beings is] identified as the        |
|principal method for repaying the kindness of the Buddhas in light of what they|
|have done                                                                      |


Verse 6.119
Furthermore, what way is there to repay
Those without dissimulation who are a friend
And grant immeasurable benefit,
Other than by pleasing sentient beings?
The buddhas look upon all sentient beings as their loved ones without any
discrimination, and also without any deceit and pretension. It is said that
there is no better way to honor and  pleasing the buddhas than to cherish
and respect all sentient beings.
It is said that there is no better way to repay the kindness of the buddhas
than to cherish and help sentient beings. In fact, it is said that there is
no better way of repaying the kindness of the buddhas, and there is no
higher offering to the buddhas than to help and benefit the sentient
beings.
Here it is said that there is no better way of pleasing the buddhas than to
work for the benefit of sentient beings. There is no better offering that
pleases the buddhas than working for the welfare and benefit of others. As
such, there is really no way to please the buddhas if on one hand we
venerate the buddhas and make offerings, and then on the other hand, we
harm the sentient beings, we get upset with them or we look down on them or
we bully them.
If there is the need to respect the sentient beings, then what is the way
to do it? One of the ways is to be patient when harmed by sentient beings.

|(2’) Establishing that                           |
|(a’) One should be patient with harm done by     |
|sentient beings                                  |
|(b’) Abandoning conceit one feels in relation [to|
|other] sentient beings                           |
|(c’) Abandoning harm                             |

|(a’) One should be patient with harm done by     |
|sentient beings                                  |


Verse 6.120
Because benefiting them will repay
Those who give up their holy bodies and enter Relentless Torment,
Therefore even if they cause me great harm
I shall behave impeccably in all.
The buddhas have worked very hard in order to become the buddhas. Even if
they could give up their exalted bodies to fulfill the welfare of sentient
beings, they would do it. They could actually even go to the lowest of the
hot hells, the Unrelenting Hot Hells, for the benefit of the sentient
beings.
So if we really have faith in such buddhas, then we should benefit the
sentient beings. That would be the best way to repay the kindness of the
buddhas in whom we have faith in.  As such, if our possessions or our
bodies are harmed in any way by the sentient beings, then the practice here
is to be able to train the mind to look at these harmers and the enemies in
the positive way - just as how we would view our spiritual teachers/ our
gurus. Because when we look at our gurus, we look at them as only wanting
to benefit and help us.
A person who is able to devote correctly to the virtuous friend is someone
who is able to see good in every action of the virtuous friend because of
his/her own way of looking at the teacher through training. Likewise, the
practice here is to train the mind to look at sentient beings, especially
the enemy and the harmer, in a positive light regardless of what they do to
us. So that is one of the ways to train.
This verse is an advice, from our side, to look at everything that the
harmer does as something that is good and positive.
Next is an advice to abandon arrogance in relation to sentient beings
because if there is arrogance, it is difficult to do what we have set out
to do here. At the beginning of the section, we say this is about the
method to develop respect towards sentient beings.

|(b’) Abandoning conceit one feels in relation  |
|[to other] sentient beings                     |


Verse 6. 121
Because those who are my Lords, for the time being
Disregard even their own bodies,
Then why does the confused I
Act proud and not behave with the attributes of a servant toward them?
The “Lords” here refers to the buddhas and bodhisattvas to whom we love,
hold in high regard, and respect very much. From the side of the buddhas
and bodhisattvas, they have the intention and the wish to give themselves
up, even their lives and their bodies, if there is a need to benefit
others.
If the buddhas and bodhisattvas in whom we really respect, love and hold in
high regard would even disregard their own lives to benefit sentient
beings, then why do we out of confusion act proud and arrogant to sentient
beings? Why are we doing that?  That is incorrect. Rather, the training
here is that we should strive to regard all sentient beings with respect
just as we would to the buddhas.
Usually a servant would do his best to please the master by acting in
accordance with what the master want. Likewise here, we should work for the
sentient beings, just as a servant would serves his/her master. One of the
main reasons why we are unable to respect others is because of arrogance.
As such, from our side, if we are able to regard sentient beings as our
master and we as the servant, then that would be easier for us to work for
others.
Next is the explanation of why it is inappropriate to harm others.

|(c’) Abandoning harm                             |
|(1”) The reasons it is unreasonable to cause harm|
|(2”) There is no way to please the Buddhas while |
|one is harming others                            |

|(1”) The reasons it is unreasonable to cause harm|


Verse 6.122
Because of their happiness the Munis will be pleased
But if they are harmed they will be displeased.
By making them happy I shall delight the Munis,
And by harming them I shall harm the Munis.
This is very straight forward and is not difficult to understand. If we can
keep these words in our mind, it will be helpful to mentally go over it
every now and then or to recite it. In particular at times when we have
thoughts of wanting to harm others, then we can bring this verse to mind.
If we harm sentient beings, then there is no way we would ever please the
buddhas.

|(2”) There is no way to please the Buddhas while |
|one is harming others                            |


Verse 6.123
Just as anything desirable would give my mind no pleasure
If my body was ablaze with fire,
Likewise when sentient beings are harmed
There is no way for the Great Compassionate Ones to be pleased.
If for whatever reasons, your body is set ablaze with fire, and if somebody
comes along and gives you a plate of delicious food or whatever desirable
object, there is no way you could enjoy it.
You will not be able to find any of the things that are given to you as
pleasurable or desirable while the body is ablaze with fire. Likewise,
there is no way that the buddhas can really be please if on one hand you
are harming sentient beings  while at the same time venerating the buddhas
with  offerings.
Now we should confess on whatever actions of harming sentient beings that
we have done in the past.

|(ii) Confessing previous      |
|displeasing actions           |


 Verse 6.124
Due to having harmed migrating beings,
I have displeased the Great Compassionate Ones.
Therefore today I confess individually all my negativities.
I request your forgiveness, Munis, for this displeasure I have caused.
If you have accumulated such negativities in the past, then such actions
would have displeased the buddhas. As such, you should confess without any
concealment in the presence of the buddhas, and also not to do similar
actions in the future again.
So verse 6.124 is confessing in the disrepectful actions that we have
engaged in the past. The next verse is refraining from any of such similar
actions in the future.

|(iii) Refraining from [allowing            |
|negativities] to arise in the future       |


Verse 6.125
From now on, in order to delight the Tathagatas,
I shall be subdued and be a servant to the world.
Although many beings may kick and smash my head or kill me,
I shall not retaliate and may I delight the Protectors of the World.
You confess whatever mistakes that you have done in the past, and now you
should refrain from such similar actions again in the future. You refrain
from such actions again in the future with the thought of pleasing the
buddhas. You should refrain from arrogance and pride, which is the meaning
of the second line, “I shall be subdued” - to subdue one’s own pride and
arrogance; and to view oneself as a servant to sentient beings and with the
attitude to benefit the sentient beings.
The highest part of the body is the head and the lowest part of the body is
the feet. It is said that from one’s own side, even if someone were to kick
your head, and even if they were to take your lives, then from your side,
is not to view that action with anger, and not to retaliate with anger.
Here we are applying mind of refrain - one is cultivating the thought that
even if such things happen to us, from our side we will not retaliate with
anger, but rather to voluntary to accept that situation. We offer these
kinds of thoughts of restraint to the buddhas, with the hope that it may
please the buddhas.

|(b) Thus, this shows in brief that we should     |
|respect sentient beings as well                  |


Verse 6.126
There is no doubt that those with the nature of compassion
Regard all these migrating beings as themselves.
These very ones seen in the entities of sentient beings are the
Protectors themselves;
Why then do I not respect them?
Through the practice of having exchanged themselves with others, there is
no doubt that the buddhas consider sentient beings as similar to
themselves, and in fact they cherish sentient beings more than themselves.
As such, then from our side, we should regard every sentient being in such
a way as being like the buddhas.
What do you think is the meaning of the 3rd line of verse 6.126: “These
very ones seen in the entities of sentient beings are the Protectors
themselves”? Here it is saying that the sentient beings are in the entities
of Buddhas.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): How are you going to explain that sentence?
Make it short as I have to finish the chapter on Patience today. There is
still some more to go.
Student: It means that the way Buddha treat sentient beings is the way he
see upon himself. That means if sentient beings were to suffer, he feels as
if he himself is suffering.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): Buddha feels suffering also? Buddha has feeling
of suffering? So Buddha is not free from suffering?
Student: Due to his compassion.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): Due to his compassion he suffers, so he is not
free of suffering?
In the teachings on equalizing self and others, there is a way of
equalizing self and other from the ultimate point of view. From the
ultimate point of view, if you look at the ultimate nature of the both
Buddha’s mind and sentient beings’ mind, both is the same in being never
ever been polluted by the defilements since beginningless lifetimes. So the
defilements are not one with the mind.
If we look at the words of this sentence literally, what it seems to
suggest is “The sentient beings that I see is Buddha.” Literally the
sentence seems to be telling us whoever you see is Buddha.
It is not that the sentient beings are buddhas; sentient beings are not
buddhas. Here by seeing sentient beings as being in the nature of buddhas,
it is giving the result to the cause, in that although the sentient beings
are not buddhas, right from the beginning they possess the potential to
become enlightened i.e. they have the fundamental cause or the nature of
enlightenment in them, so they will be the future buddhas.
The essence is that by through respecting sentient beings, then from our
side we will swiftly achieve the state of full enlightenment.
The remaining verses of this chapter are talking about the benefits of
meditating on patience.

|b) The benefits of cultivating      |
|patience                            |
|i)  A brief presentation            |
|ii) Explaining the benefits by means|
|of an analogy                       |
|iii) A condensed presentation of the|
|types of benefit                    |

|i)  A brief presentation            |


Verse 6.127
It delights the tathagatas
And perfectly accomplishes my own purpose as well.
It dispels the suffering of the world.
Therefore I should always practice it.
Here it says that when we are harmed by sentient beings, if we cultivate
patience and we do not retaliate, and also if we are respectful towards
that sentient being, then this alone is the supreme way for pleasing the
buddhas.
Meditating on patience is also the supreme method to fulfill our own
purposes of this life and our ultimate goal of full enlightenment. Our own
practice of meditation of patience alone can also dispel the sufferings of
the world.
In Gyaltsab Je’s commentary, this stated to be the benefit of patience. In
some other commentaries, there is a list of benefits that comes from
respecting others. So whatever it is, whether is a list of the benefits of
respecting sentient beings or whether is a list of benefits of meditating
on patience, the point is through ascertaining, acknowledging and accepting
the benefits, the practice of patience is something that you should always
practice.
Next is explaining the benefits through example.

|ii) Explaining the benefits by means of |
|an analogy                              |
|1’ The meaning of the analogy in terms  |
|of benefit                              |
|2’ Explaining [that the reality of it]  |
|surpasses the analogy                   |

|1’ The meaning of the analogy in terms  |
|of benefit                              |
|a’ Analogy                              |
|b’ Meaning                              |

|a’ Analogy   |


Verse 6.128
For example, should even some of the king’s men
Cause harm to many people,
Farsighted men would not retaliate
Even if they were able to.
Verse 6.129ab
For they are not alone;
The might of the king is their might.
If we know how to think of the long-term, then for whatever reasons if
somebody who is very powerful sends his subordinates to give us problems,
even though we may have the capacity to retaliate, but we will not. We will
think carefully first before doing anything because we know that that
person has the support of someone very powerful. So this is an example of
not retaliating because of fear but just put up with it.
[BP1 Part 2 L19] When the king’s tax officials act on royal instructions,
intelligent people, though unhappy with being taxed, do not harm such
officials even if they can, because they know these officials have the
support and protection of the king.

|b’       |
|Meaning  |


Verse 6.129cd
Likewise I should not underestimate
Weak harmers.
Verse 6.130ab
For the guardians of hell and the Compassionate Ones
Are their army.
Likewise when the pitiful sentient beings causes us harm, even though we
can retaliate, we should not retaliate and put them down, or look down on
them or kill them.
Here it is mentioned that we should not underestimate the weak harmers. We
may think the weak harmers as insignificance or very weak. For example, the
mosquito is really pretty insignificant to us and we have all the capacity
to smash it and destroy it if we wanted to. But the point is not to do
that.
Although we may be in a position to overcome these weak enemies and
harmers, but we shouldn’t because behind them are the armies of the
guardians of hells and all the buddhas.
How does the army of the hell guardians come in the picture? If we harm the
sentient beings, we accumulate the non-virtuous karma that will produce the
appearance of the hell guardians in the future when we are born in the
hells.
What about the army of the Conquerors that are supporting these
insignificant weak harmers? As I mentioned earlier, any actions that we do
that causes harm to the sentient beings are actions that would displease
the buddhas. By harming sentient beings we displease the buddhas, we become
further away from the buddhas, and we will not have the fortune to meet
with the buddhas. We will not have the basis to receive the blessings of
the buddhas and bodhisattvas.
So that is explaining through the analogy, but the reality, the meaning is
not equal to the example. The meaning itself is even greater. So what
happens in reality is something greater than what you see in the example.

|2’ Explaining [that the reality of it] |
|surpasses the analogy.                 |


Verse 6.130cd
 Just as subjects behave towards a fierce king,
I should please sentient beings.
Verse 6.131
Even if such a king were to become angry,
Could he cause the harm of hell,
Which is what I would have to experience
By displeasing sentient beings?
Verse 6.132
And even if such a king were to be pleased,
He could not possibly grant me buddhahood,
Which is what I would obtain
By pleasing sentient beings.
Here it says that we should please sentient beings in the way how the
subjects behave towards the fierce king. In the case of the example here,
if the king that we are trying to please is a fierce and even if the king
becomes upset with us, from his own side the king cannot throw us into
hell. But if we harm the sentient beings, we will be thrown into the lower
realms.
Back to the example, even if the king is indeed happy, but no matter how
happy he is, he can never grant us enlightenment. If you look at the
meaning, the king is really the sentient beings, if we please the sentient
beings, we can achieve enlightenment.
[BP1 Part 2 L19]The outline means that the meaning is more exalted than the
analogy. Just as the king’s subjects have to bear with the edicts of the
king, no matter how absurd they may be, we are also advised to please the
sentient beings who harm us. For, even if the subjects chose to rise up
against the king, the most he could do was torture them, confiscate their
possessions and at the very worst, sentence them to death. Displeasing
sentient beings, on the other hand, results in our going to the hell realms
- something that a king is incapable of doing to us.
If we were to please the king, at the very most, he would reward us with
money and property. By pleasing sentient beings, however, we can attain the
state of full enlightenment, which the king is unable to confer.
It is commonly acknowledged that pleasing or displeasing our superiors may
result in rewards of wealth and property or, at worst, a death sentence.
But pleasing or displeasing sentient beings leads us, respectively, to the
attainment of the supreme bliss of full enlightenment or the suffering of
the hell realms. There is, therefore, a significant difference between the
analogy and its meaning.

|iii) A condensed presentation of the|
|types of benefit                    |
|1’ The principal effect             |
|2’ The visible effects              |
|3’ Explaining the fully ripened     |
|effect                              |

|1’ The principal effect             |


Verse 6.133 a,b
Let alone my future attainment of buddhahood,
Which comes from pleasing sentient beings,

|2’ The visible effects              |


Verse 6.133 c,d
Why do I not see that there will be great glory,
Fame, and happiness in this very life?
By respecting sentient beings and practicing patience in relation to them,
then the state of full enlightenment will be ours in the future. As such
there is justification to be respectful of others and to cultivate
patience. Even in this life, it is quite obvious that through respecting
others and cultivating patience, one would have a good reputation and peace
and happiness in this life. By seeing that there are these visible results
such as having fame, good reputation, peace and happiness in this life,
then one should practice patience and also have respect for others.
[BP1 Part 2 L19]Both the temporary benefit of happiness in this life and
the future attainment of buddhahood comes from pleasing sentient beings.
Therefore, it is appropriate to please and be patient with them.
When we practise patience by accepting the harm inflicted by our enemies
and pleasing sentient beings, this results in our being well-liked, we
enjoy great wealth and renown and bring others into our fold. In short,
when we practise patience, we get along with people wherever we go and
experience the happiness of this life. Therefore, we should always strive
to make others happy.
Lastly by understanding the fruitional effects, then one cultivate this
respect and patience.

|3’ Explaining the fully     |
|ripened effect              |


Verse 6.134
While in cyclic existence patience causes
Beauty, freedom from sickness, and fame.
Because of these I shall live for a very long time
And win the prosperous pleasures of the wheel-turning kings.
The result of the practice of patience is that while we are in cyclic
existence, we will achieve a body that has pleasant appearance and is
pleasing to others, and we will be able to have good helpers.
It is said that while the practice of patience results in a very long life
and a life that is free of sicknesses. It will also results in fame.  It is
also said that one will be able to obtain the enjoyments of the wheel-
turning kings.

|b The chapter’s name        |


The name of this chapter is, “Teaching patience.”
In the face of experiencing harms or disturbances from others, if we become
overly too upset, and we react with too much anger and unhappiness, and
then life becomes really complicated. In the case of a dharma practitioner,
being overly upset and agitated really harms our practice and it becomes
very difficult to practice. In particular for someone who is aiming and
trying to cultivate bodhicitta, then becoming overly upset is a huge
obstacle.
The antidote to that is cultivating the patience of disregarding harms done
to us. If we look at the teachings pertaining to this particular form of
patience, there are so many reasons that are put forth in order to help and
to change our perspective of the harm-doer as someone who is totally bad
into someone who is really beneficial and good. So these are methods to
help us not to develop any anger towards harm-doers.
Another source of disturbance and obstacle to our dharma practice is
meeting with difficult situations, challenges, and problems in life such as
sicknesses, disturbances from people or situation. Many a times, people
give up their dharma practice in the face of such problems. As such these
problems become obstacles, and it interferes with dharma practice.
To counteract that kind of danger, there is the practice of cultivating the
patience of accepting suffering, such that you acknowledge it and you
accept it, so it doesn’t detract us from the practice, but rather we are
able to stick to the practice.
In the section dealing with this particular form of patience, the patience
of accepting suffering, in the beginning there is a discussion prompting us
to look at whatever problems we are facing, and to see if there is anything
that can be done about it. Can it be solved? If it cannot be solved, then
why are we worry? So that is the analysis.
There is also the discussion of the benefits of suffering; it is actually
good to have suffering, as it is very useful.

There is also the discussion of how we can actually deal with these
sufferings. We can actually put up with it, or even take a liking to it,
for it is only a matter of familiarity. Once we get accustomed to changing
our idea about suffering, we can really put up with it. So there are all
these discussions.

Yet another source of problem why we don’t really succeed in our practice
is a lack of desire in the first place. Dharma is not really desirable for
some people. You kind of want to practice but you don’t really want to do
it. One of the reason is because we don’t see the benefit. Basically we
don’t have the faith and we don’t have the trust in the dharma. That is
another reason.

In order to counteract that, we have the antidote in the form of the
patience of developing the certitude about the teachings, which is an
antidote to the lack of trust or faith in the teachings. The way to
cultivate this particular form of patience is to develop ascertainment of
the Buddha’s teachings in particular on the law of cause and effect
(karma), by thinking and to develop conviction until one gains stability.
For this is the foundation for practice. Also, in particular, to develop
ascertainment and certitude about dependant arising on the subtle level. It
is through these that one gains stability in one’s faith and trust in the
dharma, which then provides us the foundation to actually practice and
continuing practicing it.

On the basis of thinking about the presentation of the principle of cause
and effect (karma), then one thinks about dependant arising at its most
subtle level, which is the main contemplation. Through which if we are
really able to ascertain that the I, the person that receiving the harm,
and the harm-doer, although they exist but they do not exist by way of
their own nature, they do not exist from their own side, they do not exist
in of themselves. This understanding serves as the supreme antidote to
counteract anger.

If you remember in the earlier section of this chapter, there is an
explanation of how to regard oneself and the harm-doer as an emanation or
as an illusion, in that you and the harm doers do not exist from their own
side.

In summarizing his commentary on the chapter of Patience, Gyaltsab Je says:
  Although one meditates on the virtues of generosity and the like for many
  eons, they are destroyed by the tongue of fire of anger. Therefore, one
  needs to cultivate the force of patience over and over again, and not to
  give anger any chance.
This is really a very essential advice. Even if the Buddha was to appear
directly in person, in the context of patience there is nothing better that
he could say to us than this verse. We just have to pay attention, and
really take these teachings to heart. Sometimes when we have the
opportunity to hear the teachings for many times until that the mind
becomes hardened to the dharma, we kind of disregard these teachings and
thinking “It is one of those things again!” It is essential that we don’t
end up like that. Actually one should learn the dharma. From one’s own
side, one must seek out the dharma with great interest. The dharma should
be the utmost priority for us. Ideally that should be the case. It is so
important that we would even give up everything including our life in order
to receive the dharma, to receive an education, to learn and to practice.
So ideally it should be like that. It has to be like that but we are not
like that. It seems that that is what happens to people at times. After
having listened too much to the dharma to the point of instead of having
benefit, their mind kind of hardening to the dharma until they don’t value
the dharma. We have all the opportunities until it become just like another
teachings; but indifference is too weak a word. Therefore one should not
disregard this text and look down on it. In fact this text is a very
precious instruction. It is a very, very precious, very holy text in that
even if the Buddha was to come directly in front of us, there is nothing
much more than what the Buddha can say beside what we have already see here
in this text. Here the advice is on cultivating bodhicitta and so forth. We
have to keep that in mind. So it is important to know the text, and to
familiarize ourselves with it and mix our mind with the text with what is
said.
[BP1 Part 2 L19] In essence, there are 3 types of patience:
(1) The patience that pays no heed to those who cause harm: It is very
difficult to engage in any virtue with very strong anger in our minds.
Unable to accomplish our own purposes, how are to work for the welfare of
others? Therefore, there is a need to cultivate this patience.
(2) The patience of voluntarily accepting suffering: When the problems we
experience are so intense and cause so much mental suffering, it becomes
impossible to engage in virtue. We neglect our Dharma practice. We need to
develop this kind of patience to cope with such circumstances.
(3) The patience that is intent on dharma: This is the antidote for those
whose interest in the Dharma and virtue is weak or those who give up their
practice when they encounter the slightest difficulty, thinking, “I don’t
want to study this text because it’s so difficult,” or “I’m not going to
follow karma because it’s so difficult.”
Whenever we experience problems or unhappiness and our minds are no longer
able to focus on our Dharma practice, it is important to investigate what
is causing these situations and work on cultivating the three types of
patience.











