Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Engaging in the Deeds of a Bodhisattva/lesson14.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:52:21.924523
================================================================================


I have already spoken on the Meditation Program. For those of you who have
committed yourself, this is just a reminder that the topic of meditation
for now is correctly relying on the virtuous friend. Sometimes it is
helpful to memorize certain scriptural citation as a basis for meditating
on the topic. For example, there is a verse by Gyalwa Ensapa, which already
has been translated, says:
    “In short, whether you achieve small realization or big realization is
    dependent on whether your faith is small or great. For that reason,
    reflect on the good qualities of the fully qualified guru who is the
    source of all the attainments. Do not seize on the faults, but focus
    only on the qualities.
    By holding on to the strong commitment to this (i.e. focusing only on
    the qualities and not looking at the faults) may I bring these
    commitments to the end.”
It is the same when you look at the first verse of The Foundation of All
Good Qualities where it says:
   The foundation of all good qualities is the perfect pure guru.
   Correct devotion to him is the root of the path.
   By clearing seeing this and applying great effort
   Please bless me to rely upon him with great respect.
Meditation on the topic of correctly relying on the virtuous friend is
mainly cultivating faith in the virtuous friend and the guru.
Then one will ask: “What is the sign of having faith in the guru?”How does
one knows whether one has faith in the guru?”
What I think is that if you get reprimanded by the guru or the guru scolded
you, and you see that as a recitation of a wrathful mantra. If you are able
to understand the scolding or the reprimand to be a wrathful mantra,
perhaps this is a sign that you have faith in the virtuous friend. I
remember this is being said by the master Padampa Sangye. He also said that
to be hit by the guru is like receiving an empowerment. When you receive an
empowerment, you will generate the thought that such and such obstacle or
hindrance is removed.  It is said that getting hit or struck by the guru is
like receiving an empowerment that clears away your obstacles.
The guru has to be qualified one. What the qualified guru does is that he
is the destroyer of our three mental poisons - ignorance, anger and
attachment- and our self-cherishing. So that is the function of the guru.
The guru has to be valid and qualified, only then this applies. The
disciple/student also has to be qualified. But in this day and time, it is
extremely difficult to find really qualified teacher/guru and also it is
extremely rare to have students who are qualified.
In these days and times;
- people consider those gurus who hurt their self-cherishing to be bad,
- people consider those gurus who support their self-cherishing to be good,
- students consider those gurus whose wishes accord with their wishes to be
good
- students consider the gurus to be bad if the directions given by the
gurus do not accord with the students’ wishes
What I think is that these days and times the role of the guru and student
has been reversed. Essentially, the student becomes the guru of the guru.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): When you really think about it very carefully,
it has become like that.
In these days and times, the way the gurus act and speak, they have to take
into so much consideration of how the students may think and feel. Nowadays
it has come to a point when the guru cannot even speak directly, honestly
and truthfully with the students. In reality that shouldn’t be the case. Of
course the guru has to be qualified one.
In the context of a qualified guru:
-  If one has faith, then one will be able to follow the advice given by
the guru, and there is no difficulty in following the advice of the guru.
-  If one has faith, then being reprimanded or getting scolding from the
guru does not become an issue or problem.
-  If one has faith, not only one would not feel bad about being
reprimanded or scolded, but in fact one feels happy because one sees the
point that one’s particular fault or mistake has been exposed, and
therefore one can change.
It is only through such a process that one can progress and actually make
changes and gain realizations. Therefore this particular verse from Gyalwa
Ensapa is very effective for the mind. You should memorize it and using
that as a basis to reflect:
   “In short, whether we get big or small a realization is dependent on
   whether our faith or devotion is small or great”.
This is something you have to figure it out for yourself. It all boils down
to faith. You have to see that for yourself - your own level of progress
and attainment is commensurate with your faith. You have to see that for
yourself: how if one has more faith, one will get more profit.  This is
something to keep in mind and to think about it. This is very important
because the teachings on guru devotion always mention that faith is very
important. When you have faith, everything comes and works. It is quite
evident that when you have faith in something, whatever it may be, it
become very helpful. If you have faith, it urges you on to want to obtain
that thing or to learn/understand that thing. When you meditate on guru
devotion, primarily it is cultivating the faith. As of now we have
allocated three months to this topic. But we could shorten it to 2 months
if you find it too long. We will see how it goes.
Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds
With regards to the eons, I have mentioned that during the eon of abiding,
the average lifespan of the beings start from infinite lifespan; very long
lifespan. It then gradually decreases down to 80,000 years and all the way
down to 10 years. Then the averages lifespan of the human beings again
increases from 10 years to 80,000 years. When the average lifespan starts
to decrease from 80,000 years that is when Maitreya Buddha will descend.














This is what I have said. There are people mentioned to me that Maitreya
will descend when the average lifespan of human being reaches about 10
years old.
Maitreya Buddha will not descend when the average lifespan of human beings
is 10 years old. He will not descend as in he will not appear in the form
of the supreme emanation body, but rather it is an emanation of Maitreya
Buddha that will appear during that time. The human beings of that
particular era when the average lifespan is 10 years, essentially they are
very short with height of about 6 inches.  The emanation of Maitreya Buddha
will come with a height of 12 inches, which is double that of an average
human being.
At that particular era when the average lifespan of the human beings is 10
years, essentially they are very short with a height of about 6 inches. The
height of the emanation of Maitreya Buddha will be double that of the
normal human being during that era (about 12 inches). When the human beings
of that time seeing Maitreya Buddha is different from the rest of them,
they will proceed to ask him; “Why is it that you have a much bigger body
than us? “ This emanation of Maitreya Buddha will reply; “I have such a
body because I have abandoned killing, I practice patience and so forth.”
As the result of hearing what this emanation of Maitreya Buddha will say,
they start the practice of abandoning the ten non-virtues. As a result of
practicing the ethical discipline of abandoning the ten non-virtues, the
average lifespan of the human beings will then start to increase all the
way up to 80,000 years. It is only then Maitreya Buddha will descend in the
form of a supreme emanation body. It is said that Maitreya Buddha will be
born in the place where Shakyamuni Buddha showed the deed of passing away
into parinirvana, which means that Maitreya Buddha will be born in
Kushinagar. This is how it is explained in some commentaries.
We have finished the verses of dedication. Essentially these verses are for
generating very extensive aspirations.

|Aspiring for virtue to become a cause for material    |
|resources, etc.                                       |
|A Aspiring for you yourself to act as a cause         |
|[providing] all the necessities of others             |
|B Aspiring for more extensive times and functions     |
|C Aspiring for no discontinuation in object and times |

|B Aspiring for more extensive times and functions     |


Verse 3.21
Just like the great elements, such as earth,
And like space,
May I always be many varieties of bases of sustenance
For the boundless sentient beings.

|C Aspiring for no discontinuation in object and times |


Verse 3.22
Likewise, until all attain nirvana,
May I also be the source of sustenance
For all the realms of sentient beings
That reach unto the ends of space.
Basically it is saying that “For as long as sentient beings exist, may I be
the source of sustenance for them”.
Here it is making extensive aspirations to be able to be of benefits to
sentient beings for a very long time. Here you are projecting the will and
intention of making the aspiration to achieve or to actualize that.
If you remember the context of our discussion, prior to adopting
/generating bodhicitta, one has to trains the mind in some preliminaries
and dedicating one’s body, possessions, and roots of virtues is one method.
Initially one trains in giving one’s body, possessions, and roots of
virtues and dedicating it to all sentient beings mentally. Even after one
has generated bodhicitta, one has to continually to train the mind to be
able to dedicate these away. Through the training there will come a time
when one will actually be able to dedicate and give these away. In fact,
there must come a time when one must gives these away in actuality.
If you remember from our discussion during the Stages of the Path to
Enlightenment, and the discussion on how you should make use of this body
after you have dedicated it from the bottom of your hearts to all sentient
beings, how should you employ your body, and how you should put it to use.
You still have to use your body. You still have to eat. You still have to
take care of the body by putting on clothes and so forth. But all these
have to done with the motivation of benefiting others. So the teachings
tell you that you should keep this in mind as much as possible whenever you
utilize these various objects of enjoyment; as much as possible to generate
the thought and motivation that you are doing it for others.
We have concluded the preliminary for adopting bodhicitta through a ritual.
Now is the actual adoption of bodhicitta or taking on the bodhisattva vows.

|The actual |


Verse 3.23
Just as the previous Sugatas
Generated the mind of enlightenment,
And just as they dwelt according to the stages
In the trainings of a bodhisattva;
Verse 3.24
Likewise for the benefit of migrating beings,
I shall generate the mind of enlightenment,
And likewise I shall
Learn the trainings according to the stages.
Verse 3.23 is saying that taking the buddhas as an example - how the
buddhas and the bodhisattvas abiding on the grounds,  just as how they
generated bodhicitta, and just as how they abide in the bodhisattva deeds
in the training of bodhisattvas.
“Likewise for the benefit of migrating beings, I shall generate the mind of
enlightenment” - this is generating the aspirational mind of enlightenment.

“And likewise I shall learn the trainings according to the stages” - this
is taking the engaged bodhisattva vows.
Essentially verse 3.24 is saying “I generate the aspirational mind of
enlightenment and the engaged mind of enlightenment. And likewise I shall
also abide in the bodhisattva trainings”.
One can take the bodhisattva vows from a master who has the vows. If not,
one can take the vows in the presence of a visualized field of merit. In
the presence of the field of merit, one adopts bodhicitta using these two
paragraphs. In these two paragraphs, one is adopting both the aspirational
bodhicitta and the engaged bodhicitta in one go.
In terms of the ritual, the words of the ritual here, one adopts the
aspirational bodhicitta and the engaged bodhicitta in one go.
I have a question myself; “When you receive the vow in your continuum, do
you receive first the aspirational bodhicitta that comes with a commitment,
and subsequently the engaged bodhisattva vows, or are these two being
received at the same time? When you receive in your continuum, do you
receive it at the same time or sequentially?”
In the Stages of the Path to Enlightenment literature, these two are
adopted sequentially. If one is able to handle the commitments, then one
first adopts the aspirational bodhicitta that comes with a commitment. And
subsequently if one feels that one can practice the perfections, the deeds
of a bodhisattva, only then one does takes the bodhisattva vows. That is
clear in the Stages of the Path to Enlightenment literature; one takes them
sequentially. But if you look at the ritual words here, V3.23 and V3.24,
both the aspirational bodhicitta with a commitment and the bodhisattva vows
are taken at the same time, i.e. together using one ritual. They are taken
in one go.
My question is: When you receive the vows, are they received sequentially
or are they received simultaneously”. That is my question.
“And likewise I shall learn the trainings according to the stages” - so one
has to train in the bodhisattva deeds in stages. For example, the practice
of dedicating and giving one’s body, when one is an ordinary person on the
ordinary path, the training is only done mentally. When one abides on the
grounds, it is said that one would be able to give one’s body away without
any difficulty. Actually giving one’s body away when one is not ready is a
fault; it is a mistake. But when one is ready, e.g. when one is abiding on
the grounds as a bodhisattva, the teachings says that the bodhisattvas are
able to give away their bodies as easy as some people who is giving a plate
of vegetables to somebody else.
Here we are talking about the practice of generous attitude and the
practice of increasing the generous attitude.  The practice of increasing
the generous attitude is to reduce miserliness. When one reaches a point
where there is no miserliness in the mind, then giving anything away
including the body will be easy.
After adopting the vow, you have the conclusion. Essentially you rejoice
after having adopted bodhicitta, and that is rejoicing - rejoicing oneself
and causing others to rejoice.

|Concluding actions                      |
|A Cultivating joy oneself               |
|B Causing others to develop joy         |

|Cultivating joy oneself                 |
|1 The accomplishment of one’s own       |
|welfare                                 |
|2 The accomplishment of others’ welfare |

|1 The accomplishment of one’s own       |
|welfare                                 |
|A Cultivating joy by uplifting the mind |
|B Having found that mind, cultivating   |
|conscientiousness                       |
|C Cultivating joy by gaining the mind   |
|that is difficult to find               |

|A Cultivating joy by uplifting the mind |


Verse 3.25
Those intelligent ones have concluded lucidly seizing
The mind of enlightenment in this way,
But, in order to increase it,
They should highly praise it in the following manner:
Verse 3.26
Now my life is fruitful.
I have attained a good human existence,
Today I have been born in the buddha lineage.
I have become a child of the Buddha.
It is important to rejoice in the benefits of bodhicitta through reflecting
on the benefits of bodhicitta prior to generating bodhicitta. After one has
generated bodhicitta, it is also very important to rejoice in the fact that
one has generated bodhicitta. It is important to uplift the mind after one
has generated bodhicitta.
“Now my life is fruitful. I have attained a good human existence”- in this
time while I am still alive, I have this opportunity to generate bodhicitta
and take the vows. This is something very meaningful.
This is what you have to reflect on your own after taking the bodhisattva
vow – “This is really something very meaningful especially at this time
when I have this precious human rebirth. Due to generating bodhicitta I
have now become a child of the victorious ones”.
So that is rejoicing. Next is meditating on conscientiousness.

|B Having found that mind, cultivating   |
|conscientiousness                       |


Verse 3.27
Now whatever happens,
I will act to not sully
This flawless, holy buddha lineage,
Initiating actions concordant with this lineage.
One thinks “After having taken the bodhisattva vow, in whatever I do I will
make all my actions harmonious and concordant with the buddha lineage”.
This means “Whatever I do I’m doing it for the benefit of all sentient
beings”.
The verse is also saying “After taking the bodhisattva vow, as much as
possible in whatever I do I’m not doing it for my selfish reasons and as
much as possible I will not allow myself to be stained by the bodhisattva
downfalls and the faults”.
This teaching is telling you that as much as possible:-
-  whatever you do, you do it with the thought of benefiting others
-  whatever you do, make sure that as much as possible it is not mixed with
personal interests and selfish purposes.
- whatever you do, be conscientious to check whether you are committing any
of the downfalls and faults of the bodhisattva vow.
The main thing is after having taken the bodhisattva vow, we should
continually rely on mindfulness and vigilance to make sure that whatever we
do we do it with the thought of benefiting others, and to make sure as much
as possible that it is not done because of self-cherishing.
Next is rejoicing by thinking how one has found something which is very
rare.

|C Cultivating joy by gaining the mind that|
|is difficult to find                      |


Verse 3.28
Just like a blind man
Discovering a jewel in a heap of rubbish,
Likewise by some coincidence
This mind of enlightenment has been born within me.
The verse is saying that having taken the bodhisattva vow is as rare as a
blind man who finds treasure in the rubbish bin.  If you think about this
you can see that it is very true because we, being ordinary individual, are
essentially rubbish.  Our mind is completely filled out with the garbage of
afflictions. Despite that, at this time and age, we have this opportunity
to reflect on bodhicitta and to take the bodhisattva vow. So it is indeed
very rare.
You have been able to reflect and think of bodhicitta and take the
bodhisattva vow due to the power of your own merit and your own virtuous
friend. It is like something which is impossible has become a possibility.
If you think about it, we are just full of the garbage of the afflictions –
the three mental poisons – and we have the great demon of self-cherishing.
Despite all these, we have the opportunity to think of bodhicitta, to
generate bodhicitta and to take the bodhisattva vow. This indeed is very
rare. It is like something in which impossibility is becoming possible.
Here is rejoicing by understanding that the rarity of such an occurrence.
When you actualize bodhicitta, the bodhicitta will fulfill all of your
wishes, and it will also enable you to fulfill the wishes of others.
The next couple of verses is rejoicing in this.

|2 The accomplishment of others’ welfare          |
|A The potential [power] to alleviate the         |
|suffering of sentient beings                     |
|B The potential [power] to dispel the            |
|obscurations- the causes [of suffering]          |
|C The potential [power] to accomplish all benefit|
|and bliss                                        |

|A The potential [power] to alleviate the         |
|suffering of sentient beings                     |
|1 Destroying the lord of death                   |
|2 Destroying poverty                             |
|3 Destroying disease                             |
|4 Destroying in general the sufferings of samsara|
|5 Destroying specifically the sufferings of the  |
|lower realms                                     |

|1 Destroying the lord of death                   |


Verse 3.29 a,b
This is also the supreme ambrosia
That overcomes the lord of death of migrating beings.
[Venerable Gyurme: “This” – is bodhicitta, “ambrosia” - the nectar]
Bodhicitta can overcome the lord of death.
With bodhicitta, if one shows the path to sentient beings and teaching
them, those sentient beings can be placed in the undying state of the great
enlightenment. The undying state is the state of full enlightenment and
bodhicitta is like the nectar that bestows this undying state.
Bodhicitta can also stop untimely death. In most cases, if you think about
it, untimely death is caused by self-cherishing. If one has bodhicitta, one
will be able to avoid untimely deaths.
With bodhicitta one will be able to place others in this undying state.
Bodhicitta also destroys the poverty of the sentient beings’ experience.

|2 Destroying poverty                             |


Verse 3.29 c,d
This is also the inexhaustible treasure
That eliminates all poverty of migrating beings.
When one achieves the 8th ground, one achieves mastery or control over many
things including mastery over life, mastery over possessions and so forth.
Such a bodhisattva on the 8th ground is said to possess innumerable
resources like the sky treasury. With this they can eliminate the poverty
of sentient beings. Such mastery over the resources that the 8th ground
bodhisattvas have is due to their bodhicitta.
Bodhicitta can also eliminate the sicknesses of sentient beings.

|3 Destroying disease                             |


Verse 3.30a,b
This is the supreme medicine
That quells the disease of migrating beings too.
In the medical literature, it is mentioned that there are 404 kinds of
diseases or sicknesses. These 404 kinds of sicknesses or diseases are
caused by the three mental poisons. So these 404 kinds of sicknesses can
generally be classified into three classes of disorder:-
    1. Wind disorder, the subtle energies of the body, (sometimes is called
       lung) is said to arise from bewilderment or ignorance.
2. Disorder related to bile arises from anger.
3. Disorder related to phlegm arises from attachment.
The 404 diseases are:
- 101 diseases that do not last for a long time
- 101 diseases that are related to karma.
- 101 diseases that are related to spirit interferences.
- 101 diseases affecting life force.
These 404 types of diseases or sicknesses have their source in the three
mental poisons. The bodhisattvas overcome these diseases or sicknesses with
meditations on love and so forth.
The bodhisattvas pacify these sicknesses and diseases that sentient beings
experience by giving them teachings on love; on the twelve links of
dependent origination and on, let’s say ugliness, in order to help them
overcome these mental poisons which are the source of those 404 types of
diseases.
That is how bodhicitta can destroy the sicknesses of the sentient beings.
Next is how bodhicitta can destroy the suffering of samsara in general and
how bodhicitta can destroy specifically the suffering of the lower realms.

|4 Destroying in general the sufferings of samsara|


Verse 3.30 c,d
It is the tree of rest for migrating beings
Wandering and weary on the path of conditioned existence.
This shows how bodhicitta destroys the suffering of samsara in general.
Since bodhisattvas have to work for the welfare of others, it is stated in
the teachings that bodhisattvas should therefore train in the paths of the
Hearers and Solitary Realizers. The bodhisattvas work for the benefits of
the Hearers and Solitary Realizers by helping them achieve their respective
enlightenments.
Bodhisattvas help those who are weary in samsara by showing them the paths
of Hearers and Solitary Realizers.
By depending on the power of bodhicitta, the bodhisattvas show some
sentient beings the path of the Hearers and Solitary Realizers and thus
enabling them to liberate themselves from samsara and achieve Hearers and
Solitary Realizers enlightenment.
Next is bodhisattva destroys the sufferings of the lower realms

|5 Destroying specifically the sufferings of the  |
|lower realms                                     |


Verse 3.31 a,b
 It is the universal platform that leads all migrating beings
To freedom from the bad migrations.
Bodhisattvas show the persons of small capacity how to accomplish virtue.
They show them what they need to adopt and what they need to discard and in
so doing protect those sentient beings from falling into the lower realms.
All these happen due to their bodhicitta.
Bodhicitta is said to also eliminate the afflictive obscurations and the
knowledge obscurations.

|The potential [power] to dispel the obscurations |
|- the causes [of suffering]                      |
|1 Dispelling afflictive obscurations             |
|2 Dispelling the obscurations to knowledge       |

|1 Dispelling afflictive obscurations             |


Verse 3.31c,d
It is the dawning moon of the mind
That dispels the torment of afflictions of migrating beings.
This shows bodhicitta eliminates the afflictive obscurations.

|2 Dispelling the obscurations to knowledge       |


Verse 3.32
It is the great sun that annihilates
The cataracts of ignorance of migrating beings.
This is showing that bodhicitta can eliminate the knowledge obscurations.

I will finish the rest of chapter three in the next lesson and then we will
proceed on to chapter four.

Medicine Buddha Retreat in Kopan in Oct 2014
Khen Rinpoche (in English): Maybe short announcement. I think probably many
of you know that we are organizing the retreat in Kopan in October. This
one I think is about eight days. I did this retreat two years ago and we
are going to do the same thing again. The idea is to do retreat in Kopan.
The goal is to have some peaceful mind. We don’t do so much recitation but
mainly give time for you to meditate. Probably one day we have six hours to
meditate. Each sitting is one hour; not too long. We break into six
sessions. Probably that would be easy. Last time I did that and some people
requested that we do this Medicine Buddha retreat again. So that is why I’m
organizing this retreat again in Kopan. Probably you all know that this
will be silent for eight days. Remember the discipline is to be silent for
eight days. Remember that. People who have done last time said they did
enjoy and liked it. If they said they don’t like it, I don’t think so I
will organize. They said they liked it. Many people think they can’t be
silent for eight days. They think it is impossible. Something impossible
becomes possible for them. They said it was ok and they enjoyed that. I
think that makes the difference. When you go for retreat, especially you
are in silence, the feeling is different. When you are very silent,
especially you switch off your TV, your mobile, your computer, and your
iPad. I suggest that not to use these during the retreat; unless you have
an emergency then that is different. Otherwise, I suggest you try to cut
down for one week and see this new experience of how you find during the
meditation. Basic idea is keeping silence. So that means your mind will be
silence. Everybody has to be silence. There is nothing to do there since
you are inside the monastery. So that is the idea. Basically we are just
trying something new, looking for some kind of peace, looking for some kind
of happiness, looking for some kind of experience, changing the different
experience. Once you find some kind of peaceful and happy feeling then of
course is good. This will encourage you to do more. This is something I’m
trying to do. Because here this busy life, I think there is no time for
meditation. Even now we do this Lamrim meditation in the morning it is not
easy. When you sit down your mind is not sitting there. “I need to go this,
this, this”. Not easy. What I feel is sometime you really need to leave all
these behind and go for holiday for one week. Really leave behind and go
different place, and you forget all these things. You do not have to think
“I’ve to go this, this, this”. I mean that makes a difference for myself.
When you really go out especially when go for retreat then that become like
your job and your mind becomes more focus on that. Also there is a group,
and there is some kind of energy there. Everybody is doing same thing,
everybody is silent, everybody is trying to do good thing, everybody
sitting very straight. There is always some kind of encouragement. So it is
good to do with a group. So like that. When the break time, those of you
who haven’t been to Kopan, the place is big, you can walk, go around the
stupa, and go around the gompa. You can do walking and at the same time you
can do chanting (the mantra) of Medicine Buddha. If you think your mouth is
not moving then you can chant as loud as possible. You think your mouth is
itchy then you chant. I’m just kidding. Anyway, those who wish to go to the
retreat can sign up for that. I understand that people don’t have much
time, so you have to choose what you want to do. You want to go here, here,
here but you can’t go everywhere. So you have to choose the one you wish to
do.




