Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Engaging in the Deeds of a Bodhisattva/lesson18.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:52:13.452016
================================================================================


Q&A
Student 1:  Brahma and Indra are supposed to be Hindu gods but why they
have the wisdom to request the Buddha to teach? The Buddha then taught and
we get the benefits. In the first place, how come Brahma and Indra are
known as Hindu gods? Since they know how to request, they should be
Buddhist. It seems that there is some contradiction.
Khen Rinpoche: Somebody come in front of the mic and answer the question.
Who would like to volunteer to answer? Any suggestion? Why?
Student 2: Bodhgaya being a Buddhist holy place is also a holy place for
Hindu as well. They also see Buddha as a holy being. I heard that he is
supposed to be related to one of the Hindu god, maybe Shiva. Perhaps that
is why Brahma and Indra requested Buddha to teach even though they didn’t
realize he is the Buddha, but probably realized that Buddha is a very
special holy being. Another version is that they maybe the manifestations
of some other bodhisattva that we don’t know about. Another version could
be is to just to show that the Buddha’s teachings were for the benefit of
everyone and it doesn’t matter what religion one may have before. Student 1
mentioned that Brahma and Indra should be Buddhist. Before the Buddha
taught, technically speaking, there weren’t any Buddhist around. Until the
Buddha turned the first wheel of dharma, Brahma and Indra couldn’t be
Buddhist. At that time, the prevailing religion was Hinduism.
Khen Rinpoche: When the Buddha was born, these gods such as Indra and
Brahma actually went to the birth place and offered an ablution of bath to
the newborn baby, who later on becomes the Buddha. These gods such as Indra
and Brahma are worldly gods and they are in samsara, whereas our founder or
teacher Shakyamuni Buddha, is free from samsara. As such just from the time
the Buddha was born i.e. descended into this world and by that fact that he
is free from samsara his existence outshines all samsaric beings.  Due to
the fact the Buddha is Buddha and is free of samsara, I guess this is why
his very presence automatically brings all these worldly beings. As the
Buddha is able to outshine them, he actually gathered them and gained
control over them. It would be possible that these powerful worldly beings
like Indra and Brahma could recognize that Buddha was a special being and
could benefit the world, and I guess for that reason, perhaps this is why
they requested the Buddha to turn the wheel of dharma to benefit others.
Brahma is said to be like the creator of the world and is regarded as the
owner of this world. Isn’t in the teachings it is mentioned that when you
are doing the practice of requesting the Buddha to turn the wheel of
dharma, you can visualize yourself as Brahma making offering of a thousand
spoke golden dharma chakra and then request the Buddha to turn the wheel of
dharma? Because of these powerful gods like Brahma and Indra and so forth
requesting the Buddha to turn the wheel of dharma, this show to others that
the Buddha is a very special person and the Buddha must be someone who is
more exalted than these powerful gods. It is said that the natural splendor
of the Buddha exalted body can completely outshine all these worldly gods.
I guess maybe for that reason these worldly gods then decided to request
the Buddha to teach.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): I don’t know. I have no idea.

Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds

Next verse talked about the need to be courageous in destroying the
afflictions.

|3 Developing strength of mind in order to destroy them/the negative emotions.  |


Verse 4.36
Therefore as long as this enemy is not overcome with certainty before my
very eyes,
I shall never give up exerting myself against it.
Self-important people who become angry even at slight short-lived harm
Will not go to sleep until it is overcome.
Prior to this, there was already an explanation of the great faults and
disadvantages of the afflictions:
-  the afflictions are so harmful
-  the afflictions induce sufferings
-  the afflictions can throw one into the lowest of hells
-  the afflictions have been harming us since the beginningless lifetimes,
and if we do not counteract the afflictions, they will continue to harm us
in the future as well.
Prior to this verse, there were also the explanations of why it is wrong to
befriend the afflictions, and why it is wrong to be patient with the
afflictions. The more we befriend the afflictions, and the more we are
patient with the afflictions, the more harm we will receive from the
afflictions.
The teachings also say that the inner enemy, the afflictions, is much more
powerful than the external enemy. The teaching is telling us that it is not
sufficient to just suppress the afflictions, but rather we have to strive
to work at destroying the afflictions from the root.
Here the verse is telling us that we should generate the courage in
destroying the afflictions from the root through applying the antidote, and
we have to strive at this.
Here the verse 4.36 is giving an analogy of how a normal person who when
being criticized may go all out in destroying the person who criticized
him/her. That is what a normal person does. He/she will hold on to the
resentment and will not rest until he/she has overcome or destroy that
person, or has done something about the situation. If so much effort is put
in to counteract such a small little harm in this life, then all the more
we have to put in even much more effort in destroying the inner enemy, the
afflictions.
[BP1 L23] “Therefore as long as this enemy is not overcome with certainty
before my very eyes” means that we want to see, for ourselves, with our own
eyes, that we have completely uprooted the negative emotions. Until we are
able to completely uproot or destroy the negative emotions, for as long as
it takes, it is appropriate to continuously apply the antidotes to the
negative emotions.
We are using an analogy to establish the appropriateness of continuously
applying the antidotes.  In the analogy of getting angry at this person who
caused us harm, this person is not inherently our enemy all the time, i.e.,
this person is not by nature our enemy and does not become our enemy from
the minute he/she is born. It is not the very nature of that person to be
our enemy forever. Yet we put in so much effort to do something nasty to
overcome, kill or to harm the person in return. If we put in so much effort
for someone who is not by nature our enemy from the very beginning, then
when it comes to dealing with our real enemy, the negative emotions, which
have always been our enemy, we should not put in less effort.
“Self-important people “here refers to people who are very proud and who
think very highly of their own power and status and so forth. When they are
harmed in the tiniest way, upon hearing just one or two unpleasant words,
they will immediately do something to bully those who are weaker or
subordinate to them.
With that we have finished with the section that talked about the way to
reflect on the faults of the afflictions.
The next section is the discussion on how it is incorrect or unsuitable to
be tired of the difficulties of abandoning the afflictions. This section
talks about the need to strive in destroying the afflictions. It talks
about why it is incorrect to feel tired when the task of destroying the
afflictions becomes difficult.

|It is inappropriate to feel weary of the hardships involved in abandoning the  |
|afflictions                                                                    |
|1 Taking up arms capable of destroying the afflictions and not feeling weary   |
|about the hardships that come along with that                                  |
|2 The benefits of joyous effort in destroying the afflictions                  |
|3 It is reasonable to be diligent in the practice of destroying the afflictions|

|1 Taking up arms capable of destroying the afflictions and not feeling weary   |
|about the hardships that come along with that                                  |


Verse 4.37
If at the time of a violent battle,
Vigorously desiring to conquer those afflicted ones who are naturally
subject to suffering through death,
Men, disregarding the pain of being pierced by spears and arrows,
Do not withdraw until the goal is accomplished,
Verse 4.38
Then what need to mention that I should not despair and be indolent,
Even if I am caused many hundreds of sufferings,
When now I strive to definitely overcome my natural enemies
That are the constant cause of all suffering?
Even if you put in a lot of effort but don’t manage to destroy your
external enemy, it will comes a time that your enemy will naturally cease
to exist or die. Here the teaching talks about how the external enemies,
the pitiful sentient beings, are actually the objects of compassion.
When people fight with their enemies, they are very determined to destroy
the enemies. In the process of wanting to destroy the enemies, people will
put up with all kinds of hardship even if they are hit by the weapons that
are wielded in the hands of their enemies. People will not stop the fight
until they win. In reality, one actually does not even have to try to
defeat the enemy because sooner or later the external enemy will die. But
nevertheless, the world does not live in such a way. What normally happens
is that people will attack and attempt to destroy the enemy. They will
continue to do so until the enemy is killed.
The moment the afflictions arise, they are harmful. Just like the nature of
fire which is hot and it burns, afflictions are such that when they arise,
they harm and disturb us. This naturally existing inner enemy of
afflictions will not die on their own accord, unless we destroy them.
Like what was mentioned recently, the afflictions harm everybody; from the
top to the bottom, and everybody in between. The afflictions harm everybody
in limitless ways. They bring us into the worst of the suffering - the
suffering of the Avici Hell. As such, it is only appropriate and correct to
strive in destroying the afflictions. We need to strive in destroying this
natural enemy, the afflictions. In the process of destroying the
afflictions, we will meet with all kinds of problems and sufferings.
Nevertheless, we have to accept those sufferings that come along during the
process of destroying the afflictions. One needs to put up with it, and
generate the determination and courage to carry on destroying them.
The teachings tell us that it is incorrect to feel “I am not capable of
destroying the afflictions. I am not capable of applying the antidote,” and
as such remains discourage and not doing anything. It is also incorrect to
hang around not doing anything and not applying any antidote to destroy the
afflictions. Just remaining lazy is also incorrect.
In essence, these two verses are telling us that if we can put up with all
kinds of difficulties and hardships in overcoming the external enemies,
then all the more we should put in even more effort in destroying the
afflictions. We need to be patient and to put up with the hardships that
come along with such a task, not be discouraged and not be lazy.
The discussion continues and is pretty much the same.
[BP1 L23] There are some people who are so bent on defeating their enemies
that, in the process of doing so, they will bear all kinds of hardships,
such as the pain of being pierced by spears and arrows. They will not stop
or give up until they have won. If that is the case for an ordinary person,
then it goes without saying that we should apply joyous perseverance in
defeating our real enemy, the negative emotions. This enemy, as soon as it
arises in our mind, harms us. This is the very nature of our negative
emotions. In the process of fighting our negative emotions, we will meet
all kinds of suffering – hunger and thirst and the different kinds of
suffering that come along with fighting the negative emotions. We should
not be slothful, faint-hearted and give up, but continue to try to overcome
the negative emotions.

|2 The benefits of joyous effort in destroying the afflictions                  |
|A It would be reasonable to bear [ie. be patient with] hardships, [as such     |
|efforts] which are the cause for the excellences [that fulfil] one’s own       |
|welfare                                                                        |
|B It would be reasonable to bear hardships [as such efforts] which are the     |
|cause for the excellences [that fulfill ] the welfare of others                |
|C The reasons it is necessary to work to bring to completion the pledges one   |
|has made in the past                                                           |

|A It would be reasonable to bear [ie. be patient with] hardships, [as such     |
|efforts] which are the cause for the excellences [that fulfill] one’s own      |
|welfare                                                                        |


Verse 4.39
If even scars inflicted by meaningless enemies
Are worn upon the body like ornaments,
Then why is suffering a cause of harm to me
Who impeccably strive to fulfil the great purpose?
Normal and common worldly people will fight with one another and destroying
the enemies for some small problem. Sometimes when people fight, they
received some wounds and when the wounds heal, scars are left behind on the
body. There are people who regard these scars as ornaments, something to be
proud off, and something to show off.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): Anybody done this before? No? Here I don’t
know. Sometimes you can see that in Nepal. Not everybody but some of them.
When they fight, sometimes they have some scars on the head, and they will
say “When I was young, I fight.”  They don’t see it as bad. They think they
are a brave person, and considered the scars as decoration. The example is
something like that. Here maybe people don’t fight. In Singapore do people
fight? Only the mouths fight. Interestingly I saw how the Indian fight.
They don’t actually hit each other, but always like that (Khen Rinpoche
showing the gesture of mouths arguing). They don’t really touch the other
person, but so much argument with each other. Tibetans are not like that.
They don’t argue much, but they just fight. Maybe Chinese also the same, I
don’t know. Most of the Himalayan people don’t argue with the mouth. One or
two argument and that is, the hand then start (to move). But Indian, I see
they never put their hands, but only mouth fighting. But Nepal not likes
that. In some Himalaya place, they really just fight and the fighting is
real.
If the scars from fighting with the ordinary external enemies can be
regarded as an ornament by some, then we should regards all the hardships
that we meet while practicing to achieve enlightenment for sentient beings
as an ornament. No matter how much hardships or suffering we will meet
while in the process of achieving enlightenment to benefit others, we
should consider and look upon all of that as something that is the most
beneficial and meaningful. Therefore we should regard these hardship and
suffering as ornaments.
Since we are putting up with all these hardships and suffering to help us
to accomplish our own goals, our own wishes, and our own purposes,
therefore it is entirely appropriate to put up with all the hardships and
sufferings that come along in the process of destroying the afflictions.

[BL1 L23] We are talking here about the patience of voluntarily accepting
the different kinds of suffering that come in the course of our quest for
enlightenment that help us to purify our negative karma and obscurations.
The essence here is that, if we treasure the scars that are inflicted by
our enemies and wear them on our bodies as ornaments, then, likewise, we
should wear as ornaments the sufferings that come along in our quest for
enlightenment

|B It would be reasonable to bear hardships [as such efforts] are the cause for |
|the excellences [that fulfil ] the welfare of others                           |


Verse 4.40
If fishermen, outcastes, farmers, and so forth,
Thinking merely of their own livelihood,
Endure the harms of heat and cold,
Why do I not endure them for the sake of the happiness of migrating beings?
If fishermen and farmers can endure all the cold and heat while pursuing
their livelihood in order to sustaining themselves, it would be appropriate
to put up with whatever hardships and suffering there may be while in the
process of defeating the afflictions. Therefore, it is appropriate to bear
with all these sufferings and the hardships that come along when one is
defeating the afflictions in order to accomplish the happiness and the
welfare of sentient beings.

|C The reasons why it is necessary to work to bring to completion the pledges   |
|one has made in the past                                                       |


Verse 4.41
When I promised to liberate migrating beings
Dwelling in the ten directions as far as the ends of space
From their afflictions,
I myself was not yet freed from the afflictions.
Verse 4.42ab
Thus unaware of even my own capacity,
Was it not somewhat crazy to have spoken like that?
Khen Rinpoche (in English): Crazy or not?
A qualm is raised here: One has made the promise to destroy the afflictions
in the continuum of others and it is unsuitable to strive to destroy the
afflictions in one’s own continuum, because one would then fall into the
extreme of peace. Therefore it is incorrect for bodhisattva to strive to
destroy the afflictions in their own continuum.
There is such a qualm, and of course, this is wrong. I guess it would be
alright to say that at the time when one made the promise to liberate all
sentient beings and to destroy the afflictions of all sentient beings, one
also took the oath and made the promise to destroy the afflictions in one’s
own continuum.
If you remember the mind of enlightenment is made up of two aspirations:
1. An aspiration to accomplish the welfare of others
2. An aspiration to omniscient
The aspiration to accomplish the welfare of others is the cause. It is said
that the aspiration to omniscient is like an assisting factor, and it plays
a complementary role.
In order to accomplish the welfare of others and to destroy the afflictions
in the continuum of others, one must first destroy the afflictions in one’s
own continuum. Otherwise, one will be powerless, and one will not be able
to destroy the afflictions in others.
If one is bound by cyclic existence, one cannot accomplish the welfare of
others. Therefore, one should strive to abandon the afflictions in one’s
continuum. There is no danger the bodhisattvas will fall into the extreme
of peace when destroying the afflictions in their own continuum. In fact,
the understanding on the faults of cyclic existence and the disgust on the
disenchantment with the faults of cyclic existence that the bodhisattvas
have is much more intense and much more powerful, maybe like tens or
hundreds of times more powerful than what the Hearers and Solitary
Realizers have.

|It is reasonable to be diligent in the practice of destroying the afflictions  |
|A One should make effort in the antidotes to the afflictions                   |
|B One should make effort so that one does not come under the power of the      |
|afflictions at any time                                                        |

|A One should make effort in the antidotes to the afflictions                   |


Verse 4.42 c,d
Since this is the case I should never withdraw
From vanquishing the afflictions.
Verse 4.43 a,b
I shall adhere to this and,
Resenting them, I shall meet them in battle!
The afflictions are the objects to be abandoned. Therefore, we have to
strive and apply effort in destroying the afflictions at all times. We
should never reverse from destroying the afflictions and always regard
afflictions as the objects to be abandoned. With this thought we should
always strive to destroy them.
Qualm may arise: “If you are so hard up and so emotionally involved and
attached to destroying the afflictions, doesn’t that become a problem in
itself? Doesn’t that become an affliction? If you are so upset with the
afflictions and you get angry at the afflictions, isn’t that itself also a
problem and thereby making it an affliction? Therefore, you should abandon
these attitudes.”
Khen Rinpoche (in English): Correct?
The answer to such a qualm is as follows.
Verse 4.43 c,d
But afflictions such as these types
Destroy afflictions and are not included.
Gyatsab Je’s commentary states: Holding onto the antidote and anger to that
what has to be abandoned, these appear like afflictions but actually belong
to the class of the antidote that destroys the afflictions. It is therefore
not included in the category of that to be abandoned.
Having an attachment to the antidote of afflictions may look like an
affliction in itself but it is not an affliction. Essentially, the desire
to destroy the afflictions and the desire to apply the antidote itself is
basically a strong aspiration. With that aspiration, come strong
mindfulness and vigilance when you are implementing the antidotes to the
afflictions. Essentially, it is a very strong aspiration.
It looks like an attachment to the antidote. It looks like being very hard
up and very involved in wanting to destroy the afflictions, but it is not.
Essentially, it is an aspiration. Mindfulness and vigilance comes along
with this aspiration to destroy the afflictions. In this context, this
attachment wanting to destroy the afflictions is an aspiration.
The mind that is mindful and vigilant about the faults of the afflictions
recognizing that it is all these faults and therefore needs to be
abandoned. It is helpful and is necessary in destroying the afflictions.
They form an antidote to the afflictions and they do not become an
affliction.
In short, there is a mind that looks upon the afflictions as an enemy
through seeing the faults of the afflictions. That mind understands the
value, the necessity and the purpose of the antidotes. There is a mind that
understands this based on mindfulness and vigilance.
This mind may look like an attachment to the antidote and looks like an
angry mind being upset with the afflictions. Although they look like
afflictions, but actually this particular mind is not an affliction. It is
actually part of the antidote to the afflictions. So that is the meaning of
the verse 4.43 c,d.
[BP1 L24] Although such resentment (towards the afflictions) and obsession
(with giving up the afflictions by cultivating the antidotes) appear to be
afflictions, in fact, they are the factors of antidote for abandoning the
afflictions.
The point here is that the obsession with the antidotes against the
afflictions and the resentment towards the afflictions appear to be
afflictions but they are not afflictions.
The obsession with the antidotes appears to be a derivative of attachment
but it is not a fully qualified attachment.
The resentment towards afflictions appears to be a derivative of anger but
it is not a fully qualified resentment.
According to Gyaltsab Je, these two are not objects of abandonment.
Gyaltsab Je said, “Resentment here is not an object of abandonment because
resentment towards the afflictions is basically a mind that sees the faults
of negative emotions. Since it is a mind that sees the faults of negative
emotions, it is the factor of antidote to afflictions. Since it is the
factor of antidote to the afflictions, it is not an object to be
abandoned.”
There are two factors; the factor of abandonment and the factor of
antidote. This resentment towards the afflictions belongs to the factor of
antidote.

|B One should make effort so that one does not come under the power of the      |
|afflictions at any time                                                        |


Verse 4.44
I would rather be burned and killed,
And even have my head cut off,
Than to ever bow down
To the enemy that is the afflictions in any way.
The point that this verse is trying to make is that we have to work at
destroying the afflictions. We have to strive not to let the mind come
under the control of the afflictions.
A qualm may arise: If it is so troublesome to deal with the afflictions,
and in the process of trying to destroy the afflictions so many
difficulties and problems will arise, isn’t it better just to follow it?
Khen Rinpoche (in English): No? You follow them to solve the problem? That
is what we think.
Verse 4.44 is an answer to that. It says to have one’s limbs cut off or to
have one’s head chopped off is not too big deal. It is not really
difficult. At most we have our limbs hacked off, or somebody chops off our
head. What is the biggest problem that can happen to us? At most we lose
our lives. That’s about it. Those actions, having our heads and our limbs
chopped off, will only end our lives but will not send us to the lower
realms or the hell realms.
But if we let ourselves be controlled by our afflictions, our afflictions
will send us into the lower realms and the hells. This will obstruct our
achievement of full enlightenment. So the afflictions are much scarier
because they bring us the greatest suffering. They prevent us from
achieving full enlightenment which is the most beneficial and meaningful
thing to achieve.
These verses are very useful and beneficial for our mind. We should read
and think about them regularly. We have to understand the faults of our
afflictions and then gradually to become familiarize ourselves with these
verses. Because of these reasons we have to strive to work at not letting
ourselves come under the control of the afflictions. If we do, the
afflictions will bring us the greatest suffering and prevent us from
achieving the most meaningful thing.
This concludes the section which talks about how it is inappropriate to be
tired of the difficulty of destroying the afflictions. Up to this point
here, these verses are telling us to be enthusiastic. We should take joy in
destroying the afflictions and to be enthusiastic about it rather than
becoming disenchanted with the task.

|Next is meditating on enthusiasm because if one makes an effort, one can       |
|abandon the afflictions. Cultivating joy for the very fact that it is possible |
|[to abandon the afflictions], for, if effort is made, they will be abandoned   |
|1 If the afflictions in your own continuum are completely uprooted, there is no|
|place supportive of them [in your mind]                                        |
|2 As the cause [of the afflictions] arises from error, if one applies          |
|diligence, one will be able to abandon them                                    |
|3 If they are completely uprooted, there is absolutely no place that supports  |
|their existence and [thus] it is reasonable [to say] that they [can be]        |
|abandoned                                                                      |

|1 If the afflictions in your own continuum are completely uprooted, there is no|
|place supportive of them [in your mind]                                        |


Verse 4.45
Ordinary enemies when expelled from one country
Simply settle down in another and embrace it,
And when their capability is recovered they then return;
But the way of this enemy, my afflictions, is different.
It is possible that the external enemy can recover and come back and haunt
you even if you expel and kick him out to some faraway place. However, the
inner enemy of the afflictions is not like that. Once the inner enemy of
the afflictions is vanquished through the force of the antidotes, they can
never return again. They will be destroyed. Once they are destroyed
completely from the root, they can never return.
Next is that if one makes an effort, the afflictions can be abandoned
because the afflictions arise from a mistaken cause.

|2 As the cause [of the afflictions] arises from error, if one applies          |
|diligence, one will be able to abandon them                                    |


Verse 4.46
Afflictions, afflictions! When abandoned by the eye of wisdom
And dispelled from my mind, where will you go?
Where will you dwell and return to harm me?
Although this is so, weak-minded, I have been reduced to making no effort.
The words “afflictions, afflictions” is actually expressing how lowly the
afflictions are.  If you think about them and analyze it properly, you will
see that they can be vanquished because they arise from a mistaken cause.
We need to abandon the afflictions through generating the eye of wisdom,
which is the wisdom realizing emptiness.
The afflictions which abide in our continuum once vanquished, they have
nowhere else to go. Once the afflictions are eliminated by the wisdom
realizing emptiness, the afflictions have nowhere else to go. It is not as
if they will leave your mind and go somewhere else to recover and then come
back to haunt you. That will not happen with the afflictions.
The next verse is about emptiness.

|3 If they are completely uprooted, there is absolutely no place that supports  |
|their existence and [thus] it is reasonable [to say] that they [can be]        |
|abandoned                                                                      |


Verse 4.47
If these afflictions do not abide within objects,
Not in the collection of sense powers, between the two nor elsewhere,
Then where do they abide and how do they harm all migrating beings?
They are like an illusion. Thus I should dispel the fear within my heart
and strive for the sake of wisdom.
For no meaning, why am I harmed in hell and so forth?

Q&A
Student 3: Just now there was this explanation about the mind that
generates an aversion towards afflictions is an aspiration. There is
another kind of mind as sometimes we will think: “After so many years of
study and practice, one still see there are so many afflictions in the
mind. One may feel very discouraged and one may have a lot of self-judgment
thinking: “Why am I still like that after so many years of study and
practice? Is that kind of mind an affliction?”
Khen Rinpoche (in English): After so many years of practice, what do you
say?
Student 3: No practice, sorry. So many years of external activities
Khen Rinpoche (in English): Supporting the afflictions and not destroying,
isn’t it? That is why still no improvement. The answer is there. In the
first place we don’t put in effort to end the afflictions. Never, but
always following the afflictions. So what do you hope? No hope
All the advices are here. You can recognize the disadvantages of
afflictions, and how afflictions harm us. So many advices here - how they
control our mind, how much they harm us. Not like external enemy. This is
what it is trying to say here. For example, somebody say some harsh words
to you, even that you can’t sleep. How much they hurt you? You keep
thinking: “What I’m going to say back, I’m going to tell him.”  Even with
that you cannot sleep. Just small word can harm you. You put in so much
effort thinking what to say back, how to reply to this person and make sure
this person won’t say that next time. We put that kind of effort on small
thing.
What does Shantideva talking about here about the afflictions? How they
harm us? We never think at all. That is the real enemy but we never think
like that. We think they are our best friends. We never recognize that is
the worst enemy. We always consider this is the best friends. Whatever the
enemy, the delusion, says then you try to follow that, and then you feel
happy like that. We never recognize how the delusions deceive us. All the
advices are to recognize that the delusion is your inner enemy. Don’t fight
with the outside enemy, but fight with inside enemy. I think this is the
advice that Shantideva is talking about.  You don’t need to destroy and you
don’t need to kill the outside enemy. It will die itself. But you need to
kill the inside enemy. You need to destroy it. Also, the delusion won’t
disappear after you die, it will continue. So that is why you must put in
effort and destroy it.
What we read so far is in very simple talk. With two to three sentences we
have finished Shantideva text. It is saying that you have to understand the
delusion is the real enemy. We must understand that. So whatever we have
difficult time fighting with delusion it is important to purify. How much
difficult time to fight with whatever sufferings you have with the delusion
become the cause to enlightenment. Purify your negative karma. Again it is
saying that the delusion is no basis and it come from wrong mind. If you
put effort you are able to destroy that. With the understanding of the
realization of emptiness you can destroy the delusions. So it is talking
like that.
Student 4: Previously Khen Rinpoche has talked about all the causes for
precious human rebirth – the practice of pure morality, all the different
types of practices which is related to the six perfections like the
practice of generosity, patience and so on. On the one hand, it is so
difficult to get a precious human rebirth and it takes so many conditions,
it is so rare and so on. I have a hard time reconciling the fact that I’m
supposed to have work so hard to have received this precious human rebirth
to meet the Dharma and the teachers. Yet in this life, the afflictions are
so strong. In this life it is almost impossible to think that in some past
lives I have actually practice pure morality and all those other practices
in order to achieve the precious human rebirth that I enjoy now. My issue
has always been if it takes so much virtue and merit to generate a precious
human rebirth why is it that during the time when we are experiencing the
precious human rebirth the afflictions seem as powerful as ever before. The
afflictions are very strong, the attachment is very strong, and the
aversion is very strong. The ignorance is definitely there. Like what Khen
Rinpoche has said that all the activities that we do, if we are really
honest with ourselves, is to pursue or follow the instructions of our
afflictions and our attachment and it is not to overcome them. In this
lifetime, the afflictions seem so strong. I cannot believe that somehow I
actually have practiced. If I’ve practiced so powerfully in the past to get
a precious human rebirth surely the imprints should be very powerful in
this lifetime as well but it doesn’t seem to be the case.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): I don’t think so you have meditated on
emptiness in your past lives.
Student 4: Granted!
Khen Rinpoche (in English): Not necessary, isn’t it? You have meditated
emptiness in your past lives in order to get your precious human rebirth?
If you have done some meditation on emptiness in your past lives, then
maybe less delusions in this life, I think.
Student 4: My basic point is that we practice so much virtue in the past to
get a precious human rebirth. That virtuous mind should be very powerful.
In terms of percentage, it should be like 70% virtue and 30 percent
afflictions but actually in this life my mind seems to have 99% afflictions
and maybe 1% virtue. I’m just seeing that. It is always like I’m having a
hard time reconciling how it was possible for me to actually have practiced
well enough to get a precious human rebirth. If I’m enjoying my precious
human rebirth now why the afflictions is so strong?
Khen Rinpoche (in English): I don’t really get what you are saying.
Answer: Generally all rebirths in samsara are due to karma and afflictions.
Generally speaking, all rebirths in samsara happen without choice. They are
under the control of karma and afflictions including the human life of
freedom and endowments. A human life of freedoms and endowments like the
one we have is a result of contaminated virtue. It is a rebirth that is
propelled by the ignorance that comes in the twelve links of dependent
origination. A human life of freedoms and endowments is the result of
ignorance. Therefore, it is under the control of the afflictions. Because
we did not apply the antidote to the afflictions in the past, therefore now
our state of existence is under the control of karma and afflictions.
Did we accumulate strong virtue in the past? Yes, otherwise there is no way
to get such a human life of freedoms and endowments.
Did we practice some kind of ethical discipline? Yes to some extent.
Definitely there was practice of ethical discipline.
Did we apply the antidote to the afflictions? Did we meditate strongly on
that? That is the question.
It is clearly evident that because we didn’t apply strongly the antidote to
the afflictions therefore now in this life the afflictions are still very
strong. If we look at what we do in this life, we have a human life of
freedoms and endowments, we have met the teaching, we understand the
teachings, we listen to the teaching on the faults of afflictions but at
the end of the day, are we applying the antidotes to the afflictions?
Are there people who will just spend five minutes to sit down and really
look at the problems and the faults of afflictions? Even that is rare. It
is not the question of not being able to do it, but it is about not doing.
The problem lies in not doing. It is not about not being able to do.
If you look at this whole chapter, from the beginning to the end, basically
it is just imploring us to start, “You have a perfect human rebirth, you
have this, you have that, now it is the time to start. You should do it
now!”.  Beginning to end is all about that.
(Khen Rinpoche gesturing with his hand showing “one ear in, the other ear
out”)
Dealing with the afflictions and abandoning them is no easy task because
they have been there since beginningless lifetime. We are thoroughly
familiarized with the affliction, and it is impossible to deal with the
afflictions by applying the antidote just once. Therefore there is a verse
that says you have to apply the antidote like the flow of the river
continuously. Otherwise it is not possible at all.
 As such, there should never ever be a time, at least for now, that we ask
“Why is it that my afflictions are not subsiding? Why is it not becoming
weaker?”  In the first place, we are not doing anything about it. We
shouldn’t even ask this question. If we have been applying the antidote
continuously, and really working on the afflictions and after years if we
still find it difficult, perhaps then we can maybe wonder why.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): That is the right time to ask your question
“Why I put so much effort it is still like that. Why? Why? Why?” Now no
question about that.
In the next lesson we will finish the remaining verses of this chapter, and
then we will move on to the next chapter – the fifth chapter on Vigilance.

