Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Engaging in the Deeds of a Bodhisattva/lesson2.docx
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:52:18.727622
================================================================================

I have talked about the Four Seals in the past. I think this is something you all should think about on a regular basis. The Four Seals are:
All compounded phenomena are impermanent
All contaminated phenomena are in the nature of suffering
All phenomena are selfless and empty
Nirvana is peace
The text on reasoning composed by the great logicians Dignaga and Dharmakirti stated that because it is impermanent therefore it is suffering. What they are trying to say is pretty much the same as the Four Seals. I have talked about this before. In the text on reasoning, it is mentioned that because it is impermanent, it is in the nature of suffering. But this is not meant to be taken literally in that just because something that is impermanent, it is in the nature of suffering. We have to understand the import of that statement. 
Why is it that contaminated phenomena are in the nature of suffering? 
This is because they are impermanent. 
This is what we have to figure out. Once we understand this, then we move on to the next one. 
Because it is in the nature of suffering, therefore it is selfless. 
Of course there are many ways to interpret this statement and there are many ways to understand it. But this is something we need to think about and come to an understanding for ourselves.
Because it is impermanent, it is in the nature of suffering (misery). 
And because it is misery, it is selfless. 
Once you have understand all of these, then one comes to understand how nirvana is peace. 
Although there isn’t a statement directly alluding to that, but in meaning because it is selfless, therefore nirvana is peace. 
This is an extremely important point to understand. In fact this is the very fundamental point, the very root of the entire Buddhadharma. When we understand for ourselves how nirvana (liberation) actually exists and how it is possible for ourselves to achieve that, then we really start to taste the Buddha’s teachings. So whatever learning and study we do is to move our mind towards that understanding. Once you have gained that kind of conviction, it will help you to have a belief and faith in the dharma, and to have aspirations to want to actualize it.
These Four Seals attest a doctrine to be a Buddhist doctrine. So these Four Seals are very important. It is something that you should reflect on continually.
Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds
I have talked about the title of the text and the translator’s homage. Now we start with the actual text. The actual text starts with the author paying homage.
Verse 1.1
Respectfully I pay homage to the Sugatas who are endowed with the dharmakaya, 
As well as to their children, and to all who are worthy of homage. 
Here I shall describe how to engage in the vows of the Sugatas’ children, 
The meaning of which I have summarized in accordance with the scriptures.
What are the objects to whom the author is paying homage to? 
The objects that he is paying homage to are the Three Rare Sublime Ones, or the Three Jewels, together with all those who are worthy of homage. 
After paying homage, he states his intention of composing this text.
In the commentary there is an explanation of the word “Sugata”. 
In English it is translated as Gone to Bliss. 
In Tibetan it is made up of two words, “De” and “Sheg”. 
“De” is translated as bliss, essentially it means something good, something wonderful.
“Sheg” is to go or to have gone, or to have become that. 
“De” is translated as bliss. The bliss here refers to something that is good.  The goodness here refers to the abandonments and the realizations. 
In terms of the abandonments, they are usually described in terms of the three characteristics/features.
Abandonment here refers to having abandoned the afflictive obscurations. 
Well abandoned refers to abandoning the object of abandonment such that it would never arise again. 
Thorough abandonment refers to abandoning the two obscurations completely. 
Why are there these three features? There is a purpose behind these three features. 
The first feature of abandonment is abandonment which means having abandoned the afflictive obscurations. This is to set the Buddha apart from those non-Buddhist practitioners who have achieved the actual concentration, such as the concentration of the formless realm and in fact the highest of samsara which is called the Peak of Samsara. Those sentient beings do not have any manifest afflictions. So they have achieved that kind of quality. But the abandonment that the Buddha has achieved is very different from that.
The second feature of abandonment is well abandonment (or good abandonment). This is to distinguish the quality of abandonment that the Buddha has achieved as opposed to some of the Hinayana superiors. In the explanations of the Hinayana paths, there are individuals who have achieved the Hinayana superior paths. Within those who have achieved the superior paths, there are different categories of beings. There are some who are called stream-enterer and once-returner*. Although the stream-enterers and once-returners are Hinayana superiors, they have not yet abandoned the seeds of innate afflictions (innate apprehension of a self). Because of that they do take rebirths in cyclic existence. Unlike the Buddha who has achieved the good abandonment. The things that he has abandoned will never return, and will never arise again.
*(BP1 Lesson 2) Stream- enterer refers to a superior being on the Hinayana path of seeing, who will never be reborn in the three lower realms again.  Once-returner refers to a superior being on the Hinayana path of meditation who will return to the desire realm only one more time).
So the purpose of explaining the second feature of abandonment - well abandonment- is to distinguish the abandonment that the Buddha has achieved from the abandonment that is achieved by some of the Hinayana superiors.
The third feature of abandonment is thorough abandonment or literally abandonment without leaving anything behind.  This is to distinguish the quality of the abandonment that the Buddha has achieved from the abandonments achieved by the Hearer foe destroyers and Solitary Realizer foe destroyers. 
Thorough abandonment means having abandoned both the afflictive obscurations and non-afflictive obscurations (or knowledge obscurations)*. This kind of abandonment that the Buddha has achieved is something that the Hearer arhats and the Solitary Realizer arhats have not achieved.
*(BP1 Lesson 2) All the faults we possess are included in the two obstructions, obstructions to liberation (also known as afflictive obstructions) and obstructions to omniscience (non-afflictive obscurations). Obstructions to liberation such as ignorance, anger and attachment prevent us from attaining liberation from samsara. The imprints of the afflictions are obstructions to omniscience; they prevent us from realising all objects of knowledge directly and simultaneously.
We are trying to gain a little bit of understanding of the term Sugata - gone to bliss. The bliss here refers to something which is good, and the goodness here is made up of the excellent abandonments and excellent realizations. 
We have been talking about the excellent abandonments and you need to know that. On top of the quality of abandonment that the Buddha has achieved, we can talk about this quality of abandonment in terms of the three features; which are abandonment, well abandonment and thorough abandonment.
These three features of the excellent abandonment that the Buddha has achieved are to enable us:
-  to understand that the Buddha’s quality of excellent abandonment is different from the abandonment achieved by those who have reached the Peak of Samsara
-  to distinguish the Buddha’s quality of abandonment from the quality of abandonment achieved by the stream-enterers and once-returners
-  to distinguish the Buddha’s quality of excellent abandonment from the abandonments achieved by the Hearers arhat and Solitary Realizers arhats.
If you know some of these points and when you think about Buddha in terms of what he has abandoned, then you can see how the Buddha is different. The quality of abandonment that he has achieved is very different from those achieved by the non-Buddhist.
In order to appreciate these points, then one would have to actually know some of these things and you can only come to know about these things through learning. 
In order for you to appreciate the points that I have just explained, you have to know the presentation of form and formless absorption (concentration), the process of reaching the Peak of Samsara, the presentation of the Hinayana path, the different kinds of Sangha, what exactly is stream-enterer, once-returners, Hinayana foe destroyers (Solitary Realizer and Hearer). Ideally we should be explaining these but it is really not possible because we don’t have the time. 
Khen Rinpoche (spoke in English): Not possible.
If you want a simple explanation, just take Sugata to be gone to bliss, and the bliss here refers to abandonment and realizations. 
Khen Rinpoche (spoke in English): Can be very simple, and can be very complicated. So like that.
So Sugata is be gone to bliss. The bliss here refers to something that is good.  The goodness here refers to the excellent abandonments and excellent realizations. 
If you look at the bliss in terms of excellent realization, again we can look at it in terms of three features. 
*(BP1 Lesson 2)
These terms are found in the texts of Dignaga and Dharmakirti. The purpose of explaining the excellent realization in terms of the three features is pretty much the same as before. It is to set the Buddha’s quality of realization apart from others. Again back to those individuals who have achieved the formless realm absorptions, including those who have reached the highest level in samsara which is called the Peak of Samsara, in fact it is quite an achievement in itself. But when compare to the Buddha’s realization, it is nothing. Although these individuals have achieved the highest possible state of existence in samsara, they have not realized thusness directly. 
Why is it an Exalted Knower?  It is an Exalted Knower that directly knows thusness, or you could say the Exalted Knower that directly perceives selflessness.
The second feature is the Stable Exalted Knower. Again back to the example of the stream-enterer and the once-returners, they are Hinayana superiors and they have perceived the truth directly. However, their direct realization of selflessness is not as stable as the Buddha’s realization. Why? Although they have realized the truth directly, but nevertheless their direct realization of selflessness is not powerful enough to destroy the seeds of the innate self-grasping. Unlike the Buddha, the stream-enterers and once-returners have not achieved a stable realization. 
(not a stable realization of the Hearers and Solitary Realizers mean not powerful enough to destroy the seeds of the innate self-grasping, does not means they will lose their direct realization of selflessness)
Next is Thorough Exalted Knower. 
(Ven Gyurme: I said Exalted Knower. You could also look at it in terms of knowing as a noun or as a verb.) 
The Buddha has a Thorough Exalted Knower because he sees each and everything exactly as it is, including the paths of the three vehicles, and as such, can work perfectly for the benefits of the sentient beings; unlike the Hearers arhat and Solitary Realizers arhats.
So the “Sugata” here in this verse refers to the Buddha Jewel. Here the Buddha Jewel is the object of homage.
Respectfully I pay homage to the Sugatas who are endowed with the dharmakaya,
The dharmakaya here refers to the Dharma Jewel. The dharmakaya is the Truth Body. 
The Truth Body consists of the Nature Body and the Wisdom Truth Body. 
Nature Body - the naturally pure sphere that is free of all the stains. 
Wisdom Truth Body - the wisdom in the continuum of the Buddha superior, and the exalted knower in the continuum of the Buddha superior.
These two truth bodies are the ultimate True Cessation and the ultimate True Path respectively. This is the final and the ultimate Dharma Jewel.
The text says “I pay homage to the Sugatas who are endowed with the dharmakaya”. 
“Those who are endowed with the dharmakaya” - here it is talking about person who is endowed with it.  This person refers to the Sangha Jewel.
So this first line “Respectfully I pay homage to the Sugatas who are endowed with the dharmakaya” is referring to the object of homage. The objects of homage are the final Buddha Jewel, the final Dharma Jewel and the final Sangha Jewel. So the final (ultimate) Three Jewels are the objects of homage. 
“As well as to their children” - the children in general refers to the bodhisattva, but here in particular to the superior bodhisattva. 
“To all those who are worthy of homage” - those who are worthy of homage are basically the Buddha, Dharma and Sangha of the Mahayana.
I think this verse of homage is paid primarily from the perspective of a refuge from the Mahayana point of view. So it is a Mahayana refuge. The objects of homage are the final Buddha Jewel, final Dharma Jewel and the final Sangha Jewel. On top of that the superior bodhisattvas and so forth of the Mahayana are also included as the objects of homage. 
The first line “the Sugatas who are endowed with the dharmakaya” is also referring to the Buddha four bodies (or four kayas [dharmakaya, nirmanakaya, sambhogakaya, svabhavikakaya]. 
Through directly indicating the dharmakaya, by the way, the two form bodies are also indicated indirectly. The two form bodies are the Complete Enjoyment Body [sambhogakaya] and the Emanation Body [nirmanakaya].
There are many explanations about what a Buddha is. The whole point is to help us to understand who we are taking refuge in. We always go for refuge; “I take refuge in Buddha, etc” and whether we use the word Buddha, Sugata, Gone to Bliss, or we talk about full enlightenment, we are talking about the same thing. So this explanation here is just to help us to gain a better understanding of our object of refuge.
After paying homage to the Three Jewels, next comes the pledge of composition.
Here I shall describe how to engage in the vows of the Sugatas’ children, 
The meaning of which I have summarized in accordance with the scriptures.
“Here I shall describe how to engage in the vows of the Sugatas’ children” - is the pledge of composition.
“The meaning of which I have summarized in accordance with the scriptures”- here the author is saying that he pledges to give a summary of the bodhisattva paths i.e. how does one generates the mind of enlightenment and on the basis of that, how does one train in the bodhisattva deeds.
How is he going to make his explanations? The author says that he is doing it in accordance with the Buddha’s intent and in accordance with what is laid out in the Buddha’s teachings. He is not doing it through his own whims or fancy. He is not writing whatever comes to his mind. He is not creating something new. 
If he is going to compose this text in accordance with the Buddha’s intent, and in accordance with what is already laid out in the Buddha’s teachings, what exactly is the point then since it is all already there in the teachings? There is a purpose. His purpose is to summarize the key points of the path.
Shantideva says that he is making this summary of the Buddha’s teachings so that one can easily understand or realize the intent of the Buddha’s teachings themselves.
Next is an expression of humility.
Verse 1. 2
There is nothing here that has not appeared in the past 
And I have no skill in the art of rhetoric; 
Therefore, not to enact the welfare of others, 
I composed this in order to acquaint it to my mind. 
 “There is nothing here that has not appeared in the past” - here is a kind of expression of humility. Shantideva is saying that it is not that he is the expert in the meanings of the teachings. 
“I have no skill in the art of rhetoric” - he is also saying that he is not skill in the art of rhetoric; he is not an expert in the language and words themselves. 
The point behind this expression of humility is that pride is an obstacle to gaining quality. The point is whether one is composing a text or one is studying or whatever one does, it is important to do it in absence of pride.
“Therefore, not to enact the welfare of others” - it is saying that “I did not compose this in order to help others realize quickly the meaning and the intent of the Buddha’s teachings”.
Khen Rinpoche (spoke in English): You got it? I don’t know. I understand something else.
(Ven Gyurme: I confuse myself)
“Not to enact the welfare of others” refers to those who on their own have the ability to understand the Buddha’s teachings “I did not compose this text for their purpose, but rather, I compose this in order to acquaint it with my mind”. 
Verse 1. 3
For due to acquaintance with virtue, 
The force of my faith will for the time being increase because of these.
If, however, these are seen by others 
Equal in fortune to myself, it will be meaningful.
Here it is showing the reason why generating enthusiasm and delight whether composing a text or doing some other thing. Besides doing that activity without any pride, one should also engage in the activity happily with a sense of enthusiasm and delight. Even though one may not have pride, but if one doesn’t have enthusiasm and feel discouraged then it is also difficult to achieve one’s goal. 
Therefore he says, 
“For due to acquaintance with virtue, 
The force of my faith will for the time being increase because of these. 
If, however, these are seen by others 
Equal in fortune to myself, it will be meaningful.”
Shantideva is saying that he himself will benefit from composing the text because when he composes such a text which talks about the bodhisattva’s practice it increases his own faith in the practices of the bodhisattva. If somehow his composition is read or seen by others who are similar to him, they will likely reap the same benefit as him. With this kind of enthusiasm and delight he composes the text. 
Here we have just looked at the author’s expression of humility and his expression of the purpose of composing the text. The lessons we can draw from this is that in whatever we do we should do it with an absence of pride. At the same time, one must have courage and one must not be narrow-minded and be discouraged. If one is narrow-minded and one lacks courage, I don’t think we would be a suitable receptacle for qualities to arise. So whatever we do, we have to do it with an absence of pride, with enthusiasm, delight and confidence.
Next is the actual explanation of the stages of the path which consists of:
Exhorting one to take the essence of one’s basis endowed with the freedoms and endowments and 
Explaining the method to take the essence. 
Of the two, the first one exalting to take the essence of the basis with freedoms and endowments:
Verse 1.4
The leisures and endowments are very hard to find. 
Since they accomplish the purposes of beings, 
If I do not accomplish benefit upon this, 
How will I acquire this in the future?
The subject matter of the human life of freedoms and endowments has already been discussed in the Stages of the Path to Enlightenment in the section on the path that is shared with the person of small capacity. Since we have already talked about this, I don’t think there is any need to explain this here. 
Khen Rinpoche (spoke in English): So now when you heard one sentence you have to get whole understanding of the sentence by now. 
For example, the first line which says “the leisures or freedoms and endowments are very hard to find” – you should be able to expand on this sentence on your own. 
Khen Rinpoche (spoke in English): When you read that, you have to remember the whole Lamrim.
*(BP1 Lesson 2) Leisure means freedom from rebirth in any of the eight conditions that lack leisure, and opportunity (endowment) refers to the good conditions amenable to the practice of Dharma.
The eight leisures are characterised by being born free from certain kinds of existence that lack the conditions to be able to practice Dharma. There are four human states and four non-human states that lack the leisure to be able to practice Dharma.
The four non-human states that lack leisure for the study and practice the Dharma are: rebirth as a hell being, rebirth as an animal, rebirth as a hungry ghost, and rebirth as a long-life god.
The four human states that lack leisure to be able to study and practice the Dharma are: rebirth in a land where there is no dharma (as barbarians), rebirth in a place where a buddha has not descended, meaning a place where a buddha has not come and taught, rebirth with extreme mental or physical defects, and rebirth with strong wrong views, particularly in relation to cause and effect, past and future lives, or the three objects of refuge.
The second set of privileges that we experience, having gained a perfect human rebirth, are the ten opportunities, five of which pertain to ourselves, and five of which pertain to external conditions.
The five opportunities pertaining to oneself are:
1. being born as a human being
2. born in a central place where the dharma flourishes
3. having perfect and complete senses and sense organs
4. not having committed one of the five heinous crimes, and thus having the potential to change one's karma.
5. having faith in the Lamrim, and in the three vast collections of Buddha's teaching
The five opportunities pertaining to external conditions are:
1. having been born in a time when a buddha has descended into the world
2. having been born in a time when a buddha has taught the dharma
3. the teachings of the Buddha still remain in the world
4. there are still people practicing the teachings
5. that, through the kindness and compassion of others, it is possible that practitioners have the opportunity to receive material support that enables them the freedom to practice.
When we talked about meditation, this is what meditation is. On the basis of some short verses, you analyze and reflect on the meaning of that. Basically the statement is saying that our human life of freedoms and endowments is something that is very difficult to achieve and very difficult to attain. For example, when you look at this sentence, the question should naturally arise in your mind: Why is it difficult? Why is achieving a human life of freedoms and endowments so difficult? What is the reason proving that it is indeed difficult to obtain?
For example, if we say the human life of freedoms and endowments is difficult to achieve because the causes for it are difficult to actualize. Using this topic as an example, it is put to us that the human life of freedoms and endowments that we have achieved is something that is very difficult to come by. This is just a statement. But what is the reason? The reason is this: this human life of freedom and endowments is difficult to come by or obtain because its causes are difficult to achieve. In general, without a cause it will not have an effect. By looking at how the principle or the law of causality works in the external world, for example, you see how without fire there is no smoke, how without a seed there is no sprout. Likewise, in the internal world of mind, the principle of causality also applies. If that is the case, if causes are needed to actualize the human life of freedoms and endowments, then the question here is: what are the causes for human life of freedoms and endowments? It is not straight-forward, so it is something that requires much analysis and reflection. 
To become an ordinary human, just a human being in general, one has to keep to at least one kind of ethics; refraining from at least one kind of non-virtue. But here the human life of freedoms and endowments, we are not talking about just being born as a human, we are talking about being born as a human being with eighteen qualities i.e. a human being who is free of eight things and endowed with ten features. This is the kind of human rebirth we are talking about i.e. the perfect human rebirth, the human life of freedoms and endowments. Such a human life of freedoms and endowments is extremely difficult to come. Why? Because the causes are extremely difficult to actualize. In order to be born as a human being with these eighteen qualities, first we must live life with very pure ethics. Our practice of ethics must be complemented with the practices of generosity and so forth. On top of that these practices must be completed with pure aspirational prayers to be able to obtain such a life in the future. We ask ourselves and we have a look in our own mind and see whether we have these causes or not; whether we find it easy or difficult to create these causes.
If you look at the words “human life of freedoms and endowments” the meaning should actually immediately arise very clearly in your minds. Of course this can only happen to someone who meditates and reflects regularly. A person who reflects on this regularly is very familiar because he/she has thought about it. When he/she thinks about the words “human life of freedoms and endowments” the meaning immediately comes to mind. He/she has the understanding: “Oh, I really have this human life of freedoms and endowments”. This is the result of reflection and meditation. For those who don’t meditate and those who don’t reflect, put aside the meaning arising clearly in their mind, they can’t even count what the eighteen features are. For example, when they look at the words “freedoms and endowments” only then they start counting and even counting becomes difficult. If just merely counting the eighteen qualities is really a challenge, then one can forget about understanding the meaning of this. Of course if one doesn’t really know the meaning of this, then how can change happen in the mind?
If one is habituated to meditation and reflection, even just seeing and thinking of the word “freedom” immediately one get this kind of feeling “Oh, now I really have this wonderful opportunity to practice the dharma because I am free of these and all these are major hindrances and obstacles”. Because one has this kind of understanding then one would be able to produce that kind of feeling of joy that one has already obtain something really wonderful.
This is something that everybody has to do for themselves – to reflect, sit down and think: Will I get such an opportunity in my next life again? The only way to answer that question is to really look inside our own minds and see whether you have the causes or not, whether you are able to create the causes or not. Then you will know whether you will get such a life again in the future. Of course, you have to know what the causes are. If you look in your mind you will come to realize that if you find it difficult to create the causes and if you lack the causes for such a rebirth again then you better identify what the causes are and start actualizing them.
In this juncture with such a life with all the conditions for practice, if while you have the opportunity and if you do not make use of the opportunity then it will be very difficult for you to obtain such conditions again in the future. It will be very difficult. You have to think about this for yourself and then really persuade yourself to take the opportunity while you have it.
In short, verse 1.4 is exhorting, imploring and persuading ourselves to take the opportunity now. We have to take the opportunity to make use of this human life of freedoms and endowments that we have achieved. After persuading ourselves to take the opportunity, how do we actually go about taking the opportunity? What is the best way to extract the meaning and essence out of this human life of freedoms and endowments? That explanation starts with verse 1.5. 
There is a general explanation of how to extract the essence and then there is the detailed explanation of the individual points. In that section, the benefits of bodhicitta will be explained. 
As mentioned before that it will not be possible for us to read the text together with all the outlines from the commentary. Anyway, we finish with the exhortation to extract the essence from this human life of freedoms and endowments. Next we look at the actual way of extracting the essence, and in particular we will look at the benefits of bodhicitta. 
The three things that we need to actualize in order to obtain a human life of freedoms and endowments in the future are: 
1. Guarding pure morality. You need very pure morality. What is the measure of pure morality? What does it mean? We have to think about this.
2. The practice of pure morality must be complemented with the practices of the other perfections such as generosity and so forth. Having said that, one question we can ask ourselves is: In order to achieve a human life of freedoms and endowments do we need to practice all the perfections?
3. We need to make very pure aspirational prayers. What exactly does this mean? There are many things to think about.
Khen Rinpoche (spoke in English): The senior ones, three questions. You have graduated from the BP class.
What is pure morality? One’s practice of morality must be complemented with generosity etc. Does the “etc” include all the other perfections? 
We need to make stainless pure aspirational prayers. What does pure means? 
These points appear throughout the teachings. It is the same thing that when you look at the Lamrim – the Stages of the Path to Enlightenment- in the section of human life of freedoms and endowments, the discussion of these three points are also there, isn’t it? You need to think about these. It is said in the teachings, in order to become a human being, you need to practice morality. But in order to have a human life of freedom and endowments:-
- you need to practice very pure morality,
- you need to practice generosity and so forth and 
- you need to make stainless pure prayers. 
These three are said to be very difficult to achieve and very difficult to practice. Because the causes are difficult to achieve, then you know that it will be very difficult for you to achieve such a rebirth again in the future. If you do realize that at present moment it will be very difficult for you to achieve this again in the future, and you happen to be someone who wants to achieve this in the future, automatically you would then want to practice the causes for achieving this again in the future. You would strive at working to actualize the causes. 
If you then happen to be someone who really wants to have such an opportunity again in your future life, and you know you have to create the cause, you would automatically create the causes on your own. You don’t need somebody to push you. You don’t need somebody to remind you, and you just do it on your own and you strive at it. 
Meditation program
You remember towards the end of the previous module we announced that we will start a voluntary meditation program. It is completely voluntary. It will last for a minimum of one year. If you want to take part in this one year voluntary meditation program on the Lamrim – the Stages of the Path to Enlightenment - then you have to register. I guess you can register fairly soon, perhaps in the next lesson. It is voluntary. If you register, you must commit to meditate and reflect on the Lamrim for a minimum of 15 to 20 minutes a day. Whether you succeed or not, whether you find that you can meditate or not, once you register you have to do it every day. The point is to do it every day. That is the commitment.
Before you can start meditating, you first must make a promise or a pledge to yourself. You must have the intention and the willingness to meditate. You must be able to tell yourself “this is something I will do every day and it is part of my life. For 15 to 20 minutes a day and at this time, I will sit down in this particular place I will do it.” This is to be done on your own at home. We are not doing it as a group. It is to be done on your own every day at home. This is completely voluntary. Only do it if you can commit and see it through. Perhaps we can start registration in the next class. Think about it. 
We are not necessarily looking for many people. That is not the point. The point is you must want to do it and you must do it voluntarily. You must feel happy doing it. Even if it is just a few people, two or three people, it is fine. The point is that we have to start because Lama Zopa Rinpoche has been advising us and the organization quite a few times to do it. So it is not right if we don’t do it. So we have to start. Of course, this is voluntary. Now we should only be concerned about whether you want to do it and starting. This is not the time to think about whether I will get any results out of this or whether realizations will arise. These are question marks. If you don’t even start, then there is no basis for even thinking about these or considering these questions: “Will I get any results out of this? Will I get any realizations?” There is no basis even to think about these questions if you don’t even start. You should start and then we can talk about it one year later. The plan is that for those who sign up to the program perhaps every now and then, say in intervals of three to four months, can come together and then share the experiences or to discuss about the practice.
Khen Rinpoche (spoke in English): Sharing with each other the three months experience. Might have very interesting experience. Anyway, we have to try. Those who wish to try give the name and contact. After that we discussed how to start and when to start. I think I will make some guideline.