Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Engaging in the Deeds of a Bodhisattva/lesson24.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:52:13.484847
================================================================================


We have been talking about guarding our mind with mindfulness and
introspection. In the context of this text, we have to guard our training
in the bodhisattva deeds with mindfulness and vigilance. Regard to our
training, this primarily refers to guarding our training in the ethical
discipline. As you know, ethical discipline is divided into three types:
   1. Ethical discipline of restraints
   2. Ethical discipline of gathering virtuous dharma
   3. Ethical discipline of benefiting sentient beings
Now we are looking at the ethical discipline of restraints. Regard to this
particular ethical discipline of restraint, in this text Shantideva talks
about keeping the behaviors or actions of our body, speech and mind pure.
Recently we have been looking at how we should investigate our conduct of
the body and speech.

|D How to act when    |
|resting              |


Verse 5.37
To check if there is any danger on the path and so forth
I should look again and again in the four directions.
To rest, I should turn my head around
And then look behind me.
Prior to this there was a discussion of how you should look at the
surrounding. You were advised not to look distracted but rather just cast
your gaze downward into the space or area in front of you. Why? If you were
to look around then there is a danger that the mind get distracted by some
objects.
“To rest, I should turn my head around and then look behind me” - here it
is in the context of being in an area with danger presence in the form of
wild animals or robbers and so forth.
In the situation of having to adopt the physical demeanor of not looking
around but just looking ahead by gazing downward, so when you are tired,
you can take a rest.
As it says “To rest, I should turn my head around and then look behind me”,
so if you see some danger behind you, you should continue to move forward.
However if you see some danger ahead of you then obviously you have to move
backward.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): Shantideva teach you how to move and how to
walk.

|Advice related to actions   |
|like looking etc            |

|Application to other        |
|behaviours                  |


Verse 5.38
Having examined both ahead and behind,
I should proceed to either come or go.
Being aware of the necessity
I should act like this in all situations.
In the case of ordained people whether they are in the monastery or whether
they are going to the town or whether they are seating in the prayer
session, eating, walking, talking and so forth, whether one is doing
something to benefit oneself or to benefit others, this is the kind of
conduct that one is supposed to engage in.
The point is about engaging whatever activities that one is supposed to
engage in with introspection/ vigilance. If you are a dharma practitioner
this is what you have to do - whatever you are doing such as eating,
walking, sitting, sleeping you should engage in those actions with
introspection.
Next is investigating while you are not moving around

|Examining posture           |


[BP1 L28] “Posture” here refers to a sense of how one is keeping still
while sitting down or staying at a place and what one is doing with the
body.
Verse 5.39
Having prepared for an action with the thought,
“My body will remain in such a way,”
Then periodically I should look to see
“How is the body abiding?”
For example, when you are engaging in the practice session, right from the
beginning of the session you sit in the sevenfold posture of Vairocana and
project the intention to remain to sit in that posture throughout the
entire session. Only then you start the session. As you entered the
session, that doesn’t necessarily mean that you will able to do it
throughout the whole session. So every now and then you should investigate
with introspection to see whether you are actually sitting in the correct
posture or not.
We have finished with the section on investigating the conduct of body and
speech. Next is investigating the mind itself.
|Examining the conduct of the mind       |
|1 Focusing the mind on a virtuous object|
|2 Examining whether or not the mind is  |
|one-pointed in virtue                   |

|1 Focusing the mind on a virtuous object|


Verse 5.40
With utmost effort I should check
To see that the crazed elephant of my mind
Is not wandering off but is bound
To the great pillar of thinking about the Dharma.
Here an untamed and crazy elephant is given as an analogy.
If you do have such a crazy and untamed elephant it is extremely important
to tie up to a strong pillar to prevent it from doing what it wishes and
cause a lot of damages.
Your unsubdued and untamed mind is likened to an untamed and crazy
elephant. If you have an unsubdued mind that is afflicted with anger,
attachment and other afflictions and if you do not fasten the mind to a
virtuous object of observation using mindfulness and introspection but
rather you just let the untamed mind wander off wherever it wishes and when
the untamed and unsubdued mind is allowed to comes into contact with the
object that causes it to be upset or to be attached, then that will lead
you into accumulating all sorts of non-virtuous karma. That then in turn
lead you to the lower realm. So rather than letting your mind wander off
into the external world running after external object you should fasten the
mind onto the great pillar of the Dharma.
“Fasten your mind onto the great pillar of the Dharma” - you could explain
this to mean that when we are reflecting on the meaning of the teaching, we
should fasten our mind on to the meaning of whatever dharma or practice
that we are doing. Even when we are meditating, we should fasten our mind
onto the chosen virtuous object of observation with mindfulness and
introspection. Through that we will not loose that object of observation.
This advice also applies when we are listening to the teaching. So whenever
we are listening to the teaching we should apply mindfulness and vigilance
so that we can stay focus hearing what has been said, stay focus on the
words and stay focus on the meaning.

[BP1 L28] Our minds are likened to crazy elephants. When we do not tie up
the crazy elephant, it will cause a lot of damage. In the same way, when we
let our unsubdued minds run loose and let them follow the negative
emotions, they will cause us a lot of harm and we will be led to rebirths
in the hells or as hungry ghosts and so forth. The point is to stop the
mind from following after negative emotions like ignorance, anger and
attachment. Rather than letting our minds follow after the negative
emotions, we should focus our minds single-pointedly on the activities of
listening, reflection and meditation on the teachings. “The great pillar of
thinking about Dharma,” refers to these activities. In order to do that, we
need to have a mind as powerful, strong and stable as a pillar. We need to
have very stable minds that do not follow the negative emotions and focus
on virtue. We should not let the mind become distracted but focus it on
objects of virtue and protect it with mindfulness and vigilance.

|2 Examining whether or not the mind is  |
|one-pointed in virtue                   |


Verse 5.41
I who strive by all means for meditative stabilization
Should not wander off even for a moment.
Thinking, “What is this mind of mine doing?”
I should investigate my mind.
If one is striving to achieve concentration then it is extremely important
to fasten the mind onto the object of observation to investigate whether
one’s focus and one’s attention is actually being place on the chosen
object of observation or not.
Having concentration means being able to stay focus on the chosen object of
observation without being distracted. With mindfulness and vigilance, if we
do find our mind going off somewhere rather than being focused on the
object of observation then we should hook the mind back and bring the mind
attention back onto the object of observation.

|Explaining the contexts for permitted   |
|and prohibited actions                  |


Verse 5.42
But if I am unable to do this when involved in fear or
Celebrations and the like, then I should relax.
Thus it has been taught that at times of giving,
You may be indifferent to ethics.
Generally speaking there are certain actions of the body and mind that we
are suppose to engage in but in certain situation such as if there is a
danger to one’s life or when there is a special occasion when one is
actually focusing on paying homage, making obeisance and making offering to
the Three Jewels or in those situation where one has to engage in certain
action that will bring about great benefit to others, then perhaps that is
the exception.
For example, if one is engaged in a sustained practice for developing
concentration and there is some special occasion in a Buddhist festival of
making homage or making offering to the Three Jewels. Then at that time
being it is alright to temporary stop one’s practice of concentration and
engage in those actions of making offering but with mindfulness and
vigilance.
The essence is that if there is a special purpose then it is alright even
if one is not able to adopt those certain subtle behavior or actions of
one’s body and speech that one normally has to be engaged in.
Another example as explained in the commentary is that if one is engaged in
the practice of generosity and one wants to further strengthen one’s
practice of generosity, and in those situation when one is actually
carrying out the practice of generosity, it is said that it is alright if
one is not able to engage in certain mode of conducts that are required of
when one is practicing ethical discipline. To give an example, in the
training for an ordained person, when one is walking around one does not
walk around making all kind of unnecessarily gestures with the hands such
as one is not allowed to walk with swinging one’s hands as this is
unnecessary gesture. However if one is practicing generosity and one has to
distribute gift with one’s own hands that involves walking around and
moving the hand then that is an exception. Generally speaking it is no.
The other point is that if one is primarily engage in the practice of
generosity in a particular time then it is permissible that during this
time if one is not able to adhere to some of these subtle aspects of
ethical discipline.
Or you are engaging in the practice of the generosity of fearlessness. When
you are giving fearlessness, you are protecting others from fear. In that
context, if you see an animal passing by and then a hunter comes along and
ask “Did you see the animal?” As you are suppose to give fearlessness and
protect that animal, then in that situation it is permissible to say: “No,
I didn’t see it.”
Khen Rinpoche (in English): Ok to say that or no? What you are going to say
if someone asks you and you want to protect the animal?
You saw that animal passing by but you say to the hunter: “I didn’t see the
animal”. That is a lie and is necessarily not virtue.  Did Buddha ever give
permission to engage in a natural misdeed? Lying is a natural misdeed and
by nature not virtue.
In one commentary it is said that in such a situation it is alright to say
“I didn’t see the animal.”
In one mind training text it suggests that you could say “I didn’t see the
true existent animal.”
Khen Rinpoche (in English): Is it a lying? You are not lying, isn’t it? You
are telling the truth but you deceived the person.
There is an account of how the Buddha in one of his past life prior to
becoming a Buddha, he was traveling in a ship with many people. He
discovered that one of the people onboard planned to kill everyone. The
Buddha-to-be then killed that person.
In essence, this particular verse is saying that if one primarily engage or
focus on the practice of generosity and during the training it is alright
even if one is not able to guard some of the subtle points of training in
ethical discipline.
Isn’t the practice of ethical discipline is superior to the practice of
generosity? As such it is wrong to be indifferent to the practice of
ethical discipline while one engages in the practice of generosity. It is
wrong. What would you say?
[BP1 L28] At times when one is training in the very extensive practice of
giving, one may be neutral to certain aspects of moral discipline as stated
in the Aksayamatipariprccha Sutra:
“'At times of giving, moral discipline may be condensed; that is to say,
left in a neutral state.”
Q: Could you give us an example of killing that is permitted?
A: One example is when the Buddha, who was a ship captain in one of his
past lives as a sentient being, killed a potential murderer in order to
save 500 people on the ship. When we say killing is permissible, I think
that it is only an action that is permitted for people who have real
bodhicitta. People who have bodhicitta never think about themselves. All
they do is to think about others. Permission is only granted to such
people. Apart from that, killing is not permitted.
When we have no bodhicitta, it means that we have self-interest. As long as
we do any negative action that is tainted by even an atom of self-interest,
then that is not allowed at all.
Verse 5.43
I should undertake whatever deed I have intended to do
And think of doing nothing other than it.
With my mind focused upon that,
I should set about for the time being to accomplish it.
Prior to engaging in any practice or prior to doing any work or job, right
at the beginning you need an intention to start that particular task and to
accomplish it. Normally we tell ourselves that “until I accomplish it I
will continue. I will complete the task.” For example, if you are studying
this text here, Shantideva’s “Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds”, right
from the beginning if you decide to start it, then you have to tell
yourself that you are going to finish learning it. If you don’t do that and
in between you decide to look at something else, then you will not be able
to accomplish the task of studying Shantideva’s text.
Back to the question about being indifferent to one’s practice of ethical
discipline while engaging in the practice of generosity. Here the context
is that you are talking about someone who is primarily focused on the
practice of generosity. For someone who is primarily focused on the
practice of generosity, the person has to start with the practice and make
sure that he brings that practice to fulfillment and to completion.
However, in the process if he gets distracted and starts to do something
else, then he will never be able to finish the practice of generosity,
isn’t it?
For a person who is primarily focused on the practice of generosity but
doesn’t stay on the course because his attention is being diverted to
somewhere else in the process and thinking “I’m going to do this and that.”
In the end, he achieves nothing. There is no generosity to speak of.
Neither is there any ethical discipline to speak of as well.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): From my own example, when I read a book, they
say this book is very nice I read 10 pages. After that “Oh maybe this book
is good” then I read this book 10 pages. At the end I never complete any
book. The idea is that when you read one book and with focus to complete
the book. When you complete then you read another book. I’m telling my own
experience how bad I am reading book. I never complete any book except when
I study. That is different because I have to finish them.
Whether it is your study or your practice, you just have to do it in an
orderly way. You can’t skip. You first have to finish the earlier practice
before you can begin with the later ones. Otherwise, you will never finish.
You start with something, and before you can actualize that practice, you
turn to something else. Then you move again to something else. You will
never achieve anything. It has to be done in an orderly manner. You have to
start from the beginning of your practice. You cannot jump as there is no
such thing as jumping. You just have to finish the earlier practices. Once
you have accomplished that then you move on to the next practice and so
forth. It is only then you can bring the practice to completion and
fulfillment.
For example, when you walk, you lift up your right leg and before you plant
your right feet on the ground, you don’t lift your left leg, isn’t it? It
only happen until your right feet is firmly planted on the ground. If your
right leg is still in midair and then you try to lift your left leg, then
you know what will happen.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): You know what will happen next?
While it is true that the practice of ethical discipline is superior to the
practice of generosity, but until one has gained some stability and
familiarity with the practice of generosity and have done it well, you
cannot move on to the next one.
Up to here, in the sections prior to the next verse, the verses are talking
about investigating our body, speech and mind.
Note:  Verse 5.44 was not mentioned in class
[BP1 L29]
Verse 5.44
By acting in this way, all will be done well,
Otherwise neither will be done.
There will thus be no increase
In the secondary affliction of non-introspection.

This ignorance, with regards to the order of the proper stages of training
the mind in the path, is the secondary affliction called non-introspection
(non-vigilance/non-alertness). In this context, non-introspection would be
ignorance about the proper stages of training the mind in the path.
When we understand the proper stages of training the mind in the path, then
the secondary affliction of non-introspection will not increase. This
explains the last two lines of verse 5.44:
“There will thus be no increase in the secondary affliction of non-
introspection.”
The point here is to have a good understanding of the proper stages of the
path; of the ways of training the mind. This is a gradual process and the
order must be correct. When we have a very good understanding of this, then
the secondary affliction of non-introspection, which is the ignorance of
the proper stages of the path, will not increase.
The point here is to first ascertain the proper stages of training in the
path; we must follow the proper way of transforming the mind according to
the actual stages. On the basis of having ascertained the proper stages of
the path, we should then train our minds according to that ascertainment;
ensuring that we finish our training in the first topic before we move on
to the next one and so forth. When we do not do this, we will probably not
achieve much. This is applicable to our practices - in the beginning,
nothing is stable; people sometimes look for initiations or lamas, doing
different kinds of daily prayers without developing a stable relationship
or practice with a single teacher. Then, they move on to the next teacher,
the next deity or the next practice. At the end of the day, nothing is
achieved.
Next is protecting/guarding oneself from degeneration. Here we are talking
about gaining mastery.

|Guarding against all deterioration      |
|A Guarding against deterioration in the |
|training of the body                    |
|B Guarding against deterioration in the |
|training of the mind                    |

|A Guarding against deterioration in the |
|training of the body                    |


      |Guarding against deterioration in the   |
|training of the body                    |
|1 Not allowing oneself to fall under the|
|sway of distraction                     |
|2 Abandoning pointless activities       |
|3 Examining the motivational thought    |
|when acting                             |

|1 Not allowing oneself to fall under the|
|sway of distraction                     |


Verse 5.45
If I engage in a variety
Of senseless talk
Or in many kinds of spectacular shows,
I should abandon attachment towards them.
It says here that it is possible that:
- for the purpose of benefiting someone or
- if there is a benefit in carrying out meaningless talk or
- if there is a benefit or real purpose in dancing or singing or engaging
in whatever activities, here it says spectacular performances,
So if there is a purpose, even then one has to engage in those actions
mindfully but without attachment.
In the first place, meaningless speech, singing, dancing and seeing shows
and so forth are distraction. But if there is a purpose for engaging in
them such as there is a purpose in order to protect the minds of others,
then one must engage in them mindfully and without attachment.
The point here is that it is never correct to let the mind be distracted.

|Abandoning pointless activities         |


Verse 5.46
If for no reason I dig the earth,
Cut grass, draw patterns in the earth, and the like,
Then, recalling the advice of the Sugatas,
I should immediately stop out of fear.
This happens when some people just can’t sit still and they have to do
something. In a distracted state of mind, these people end up digging holes
in the ground or just plucking leaves from the plants or trees for no
reason.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): There is one restaurant where they put piece of
paper and chalk for you to do something. They purposely put there. They
know what we want to do.
Some of these examples that I have mentioned such as cutting grass and so
forth are primarily vows of a fully ordained monk. These are what fully
ordained monks are not supposed to do because there is a purpose behind
these vows. For example, we are not supposed to cut grass because if we do
then there is a danger of killing. So that is the purpose.
The point is that if we find ourselves distracted and about to engage in
some of these meaningless activities, then with mindfulness and vigilance
we have to hold and bring our minds back. We have to remember that it is
mentioned in the bodhisattva training that we should not engage in any
activity that does not bring any benefit to sentient beings.
So there are these meaningless activities such as cutting grass, digging
holes in the ground, and so forth. If we find ourselves about to engage in
something like that, then with mindfulness and introspection, we have to
bring our minds back and stop ourselves from doing those things.
Verse 5.46 comes under the outline abandoning meaningless activity.
Next is analyzing/checking one’s motivation at the time of action.

|Examining the motivational       |
|thought when acting              |
|A Presenting                     |
|B Explaining                     |
|C Synopsis                       |

|A Presenting                     |


Verse 5.47
Whenever I have the desire
To move or to say something,
First of all I should examine my mind
And then, with steadiness, act in the proper way.
Before you start moving or walking around, before you switch your physical
posture, when you do something with your body or before speaking or before
you say something, there is a wish to say something, isn’t it? Whatever it
is, the verse is telling us that we should examine and check the motivation
for wanting to do that.
Whatever physical or verbal activity you are about to engage in, and prior
to engaging in it, you should investigate and check what is the motivation.
Of course, if it is non-virtue then ideally not do it and stop yourself
from doing it. If it is virtuous, you could engage in it.  It is through
checking the motivation that you stop yourself from committing faults and
downfalls.
A person who is seriously committed and seriously engaging in the practice
of training is to actualize or develop bodhicitta. For such a person,
before he/she engages in any activity, before moving about, walking,
sitting, talking and so forth, ideally he/she would look into his/her own
minds and examine his/her own motivation to see whether his/her motivation
for wanting to do that action is motivated by self-cherishing or is
motivated by the thoughts of benefiting others. Upon checking, if the
motivation is found to be that of self-cherishing then the person would not
engage in that action. Of course, if the action is primarily motivated by
heartfelt thought of benefiting others, then he/she would engage in that
action.

|Explaining                                   |
|1 How to act when one wishes for afflictions |
|to arise                                     |
|2 How to act when excitement and so forth    |
|arise                                        |
|3 How to act when [you are the recipient of] |
|gain and honor                               |
|4 How to act when thinking of others’ welfare|
|5 How to act when you wish for fury and      |
|discouragement etc. to arise                 |

|1 How to act when one wishes for afflictions |
|to arise                                     |


Verse 5.48
Whenever there is attachment in my mind
And whenever there is the desire to be angry,
I should not do anything nor say anything,
But remain like a piece of wood.
When one sees something desirable – an external object or person - there is
a wish to be attached to. The mind is desirous of that object. Or if you
think of an unpleasant object or you see an unpleasant object, then there
arises the wish to be upset and angry. At those times, the verse is saying
that you should remain still and not do or say anything. The advice is that
in those situations you should remain physically and verbally still. You
should not move or do anything or say anything.
In those situations the mind wishes to follow after the attachments, isn’t
it? The mind wishes to follow after the anger, isn’t it? The point is not
to follow after attachment or anger. Here the verse is saying that you
should remain still and not to follow attachment or anger, and not to let
yourself to follow after the afflictions physically, verbally and mentally.
So you should remain still on those three levels.

|2 How to act when excitement and so forth    |
|arise                                        |


Verse 5.49
Whenever I have excitement, the wish to verbally belittle others,
Pride and arrogance;
When I have the thought to describe the faults of others,
Cunningness and the thought to deceive others;
Verse 5.50
Whenever I am eager for praise
Or have the desire to blame others;
Whenever I have the wish to scold and quarrel;
At such times I should remain like a piece of wood.
The examples here are when we find that there is pride and arrogance
arising or there is a wish to expose the faults or mistakes of others and
so forth, the advice is like before, we should not follow after the desire
to engage in those actions but rather to remain still.

|3 How to act when [you are the recipient of] |
|gain and honour                              |


Verse 5.51
Whenever I desire material gain, honor, or fame;
Whenever I seek servants or a retinue,
And when in my mind I wish to be served;
At these times I should remain like a piece of wood.
It is similar as before. It is just that here when one has this desire
looking for wealth, looking for praise, looking for hankering after having
good reputation and wanting to build up and to have many followers, like
before, we are advised to remain still and not to follow after those
thoughts.

|4 How to act when thinking of others’ welfare|


Verse 5.52
Whenever I have the mind wishing to neglect the welfare of others
And to pursue my own welfare,
Wishing to say something,
At these times I should remain like a piece of wood.
For a person who is seriously engaging in the practice of cultivating
bodhicitta, benefiting others is a priority over benefiting oneself. For
such a person if there is thoughts of cherishing oneself at the expense of
others, or if there is thought of neglecting the welfare of others, I guess
that person would have to remain still. That person should not entertain or
follow after those thoughts of self-cherishing or those thoughts of
benefiting himself.
If there is a desire to say something motivated by self-cherishing or
benefiting oneself or if one feels like saying something because one is
feeling angry or upset, then at those times one should just remain silent
and not to say anything. There is a saying in Tibetan:  “Our mouth is like
a treasury of negativities”
Khen Rinpoche (in English): Treasury of negativities!
Essentially, these are advices for us to remain still physically, verbally
and mentally in the situations when we are about to engage in something non-
virtuous. So it is about checking the motivation.
Next, what to do at the time when one wishes to generate anger or
discouragement.

|5 How to act when you wish for fury and      |
|discouragement etc. to arise                 |


Verse 5.53
Whenever impatience, laziness, fear,
And likewise shamelessness or the talking of nonsense,
And thoughts of partiality arise,
At these times too I should remain like a piece of wood.

|Synopsis |


Verse 5.54
Having in this way examined his mind for afflictions
And for thoughts that strive for meaningless things,
The hero should hold his mind steady
By means of the antidotes.
Student: Why is it that when you are lazy you have to remain like a piece
of wood and continue to be lazy?
Khen Rinpoche (in English):  Lazy then what? Don’t do anything?
Answer: Joyous perseverance is the mind that is enthusiastic about virtue.
The opposite of that is laziness. Laziness is the mind that is
unenthusiastic at all about virtue. When there is laziness, then we have to
stop our minds from following after that thought.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): If you follow that thought then you become
lazier. So better don’t follow that thought. Maybe like that.
Student: When Shantideva say: “To remain like a piece of wood”, does it
mean that if I want to go to sleep because I’m lazy as I’ve been sleeping
the whole day, I stand still and not go to sleep when I go near the bed?
Does that means I try to check myself against laziness by not following my
thoughts of wanting to lie down again?
Khen Rinpoche (in English): So don’t lie down. Stand still.
Student: So the spirit is that if you are going to engage in something out
of wrong motivation, you don’t carry out the action. So if I’m going to get
angry, I can’t just remain still. If I remain still, the anger will just
build up. While I’m remaining still, what should I be doing?
Khen Rinpoche (in English): While you are angry, don’t say anything.
Student: If I don’t say anything, my anger will just build up. Maybe I
remain still for 1 or 2 mins but 5 mins later something will come out of my
mouth
Khen Rinpoche (in English): That is why it shouldn’t come out.
Student: In a practical sense, if I notice that other than remaining still,
I should be doing something else.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): You can do something else but the whole idea is
don’t follow that emotional thought.
Student: So as long as I do anything to stop the energy from building up to
carry out the action of wanting to shout back?
Khen Rinpoche (in English): Yeah





