Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Engaging in the Deeds of a Bodhisattva/lesson25.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:52:13.327888
================================================================================


Student 1:  Of the two karmas of the twelve links (of dependent
origination), can we say:
    - it is the actualizing karma that actualizes uncontrolled rebirth in
      cyclic existence whereas
    - it is the projecting karma that projects either a higher or lower
      rebirth (virtuous projecting karma for a higher rebirth and non-
      virtuous projecting karma for a lower rebirth)
The actualizing karma only comes at the time of death whereas the
projecting karma is accumulated in our entire lifetime. Could Khen Rinpoche
elaborate on this to help us to develop more faith in order to the guard
ethical discipline in our daily lives?
Answer: Projecting karma is essentially like the seed from which sprout
appears. Without the seed, you are not going to have sprout. That is the
principle cause. In order to address the question of whether a projecting
karma is accumulated or not, you have to understand the discussion in the
Lamrim on how karma is accumulated.
In order for karma to be accumulated, that karma has to be powerful or it
has to be done over a period of time.
There is a discussion of the possibilities or permutations between karma
that is accumulated and karma that is created.
There are examples of karma that are both karma that is accumulated and
karma that is created.
In short, karmas that are accumulated are those karmas that are strong,
powerful and done over time. They are accumulated over time.
What determines the kind of rebirth that you will take, whether good or
bad, is primarily dependent on the projecting karma. So in order to
accumulate virtuous projecting karma, which is a cause for a good rebirth,
then those virtuous karma that is accumulated has to be strong and has to
be done over a period of time.
The projecting karma will manifest as the actualizing karma prior to death.
According to the twelve links of dependent origination, prior to
actualizing karma (which has to manifest before death), there must be
craving and grasping which nourishes it.
So the food for thought that I have mentioned in the few lessons ago was
about two things:
   1. In the sense of nourishing the karma, when does craving and grasping
      come into play?
   2. Is the desire or attachment of the desire realm necessarily non-
      virtuous?
Khen Rinpoche (In English): Have you thought about that? Anybody have any
idea what to say, especially the senior ones? There is one lady says she
has the answer but she is not here today. I didn’t see her.
Actualizing karma manifests prior to death. The thing that causes it to
manifest are craving and grasping.
During the death process, the inner elements of the physical body undergo
dissolution process. The process starts with earth dissolving into water,
and water dissolving into fire and so forth. What I think is this - the
craving and grasping has to be manifest during these first three stages of
the entire death process. The craving and grasping arises during the first
three stages of the death process. When craving arises, depending on which
karma is stronger, virtuous or non-virtuous, there is a craving for a
future existence.
Perhaps the craving for future existence is not so much about craving for a
particular or specific kind of body or existence but it is a general kind
of craving to want to take on an embodied existence again. So there is this
kind of craving.
What I am stating here is just my personal opinion and it is not stated in
any text. After craving comes grasping, which is essentially a stronger
form of attachment.  The earlier craving for an existence becomes much
stronger. You are really clinging on to wanting to get a particular kind of
existence.
This is something that requires much thought. You have to think about it
for yourself because you will not find any description or discussion in
many of the texts pertaining to what we are discussing here.
At the time of grasping, there is this very strong desire/attachment to
want to be embodied again i.e. to take on an existence. One is wondering
“What will I get” and this nourishes the karma. This craving and grasping
nourishes the karma that was accumulated earlier, depending on whether is
virtuous or non-virtuous projecting karma. Whatever it is, craving and
grasping gives it strength and makes it very powerful.  Then one dies and
goes on to the next life.
In Sutra, there isn’t a description beyond the dissolution of the elements.
It is only in Tantra that you talk about the later steps that make up the
whole death dissolution process. That is what we call the white appearance,
the red increase and the black near attainment and so forth. Whether you
will get a good rebirth or a bad rebirth, let’s say if you are going to get
a good rebirth, the primary cause of that is the seed, the projecting karma
that was accumulated earlier.
The primary causes are not craving and grasping. They are conditions to
nourish the primary cause, which is the seed or the karma that was
accumulated earlier. So the primary cause of a good rebirth is not craving
and grasping.
Khen Rinpoche (In English): Listening? Contemplating? Thinking? This one
you really need to think. If you are interested then I talk more, otherwise
I leave at this.
Answer: The point is the primary cause of a good rebirth is the virtuous
projecting karma. It is not craving and grasping. As to whether the
attachment of the desire realm is necessarily non-virtuous or not is
something that we can think about. According to one of the Hinayana tenets,
the Abidharmakosha (Treasury of Manifest Knowledge), the attachment of the
desire realm is necessarily non-virtuous. It is stated very clearly in the
Treasury of Manifest Knowledge that afflictions such as ignorance, view of
the transitory collection could be unspecified i.e. it can be neither
virtuous nor non-virtuous. It is stated very clearly that all the other
afflictions are necessarily non-virtuous.  Ignorance, the first of the
twelve links of dependent origination, can be said to be unspecified. So
the projecting karma that is accumulated is the karma that is propelled or
motivated by this ignorance is unspecified. Based on this, there is nothing
wrong in saying that craving and grasping can nourish a virtuous projecting
karma.
In the Hinayana tenets, when we look at the text like the Treasury of
Manifest Knowledge, the afflictions such as the attachment of the desire
realm are necessarily non-virtuous. That is clearly stated. But if you look
at the Treatises of the Middle Way, the Mahayana tenets, perhaps it is not
so clear cut. It is mentioned in those teachings that there can be
instances of attachment which is an apprehension of true existence. As
such, I think perhaps one can say that the attachment of the desire realm
is not necessarily non-virtuous.
Would it be okay to say that it is possible to have an attachment of the
desire realm that is unspecified?
Anyway, I’m just giving you what my personal opinion. Nobody can say that
for sure this is it.
Khen Rinpoche (In English): You are happy on what I’m talking? If not
happy, must ask if you said this is not correct.
Student 2: When you are talking about unspecified karma, based on what was
translated attachment which is an apprehension of true existence, does that
fall into the general division that is given in the Lamrim Chenmo about
karma being contaminated and uncontaminated? So in this case, the
possibility here is that contaminated virtuous karma can throw you into a
rebirth in the desire realm.
Can you help me to understand in terms of how this relates to the division
that is called contaminated virtuous karma and uncontaminated virtuous
karma?
Answer: The discussion on the projecting karma in the context of the twelve
links of dependent origination is necessarily contaminated by looking at
the process of how the projecting karma is accumulated as something being
impelled or propelled by ignorance of the twelve links of dependent
origination.
In short, the contaminated karmas are those karmas that are accumulated
about being impelled or motivated by ignorance.
Khen Rinpoche (In English):  Ven Gyurme is asking about what kind of karma
to take rebirth in the pureland? You need the karma to be reborn in
pureland, isn’t it? That is contaminated karma or uncontaminated karma?
Student 3: I have problem with Amitabha Pureland, but not the Tushita
Pureland.  Due to the power of the prayer of Amitabha Buddha, he actually
promised that whoever can recall his name and has recited his sutra and
visualize….
Khen Rinpoche:  Essentially you are saying that to be born in Amitabha’s
Pureland is a result of karma and that karma was motivated by ignorance.
Are you saying that?
Student 3: Yes.
Khen Rinpoche: So it follows that the body of the sentient being in the
pureland is true suffering?
Student 3: Yes.
Khen Rinpoche: It follows that there is suffering in Amitabha’s Pureland.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): Is there suffering in Amitabha’s Pureland?
Student 3: No.
Khen Rinpoche:  Why we have suffering?
Student 3: The person has no gross suffering but the person still have
pervasive compounded suffering; not suffering of suffering and suffering of
change.
Khen Rinpoche: Why we have suffering?
Student: Due to karma and delusion.
Khen Rinpoche: In Amitabha’s Pureland, there are karma and delusion?
Student 3: Yes. There are some sentient beings who are reborn in Amitabha’s
Pureland still have karma and delusion.
Khen Rinpoche: So they have suffering?
Student 3: Yes.
Khen Rinpoche: Same as us? Not different? Then just stay here, don’t go
there.
Student 3: Is attachment to inherent existence an unspecified attachment
which is neither virtue nor non-virtue? Let’s say I pray to have a precious
human rebirth. So whatever I do in this lifetime, I dedicate the merit to
have precious human rebirth in my next life. While doing this dedication, I
have no understanding of emptiness.
So it is a dedication with a mind fully grasping at true existent. Does
such dedication will result in a virtuous karma? Or to have a precious
human rebirth is a mind that still grasp at inherent existent?
Khen Rinpoche (In English): I don’t know what you are saying. You are
saying something like in order to achieve human rebirth, you need to
realize emptiness? You are saying something like that?
Student 3: Not necessary.
Khen Rinpoche: Then you got the answer I think.
Khen Rinpoche: It is clearly stated in the teaching that the ignorance that
is of the twelve links is unspecified.
But the karma that is motivated by this ignorance could be non-virtuous or
it could be virtuous. There are varieties. This is clearly stated in the
Svatantrika-Madhyamaka’s explanation of the twelve links.
My earlier question was about whether the craving and grasping are
necessary non-virtuous or not. According to the Hinayana tenets, they are
necessary non-virtuous. Craving and grasping belongs to the desire realm.
That means the attachment of the desire realm is necessarily non-virtuous.
But if you bring the Mahayana tenets into the picture, perhaps you could
say that the attachment of the desire realm is not necessarily non-
virtuous.
According to the Middle Way Consequence school there seemed to be a
discussion that talks about an attachment that is an apprehension of true
existence. As such, based on my personal opinion, perhaps you could say
that an attachment of the desire realm is not necessarily non-virtuous.
That was just my personal thought or personal reflection. The reason why I
asked you the question because even if we look at craving and grasping as
necessarily non-virtuous, as in the case of someone who is going to get a
good rebirth, what it nourishes  is a virtuous projecting karma. Even if
the craving and grasping are non-virtuous, is there a problem in saying
that they do nourish a virtuous projecting karma? Is there a problem or
not? That is why I brought it out for discussion.
We could substantiate and justify that craving and grasping, even if it is
non-virtuous, can act as a good condition for a good rebirth. The main or
primary cause of good rebirth is the virtuous projecting karma. It is not
the craving and grasping. Craving and grasping is just a condition
basically makes that karma activate it.
The karma that throws us into the next rebirth is the projecting karma,
which could be virtuous or non-virtuous. Which will ripen earlier?  The
stronger of the two will ripen earlier.
If both are equal then the one that you are more familiar with will ripen.
If you are equally familiar then the one that was created earlier will
ripen.
Depending on which karma is stronger, virtuous or non-virtuous, then
correspondingly you have craving and grasping. Let’s say you are going to
get a good rebirth then at the time of craving, you have a desire and a
craving to have a future existence. Can we then say that at the time of
grasping, there is a desire for a specific kind of existence? So craving
and grasping nourishes the karma and activates it such as when it is fully
potentialised you are definitely going to that particular rebirth.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): What do you think? You are happy with that?
You have to think at the second level, and not to stop there.
In the case of someone who is going to get a good rebirth, at the time of
grasping, let’s say that there is a desire for a particular good rebirth,
do you accept? You accept? You also have to accept the same thing for
someone who is going to the lower realms.
For someone going to the lower realm, at the time of craving and grasping
thinking “I want to go to the lower realm. I want to get this hell body. I
want to get this hungry ghost body”. Does such a thought arises or not?
Khen Rinpoche (in English): The question comes there. Never ends. You think
that. The craving thinks like that at that time? No? You said no!
Why that cannot happen? Your karma forces you to think like that.
(Inaudible reply from students)
For those who are going to the lower realms, do they have the thought “I
want to go to the lower realms”?
Khen Rinpoche (in English): I speak like Singaporean. Have or don’t have?
(Inaudible reply from students)
Ven Gyurme: They don’t know there is lower realm?  Then those who are going
to good rebirth know there is good rebirth?  Atheist or non-believer?
Student 4: Don’t have. How can there be craving for existence to be burned
in hells when you cannot even imagine the fire in the hell? You are saying
craving for the potential existence that you can’t even imagine? How could
that be?
Khen Rinpoche (in English): You don’t have craving at that time? No
craving?
Student 4: I think you are craving for an experience of feeling cold or
craving for warm, and that nourishes that particular projecting karma which
projects in the hell realm. It is not like you are craving exactly for hell
existence that kind of experience. It is just the experience of wanting
something hot or warm.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): But how that nourishes that particular karma to
born in the hell realm? You can reborn in the human rebirth. You can feel
hot, yeah?
Student 4: I don’t know how you get but maybe you crave for human existence
before you experience that. But I cannot imagine that you craving for hell
existence which is burning in the hell for hundreds of …..
Khen Rinpoche (in English): Why not? The question is why not?
Student 4: All sentient beings want happiness and don’t want sufferings.
There can’t be a masochist. Not everyone is masochist and there are so many
hell beings.
Ven Gyurme:  We are saying possible or not?
Student 4: I mean it is possible but we are saying experience for a large
number of hell beings. They can’t be so many masochists in the world. I may
have some explanation of why it nourishes.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): First you answer - when does that nourish?
Which age? Eighty years? Which age does that particular karma nourishes?
Ven Gyurme: When? How many hours before death for example?
Khen Rinpoche (in English): Before one year?
Student 4: I don’t know.  My explanation is like this. Let’s say it is
attachment. I have an attachment towards a lady. I craved then I grasped.
That in a way is kind of craving and grasping. In my past life, I have done
some kinds of sexual misconduct before and it produces a seed in my mind.
So at that moment of time, if I have this seed which about to bear its
fruit, this craving and grasping for this lady actually nourishes this
seed. Because this experience is the same as the fruitional effect, so it
brings it into fruition. That is how craving and grasping actually
nourishes…
Khen Rinpoche (in English): The example is actually quite nice. Now you put
that into the meaning now. Ok.
Student 4: Similarly, at the point at the time I about to die, for some
reason, I feel cold so I crave and grasp for warm. That nourishes the seed
which I have created to reborn in a hell realm. The experience is the same.
Ven Gyurme: Hell is necessarily hot, is it?
Student: I mean you can crave for cold, and that kind of experience which
nourishes the experience. I feel that it cannot be a specific hell
experiences that you are carving for because you have never experience hell
or maybe you have. To crave for a hell existence which is like living in
the sun so hot that you are melting? It is difficult to imagine that you
want to crave for that kind of existence at the point in time that you die.
Ven Gyurme: What do you need to crave in order to be an animal or hungry
ghost?
Student: That one you have to think.
Ven Gyurme: It doesn’t make sense.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): You are saying something like if the person is
going to take rebirth in the human realm, he doesn’t have any craving on
heat and cold. Are you saying that? When there is craving for heat and cold
must go to the lower realms. The idea is something like that? Not necessary
isn’t it?
Student 4: What do you crave for in order to be a human being?
Khen Rinpoche (in English): No. Even if you reborn as human rebirth,
sometimes you are craving for heat or cold, possible isn’t it? Not
necessarily at the time of death you feel grasping of the heat or grasping
of the cold then you will go to lower realm. I don’t think so. At the time
of death, you feel hungry doesn’t mean go to hungry ghost. Not necessary.
When you feel hungry now, you doesn’t go lower realm. What you think is not
so?  The example is good but when you transfer to meaning it doesn’t match.
It is all determined by karma, isn’t it? So, there is no point in
remembering your guru. There is no point in remembering the Buddha. There
is no point in remembering the Three Jewels. It is fixed already. Karma
throws you that way and there is nothing you can do.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): What matter at the time of death, whatever
virtue you think doesn’t change, isn’t it? Not likely to change.
If it can change, then heavy or not heavy karma, whichever one comes first,
it doesn’t matter anymore.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): What are you going to say if somebody says
“Your karma decides everything, then what is there to generate virtues at
the time of death?” What is your answer?  Your karma decides everything,
isn’t it? Even if you generate virtues at the time of death, does it change
or it won’t change?
Student 4: Even if you have the negative karma, you can cut-off your
craving and grasping, it doesn’t come in fruition. So in the way you can
actually control it.
Ven Gyurme: So, the heavier of the two will not ripen first?
Student 5:  I remembered to have read a story about a great lama who has
great compassion to everyone and especially to the beings of the lower
realm. He wanted to have rebirth in lower realm but he has dream that he
will directly go to pure land. Even though he desired and attached to lower
realm but somehow his karma decided for him to be liberated and get
enlightens.
Answer: What you said actually supported the point. It shows that it is not
by wish but through karma. Everything is determined by karma. The lama has
the wish to go to the lower realms to help sentient beings but because he
didn’t have the karma to go to the lower realms therefore he didn’t go to
the lower realms. So it is all karma. Without the strong karma that will
propel one into the lower realms even if you have the wish to go to the
lower realms you will not go to the lower realms. But if you have both the
strong non-virtuous karma to go to the lower realms and if you have a wish
to go there definitely you are going to go there.
Ven Gyurme: I don’t think Khen Rinpoche said that. That is mines.
From this, it is clear that the main deciding factor is karma, whether you
have the karma or not isn’t it? Accept?
(Student reply inaudible)
There is no need for you to state this because I believe it is very clear
in the text that just having the karma alone is not sufficient. In order
for it to ripen, it must be activated by craving and grasping. Nobody is
ever disputing with that. The two primary causes of cyclic existence are
karma and afflictions. From the text, of the two, an affliction is the
principal. Without the affliction that nourishes the seed of karma, no
matter what karma you have, it would not be activated and it cannot be
ripened. Nobody is saying that just because you have the seed, you
definitely would have a sprout.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): Still need to put water. You know how to plant?
Don’t put your seed under the table and wish for it to grow, it wouldn’t
grow.
Something you need to think about:
    • What does craving nourish?
    • What does grasping nourish?
    • What is their manner of nourishing?
    • Is there a difference in their manner of nourishing the karma?
    • Can we say the difference in their manner of nourishing the karma be?
    • Craving nourishes it in the general way and grasping nourishes it in a
      specific way?
 I guess perhaps it is alright to say that if there is a single-pointed
faith in the guru or in the Three Jewels, then that can change things.
Perhaps we can say that this is an exception.
Generally, as a rule, we have to follow according to the karma - karma
dictates everything. But in the case of someone having generated single-
pointedness faith in the guru or in the Three Jewels then those are
exceptions. This is where the power of the object comes into play. In the
Lamrim, we talk about the power of the object.
In the teaching it is mentioned that in most cases:
    • If the motivation is non-virtuous, the action is non-virtuous.
    • If the motivation is virtuous then the action would be virtuous.
That is the general rule that is applied to almost all situations. The
thing that differentiates between non-virtuous and virtuous is the quality
of the mind, whether the mind was virtuous or non-virtuous.
It is mentioned clearly in the great treatise of the Stages of the Path to
Enlightenment by Je Rinpoche that when the power of the object comes into
play then those are exception. That means regardless of your motivation
behind making offerings to the Buddha, constructing holy objects and so
forth, even if the motivation is non-virtuous, whatever it maybe but that
whole karma becomes virtuous due to the power of the object. Those are the
exception.
Khen Rinpoche (In English): You understand what I said? You get the point?
What is the point I am driving?
The very essential point that I am saying is “At the point of death, if we
can remember the guru, if we can remember Buddha then that can change the
karma”.
Student 6: For the four divisions of grasping, which will be virtuous,
which will be non-virtuous and which will be unspecified?
In the explanation of craving and grasping, there are different kinds of
craving that are mentioned.
There are:
   1. Craving for goal
   2. Craving for existence
   3. Craving for view
   4. Craving of clinging on to
Maybe there isn’t a division of these different forms of craving into
virtuous and non-virtuous. It is stated very clearly in the lower
Abhidharma (Treasury of Manifest Knowledge) that the attachment of the
desire realms is necessarily non-virtuous.
Student 7: If a little baby dies, he doesn’t have a consciousness to
properly think of virtuous or non-virtuous things. Then there isn’t holy
object around for him to see then, where will he go?
The rule of the thumb or the general procedure is that whether it is a good
rebirth or bad rebirth is all dependent on karma. When we talk about karma,
which is:
    • Heavy?
    • Familiar?
    • Whatever that was created earlier?
So what determines the rebirth is which karma is heavier.

If both are equally heavy then which karma you are more familiar with?
If you are equally familiar then whichever was created earlier?
Which karma will ripen, the heavier of the two: virtuous and non-virtuous.
If there are equally heavy, the next one is whatever you are familiar with.
Whatever manifests at the time of death is the one with are more familiar
with.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): You said four? What is number four?
(Student reply inaudible)
• Generally, of the two - virtuous or non-virtuous karma- the heavier of
  the two will ripen.
• If they are equal then the one you are more familiar with will ripen.
• If they are equally familiar with virtuous and non-virtuous then the one
  that you have created earlier will ripen.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): I think it is only these three.
Ven Gyurme: It is from Abidharmakosha?
Khen Rinpoche (in English): What it said?
Student 8: The four are (1) Weighty (2) What is manifest (3) What is
familiar (4) What is created first?
Khen Rinpoche (in English): Anyway, I don’t remember.
Back to the rebirth being born in the pureland, for an ordinary being likes
ourselves to be born in a pure land, we must have accumulated the karma to
be born there. Of course whatever the karma is, it is a karma that is
impelled by ignorance.  Then you accumulate the karma. That karma would
have to be nourished by craving and grasping. I guessed, perhaps, probably
we have to say that in order to be born in the pureland, the process is
quite similar into that you have to create the karma, the karma for the
ordinary being is the karma that is impelled by ignorance. That karma has
to be nourished by craving and grasping. Of course, there are many
conditions that are necessary before one can get the result going to the
pureland.
First, one must have accumulated the very strong and powerful virtuous
karma. Without which there is no basis to be born there. Then for us ,
ordinary being, how are we going to accumulate karma is necessarily
involves ignorance. Ignorance is always there. At the time of death, there
must be a very strong craving and grasping to be born in the particular
pureland. You need that kind of strong wish, and once you get yourself
there, obviously as an ordinary being. It is showed that there are ordinary
beings who are in pureland, ordinary beings who have not entered any paths.
Of course, you will find hearers, solitary realizers, bodhisattvas and all
kinds of person there. But it is said in the pureland, there is no non-
virtue and there is no suffering.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): How nice!
Are there afflictions in the pure land?
Khen Rinpoche (in English): Is there afflictions in the pure land? Is there
attachment in the pure land?
Ven Gyurme: You said not manifest? That means have afflictions?
Khen Rinpoche (in English): When you reborn in the pure land, when you see
all these beautiful palaces, all beautiful goddesses, you get attachment
there or no? Actually I don’t know much about pure land.
Student 9: It is said in some texts for ordinary being that are born in
pureland, it is more difficult for such beings to develop bodhicitta? Is it
due to attachment?
Khen Rinpoche (in English): Not necessary
If there is no suffering in the pure land, it is very difficult to generate
renunciation, isn’t it? If you cannot generate renunciation, how are you
going to generate bodhicitta?
Khen Rinpoche (in English): Is it true? You must listen carefully what he
said.
It is clear that there is no suffering in the pureland. Because there is no
suffering, you can’t generate renunciation. If you can’t generate
renunciation, it is going to be very difficult to generate bodhicitta. So
it follows that going to the pure land is an obstacle for generating
bodhicitta.
Ven Gyurme: Khen Rinpoche rebutted by saying it is not impossible but it
just takes a long time.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): How long? There is no time limit. Not one year,
ten year. You have to develop renunciation, then bodhicitta and then get
enlighten there. Without renunciation, without bodhicitta, you wouldn’t get
enlighten. Only it take long period of time.
Student 10: There is ordinary being in the pure land. Therefore there is
still non-manifest affliction in the mind of this ordinary being. Therefore
it follows that in pure land there is suffering, right?
Khen Rinpoche (in English): No suffering. You are not listening. I told you
from the beginning in pureland there is no suffering.
Student 11: To me, in pureland it is in state like people who are in calm-
abiding. The afflictions are temporary suppressed. However being a person
who has not realized emptiness, the seeds of afflictions are still there.
Therefore there is still all pervasive suffering, right?
Answer: Whether they have pervasive compounded suffering or not, it is
remaining to be examined. It is said that people who are born in pure land
attain the five super-knowledges like that. If that is the case then it
suggesting that people who born in pure land automatically has calm-
abiding.
It is mentioned clearly in the teaching that the beings who are born in
pure lands achieve five super-knowledges by virtue of being born there. It
is stated clearly in the teachings that once you are born in the pure land
you will never ever be reborn in any of the inopportune states.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): Today we never read. Anyway, it is good to
think about the twelve-link. Sometimes it looks easy but when you think,
there are so many questions in the brain. Even I have so many but there is
no where I can read the book. I also don’t know who to ask also.
