Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Engaging in the Deeds of a Bodhisattva/lesson42.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:52:18.142509
================================================================================


Those of you who are part of the Lamrim analytical meditation program
started off with the topic of correctly relying on the virtuous friend. Now
you are meditating on the topic of human life of freedom and endowment and
death and impermanence. In the meditation on death and impermanence, the
outline starts with reflecting on the disadvantage of not remembering
death. I think about six disadvantages are mentioned in the Lamrim. We
could relate to whatever we have covered so far on chapter 7 in this text,
as a couple of verses are on death and impermanence. We could relate to
what we are studying now to the section on the drawbacks of not remembering
death.
It was mentioned in the teachings that laziness is one of the things that
prevent us from practicing the dharma and from accomplishing virtue. We
know we have to engage in virtue but we don’t get down to doing it.
Laziness plays a part in stopping us from engaging in that virtue. Of the
different kinds of laziness, there is laziness of holding on to those
inferior or common activities and just wanting to do that. Laziness blocked
us from accomplishing virtue.
In the last lesson we talked about the form of laziness that is essentially
an attachment to idleness. We derived pleasure from just hanging around and
doing nothing or we enjoy sleeping or hanging around, chatting and so
forth. We feel that they bring us joy. There is a mind that is attached to
the joy that comes from these kinds of activities. That mind that is
attached is the laziness that we are talking about here - the laziness that
is attached to these inferior activities.
[(LRCM V2 page 187) There are three types of laziness:
   1. Laziness of procrastination
   2. Attachment to ignoble activities
   3. Discouragement or self-contempt
It is taught that one of the best remedy or antidote to turn away or
reverse this kind of laziness is the meditation on death and impermanence.
In the discussion on the drawbacks or the faults of not remembering our own
coming death and our own impermanence is that when we don’t remember death
and impermanence, we don’t remember the dharma. So that is the first
disadvantage that is mentioned in the literature of The Stages of the Path.
Even if we remember the dharma, we don’t practice it. That is attributed to
not remembering death and impermanence. Even we remember the dharma, even
if we practice the dharma, the practice doesn’t become pure. That is also a
fault of not remembering own death and our own impermanence. Even when we
do remember the dharma and we practice it and somehow it becomes real
practice and is pure, but we couldn’t sustain it. We are not able to
continually sustaining the practice .That again is due to not remembering
death and impermanence and not meditating on death and impermanence. As
such we live our life like that - not remembering the dharma or remembering
it but not practicing it, or practicing it but it doesn’t become pure. Even
if it is pure, the practice is not completed and we don’t sustain it.  The
teaching said that this is how the life is wasted. At the end of the wasted
life is regret. We will have to die with sorrow and regret which is said to
be another fault or drawback of not remembering our own death and
impermanence.
That is nothing that we don’t know. We know of what I have just mentioned.
It is not about listening and that doesn’t do the job. From our own side,
what we need to do is to think about it. Not just think about it, but to
think about it continually all the time. This is an extremely important
point. This is the story of our lives, all of us here without exception,
you, me, and everybody else out there. The moment we don’t think of our own
death and impermanence, then that is how our whole life gets wasted.
Guntang Rinpoche said his poem:
-  the first twenty plus years of our lives, we don’t even think of
practicing the dharma.
-  the next twenty plus years of our lives, we think of practicing the
dharma, but we don’t get down to doing it
-  then after the next twenty plus years we think “I didn’t get to practice
the dharma.”
- finally, then one has to die with much regret.
This is the story of an empty wasted life. These pieces of advices are
really very helpful and very good. Similarly, the first couple of verses in
chapter seven of this text are also very essential and effective if we
think about it. We talked about reflecting on death and impermanence. It is
reflecting of our own coming death. So that is important. It is essential
for ourselves to think of our own upcoming death and our own impermanence.
Without reflecting on our own death, and without meditating on our own
impermanence, there is no space for us to do any practice.  The dharma
practice doesn’t become practice at all. We are like the fish that is
caught in the net that is thrown by the fishermen in the sea. If you are a
fish and once you get stuck in the net that is cast by a fisherman, you
definitely going to die. There is no way for the fish to escape. It is a
matter of time the fish will definitely die.
We are like the fish, and the fisherman is analogous of our affliction;
primarily our anger and attachment. Propelled by our anger and attachment,
we are cast into the net of the ocean of samsaric suffering. The net is
analogous of samsara. As long as we are born in samsara, then death is
given. Death definitely will happen to us. We can use this particular
analogy to reflect on our own situation. It could be helpful.
Another thing that could be useful is to think about the fellow human
beings, literally people of the same type. If we look at our lives and at
our own experience, how many people that we know in our lives have already
passed away; whether it was our loved ones, our friends, or the people that
who we see.  We could perhaps mentally count the people in our lives that
have already passed away. From there, perhaps sometimes one can notice that
when it comes to dying, there is no certainty as to people who are older
will necessary die. People die at all different ages; some die when they
are young, some die when they are old. Perhaps that may be useful to think
about.
In our lives we have already witnessed relatives, loved ones, friends and
people we know who have already died. We also see people dying. Yet we
don’t seem to be moved by it. While we have seen and we are still seeing
that people around us are slowly dying, somehow we are not moved enough to
practice the dharma. The teaching gave the example of we are likened to the
cattle, cow, buffaloes, goats and sheep. The whole flock of animals is led
to the slaughter house. Then the butcher kills the animal one by one. So if
we look at the animals, while the butcher is killing the animals in front
of them, they are so ignorant and not cognizing of their own fate. They
just happily grazing, eating, laying around and sleeping. They are
completely ignorant. In this example, the goat, the sheep, the buffaloes
and the cows are being killed, while the rest of the animals are just
hanging around, and doing nothing. We are like those animals just hanging
around while the ones in front are being killed. While we are going to die,
we just hang around and we get distracted by all kinds of things which then
distract us from doing our practice.
We are also like someone who is travelling on a particular road to
somewhere. Then we know we have to travel only that road and have no choice
because all other roads are completely blocked. We know that there is an
assassin, who is out there to get us somewhere along the road. We have no
choice but to travel on that road, which is the only road that is opened.
If we are someone travelling on that road and knowing that there are an
assassin and somebody going to kill us, there is no room to feel at ease.
We will feel worried all the time. Likewise the teaching used this example
to say that how could it be possible for us to feel relax and just hang
around and to be attached to all kinds of things that are not worthwhile.
We are attached to all kinds of various things, while knowing that the Lord
of Death is waiting for us and can strike at us anytime.
In the example, there is a person who is travelling on that road, because
all other roads are blocked. This is an analogy of the fact that death is
certain, and there is no way to stop death. We have no choice but to travel
on the road to death. Somewhere along that road, the Lord of Death is just
waiting to pounce on us. The Lord of Death is ready. We are basically just
like that person in that we are moving towards the Lord of Death without
any solution whatsoever. The teachings say that if we are cognizant of this
fact, and if we really think about our own upcoming death, then there is no
way we will just live our lives as it is - hanging around and happy to just
pass the day - the day is over and now is the night then you sleep and we
will carry on doing what we are doing the next day. The teaching claimed
that anyone is cognizing of that fact would never ever live life like that.

These are the different examples that we could reflect on in order to have
the feel of the certainty of our own death. Not only are we definitely
going to die, our death will happen to us very soon.
If you remember the teachings do mentioned that the Lord of Death doesn’t
wait for you to retire from your job before taking you.  It doesn’t wait
for you to retire; it doesn’t wait for you to finish whatever your plans
are or whatever you want to do. He doesn’t wait. He can just come and claim
you anytime.
There are so many conditions that just come to us - conditions that are
unfavorable for sustaining life and conditions that are favorable for dying
quickly, all kinds of difficulties in life, different kinds of diseases and
sicknesses and so forth.
In our lesson we also saw how thinking of wanting to practice at the time
of death without actually having done so while one was well and alive is an
incorrect thing to do. It is wrong because it is too late. If one doesn’t
practice when one is well, then on the day of death one thinks: “I must
practice dharma, I must do something.”  One may think “On that day maybe I
will do something.” Shantideva says that is wrong and is incorrect. The
time to think of practicing the Dharma is not on the day of death. The time
to think about practice is right now. If one didn’t practice dharma when
one is alive, and if one is thinking that one could practice the dharma at
the time of death, then you have to understand that it is probably very
difficult to do so. As says in the verse 7.10* that at the time of death,
if you are someone who didn’t do any practice or didn’t do much practice
before the day of death, and on that day, you may suddenly remember all the
things that you feel that you shouldn’t have done in your life, and
remember all the negativities that you have created. The mind will be quite
upset and disturbed, and there is so much regret. I think it is really
quite difficult to practice any dharma during that time. If you are one
that is going to the lower realm, then at the time of death and when the
karma ripens you will have all these karmic appearance such as hearing
unpleasant sounds or wailing or sounds that is indicative of your impending
rebirth in the lower realms. When you hear these kinds of sounds, it can be
very frightening. The mind will be so worried and you are so frightened. It
becomes almost impossible for you to practice any dharma or to think of
virtue then.
Those who didn’t get to do the practice when they were alive, and didn’t
get to do anything really meaningful and beneficial, then at the time of
death, many a times they become like a crazy person, and got freak out.
When you look at their physical demeanor and what they are saying, you can
see how and what they are thinking inside. It comes across as if they are
crazy and were freak out. In such a state of mind out, what practice can
they do and what virtue can they remember?  This is what is being described
in the teachings.
There are people who don’t practice and at the time of death, they freak
out. A lot of time they cannot even recognize the people around them. If
you cannot even recognize the people around you, how can you remember the
dharma? Therefore, while we are still alive, while we still have some
control and freedom to practice and while we still have the conditions to
do so, then we have to start from now. We should thinking of our own
impending death to persuade ourselves into to the practice. This is like a
repeat of the meaning of the verses which we have looked at in the previous
class. In the previous class we didn’t have much time to talk about each of
those verses individually. Essentially, what I have just said is the
meaning.
*Verse 7.10
Tormented by the memory of my negativities
And hearing the sounds of hell,
In terror I shall clothe my body in excrement.
What is the use of such a delirious state?
Q&A
Student 1: In the chapter of Patience, verse 6.96 says:
If I am happy due to his happiness,
Then I must act similarly towards all.
And if this were so then why am I unhappy
When others are happy due to joy?
Here it is questioning whether we are attached to the words or the sounds
of the praise or the happiness in the mind of the person praising us.
If the person is happy to praise us, it is said that there is no way that
we can partake his happiness. I think that from the angle of rejoicing, to
rejoice in the person who praises others, which is a virtuous thing to do,
one gain virtuous from rejoicing. It is supported by verses 6.76 and 6.77:
Verse 6.76
Should others find joyous happiness
By praising someone having excellent qualities,
Why, mind, do you not praise him too
And be joyful?
Verse 6.77
That joyous happiness of yours
Is a source of joy without misdeed,
Permitted by those having excellent qualities
And is also a supreme means for gathering others.
I feel that V6.95 and V6.76 and V6.77 are contradictory and I would like to
clarify that. Maybe it is not the intend.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): I have no idea. You say these two are
contradicting.
Student 1: V6.95 is saying that praise is not good whereas in V6.67 and
V6.77 are saying that you should rejoice when someone praise someone.  If I
put them together it seems to be contradicting.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): Somebody answer on what she is asking. Short
answer as she says contradicting.
Student 2: For V6.76 and V6.77, the outline says “It is inappropriate to be
jealous when your enemies are praised”. So it is talking about somebody
praising your enemy, you should not be jealous, whereas for V6.95, it is
talking about yourself not being attached to the mind of somebody who is
happy praising you. Do you see the difference?
Student 1: I would feel that this is very much to oneself in the situation
whereby like if it is praising someone that you don’t like, you should
actually rejoice at the praises, because that is the mind that you should
change one’s own mind, and is very much to yourself. When the praises is to
yourself then you would think otherwise. So you have to be flexible, in
that sense, not applying….
Ven Gyurme: It is not about the praise. It is about whether you are
attached to the praise.
Khen Rinpoche: The section of V6.76 and 6.77 is talking about how we should
react when we hear our enemy or the people whom we don’t like are being
praised by others. The usual reaction is that we don’t like it when our
enemies are praised we get upset. Therefore we need to be patience.
What is an upset mind? An upset mind is the mind that is disturbed. How do
you counteract that? You counteract by checking whether that praise is
according to the fact or accords with reality or not. If the enemy is being
praised for something that he deserved, something that is in accord with
reality, something that is really happening, or something is good, then the
teaching tells us that we should acknowledge that fact. By acknowledging
that the praise that he deserved and it was accord with reality then we
don’t become disturbed or become less disturbed. The point is about dealing
with our own mind. It is our practice.
V6.95 is related to oneself being the object of praise. The problem is that
when we are praised, the usual reaction is that we get super excited. Then
we become very attached to it and that cause us to be proud. That is what
the usual reaction is. We become very arrogant and proud because of the
praise. We become attached to it. That is the problem. That needs to be
addressed. That needs to be stopped because it is an obstacle for us. The
point here is not getting attached to the praise. That verse is about
dealing with whatever attachment that may arise when we are praised.
Getting attached to the praise that we may receive from people is something
that needs to be dealt with. So in that section, there is a list of
suggested antidotes or remedies. The point is to think about even if we do
receive some praises, it doesn’t make us live longer, it doesn’t make us
stronger physically, it doesn’t make our problem such as sicknesses goes
away and so forth. These are just the different ways to counteract whatever
attachment that may arise when we are praised.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): I thought we have completed the patience
The particular section that we are dealing with talks about the laziness
which is an attachment to ignoble activities or inferior activities;
basically like idle chatting, hanging around, and sleeping. Such kind of
laziness harms us and causes us problems in this life and would also bring
about problems in the future life.
Next is about abandoning laziness by thinking about suffering that we have
to experience in the next life.

|2" Abandoning laziness by reflecting on the disadvantages|
|of it in future lives                                    |
|a" Suffering is certain to arise                         |
|b" It will be difficult to bear                          |
|c" It is contradictory to want happiness yet not pursue  |
|virtue                                                   |
|d" Imploring one to pursue the methods by which one may  |
|be liberated from suffering                              |

|a" Suffering is certain to arise            |


Verse 7.11
If even in this life you shall be gripped with fear
Like that of a live fish being rolled,
What need even to mention the unbearable sufferings of hell
[Due to] the negativities you have committed?
If a fish jumps out of the water for whatever reason, and from the shore
you can see the fish is flipping and struggling. You can see the fish is
really suffering. Likewise, because of laziness and not having engaged in
virtue then it is needless to say that we will have to experience even much
more unbearable suffering of being burnt in a hell realm, which is much
worse than the fish if we did not practice when we are alive. On the day of
death we will find the whole process of dying very difficult and very
unbearable; just like how a fish is struggling when it is out of water. And
because of immeasurable amount of negativities that we have accumulated,
then it goes almost without saying that there is much worse suffering that
we have to experience in the next life in the lower realms. How it is
possible for us to endure that kind of pain?

|b" It will be difficult to bear             |


Verse 7.12
Why do you remain at ease like this
Having committed the actions of hell
Where your delicate flesh will burn
When touched by streams?
It is said that the hell fire is so many times hotter than whatever fire
that we humans know of. On top of that, it is said that the bodies of those
that are born in hell, especially the skins, are very delicate. The
dedicate skin is like of a new born child. When you have such delicate skin
and coupled with the fire of hell which is so many times hotter than the
fire of this human world, how is it possible for us to endure something
like that?
The point here is that we should practice dharma and not be lazy. We should
see all these verses so far as somebody persuading us or imploring us to
practice dharma. It is a contradiction to want happiness on one hand and on
the other we don’t want to engage in the cause of happiness; which is
virtue. So, there is a big contradiction.

|c" It is contradictory to want happiness yet|
|not pursue virtue                           |


Verse 7.13
Much harm befalls those who want results without striving,
As well as those sensitive ones.
While clasped by death, I shall wail like the gods,
“Oh no, I shall be destroyed by suffering!”
Those who are cognizant of their own impermanence and those who are
cognizant of their own death going to happen soon and if they don’t
practice dharma and don’t engage in virtue, they would have a horrible and
very fearful death. They would have to experience unbearable suffering in
the future life. It is said that those who are cognizant of all these are
the one who really have to joyous persevere day and night and even giving
up sleep, and only engaging in virtue.
The teaching says that we are not exactly interested in accomplishing
virtue in the ways such as going for isolation or doing retreat; whether it
is for years or for months. We don’t put in that kind of effort and don’t
have that kind of determination. Whether it is studying or learning the
Buddhadharma, we are also pretty much like that. We don’t really want to do
it with heartfelt wish and that mean we don’t really strive. That is us.

Forget about being practicing day and night, we don’t even put in effort to
strive for a month. How can we say we practice day and night; even a month
is difficult for us. Yet at the same time, we have big goal and what we
aiming for is so huge, for example, we want to be an expert in this or that
but the efforts and the determination do not commensurate with it.
We want to experience the path, we want realization, and we want this and
that but we don’t want to work for it and our efforts do not commensurate
with that. We may even thinking of wanting to get a good rebirth. Some
people think “I want to go to the Pureland” but at the same time not doing
anything to achieve it. We wish to achieve all kinds of results but yet not
doing anything to achieve it or not putting in the efforts that is
commensurate with the goal. So this is a contradiction.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): It is contradiction.
Next the text says that if we cannot tolerate or endure small
inconveniences and small hardships, then life would be just a big problem.
As we saw earlier, anybody who is born in cyclic existence is somebody who
is destined to die. Death is an inevitable part of samsaric life. Yet that
being the case, you can see that there are many people who behave as if
they are gods of the desire realm. Gods of the desire realm have very long
life and have many enjoyments. They just hang around and enjoying their
lives. But there are many people who are in samsara and who are not the
desire realm’s god behave as if they were desire realm’s god. They are
content, happy just to pass day and night enjoying and living life as if
they are not going to die. The teaching says that these people who have
this kind of mind set and behave in such a way are object of compassion.

|d" Imploring one to pursue the methods by which one may  |
|be liberated from suffering                              |


Verse 7.14
Relying upon the human boat,
Free yourself from the great river of suffering!
As it is hard to find this boat later,
Do not sleep at this time, fool!
The verse is saying that having obtained this human life now, we should use
it to free ourselves from the three realms of samsara. This is essentially
the meditation on how this human life of freedoms and endowments which we
are now obtained is greatly meaningful and it is difficult to find again.
Through reflecting on these two points, we encourage and persuade our minds
to practice the dharma.
With that we finish with the antidotes or remedies to the first type of
laziness. Essentially the first type of laziness is actually the laziness
of procrastination, but that is not how it is termed in Gyaltsab Je’s
commentary. The meaning is that due to the attachment to those various
things such as idle chatter, or sleep or just hanging around doing nothing,
one procrastinate the practice the dharma. Having said that, according to
this section, the next laziness is the laziness that is attached to
inferior activities or ignoble activities.
The first laziness was the laziness of idling around or just lazing around.
That is essentially the laziness of procrastination, literally is the
laziness of idling or lazing around. The second form of laziness which
start with verse 7.15 is the laziness of attached to inferior or ignoble
activities.
[(LRCM V2 page 187) There are three types of laziness:
   1. Laziness of procrastination
   2. Attachment to ignoble activities
   3. Discouragement or self-contempt
[BP1 Part2 L21] On the basis of the human life of leisure and opportunity
that we have obtained now, we can free ourselves from the river of
suffering. If we let the boat leave without boarding it, it will take a
long time for it to come back. Likewise, it is extremely difficult to find
such a human life of leisure and opportunity again in the next life,
because the causes for attaining it are so rare. As we are not creating the
causes for such a rebirth, it will not come again: As it is hard to find
this
boat again, / This is no time for sleep, you fool. Therefore, while all the
conditions for practising the Dharma are present, we must train in the
paths of the person of small, medium or great capacity, (according to our
abilities) and free ourselves from the river of suffering. The Dharma
should be used to move our minds to strive for virtue at times when we are
distracted by non-virtuous activities. We must use the Dharma to benefit
our own minds, checking to see whether our mental states are improving or
not, rather than using it to check on the progress of others, which is none
of our business!

|2’ Abandoning the laziness that clings to |
|unwholesome activities                    |


Verse 7.15
Having rejected the supreme joy of the sacred Dharma
That is an infinite cause of joy,
Why do you enjoy being distracted by the causes for suffering,
Frivolous amusements and the like?
Verse 7.15 is saying that the sublime dharma is the source of endless joy
and the highest joy. Now having found the dharma, why are we wasting our
time by not practicing that sublime dharma?
Now having found this sublime dharma which is the source of endless joy and
the highest joy, the verse is telling us that it is wrong to not practicing
that but just living a busy life, and wanting to the live a life of hustle
and bustle. Having attached to that will lead to all kinds of problem in
this and future life.
The teaching says that most people in this world live their life revolving
around the enemy and the loved one. When an enemy arises, they will always
think of how to defeat the enemy, how to get around the enemy or how to
overcome the enemy. At the same time they will think of how to support and
take care of their loved one. Arising from these two ways of relating to
people then come anger and attachment. There is how people live their life
just revolving around hatred and attachment.
Many people live their whole life revolves making money day and night and
accumulating wealth. This is how they get distracted in their whole life.
Also most of us live our life revolves around idle chatter which invariably
links to either hatred or attachment.
Also many people have very strong concept of past and future, i.e. what is
happening in the situation now, they will relate to what had happened in
the past and then project what will happen in the future. There is a lot of
mental agitation, and here it is mentioned as excitement. There is a lot of
this kind of discursive thought. That is another way in which how people
fritter away and wasting their life.
The teaching describes how most people live and wasting their life like
that due to attachment to all these various things. As such there is a need
to deal with attachment.
Next is abandoning the laziness of discouragement.

|3’. Abandoning the laziness that is disheartened about virtue        |
|a’ Instructions on making effort in the antidote to being            |
|disheartened                                                         |
|b’ How the scriptures teach the way to put the antidote into practice|
|c’ If one makes effort, laziness will be arrested and one will be    |
|capable of accomplishing enlightenment                               |

|a’ Instructions on making effort in the antidote to being            |
|disheartened                                                         |


Verse 7.16
Without despondency, I should gather the masses of army
And diligently take control of myself.
Through equalizing self with others and
Exchanging self for others,

|b’ How the scriptures teach the way to put the antidote into practice|


Verse 7.17
I should not be despondent by thinking,
“How can I ever attain enlightenment?”
Thus the tathagatas who speak what is true
Have uttered this truth:
Verse 7.18
“If they develop the strength of exertion,
Even those who are flies, mosquitoes, bees, and likewise worms
Will win the unsurpassable enlightenment
Which is hard to attain.”

|c’ If one makes effort, laziness will be arrested and one will be capable of   |
|accomplishing enlightenment                                                    |
|1" Reflecting on the way in which one will be capable of attaining             |
|enlightenment if one develops the strength of effort                           |
|2" It is reasonable to bear the hardships that accompany working to attain     |
|enlightenment, for they are not even a fraction of those of the lower realms'  |
|suffering                                                                      |
|3" As the king of doctors prescribed gentle rites for healing the great        |
|disease, it is reasonable to bear [the hardships involved]                     |
|4" There is no suffering in that and happiness increases, therefore, it is     |
|reasonable to take joy in that                                                 |


Verse 7.19
Since I have been born human by race
And recognize what is beneficial and what is harmful,
If I do not forsake the deeds of enlightenment,
Why will I not attain enlightenment?
So you know what the verses are saying: If you work for it, you will be
enlightened.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): Okay. That is.
According to Gyaltsab Je’s commentary, verse 7.16 is related to the
laziness of discouragement whereas there are other commentaries they put it
with the previous laziness – the laziness of attachment to ignoble
activities.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): I better stop here now. You all look lazy.
Myself look lazy so….



