Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Engaging in the Deeds of a Bodhisattva/lesson37.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:52:14.640088
================================================================================


I believe I have mentioned this in the past. There is a citation from the
sutra which mentions “How much merits one gets if one make offerings, give
foods and clothing for eons equaling to the number of grains of sand in the
Ganges River? That merit, of course, is huge. But compare that merit to the
merit of just hearing the word “Buddha” or seeing the representations of
the Buddha in the form a painting, statue and so forth, the merit that one
accumulate is so much greater than the earlier example.”
Basically it is saying that how much opportunity we have in accumulating so
much merit just by hearing the word “Buddha” or just by seeing the
representations of the Buddha in the form of holy objects.  If we can
accumulate so much merit just by hearing the word “Buddha” or just by
seeing the representations of the Buddha in the form of the holy objects
such as statues, paintings and so forth, then it goes without saying how
much more merit we will accumulate, if out of faith, we were to put our
palms together paying homage to the Buddha, or praise his qualities
verbally.
If that is the case, then by extension, the fact that we have the
opportunity to come into contact with these instructions that shows the
stages of proceeding towards omniscience or enlightenment, where such a
path that is praised by all the buddhas, and to educate ourselves with
these instructions and, on top of that, to analyze and to reflect on it,
then the merit we accumulate from doing this will even be much greater than
the earlier examples.
That is why I have always mentioned about the need to read your text. By
reading the text and educating yourself, you can see how much benefit you
can get from those examples. So it is important to read the text. On the
basis of reading the text and if you are able to analyze and think about
what you have read, then of course, the benefit is really great. The
essential point that I am trying to make is that you should keep in mind
the benefits and the purpose. You then have to educate yourself by
continuing looking at your text.
While you read, you have to analyze and think, and in doing so you plant
imprints in your minds. It is important to plant stable imprints. As I have
mention before, you plant imprints when you merely read the text. You also
plant imprints when you reflect and analyze the teachings. You also plant
imprints when you familiarize yourself with the teachings through
meditation. The imprints of the latter are superior to the former, i.e. the
imprints from reflection and meditation are superior to hearing and so
forth. At this time, you still have the human life and having met the
Buddha’s teachings, you must try your best to place as many imprints as
possible and place stable imprints in your mind.
Recently we had quite of discussion on the twelve links of dependent
origination. From this, you can see it is vital to plant good and stable
imprints while you are still alive. If you didn’t do that and expect you
can suddenly think of something virtuous at the time of death, and as you
claimed that it can be nourished and then ripens, that can be quite far
fetched. It is not impossible but it is difficult. If one cannot do it
while the mind is clear, it is going to be difficult at the time of death.
So, while one is still alive and when the mind is still fresh, it is
important to plant as many stable imprints as possible. It is only then, at
the time of death, there is really good chance of getting a good rebirth
because of the familiarity.
If at this time when you are alive and the mind is still fresh, alert and
still employable, you cannot figure things out such as you cannot plant
imprints and so forth, how is it then possible to do so at the time of
death? When the mind is clear, you cannot do it. Then at the time of death
when the mind is a bit disturbed and so forth, how is it possible? To say
“I don’t do anything now and at the time of death it will happen” that is a
bit far fetch and I wonder how that is possible. The point here is that
while you are alive, as much as possible, work continuously at learning,
educating, practice and so forth to plant stable imprints.
If we think about craving, I don’t think craving starts only at the time of
death. It starts when you are alive. We are talking about the craving that
nourishes the karma. So I don’t think craving starts at the time of death,
craving already starts in this life.
There are the projecting causes and the projected results. There are four
projected results: name and form, the six sources, contact, and feeling.
When these four projected results come into being, I would think that
craving already starts. We already have craving because we have the
projected result of feeling -pleasant feeling and unpleasant feeling. We
desire pleasant feeling and we don’t like unpleasant feeling. When pleasant
feelings arise, there is craving for it, and that is how it nourishes. That
is when it is call nourishment.
We don’t like suffering. Because of craving and attachment, we want to be
free from suffering. Also when we are alive, we have this feeling that we
come into existence, and we don’t want to lose this existence. We say we
don’t want to lose this body, and we don’t want to be parted from this
body. That is also due to craving. Through this craving alone, we
accumulate so many fresh karmas.
Grasping primarily arises during the time of death. It is a stronger form
of craving, and that is what manifests mainly at the time of death. If we
look at how it is phrased “primarily it is at the time of death”, from
that, perhaps we can say that there could be instances where there could
also be grasping before death.
The main point is “How is the actualizing karma manifest? What is the
process?” At the time of accumulating the projecting karma, and when that
is finished, something is left on the causal time consciousness. Simply
speaking, a karmic seed is planted and an imprint is planted on the mind.
From then, there is no projecting karma. Projecting karma is finished i.e.
it is done. How projecting karma does transforms or manifest as the
actualizing karma? What is this process? How does it come about? It is a
question for everyone. You all already understand the 12 links?
Khen Rinpoche (In English):  Already graduate.
That is why it is important to think about karma; so many things for you to
think about. It is not enough just to say “I have heard this, and it is
like that.” You need to think about it until you get a decisive and
definite ascertainment “It is like that, and not like this”.  In order to
reach that, you really need to think about it. And in order to do that, you
need to have questions. You need to understand and in order to understand,
you need to really think from many angles and ask questions.
A karma that is accumulated is a karma which results you will definitely
experience.
In order to experience the results of the karma that is accumulated, must
that karma be completed in the sense of having the four elements of the
attitude - the motivation, correct perception, an actual act and the
completion of the act?
For example killing, karma of killing is a karma that is accumulated. In
order to experience the result of this karma of killing that is
accumulated; must the act of killing be completed?
The definition of completion is that the person dies before you.
In order for the karma of killing to be powerful enough to issue forth an
effect, you experience the result. Does the karma of killing needs to be
completed or not?
Ven Gyurme: Karma that is accumulated is karma whose results you will
definitely experience.
This is not to waste time. This is a very important exercise that everybody
should be involved.
You have to focus: Why yes? Why no?
Student 1: For karma to be accumulated, it doesn’t have to be completed.
Ven Gyurme: Why?
Khen Rinpoche (In English): You said Lamrim says don’t need to complete?
You sure? Where does the text say it doesn’t have to be completed?
Student 1: I need to refer to Lamrim text: Karma that you have accumulated
is that not included among the following ten types of actions: actions done
in dreams, … those done without wanting to …
 So anything that is other than these ten instances is karma accumulated
but they do not have to be completed.
Khen Rinpoche: That is not the question. We say that karma is accumulated,
but where does it say it has to be a karma that is accumulated plus it has
to be completed. Let’s say there is karma of killing, must the person die
before you do? Where does it say that you do not need completion? Where
does it say, “the karma that is accumulated but it is not completed”?
Student 1: It doesn’t say. Neither does it say.
Khen Rinpoche: In order for a karma of killing to be a karma that is
accumulated, do you need all these four elements of the attitude or not?
Student 2: Don’t need.
Khen Rinpoche (In English): Don’t need, then give me example.
Khen Rinpoche: Which one you don’t need -motivation, execution of the act
and culmination of the act?
Student 2: Need motivation. Don’t need culmination and execution.
Khen Rinpoche: Give an illustration of what you have just said - a karma of
killing that is a karma that is accumulated just having the motivation.
Student 2: I’m motivated by anger. I wanted to kill Peter but ended up kill
John.
Ven Gyurme: Execution is there.
Student 2: I think execution is needed but don’t need object and
culmination.
Ven Gyurme: So you now say you need performance. You changed your mind.
Student 3: I will use an example where a non-virtuous motivation is not
required for killing. In the case of the bodhisattva who killed a sailor
and the motivation to kill is not non-virtuous. He performed the act of
killing and he actually experienced the result in the end by being reborn
in hell for a short time. So this is a case of killing not having the four
aspects because the motivation is not totally non-virtuous and it does
culminate in the result of being reborn in hell realm. So this is a case
where there is killing which is accumulated and has produced a result and
doesn’t need all the four factors.
Khen Rinpoche: So when you kill, you accumulate negative karma. Did that
bodhisattva accumulated negative karma or not?
Student 3: Yes
Khen Rinpoche: It follows that you can accumulate negative karma motivated
by good motivation.
Student 3: Oh, I must consult my advisor. I passed this one. Let me give
another example. Nagarjuna was supposed to live for 600years but he was
killed by someone who used a grass to cut his head. That was because in the
past when he was cutting the grass, the grass accidentally killed an ant.
He didn’t have the motivation of killing the ant but yet he had to
experience the result. That is a case where there is no non-virtuous
motivations involved but yet he experienced the result of having his head
cut off.
Ven Gyurme: The story goes that he cut his own head off, not that his head
got cut off. There is a big difference.
Student 3:  When he was cutting the grass, the grass accidentally cut off
the head of the ant. Because of the karma accumulated, later on he
experienced the result of having his own head being cut off.
Ven Gyurme: No, he cut off his own head. His brother wanted to inherit the
kingdom. Since he lived for so long, he couldn’t die, and the only way he
could die is to cut off his own head with a grass.
Student 3: Is that a case of not having all four factors i.e. there is no
motivation in the killing and yet having to experience the result again?
Khen Rinpoche: In this case, there is performance and culmination.
Student 3: But there is no non-virtuous motivation.
Khen Rinpoche:  This is an example of a karma that is created but not
accumulated.
In order to be a karma that is accumulated, do you need all three
-motivation, performance and culmination?
In order for it to be covetousness, you need all three:
   1. basis of the action
   2. performance
   3. culmination
Even if all three are present, it doesn’t manifest in a physical or any
verbal way. Through the coming together of the basis, performance and
culmination, then one accumulates karma.
For the case of covetousness, in order for it to be complete, you need the
motivation, the performance and the culmination. What is posited as the
culmination of covetousness?
Student 2: The thought that I will make that particular thing mine. I make
up that decision.
Khen Rinpoche: That was well said. Everybody must remember that.  What is
posited as the performance of covetousness?
Student 4: A strong desire to have the thing.
Student 5: According to this book, it seems that covetousness is mainly
mental action. You just need to think about it to trigger off the
covetousness.
Ven Gyurme: What is posited as the performance of covetousness?
Student 5: Just to think about it? There is only one component.
Ven Gyurme: There are three - motivation, the performance and the
culmination. These three constitute a complete act of covetousness. So what
is posited as the performance?
Student 4: The motivation is strong to desire that thing. That is
performance. The motivation becomes stronger and once you have it and
decided that this is mine, then that is the culmination.
Khen Rinpoche (In English): Okay what is it?
Student 5: You need the intention. There is no mental action without any
intention to think about it. There is no such thing as mental action that
is not done intentionally because you are forced to do it by someone else.
Ven Gyurme: So what would you say is the motivation then?
Student 5: The grasping?
Khen Rinpoche: The motivation of covetousness is posited as the thought
wanting to have an object belonging to somebody else. So that is posited as
the motivation. Just that thought of wanting to have that.
Essentially, covetousness is a continuity of a similar thought and the
intensity of the thought increases. At the beginning you have the thought;
the motivation. You see something that belongs to others then you think “I
want that stuff”. Then that thought grows stronger and stronger until it
reaches the point where it is performance. Then you reached the point where
you decisively think “I really want this. How wonderful if this is mine. I
really want this.” That is the culmination. So it is a stream of similar
thought.
When you have the motivation, the performance and the culmination, then you
will have the complete act of covetousness. In dependence on that, you
accumulate karma. We are not saying that covetousness is karma. It is not.
But through a complete act of covetousness, which is an affliction, and
based on that, then you accumulate karma.
In terms of karma of killing, to be a karma that is accumulated but not
done, you have the motivation to kill.
Then the thought become stronger and stronger that you really want to kill
the person. Let’s say we use the word – performance.
Then you reach the point in time you just mentally decide “I am going to
kill this person” That phase perhaps we use the word – culmination.
In that sense, then you have the motivation, performance and culmination.
Perhaps through that then there is how the karma of killing is accumulated
but not done. This is what I think.
In order for the karma of killing to be karma of that is accumulated but
not done, initially there must be a thought, the intention, to kill.
The intention then grows stronger and it reaches the point where you really
have to kill “I am going to kill this person.”
I think that when you reach this point in time then it becomes karma of
killing; that is a karma that is accumulated which will definitely bring
about a result.
The teaching classify killing as a physical karma (bodily karma)  [three of
the body, and four of the speech]
Also the teaching posit culmination for killing to be that the victim has
to die before you.
You have to think about this.
Back to the question about the manifesting of actualizing karma, so how is
it manifest?
When does craving nourish the karma?
From this exercise you can see things are not so straightforward. If you
just look at it casually and just accept “It is like that.” But if you
really think deeply, there are so many questions. You cannot actually say
in certainty that you know the subject. So it requires really constant
thinking and analysis. From this you can see that just by looking at thing
casually, and when you start thinking, a lot of time you cannot say with
confident “I actually know this and I actually believe in this.” To reach
the point where you are able to speak with conviction “It is like that, it
is not like this,” is a result of having really reflected or thought about
things well for some time. You really have to dig and think. It is only
then you can speak with conviction “It is like that and it is not like
this.” That makes a high quality Buddhist.
It is really important to read and think about stuff. When you have
questions, you bring it up in class. If you don’t think about stuff, then
all looks very easy, isn’t it? When you think it is easy that is where it
becomes boring “It is boring coming to class. I just sit and listen. He
talk, and I listen. It is so boring.” Nothing, it is just like that. This
happens if you don’t think. If you just casually look at this text
“Engaging the Deeds of the Bodhisattva”, it seems quite straightforward and
easy. But when you start to think about stuff then you discover that you
actually have difficulty to speak with conviction about the various things,
and you don’t have the confidence when you are asked.
Like here we have been talking about the chapter on Patience. In order to
cultivate patience to deal with anger, we have to use the whole varieties
of reasons. The chapter is just telling us how to think, what kind of line
of thinking is wrong, what is right and so forth. Basically, we have to see
what the text tells us. We have to think about it for ourselves. If you
don’t agree with any of the reasoning that is brought up, and if you really
think about it and don’t agree with, then you must say with confident “I
don’t agree with this”. Then you challenge it and even ask it in class.
Even the reason is correct and valid, until you think about it yourself,
you have to think about it yourself to reach a point where you are
confident that it is really like that, what it says is really true. We have
to think. Without thinking this is not going to happen.
Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds

|(a) Feeling regret for how many bodies we have wasted in the past and still|
|not accomplished either our own or others’ welfares                        |


Verse 6.74
For the sake of my desires
I experienced thousands [of eons] in hell,
But I enacted the purpose
Of neither others nor myself.
Earlier on we saw how it is possible that we raise the qualm to object to
the idea of having emotionally parted or having not be so attached to our
loved ones and the people who matter to us because of saying “I cannot bear
this and it is unpleasant.”  If there are such thoughts then verse 6.74 is
the answers for this.
In the past, out of a desire for material gain or out of desire to get
those pleasurable objects of form, sound, smell, taste and touch and so
forth, we bear a lot of hardship including having to sacrifice our limbs.
Somehow these had happened due to the karma that we have created out of
attachment.  We even have born in the hell and experience so much suffering
because of following after desire and attachment. All those experiences of
suffering were for nothing in that our desire are still not met, our own
purposes and our own goals are not fulfilled, neither have we fulfilled the
purposes or the goals or welfares of any other person. Having experienced
all those problems and sufferings for so long time has not brought about
any benefit and have not achieved anything meaningful. If that is the case,
why shouldn’t we put up with the problem that we experience now that come
about through having practice patience. Why can’t we put up and tolerate
with those difficulties since it will bring about something greatly
meaningful.

|(b) It is reasonable to enjoy accomplishing the welfare of all migrators by|
|being patient with present hardships                                       |


Verse 6.75
But now since great purpose will be established
From harm which is not as much,
I should be solely joyful
Towards such suffering that dispels the harms of migrating beings.
By being patience with the sufferings that we experience as a human being
and by accepting those sufferings voluntarily we will be able to avoid the
suffering of the lower realms such as the suffering of the hells. As such,
our suffering is not considered big and is nothing as compared to the
suffering of hell. So by putting up and voluntarily accepting the problems
and the sufferings that we have experienced, like what was mentioned
previously, with the thought of voluntarily accepting suffering and seeing
it as a method or way to purify the negativities that we have accumulated
in the past, and using those experiences of sufferings to persuade
ourselves to accumulate virtues which are the cause of happiness. As such,
therefore, it is reasonable and appropriate for us to meditate/ cultivate
patience.
This concludes the section which talks about the needs for us to be
patience when the people matter to us are harmed.
[BP1 Part 2 L13: There are two ways to deal with our inability to bear harm
directed at ourselves or our loved ones:-
Reflect on how, for the sake of accomplishing small purposes in the past,
we had experienced the consequences of those actions by taking rebirths in
hell for a very long time. In the end, we did not fulfill our own purposes
or the purposes of others. If we were to compare our present suffering to
what we had experienced in the past, it is insignificant. Therefore, we
should voluntarily accept our enemies’ harm now.
In addition, we should recall that, by voluntarily accepting the present
suffering, this will act as a condition for us to achieve the state of full
enlightenment whereby we can fulfill the purposes of all living beings.
Bodhisattvas work only for the welfare and purposes of all living beings.
This is how the bodhisattvas practise when they and their loved one are
harmed. We should reflect in the same way and even if we cannot practise
like that now, we can make aspirational prayers to be able to do so in the
future.
The next section is about stopping ourselves from being angry at those who
benefit our enemies. Why do we need to that? Because it is the cause for
one’s happiness, it is suitable to want it.

|c’ Arresting fury towards those who do well by one’s    |
|enemies                                                 |
|1 Abandoning impatience with the praise and renown of   |
|one’s enemies                                           |
|2 Abandoning impatience with the accomplishment of our  |
|enemies’ pleasure                                       |
|3 Abandoning impatience with the accomplishment of      |
|material gain                                           |

|1 Abandoning impatience with the praise and renown of   |
|one’s enemies                                           |
|a” As it is the cause of one’s own happiness [it is     |
|unreasonable to wish for such]                          |
|b” As it is the cause of others’ happiness, it is       |
|unreasonable to not wish for it                         |

|a” As it is the cause of one’s own happiness [it is     |
|unreasonable to wish for such]                          |


Verse 6.76
Should others find joyous happiness
By praising someone having excellent qualities,
Why, mind, do you not praise him too
And be joyful?
Verse 6.77
That joyous happiness of yours
Is a source of joy without misdeed,
Permitted by those having excellent qualities
And is also a supreme means for gathering others.
When our enemy is praised, the person who is praising our enemy also gains
happiness.
Our enemy gets praised by somebody and the person who is doing the praising
also feels happy.
So the person who is praising the enemy is happy in doing so. As such,
since that person is happy when he praises our enemy, likewise, shouldn’t
we also praise our enemy?
We know that when another person praises our enemy, the person who is doing
the praise is happy, isn’t it? So, if we see that is the result he gets
happiness from praising the enemy, then the argument here to us is that if
we see that then why is it that we do not praise our enemy?
Anyway, the point it is driving at is that when we see someone is praising
another person who is our enemy, we shouldn’t be disturbed. If we praise
our enemy or the person that we don’t like, we will experience the
happiness in the heart. If we do that, then the happiness is the highest
kind of happiness. It is the kind of happiness and joy that pleases all the
Buddhas and bodhisattvas. So if we praise the enemy then that becomes the
highest kind of joy that pleases the Buddhas and bodhisattvas.
It is the best kind of speech that makes others happy. In so doing that is
how we bring people into our fold, literally gathering people. Instead of
jealousy, by praising the enemy or the people that we don’t like then it
said to be the best way to make the person like us or to make the person
come into our fold.
Next is if we do not wish others to have happiness then our own happiness
will degenerate.

|b” As it is the cause of others’ happiness, it is       |
|unreasonable to not wish for it                         |
|(1) If you do not want others to be happy, your own     |
|happiness will decline                                  |
|(2) Thus, it is reasonable to wish for others to be     |
|happy                                                   |


Verse 6.78
Furthermore, it is said that others will be happy in this way.
If you do not want this happiness,
Then you should stop giving wages and the like.
Thus you would be adversely affected both in this and future lives.
This verse is saying that if we do not wish for others to be happy then our
own happiness will deteriorate. We don’t like to praise our enemy or the
people that we don’t like because of jealousy.
We cannot tolerate the fact that the enemy will be happy if we praise the
enemy. Our normal way of reaction is that we don’t want to praise the enemy
or the people that we don’t like because out of jealousy. We think that the
person will be happy. Earlier we have established that if we can really
praise the enemy without jealousy then we ourselves should be happy. But
now, we are the one who are stopping ourselves from being happy by not
praising the enemy.
Essentially you are stopping your own happiness on the account of the
reason that he will be happy if you praised him. Well, this is the thought.
 You stop your own happiness because you don’t want the other person to be
happy. If that is the case then it is the same as not paying your staffs
wages because when you pay your staffs wages, you will make your staffs
happy. Since paying your staffs would make them happy, so if you don’t want
to be happy then you stop paying your staffs. When you don’t pay your
staffs, you will be really unhappy because you will get a lot of problem in
this life. They will make a hell of problem for you. That is what you can
see in this life; the visible effect.
Because of depriving your staffs of salary, even in your future lives you
will not have possessions and so forth because not paying your staffs wages
is kind of stealing, isn’t it?
Next is it is appropriate to wish for others to be happy.

|(2) Thus, it is reasonable to wish for others to be     |
|happy                                                   |


Verse 6.79
When people describe my own good qualities
I want others to be happy too,
But when they describe the good qualities of others
I do not even wish them to be happy.
We will be elated and bliss-out if our enemies were to praise us. We do
feel happy, isn’t it? In fact we also want that to happen. But when we see
another person praising that enemy or another enemy, we don’t like it.
Literally, that is really a very mistaken way of looking at thing.
We feel happy when others praise us, including when our enemy praise us.
Just as we want that kind of praise as well, so it is entirely appropriate
to feel happy when others are praised, including our enemy because they
also want to be happy. They also experience happiness when they are
praised. They also want to be praised.
When our enemy or somebody we don’t like praises us, we feel good and
happy. We like it and we want it. Then we have to remember that experience.
Just as we want to be treated in such a way, so when others are praised,
including our enemies, then we should also wish them well.
Next is abandoning intolerance to achieving their happiness.

|2 Abandoning impatience with the accomplishment of our  |
|enemies’ pleasure                                       |


Verse 6.80
Having generated the mind of enlightenment
Through wishing all sentient beings to be happy,
Why do you become angry
If sentient beings find happiness themselves?
Most people here have taken the great empowerment as such the bodhisattva
vows and some even have  the tantric vows. Essentially when you take on
these vows, you are making a pledge to achieve the highest unsurpassed
state of full enlightenment in order to place all sentient beings in that
state as well. That was the pledge taken and that was the oath that most of
you have promised during the time of the initiation.
A lot and many of you and many people have taken on the bodhisattva and
tantric vows and, essentially, taking the oath to achieve omniscience in
order to accomplish the welfare of all sentient beings. Here in this
context we are talking primarily about the enemies, the people that we
don’t like, or those who we consider as our enemies.
Without you having to make any effort, and you didn’t have to do anything
but now the enemy is experiencing those kinds of happiness, getting more
powerful, becoming more well-known, and with more possession. All the good
things are happening to him without us having to do anything. So, he is
achieving what you have promised to. He is achieving the happiness without
you having to lift a finger. So the question then directed at you is “Why
should you be upset when that happen to your enemy?” So, that is the
question that you have to ask yourself.
Therefore, for a person who is seriously and sincerely working to actualize
the oath or the pledge to help all sentient beings would not get upset when
he/she see others achieving these various different kinds of happiness,
especially, if they achieve it on their own without he/she having to do
anything. So such people should not get upset at all.  In fact, actually
when he/she see that others are achieving the happiness on their own,
he/she should feel even happier.
Verse 6.80 is about abandoning this intolerance when we see the enemy gain
some kinds of happiness. So, verse 6.81 is giving up the intolerance with
regards to our enemies getting some material gain, some possession or
wealth. When we see that we shouldn’t be intolerance.

|3 Abandoning impatience with the accomplishment of material|
|gain                                                       |
|a” Reflecting on how it accomplishes one’s own desires     |
|b” Reflecting on how there is nothing to not want [in that]|

|a” Reflecting on how it accomplishes one’s own desires     |
|(1) It is reasonable for oneself to enjoy sentient beings’ |
|accomplishment of material gains                           |
|(2) Example                                                |
|(3) If one does not want that, bodhicitta will deteriorate |

|(1) It is reasonable for oneself to enjoy sentient beings’ |
|accomplishment of material gains                           |


Verse 6.81
If I wish for all sentient beings to become
Buddhas worshipped by the three worlds,
Then why am I tormented
Due to seeing them receiving just vile gain and honor?
Essentially, people who have taken the bodhisattva vows are the people who
are working to make every sentient being to become a Buddha that is
worshipped and honored by all kinds of praise and offerings in the three
realms.
That is what we are working for. If that is the case then why are we upset
when we see our enemies or the people that we don’t like getting some
praises, getting material gains, or receive some offerings? Why are we
upset? Why do we dislike that? Why are we jealous? In fact, it is
inappropriate to be jealous. Most of us are like that, isn’t it? When the
people whom we don’t like are happy, we don’t like it. When something good
happens to them, we don’t like it. When they are happy or when are getting
richer or they get something, we just don’t like it. A lot of time, it has
to do with jealousy. So, the teachings are asking us “What do you achieve
out of that? What purpose is there?”
Next is using an example to illustrate that.

|(2) Example                                                |


Verse 6.82
If relatives for whom you are caring
And to whom you practice giving
Are able to find their own livelihood,
Would you not be happy, rather than angry?
If we do not wish for our enemies to be happy or to receive material gain
and so forth, the bodhicitta that we have generated will decline.

|(3) If one does not want that, bodhicitta will deteriorate |


Verse 6.83
What [kind of person] wishes enlightenment for migrating beings
If he does not wish for them to have even this?
And where is there a mind of enlightenment
In him who becomes angry at the wealth of others?
How is it possible for someone to generate bodhicitta – the thought
thinking to achieve omniscience in order to accomplish the welfare of all
sentient beings - cannot even like others receiving some small little
profit or gain?
For someone who has that kind of jealousy and negative competitiveness and
at the same time very attached to money and possession and so forth, the
teachings are saying “How is it possible for such a person to develop
bodhicitta?” Even the person has to adopt bodhicitta,  it will degenerate,
isn’t it? Also such the person’s merit will also decline.
So far, this particular section is saying that there is no way to develop
bodhicitta if we cannot even wish for our enemies to have even some small
happiness. If we cannot even tolerate them having some small benefits or
profits then that is no way to develop bodhicitta. No way.
What is the essential point then? Don’t be upset with our enemies when they
are doing well, when they gain some respect or some material gains. The
essence is not to be upset. Don’t be jealous. We shouldn’t let our mind to
be disturbed. We cannot tolerate other people doing well especially the
enemies primarily because of jealousy. But why are we jealous in the first
place? Because we are attached, we ourselves want respect, we want material
gain and so forth. That is the condition. Therefore, when we see others
have it we just cannot accept it. When we see other people are respecting
our enemy, people are honoring the person, giving the person things, we
cannot take it. We cannot bear it. The mind is really disturbed from the
depth. That is what you call jealousy.  That is what jealousy is.
Essentially here, this section of the teaching is telling us don’t be
jealous.
[BP1 Part 2 L14] Question: When we are practising patience, are we advised
to abandon our jealousy as well as our anger?
Answer: The practice of patience deals with anger as well as jealousy,
because jealousy is a derivative of anger. Jealousy is defined in Asanga’s
‘Compendium of Knowledge’ : “Due to one’s strong attachment to material
gains and respect, one’s mind is disturbed and upset and unable to bear
others enjoying these things.” Since jealousy is the derivative of anger,
the antidote of patience acts against both jealousy and anger.

