Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Engaging in the Deeds of a Bodhisattva/lesson26.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:52:12.864797
================================================================================


We have been talking about protecting oneself from degeneration. There are:
(i) Protecting the training of the body from degeneration and
(ii) Protecting the training of the mind from degeneration.
We have finished with the protecting the training of the body from
degeneration.
Protecting the training of the mind from degeneration has three parts:
   1. Protecting with the individual antidotes
   2. The common antidotes
   3. The way of training and meditating on the antidotes

|B Guarding against deterioration in |
|the training of mind                |
|1 Guarding by means of the          |
|individual antidote                 |
|2 The common antidotes              |
|3 The way to apply oneself to       |
|cultivating the antidote            |

|1 Guarding by means of the          |
|individual antidote                 |


Verse 5.55
Being very resolute and faithful,
Steady, respectful, polite,
With a sense of shame, fear, and pacification,
I should strive to make others happy.
Verse 5.56
I should not be disheartened by the whims
Of the childish who are in discord with one another;
I should be merciful, thinking, “This mind of theirs
Is due to the generation of afflictions.”
Whatever kind of practice that one is going to undertake, there are things
that are to be done as:
- the preliminary,
- the actual practice and
- the conclusion of the practice.
With regards to these three - the beginning, the middle and the end - it is
said to be very important not to have any doubts about whatever practice
that one undertakes. One should have eliminated any doubts and any kind of
wrong concepts or wrong understanding of that practice that one is going to
undertake. If possible, at least one should have correct assuming
consciousness (or correct valid belief). On top of that, if one has a valid
cognition of that practice that one is going to undertakes, then that would
be wonderful. The point is that one has to be very resolute in one’s
practice, which means that in one’s practice, there must not be any doubt
or any wrong understanding of the practice that one is going to undertake.
The verse 5.55 starts with “being very resolute”, so that is what it means.
You must have strong ascertainment of the very topic or the very practice
that you are going to do. You should have eliminated doubts and wrong
understanding of it such that you have very strong ascertainment and have
the feeling; “It is as it is. It is like that.  Not something else”. Based
on that, you have the faith of conviction, which is indicated by the
remainder of the first line of the verse 5.55 “and faithful”. Based on
that, you have to engage in your practice with proper thought and proper
action. You must have a stable intention, stable thought and stable action
when carrying out the practice. Having a stable intention means being
resolute and determined in doing that practice. When carrying out the
practice, you should be resolute. You should be stable in that. You have
the determination to carry on with the practice and not be side-tracked by
unfavorable conditions such as when you get sick or you meet some problem
and that suddenly that becomes the reason for you to discontinue the
practice. That shouldn’t be the case. So it is very important that whatever
practice you are doing, you should do it from the bottom of your heart. You
must want to do it. You must want to do it from the bottom of your heart
and you do it with great enthusiasm.
Here it is also said that with respect to one’s conversation with others
such as with your teachers or those who are seniors in training, the
conversation should be carried out with respect, and the nature of the
conversation should be soft and gentle. Here the advice is saying what you
do with the teachers and those who are senior in training to you. As said
here, likewise, extend the manner i.e. the way of conducting a gentle
conversation with respect with everyone.
“With a sense of shame” means one should have a sense of shame, which is
restraining from negativities on account of oneself, and by remembering the
fruitional effects that one would have to experience in the future if one
were to engage in negativities. So through reflecting on the future
negative consequences, if one engages in negativities, then one has to
subdue one’s senses.
When we restrain the eye sense power and the ear sense power, we also have
to restrain the mind. We have to restrain our eye sense power in that we
have to be vigilant. Otherwise it is possible to generate all kinds of
negative thoughts and afflictions depending on what we see. It is same
thing with hearing. We hear all kind of stuffs.  Sometimes when we hear
certain things, those things may act as a condition for us to develop
afflictions.
Likewise, subduing or taming our mind. Through subduing our physical body
and mind, as it says here that the behavior of our body and mind should
strive to make others happy. Here we are talking about the training or
advice especially for bodhisattvas. They have to put on a very subdued
manner, and they strive to make others happy. One reason is that through
doing so, they stop others from creating negativities in relation to
themselves. Otherwise, others may create negativities in relation to the
bodhisattva. People who create negativities in relation to bodhisattva
accumulate very strong negativities. That is one reason that in order to
stop others from accumulating that kind of negativities.
Here it said that the bodhisattvas have to live harmony with others. But
nevertheless, things still do happen. When bodhisattvas relates to others,
there are others who may be upset with them and may cause problems. In
those cases, it is said that the bodhisattvas must not get disheartened.
When a bodhisattva in dealing with others, if due to any particular
sentient being who acts in a very negative way and gets upset with the
bodhisattva despite the bodhisattva showing love. If the bodhisattva gets
upset and disheartened, and because of that conditions there is a danger
that the bodhisattva may degenerate his/her own bodhicitta. As such the
bodhisattva has to be careful. As such a situation when the bodhisattva
faces a sentient being who is very upset or negative, the bodhisattvas have
to remind himself/herself that there is a wide variety of disposition and
inclinations among sentient beings and that this sentient being is acting
under the control of his/her own afflictions. As such that is a reason for
them to show even more love and affection towards that sentient being.
According to the Ornaments of the Mahayana Sutra:
  By thinking how they are without power due to their constant faults,
  possessing the mind, do not hold it against beings.
Aryadeva’s Four Hundred Verses says:
  Like the physician that does not gets disturb despite aggression (from
  the patient). The abled one seizes the afflictions. There is no person
  without afflictions.
This is an advice for the bodhisattvas not to get disheartened when they
meet with negative people or difficult people. They have to remind
themselves and to understand that all sentient beings are afflicted. They
are acting in such way due to their afflictions. As such, one should hold
them, to cherish them, to have more love and affection.

[BP1 L29] Shame is a virtuous mental factor. Shamelessness/non-shame is non-
virtue. Eg. if one were to engage in the negative action of killing or
stealing without feeling any shame at all, that action would become
heavier. When there is a sense of shame in one’s mind, that is actually
virtuous. Shame is in consideration for oneself when one personally feels,
“This is really bad. I should not do this.” If, before one is about to
engage in a negative action like killing or stealing and one suddenly
thinks, “This is not good because if I do this, it will harm others and
cause problems for them, ” that kind of thought is called embarrassment as
one is considering others and is referred to as apprehension in the verse.

|2 The common antidotes             |


Verse 5.57
Having control over that which is actually not misdeeds
In myself and other sentient beings,
I should always hold my mind
Like an emanation without an I.
Here it is saying that in whatever activity you are engaging in, whether is
for yourself such as engaging in virtue when you are eating or is for the
benefit of others such as teachings, you should do them without the thought
of being puffing up or thinking that you are doing something that is so
wonderful and important. You should do it without the feeling of self-
importance.
This is an advice that while at the time of engaging in the activity,
whether is for yourself or others, to do it without holding onto the ‘I’ or
the self by reflecting on how things are like illusion, or how things are
empty in nature.

[BP1 L29]Bodhisattvas, while working for the benefit of others, should
abandon the conception of “I” or “mine”. Bodhisattvas, when engaging in
actions to benefit themselves and others, should realize how things are
like illusions; how things are empty. With that understanding, they engage
in these actions without being conceited or proud. When the bodhisattva
engages in these actions without remembering that things are empty or like
illusions, this bodhisattva would have the conception of “I” or “mine”.
This bodhisattva would think, “I did this, I did that.” This conception of
“I” or grasping at “I” is non-virtue. When the bodhisattva understands how
things are empty or like illusions, then the bodhisattva will not generate
pride or be conceited about what has been achieved because there is no
conception of this “I”.

|3 The way to apply oneself to      |
|cultivating the antidote           |


Verse 5.58
By thinking again and again that
After a long time I have obtained the supreme leisures,
Thus I should hold my mind
As utterly unshakeable as Mount Meru.
This is something that you have to constantly remember - this human life of
freedoms and endowments which you now possess is obtained just about only
once and is a result of having worked very hard for very long time over
many lifetimes in the past. On the basis of having found this human life of
freedoms and endowments, it is said that you can achieve so many meaningful
objectives and goals on the basis of this rebirth. Yet it is something that
you will have to part with, and it is something that will end with only a
matter of time. So by reflecting on these various points, you should
persuade yourself to move your mind into practicing the Dharma. You must
protect your mind the wants to practice the Dharma and to engage in virtue
and to make sure that it is as stable as a mountain.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): Mind is stable as a mountain, not like a water
bubble.

|The way to train in the ethics of gathering    |
|virtuous dharmas                               |
|1 Abandoning attachment to the body: the cause |
|for not training in ethics                     |
|2 One should be knowledgeable about            |
|accomplishing virtue                           |


Of the three types of ethical discipline, we have finished with the first
ethical discipline of restraining from faults/misdeeds. Next is the way of
training in the ethical discipline of gathering virtuous dharma. One of the
reasons why we are unable to guard our ethical discipline and why we are
unable to engage in virtuous practices is due to the attachment to this
body. As a result, in the beginning we have to overcome and to abandon that
kind of attachment. We have to abandon the attachment to the body, and we
also have to be skillful when practicing virtue. In abandoning the
attachment to the body, an example is given to show why it is inappropriate
to be attached to the body.

|1 Abandoning attachment to the body: the cause for not training in ethics      |
|A An example of how it is unreasonable to be attached to the body              |
|B Cultivating a sense of the body’s lack of cleanliness                        |
|C Reflecting on how the body is without essence                                |
|D The reasons it is unreasonable to be attached to the body                    |
|E As it quickly perishes, it is reasonable to utilize it for virtue            |

|A An example of how it is unreasonable to be attached to the body              |


Verse 5.59
If, mind, you are not made unhappy
When this body is dragged here and there and
Taken away by vultures attached to flesh,
Then why do you advise so now?
Everyone is very concern about their body. We will do everything to take
care of our body. When we are hungry we look for food. When we are cold, we
put on additional layer of cloths. When something happens to the body, we
get very worried. We will do everything to take care of it. We do all these
because of the attachment to the body. When something happens to a specific
part of the body, we get very upset and worry. If somebody is to point out
a certain fault in our body such as physical shortcoming that we may have,
then we get upset. The reason is because we are attached to the body.
At the time of death, we leave our body behind. Whether the body is given
to the vultures, or it rot and eaten by maggots or it is burn by fire, and
we are not upset at that time, then why are we upset now when something
happens to the body.
It is inappropriate to conceive the body as mine and hold on to it so
strongly with the idea that the body belongs to me. For if we do so, then
all kinds of problems and unhappiness arises.
Verse 5.60 ab
Holding this body as “mine”,
Why, mind, do you guard it so?
If you counter that by saying “Of course I have to hold this body as mine
because I need it. It is a necessity”. Then the answer to that will be:
Verse 5.60 cd
Since you and it are separate,
What use can it be to you?
We and our bodies are not the same. They are different. They are separate.
No matter how we may think of our body as something that is absolutely
necessary, something that belongs to us, and at the time of death, we have
no choice but to discard it. There is nothing we can do to stop ourselves
from discarding this body. This is the same as the outline in the Lamrim on
the section of “Death and impermanence” where it says that at the time of
death, the body is of no use.
Next is meditating on how filthy the body is.

|B Cultivating a sense of the body’s |
|lack of cleanliness                 |


Verse 5.61
Why, confused mind,
Do you not hold onto a clean, wooden form?
Just what is the point of guarding
This rotting machine that is a collection of filth?
The verse is asking us why are we so hard up on this body. Why are we
holding on to this body since it is by nature filthy and dirty? It is just
a dirt and filth making machine.
This point is something that we have to think about over a period of time.
It may not be apparent if you look at it just superficially. Contemplating
on how this physical body is without any essence and without any meaning.
[BP1 L29]Verse 5.61 refers to the “confused mind.” There is this mind that
thinks, “It is OK to protect and take care of the body out of attachment
because this body is the base for the mind; ie this is where the mind
resides.” When people think in such a way, one can say to them, “Why don’t
you hold onto something which is cleaner like a piece of wood?”
What they are saying here is that the mind is dwelling on the body and the
body is the base. The question then is why does the mind not hold onto
something that is cleaner than these dirt-filled machines, our bodies. The
point here is to reflect on the nature of the body - its uncleanliness. It
is, by nature, unclean like a machine that produces filth.
We have nine orifices in our bodies. Whichever orifice we choose to look
at, whatever comes out of this orifice is only filth and dirt. Even when we
eat very pleasant, nice and clean food, what comes out of the body, at the
end of day, is not clean. His Holiness said that this body of ours is like
a toilet and is a machine that produces filth and dirt.
There are four close placements of mindfulness. (These are among the 37
aspects of the path to enlightenment): the close placement of mindfulness
of the body, the feelings, the mind and of phenomena. The close placement
of mindfulness of the body is the reflection of how our bodies are, by
nature, unclean. By doing so, one reduces attachment to them. One reflects
on how the body is by nature unclean, how our bodies are machines that
produce filth, and what is the point of then being attached to them. When
we understand that, we make a mental promise to stop attachment to our
bodies.

|C Reflecting on how the body is without essence                                |
|1 If one were to divide the body into parts and examine them, one would find   |
|nothing that is in the slightest a reliable essence                            |
|2 It is unreasonable to be attached to something that has no essence           |

|1 If one were to divide the body into parts and examine them, one would find   |
|nothing that is in the slightest a reliable essence                            |


Verse 5.62
First of all, mentally separate
The layers of skin,
And then with the scalpel of wisdom
Also separate the flesh from the skeletal frame.
Verse 5.63
And, having split open even the bones,
Look right down into the marrow.
While examining this ask yourself,
“Where is its essence?”
Earlier it was said that there is no purpose of holding onto this body and
being attached to it since it is filthy by nature. It is a filth producing
machine. Nevertheless, it is still possible to think “whatever it is, there
is still something to hold on to.” Here these two verses (5.62 and 5.63) is
telling us that there is nothing in the body as there is no essence and
there is no real meaning in it.
Here we have to use our wisdom to investigate whether in reality the body
has any essence and whether there is something that is really worthwhile
for us to hold on to. With the mind of wisdom, we first look beneath the
layer of skin, then we go down to the layer of the flesh, and then going
down to the bones, and then right into the bone marrow. So with the eye of
wisdom, we ask ourselves objectively: what exactly is the very thing or the
essence that we are holding on and are grasping at?  What we see the things
that make up the body and that is the very reality. But we don’t see the
reality and we don’t perceive the body in such a way precisely because we
don’t look at reality. We don’t think about it. If we think about it, it is
a fact what the body is. When we go beneath the skin, what we see is just
muscle, flesh, bone and blood and so forth. We would not find bones, flesh
and blood as being attractive. Therefore it is inappropriate to be attached
to something that has no essence.

|2 It is unreasonable to be attached to      |
|something that has no essence               |


Verse 5.64
If, even when searching with such effort
You see no essence,
Then why with so much attachment
Are you still guarding this body now?
All these are exercises that we have to do for ourselves. What exactly are
we so attached to? First, its nature is dirty, unclean and filthy, and
there is no essence in the body. If after seeing all these and yet we are
still grasping at the body and being so attached to it, then the question
we have to ask ourselves is “Exactly what on earth are we attached to?

|The reasons why it is unreasonable to be|
|attached to the body                    |


Verse 5.65
What use is this body to you
If its filth is unfit for you to eat,
If its blood is not fit to drink
And if its intestines are not fit to be sucked?
Verse 5.66 a,b
At second best it is only fit to be guarded
In order to feed the foxes and vultures.
Here it says “What use is this body to you?” Can we eat the flesh of
ourselves or are we going to drink our own blood? Can it sustain us? Are we
going to eat our intestines?” If that is not the case and we are not going
to do that, then what exactly are we so uptight about? What is it that we
are so hard up on? What is it that we are cherishing and holding on so
tightly to this body? Perhaps if we are taking care of our body because we
are going to feed the wild animals then maybe there is something to be said
about. But that is not the point. The point is it is kind of asking
ourselves what exactly is the reason.

|D As it quickly perishes, it is reasonable to utilise it for     |
|virtue                                                           |
|1 It is reasonable to utilise the perishable body for virtue as  |
|death will soon be upon us                                       |
|2 An example of how it is unreasonable to carry on with craving  |
|while not doing a single thing                                   |
|3 Causing one to accomplish one’s aims and desires by providing  |
|it one with incentives                                           |
|4 It is reasonable to accomplish the welfare of all sentient     |
|beings with that in the back of one’s mind                       |


Verse 5.66 c,d
This body of a human being
Should only be put to work.
There are many points being mentioned here, but these are just points for
us to deal with our attachment to our bodies. There is a need to deal with
out attachment to our bodies. There is a need to abandon that because
without abandoning our attachment to our body, it is very difficult to
guard our ethical discipline. It is very difficult to engage in virtue.
Also, due to our attachment for the body, people suffer so much. Because of
their attachment to their body, and the stronger the attachment, the more
worries they have. People suffer so much mentally and physically as well
such as having to work so hard to take care of this body. The level of
mental disturbance and physical discomfort that we experience in cherishing
and taking care of this body basically commensurate with the strength of
one’s attachment for the body.
Here we are talking about abandoning the attachment to the body for the
attachment to the body is one of the unfavorable conditions that stop and
prevents us from engaging in virtue.
We have to understand that these various points here are not telling us
that we should not take care of our body. That is not the point. All they
are saying is that if we take care of our body solely because of our
attachment to it then it is inappropriate. There are so many problems arise
from attachment. Because of attachment to the body, we cannot engage in
virtue or we cannot engage in a lot of virtue. If that is the case, how
should we use our body? What should we use our body for? We should use it
for virtue and to engage in virtue.

|1 It is reasonable to utilise the perishable body for virtue as  |
|death will soon be upon us                                       |


Verse 5.66 c,d
This body of a human being
Should only be put to work.
Verse 5.67
Even though you guard it thus,
Then what will you do
When it is stolen by the merciless Lord of Death
And given to the birds and dogs?
We critically examine the inside and the outside of the body, and by
nature, the body is just dirty and filthy.  We then look for its core
essence by trying to find out whether there is anything really meaningful
in it. We again look at the outside and the inside but there is nothing
there we can point to that is really meaningful. If the body is as such
without any meaning on the inside and outside and it is just dirty on the
inside and outside, then how can we extract any meaning from it?
How can we make use of this body to extract the essence of it? Our mind
must take full control of our body and speech, and through that then we
should employ our body and speech in virtue.
Of the six types of migratory beings in samsara, the human body is the best
basis for practicing and actualizing the Dharma. As such, having obtained
such an opportunity now then we should employ our body and speech as our
servant and use them to engage in virtue. The way to make use of our body
is employing it as the servant to engage in virtue. That is the only way of
how we should make use of the body. If we do it in the normal way by acting
out of attachment, we take care of our body by giving food and drink to it
and adorn it with all kinds of jewelry and make-up, still come a day when
we have to die. There is nothing we can do then. We still have to discard
this body.

|2 An example of how it is unreasonable to carry on with craving |
|while not doing a single thing                                  |


Verse 5.68
If servants are not given clothing and so forth
When they are unable to be put to work,
Then why do you nourish it in health
When, even though caring for the body, it goes elsewhere?
If you happen to have domestic helpers or have workers under you and if
they do not do their job, you are not going to pay them the salary, isn’t
this how the world works? You are not going to give them food,
accommodation and salary. In fact, you will punish them and subject them to
disciplinary actions. Likewise, if you feed this body, take care of it,
adorn it and do whatever to it out of attachment despite of not doing any
virtue, then at the time of death, the body will leave us. It would become
doing all that for nothing and you get nothing in return.

|3 Causing one to accomplish one’s aims and desires by providing |
|it one with incentives                                          |


Verse 5.69
Now having paid my body its wages,
I shall make it enact my welfare.
I shall not give it anything
If it is not beneficial.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): Don’t give anything.
We will feed our body, take care of it and pay wages to it. If it is able
to do something beneficial for us, then it is worth it. Otherwise, it is
not worth doing that. Now having paid our body its wages by giving it food,
sustaining it and so forth, we should employ it in virtue by learning,
reflecting and accumulating virtue.

|4 It is reasonable to accomplish the welfare of all sentient    |
|beings with that in the back of one’s mind                      |


Verse 5.70
I should conceive of my body as a boat,
A mere support for coming and going,
And in order to accomplish the welfare of sentient beings
Transform it into a wish-fulfilling body.
We should regard our body like a boat, on which we can cross the ocean of
samsara and reach the shores of liberation and omniscience. And thereby
achieving the exalted body of the Conqueror, which is like a wish-
fulfilling jewel. Any sentient being who comes into contact with this wish-
fulfilling jewel body of the Conqueror through hearing, seeing, thinking
and so forth, the wishes of many sentient beings are fulfilled.
So those are the verses that pertain to abandoning attachment to our
bodies. Next is the section on being skillful when accomplishing virtue.
This section talks about the importance of beautifying our normal daily
actions and behavior.

|The way to train in the ethics of gathering virtuous  |
|dharmas                                               |
|1 Abandoning attachment to the body: the cause for not|
|training in ethics                                    |
|2 One should be knowledgeable about accomplishing     |
|virtue                                                |

|2 One should be knowledgeable about accomplishing     |
|virtue                                                |
|A Performing ordinary activities beautifully          |
|B Being knowledgeable in the way of befriending others|
|without incurring misdeeds                            |
|C Being knowledgeable about performing actions of the |
|three doors                                           |

|A Performing ordinary activities beautifully          |
|1 How to act when encountering others                 |
|2 How to act with regards to discarding and adopting  |
|basic necessities                                     |
|3 Acting at all times with noble demeanour            |

|1 How to act when encountering others                 |


Verse 5.71
Now, while I have freedom,
I should always present a smiling face
And cease to frown and look black-faced;
I should be a friend of migrating beings and be straightforward.
First, our body and speech has to come under the control of our mind. Our
mind has to come under the control of the antidotes. On basis of that, in
contact with others, here it says “I should present a smiling face”, and
without putting on very unhappy facial expression.
With that then we should be a friend to the sentient beings. Here it says
to “be straightforward” in dealings with others. In conversation with
others, there shouldn’t be any kind of deceit or guile, putting up an act,
pretention and so forth but rather just to be straightforward and honest.
This is about how to act when meeting others.
In short, we should relate to others with a pleasant demeanor and when
talking to them, to be honest, truthful without any pretension, deceit or
guile.
Nest is how to handle one’s possessions

|2 How to act with regards to discarding and   |
|adopting basic necessities                    |


Verse 5.72  a,b
I should desist from inconsiderately and noisily
Moving chairs around and so forth,
[Ven Gyurme: It doesn’t matter whether it is translated as chairs or beds]
These are advices for the bodhisattvas. The point is that whatever the
bodhisattvas do, they do it without harming others or doing it without
causing any disturbance to others.
The point is that when moving chairs or beds or dragging things around, not
to do it with a lot of noise. When one is settling down on the seat or
cushion, one does not just throwing oneself onto the ground and making a
lot of noise but to do it gently. The point is not to cause disturbance to
others and also not to cause others to lose faith in you.
While these are advices for the bodhisattvas, they are also applicable to
us. These activities are how we can beautify our ordinary actions. We need
to make sure that the actions do not disturb or harm others. In that sense
it is relevance for us.

|3 Acting at all times with noble demeanour     |


Verse 5.72 c,d
As well as from violently opening doors;
I should always delight in humility.
Verse 5.73
The stork, the cat, and the thief,
By ambushing and moving silently,
Are able to accomplish what they desire to do;
I should always behave in this way.
Whether it is opening or closing the doors, if these are done in a very
violent way such as slamming the door on people and so forth, it does
disturb or displease or make people unhappy. With the recognition of our
own mistakes and our own faults, we should abide in humility. This is how
we should go about conducting ourselves and practicing the Dharma.
It is best to live a life of simplicity and contentment. Here it talks
about going into isolation where you don’t need to meet people. In that
kind of situation you are able to subdue your own mind and actually be able
to complete the practice. You need to go into isolation.
With conscientiousness, we have to go about in a pacified and subdued
manner. That is how we should go about also in our practice of the Dharma.
When predators hunt for their prey, they do it in a very subdued manner
with a lot of planning and patience. They will sneak up on their prey. They
will take their time and plan and then they attack. They are able to kill
their prey. They do it in a very non-exposed and very quiet way to get
their prey. Likewise, when we are engaging in our practice, we shouldn’t be
going around advertising “I did how many of this. I’m doing this and I did
that”.
Here the word “the abled ones” is not translated but rather, it is
translated as “are able.”  Actually it should be translated as “the abled
ones” to accomplishwhat they desire to do, and “the abled ones” always
behave in this way. “The abled ones” are referring to the bodhisattvas. At
all times when the bodhisattvas work for the benefit of sentient beings,
they do so in a peaceful and subdued manner and with conscientiousness.
Next is how to act in relation to well-meant advice.

|Being knowledgeable in the way of befriending others |
|without incurring misdeeds                           |
|1 How to speak beneficially                          |
|2 How to speak truthfully                            |
|3 How to act when you see someone doing virtue       |
|4 How to act when remarking on another’s qualities   |
|5 The benefits of acting in a way that others enjoy  |

|1 How to speak beneficially                          |


Verse 5.74
With respect I should gratefully accept
Unsought for words that are of benefit
And that wisely advise and admonish me.
At all times I should be the pupil of everyone.
When we receive advices including advices which we did not seek but
nevertheless advice that is useful and beneficial for us, we are advised to
listen.
Whatever advice we hear, if it is beneficial for us, here it says we
should, metaphorically speaking, place the advice on the crown of our
heads. That has to involve a lack of pride; basically to be able to listen
to beneficial advice without pride and to consider ourselves to be a
student of all. One should act without pride and to consider ourselves
students of all to those who can give good and beneficial advice.

|2 How to speak truthfully                            |


Verse 5.75 a,b
I should say, “Virtuously said,”
To all those who speak well,
In response to the beneficial advice that was well-spoken, we should say
“Well said. It is good”.

|3 How to act when you see someone doing virtue       |


Verse 5.75 c,d
And, if I see someone creating merit,
I should praise him and be well pleased.
If we see or hear of someone creating merit, we should rejoice. We should
feel happy and directly praise that person in order to increase his
enthusiasm.

|4 How to act when remarking on another’s qualities   |


Verse 5.76
I should discreetly talk about the good qualities
And repeat those recounted.
If my own good qualities are spoken about
I should just know and be aware that I have them.
If there is a possibility that the person that you wish to praise may
actually think that you are just flattering him/her, rather than praising
that person directly, you could do so indirectly such as saying it to
somebody else.
When somebody mentions about the good qualities of a third party to you,
you should respond and agree by saying “It is like that!”
Here it says that when our own qualities, or if somebody were to directly
mentions or praises us for having some qualities, without any conceit or
arrogance and pride, we should first check to see if we do actually possess
them or not. Even if we do actually possess them, without any pride, we
should just simply recognize that as a fact but without feeling arrogant.
I seem to remember that in one commentary it mentioned that if somebody
praises you and claims that you have certain qualities which you actually
don’t have or you know that you don’t have, perhaps you could reply by
saying “How wonderful that this person is saying this, for it shows that he
has a very pure mind”. You can think of the person who is praising you for
your non-existent qualities as special who shows something in that person.
If the person is praising someone for the qualities that do exist, that
praise is simply an acknowledgement of those qualities. It is just verbally
stating that this person has such and such qualities, and that’s it. It is
nothing beyond that.
When we see others accumulating merits such as making offerings to the
Three Jewels, here the text says that we should encourage them by praising
them to enhance their enthusiasm, and to make them feel good about what
they are doing.

DISCUSSION QUESTIONS FOR SUNDAY, 25TH MAY 2014

1.  What  is  the  difference  between  mindfulness  and  introspection  (or
vigilance)?

2. (a) What are the reasons for guarding the mind?
    (b) What are the benefits of guarding the mind?

3.  What are the faults and what problems will  there  be  when  we  do  not
protect the mind?

4.  It is said that when we do not possess  introspection,  our  ethics  (or
ethical discipline) will not be pure. Why is this so?

5.  How is introspection generated in dependence upon mindfulness?

6.  Explain the exceptions mentioned in Verse 5.42.
