Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Engaging in the Deeds of a Bodhisattva/lesson30.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:52:13.462436
================================================================================


Student 1: Follow on to lesson 27, I was asking about the single-pointed
faith to the guru at the time of death. You mentioned that it is a
condition rather than karma. Does this condition, the single pointed faith
to the guru at the time of death, can change an actualizing karma which
could be non-virtue to a virtuous one?
Khen Rinpoche: In general, the projecting karma for a good rebirth is
virtuous and the projecting karma for a rebirth in the lower realms is non-
virtuous. For the non-virtuous karma transforming into a virtuous karma, I
think probably that is not possible. You were saying that at the time of
death, if one dies with a virtuous state of mind, can that act as a
condition to change a non-virtuous karma into a virtuous one. I think
probably not.
As I said before, the very basis for a good rebirth has to be virtuous
projecting karma. In the first place that must be virtuous. At the time of
death, let’s say a virtuous frame of mind is manifested, and that nourishes
a virtuous karma that was already accumulated in the past. So that
nourishes that virtue and thereby leading to a good rebirth. You can’t have
a virtuous state of mind nourishing a non-virtue which will then lead you
to a good rebirth. I don’t think that is possible.
Khen Rinpoche (In English): Now question for you.
Question: At the time of death, let’s say a virtuous state of mind is
manifested, do you then freshly accumulate a virtuous projecting karma
which then transform into actualizing karma, and that very same karma sends
you off to a good rebirth? Is that possible?
Khen Rinpoche (In English): That is question for you. Is that possible? You
got the question? Yeah, the senior one.
You die with a virtuous state of mind. At the time of death, due to the
virtuous state of mind, you accumulate fresh virtuous projecting karma.
That very virtuous projecting karma becomes an actualizing karma which is
nourished, and then sends you off to a good rebirth, is that possible? You
must explain why.
First thing, at the time of death, is it possible to accumulate fresh
projecting karma?
Khen Rinpoche (In English): If you have the answer then gives me the
answer. If you don’t have then you think. If you say no, you must give
reason why.
Khen Rinpoche (In English): At the time of death, whether you create
projecting karma or not?
Student 2 responded (audio file from 11:22 min to 18:31)
Khen Rinpoche (In English): One thing what I’m telling other people must
listen. When you discuss, the point must go one to one. When somebody ask
question then you go like that then you are not getting your point and take
long time. This must learn. Sometimes somebody ask something but you are
talking something else. So what I’m doing here is like that. What I’m
asking you must answer that.
Student 3 responded (audio file from 19:46 min to 25.45)
Input from Khen Rinpoche (In English) along the way:
← Projecting karma cannot create at that time of death?
← It can be nourished by that virtuous karma?
← In order to nourish the karma, must it be very strong karma at that
 moment?
← So in order to nourish, the karma must be strong at the time of death.
 Are you saying that?
← In your logic, the karma which is created eons of years, that must be
 nourished, isn’t it? This life you create karma cannot nourish by the
 virtuous karma, are you saying that? Your logic is because it has to be
 already strong, so in order to nourish your karma it must accumulate eons
 of years, isn’t it?
 This life cannot nourish?
← Now you listen. According to your logic, due to short time the karma is
 not strong. Your logic is that. By your logic, so you are saying that
 earlier path when you are a child, you create virtuous karma that cannot
 be nourished at the time of the death. Not possible, isn’t it?
← Because not possible must be strong in the long time.
← So you compare karma you created this lifetime and karma created eons,
 it must nourish the karma you collected in eons. You cannot nourish the
 karma you collected this lifetime because too short compared to the eons.
 You have to think what you said.
← Does it make sense when you compare to eons and this life? Same thing
 isn’t it. Exactly the same. It is short compared to the time of the death
 and only part of your life, not so big difference compared to eons and
 your life. But something karma you created in this lifetime, at the time
 of the death, you can nourish that isn’t it?
Student 4: I think the answer lies around the 12 links.
Khen Rinpoche (In English): Create virtuous karma. That is projecting
karma.
Student 4: You need craving and grasping to actualize the projecting karma.
Because of that, what you create is not last moment. You need an
intervening moment before you die before you go to the next life. So the
action that you did produce the projecting karma wasn’t the last moment.
You need to create the craving and grasping. So that becomes your last
moment.
Khen Rinpoche (In English): I think something there. Good one, I’m not
sure. I am just thinking.

Student 4: It is the intervening moment before the projecting karma can be
actualized. You need craving and grasping in the next moment in mind.
Therefore, the last moment of virtuous thought actually is related to this
craving and grasping. So it cannot be that virtuous thought that produces
the projecting karma that can be actualized in the next life.
Khen Rinpoche (In English): I ask some similar question. The last moment of
the mind is craving and grasping or virtuous mind? After craving and
grasping then come the virtuous mind? Or virtuous mind come before that?
Student 4: Virtuous mind comes before craving and grasping.
Khen Rinpoche (In English): That is. I got you. Now you listen. Before
that, then why not now? What you said before is totally opposite what you
say now. You must listen to what you said and what I said. You must listen
actively your mind. Before what you said, now what I said. Now what you say
before is opposite.
Student 4: I don’t know, have to go back and think.
Khen Rinpoche (In English): Better go back. Sit down.
Khen Rinpoche (In English): Of course I don’t have my conclusion answer for
anyone, but just get some idea. What the person said, immediately you must
go direct what the person said. You are not fighting there but with the
logic of what you said.  Whatever the reason he said doesn’t makes sense
because too short time. But you don’t think, of course you ???  “Oh that is
true, too short time then no time to nourish”. Your mind doesn’t think
anything else. Kelvin said “Too short time.” Most of people will think “OK,
that is right”. You don’t really go deep down. Then Swee Kim said “Because
of craving, grasping, this and that.” People also think “That is also
right”. Then what Mui Cheng said also right. People don’t think much. Here
we are learning Buddhist philosophy you need to think why the person says
until you get like “Oh, this makes sense. This is the right thing.”
Whatever logic, it doesn’t contradict. Then you get some idea. So this is
to learn and think. Our mind needs to think more. Sometimes we debate,
sometimes just get upset. Our practice is not so correct also. You have to
be strong but cannot be upset. Now going into patience chapter, Patience
chapter is coming. I mentioned before, sometimes this happen in the
monastery. First is virtuous mind, after really argue “mine is right, yours
is wrong” then go to anger. So sometimes that happens. But I didn’t see.
Just anger arises but we don’t really hit or fighting likes that. Sometimes
anger arises. So shouldn’t be that way. When you debate sometimes you have
to be strong otherwise whatever the person says, you say “Okay lah.” It is
not really good debate. You say your view then you don’t think much. Then
what other person is sharing his view, you say “Okay lah! Whatever you
like.” Not really going deep down. We should go deeper to understand. Of
course if you go deeper, you must have some knowledge otherwise difficult.
About the 12 links, I thought everybody knows very well. This is the basic
of Buddhism and I thought everybody knows.

Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds

|3. Explaining the way to train in the remaining four perfections               |
|A. The way to train in patience                                                |
|B. The way to train in joyous effort                                           |
|C. The way to train in the absorptions included in the common and uncommon calm|
|abidings                                                                       |
|D. The way to train in wisdom - the nature of insight                          |

|A. The way to train in patience                                                |
|a. Explaining the chapter’s material                                           |
|1) Abandoning hindrances to the accomplishment of abiding by the antidote:     |
|devoting oneself to the cultivation of patience                                |
|a) The disadvantages of anger                                                  |
|i) The unseen disadvantages                                                    |
|1’ Anger destroys the roots of virtue                                          |
|2’ One should make effort in cultivating patience after having understood the  |
|faults and qualities of fury and patience                                      |
|ii) The visible disadvantages                                                  |
|iii) A presentation of the disadvantages in brief                              |
|b) Reflecting on the benefits of patience                                      |
|2) Engaging the mind in the methods for accomplishing patience                 |


Chapter Six Relying on Patience
Anger is a big obstacle to the generation of bodhicitta. So the discordant
class of bodhicitta is anger. Therefore, it is said that meditation on
patience is a very important antidote to anger.
Chapter 6 is an explanation of the faults of the hatred and anger, the
benefits of patience and the need to respect others. The chapter starts
with an explanation of the faults of anger.
The faults of anger consist of:
- those that are visible and
- those that are invisible
 As for the two, we first look at the invisible faults of anger.

|      i) The unseen disadvantages                                              |
|1’ Anger destroys the roots of virtue                                          |
|2’ One should make effort in cultivating patience after having understood the  |
|faults and qualities of fury and patience                                      |


As for the invisible faults of anger, the text talks about:
- how anger destroys the roots of virtue
- how one should strive to meditate on patience after understanding the
faults of anger and the benefits of patience.

|1’ Anger destroys the   |
|roots of virtue         |


Verse 6.1
Whatever wholesome deeds,
Such as generosity and making offerings to the sugatas,
Have been amassed over thousands of eons,
Will all be destroyed by anger.
“Whatever wholesome deeds such as generosity and making offerings to the
sugatas have been amassed over thousands of eons” - here the eon refers to
a great eon.
We are talking about a thousand great eons. As we have seen, one great eon
consists of 80 intermediate eons:
    • the eon of formation,
    • the eon of abiding,
    • the eon of disintegration/destruction
    • the eon of nothingness
Each great eon is made up of these 80 intermediate eons.
Here, the merit amassed over a thousand great eons that one has collected
through practices such as generosity, ethical discipline, meditating on
patience, and cultivating meditative stabilization.
Of the two collections, all these roots of virtues essentially come under
the collection of merit.
So the collection of merit amassed over a thousand eons is destroyed by
just one moment of anger directed at a bodhisattva.
Here is an indication of how powerful anger is a negativity in that just
one moment of strong anger that is directed at a bodhisattva destroys the
collection of merit amassed over a thousand great eons.
The destruction of merit accumulated over a thousand eons was taught by the
Buddha in the sutras but the context is referring to a non-bodhisattva who
gets angry at a bodhisattva.
Then the Play of the Manjushri Sutra says that the merit accumulated over a
hundred eons is destroyed by anger. This sutra is also cited by
Chandrakirti in his Supplement to the Middle Way. There seems to be a
difference, because the context is different.
The destruction of merit accumulated over a hundred eons is in the context
of a more powerful bodhisattva who gets angry at a lesser bodhisattva. So
if a higher bodhisattva or more powerful bodhisattva gets angry at a lesser
bodhisattva, then he/she destroys a collection of merit accumulated over a
hundred great eons.
Who is the higher bodhisattva and who is a lower bodhisattva? It is
relative. The Mahayana Path of Accumulation is broken into the small,
middling and great, and the Mahayana Path of Preparation is also divided
into four stages. Let’s say a bodhisattva who is on the Mahayana great Path
of Accumulation gets angry or upset with the bodhisattva on the Mahayana
middling Path of Accumulation then that bodhisattva on the Mahayana great
Path of Accumulation  would destroys the collection of merit accumulated
over a hundred great eons.
If a lesser bodhisattva gets angry at a higher bodhisattva, of course that
bodhisattva will also destroy his merits.
In the Condensed Sutra, it is mentioned that if a bodhisattva who has not
received prediction of his enlightenment is to get angry at the bodhisattva
who has already received prediction of his enlightenment, he will have to
start his path all over again.
I think a bodhisattva who has obtained prediction of his enlightenment is
at least a bodhisattva on the Mahayana Path of Preparation. In this case,
then if a bodhisattva on the Mahayana Path of Accumulation is to get angry
at the bodhisattva on the Mahayana Path of Preparation, then that
bodhisattva on the Path of Accumulation would have to start his path all
over again.
What is the meaning of having to train all over again?
An example is given in the teachings. Let’s say a bodhisattva on the
Mahayana Path of Accumulation is to attain the Mahayana Path of Preparation
within one eon. But before he achieves the Mahayana Path of Preparation,
and for whatever reason he gets angry at a bodhisattva on the Path of
Preparation, and because of his anger his achievement on the Path of
Preparation is delayed by one eon. In that sense, it is like he has to
start again.
Khen Rinpoche (In English): So that means actually one eon, and because of
anger become two eons.
I think that’s the meaning of “to train all over again” or to start again.
The teachings also mentioned that if a non-bodhisattva, who gets angry at a
non-bodhisattva, so we are talking about ordinary beings, he/she destroys
the merit.
In another text, it gives the example of the merit one accumulates from
making one full-length prostration to a holy object such as a stupa
containing the actual relics of the Buddha. The merit that one accumulates
will enable one to take rebirth as a wheel universal monarch, and the
number of times is equal to the number of atoms being covered when the body
prostrate on the floor. So one accumulates a lot of merit, but that is all
destroyed when one gets angry at a fellow practitioner, somebody who is
likewise engaging in virtue like yourself.

|A non-bodhisattva gets angry at a   |destruction of merit accumulated over a  |
|bodhisattva                         |thousand great eons                      |
|A higher level bodhisattva gets     |destruction of merit accumulated over a  |
|angry at a lower bodhisattva        |hundred great eons                       |
|A lower level bodhisattva who gets  |his achievement of the next path is      |
|angry at a higher bodhisattva       |delayed e.g. A bodhisattva on the great  |
|(A bodhisattva who has not received |Mahayana Path of Accumulation is due to  |
|prediction of his enlightenment were|enter the Mahayana Path of Preparation   |
|to get angry at a bodhisattva who   |gets angry at another bodhisattva who is |
|has received prediction of his      |already at the Path of Preparation,      |
|enlightenment)                      |instead of entering the Path of          |
|                                    |Preparation, his realization is delayed  |
|                                    |for an great eon and he has to retrain   |
|                                    |for this path all over again             |
|A non-bodhisattva gets angry at a   |destruction of merit that comes from     |
|non-bodhisattva                     |making a full prostration to a stupa (The|
|                                    |sutras say that however many atoms are   |
|                                    |covered by the body during such a        |
|                                    |prostration is equal to the number of    |
|                                    |times to be reborn as a Wheel Turning    |
|                                    |King).                                   |


The roots of virtue that are subject to destruction when one gets angry are
the roots of virtue that are included in the collection of merit. The roots
of virtue that are included in the collection of wisdom are not destroyed
by anger.
The destruction of the roots of virtue should not be taken literally to
mean that the roots of virtue themselves are destroyed. Rather, the
destruction of the roots of virtue means that the capacity of a particular
root of virtue to produce a fruitional effect is hindered or eliminated.
That is the meaning of the destruction of the roots of virtue.
In Chandrakirti’s Supplement to the Middle Way, the hindering of the roots
of virtue’s capacity to produce forth a fruitional effect is discussed in
terms of the word “extinguishment”. There can be a great extinguishment,
middling extinguishment or small extinguishment.
Examples of small extinguishment: If a particular root of virtue is not
destroyed by anger, it would have produced a great fruitional effect or it
would have enabled one to experience that positive fruitional effect for a
very long time. But because of anger, one still experience the positive
fruitional effect but the result is smaller or one can only enjoy it for a
shorter period of time. This is the examples of small extinguishment.
A great extinguishment refers to the situation whereby you almost don’t
experience anything positive from the roots of virtue. It is like you are
almost not going to get anything positive out of the root of virtue because
its capacity to produce any positive fruitional effect has been eliminated.
When that happens, that is what you call a great extinguishment.
Chandrakirti’s tells you what a small extinguishment is, he also tells you
what a big extinguishment is. Then he says based on that you figure out
what is the medium extinguishment.
Essentially the destruction of the roots of virtue is referring to the
elimination or the hindering of the capacity of the roots of virtue to
produce a positive fruitional effect. The destruction of roots of virtue
could either mean that the roots of virtue will not produce any positive
fruitional effect or it would only produce something very small. So the
destruction of roots of virtue does not mean that the seed of the virtue is
destroyed. The seed is not destroyed, but rather the capacity of the seed
to produce a fruitional effect is either hindered or incapacitated.
In the teachings on Mind Training (lojong), the teachings advised us to
look upon everybody as a virtuous friend, as a guru. Also, it says to
meditate on the kindness of all. If we get angry at someone, or if the
person is a Buddha in reality, of course it goes without saying that one
destroys so much merit. Even if the person is a bodhisattva, so much merit
is destroyed. Even if the person is not a bodhisattva, just an ordinary
being, one also destroys a lot of merit. Hence, there are these advices to
regard everyone as our virtuous friend or our guru.
We see such proclamations by the Buddha on the invisible effects of anger.
We find it difficult to believe. It is quite inconceivable, isn’t it? How
it is that one moment of anger can destroy the roots of virtue accumulated
over a thousand great eons?  Remember some time back we have this
discussion as to how long one great eon actually is. We are talking about
hundreds of billions of years. Here we are talking about merit that is
accumulated over a thousand great eons that can be destroyed by just one
moment of anger. So it is quite difficult for us to believe, isn’t it? It
can’t fit our mind. But here the proclamation was made by the Buddha who at
all times correctly sees every single phenomena including those extremely
hidden phenomena as it is. Also if we think about it, if we apply a little
bit of reasoning, you can see some truth in it.
How I think about this is basically like this: it does not exactly proving
that anger can destroy roots of virtue accumulated over such a long period
of time, but anyway this is what I think.
Relationships that have been built over a long period of time of over 30 or
40 years, whether it is a relationship between loved ones or close friends,
can actually be destroyed by just a couple of spoken harsh words. So a
couple of harsh words spoken just once can actually have the effect of
destroying relationships built over 30 or 40 years. If we compared time to
time, one moment of harsh speech versus destroying relationships built over
30 or 40 years.
We all know that our non-virtuous actions, whether it is anger or harsh
speech, are very strong. Our virtue is very weak, and it takes us so much
effort even to be able to do some small virtues. Non-virtue is so powerful.
A brief moment of non-virtue can have very bad consequences.
Anyway, these are the invisible faults of anger. The reason why it is
called invisible is because there is no way for us to directly perceive it.
We can only rely on the Buddha’s speech.
Next is one should strive to meditate on patience after understanding the
faults of anger and the benefits of patience.

|2’ One should make effort in cultivating patience after understanding the      |
|faults and qualities of fury and patience                                      |


Verse 6.2
There is no negativity like hatred,
And no fortitude like patience.
Thus I should cultivate patience
Persistently through various ways.
As we have seen anger is one of the greatest hindrances to producing the
paths within our minds, and one of the greatest hindrances to developing
the experiences and realizations of the path. Also, anger is so powerful in
destroying virtue accumulated over such long periods of time. Therefore,
here it says “there is no negativity like hatred”.
There isn’t any antidote to anger that comes as close as patience. There is
nothing that comes close to patience in acting as the antidote to anger.
Since there is no negativity that comes close to hatred and there is no
fortitude that comes close to patience, therefore Shantideva says “We
should earnestly and persistently cultivate patience through various
ways/avenues that will be described soon”.
Next is a discussion on the visible faults of anger and how anger takes
away the opportunity for physical and mental wellbeing and how anger turns
away friends and so forth.

|ii) The visible disadvantages                 |
|1’ Anger eliminates the opportunity for       |
|physical and mental pleasure                  |
|2’ [Anger] causes us to destroy dear          |
|friendships and so forth                      |

|1’ Anger eliminates the opportunity for       |
|physical and mental pleasure                  |


Verse 6.3
My mind will not experience peace
If it holds painful thoughts of hatred.
I shall find no joy or happiness;
Unable to sleep, I shall feel unsettled.
It doesn’t matter who we get upset with. Once we are upset or angry and if
we keep that anger in our mind, then we will not experience any peace. This
is plainly obvious to all of us.
When there is anger in the heart, there is no peace inside the heart and we
feel very unsettled.
When we are unhappy inside, we will not be able to fall asleep easily or we
may not sleep at all, and thus affecting our physical wellbeing and our
health. Basically an unhappy mind acts as a condition for physical
discomfort and affects our health. This is also very obvious.
When there is anger the mind is disturbed and you will not feel settled.
The mind cannot be at ease. These are visible faults because all of us can
see it, all of us know it, all of us are aware of it, and all of us
experience it. That is why it is visible.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): That’s why Buddha is visible. Visible?

|2’ [Anger] causes us to destroy dear          |
|friendships and so forth                      |


Verse 6.4
A master who has hatred
Is in danger of being killed
Even by those who for their wealth and honor
Depend upon his kindness.
Verse 6.5  a,b
By it, friends and relatives are disheartened;
Though drawn by his generosity they will not rely upon him;
Even you extend good treatment in terms of giving material comfort to the
people around you, your followers, your servants, your staff or your
workers, whatever the context, but if you are bad tempered and get angry
with them, they forget all of that. They forget all those positive
treatments in terms of being showered with material gifts but instead they
get upset, and sometimes they retaliate. They may even harm their boss,
their master and sometimes even kill them.
These things happen primarily because of anger. Under the influence of
anger, people usually engage in harsh speech and also the physical demeanor
will look unpleasant. Through this, one’s friends and relatives will get
disheartened and they may also leave you.
Even if you try to bring people into your fold or under your influence by
showering upon them with all kinds of material goods and gifts without any
sense of loss from one’s own side, i.e. you give generously without any
hesitation, but if you are the angry kind of person with short tempered and
with no patience, then no matter how much you can give materially, these
people will never submit hundred percent to you. There will be mental
distance between them and you. They will still need to rely on you, they
will still do things for you, but they will not do it happily from the
heart.
Next is the summary of the faults of anger.

|    iii) A presentation of the    |
|disadvantages in brief            |


Verse 6.5 c,d
In brief there is nobody
Who dwells comfortably with anger.
Verse 6.6  a,b
The enemy, anger,
Creates sufferings such as those.
In short, there will not be any person who can say that “I’m happy” while
there is anger burning in the heart. No way because anger has all these
faults. Therefore the text is telling us that we should strive in
abandoning anger.
As I have mentioned earlier, anger destroys the roots of virtue that one
has accumulated in the past and prevents one from experiencing those
positive fruitional effects and happiness that otherwise one would have
experienced. Not only that, anger causes one to create negative karma which
will then throw one into the lower realms such as the hells. In short,
anger causes one problems in this life and will cause sufferings and
problems in one’s future lives. Therefore it says “the enemy, anger,
creates sufferings such as those”.
In short, the enemy – anger – is the full-fledged cause of all the problems
of this life and the future lives.
Next is  the benefits of patience

|b) Reflecting on the benefits of  |
|patience                          |


Verse 6.6 c,d
But whoever assiduously overcomes it*
Creates happiness in this and other lives.
*“it” refers to anger
On the other hand, if someone was to subdue his own mind, control his own
anger and able to destroy his own anger, then he will not experience all
those problems of anger as mentioned earlier. Instead that person will have
happiness in this life and also have great happiness in all the future
lives.
Destroying anger is the cause for achieving happiness in this life and all
the future lives. Therefore, the text is saying that we should strive to
abandon anger and to cultivate patience.  The text is also saying that if
one meditates on patience, there are only benefits i.e. only happiness and
no problems. It will not bring about any problems. It will only bring about
benefits in this life and in all the future lives.
Gyaltsab Je in his commentary mentioned that meditating on patience is the
cause of happiness. It brings only happiness. Therefore, one should strive
in cultivating it.  But if one gets angry, one experiences only problems.
There is no benefit whatsoever but only problems. Through meditating on the
faults and the disadvantages of anger that was explained earlier, then one
can strive in cultivating its antidote – patience.
Next is bringing to mind the methods for cultivating patience of which
there are two points:
   1. Eliminating the cause for anger
   2. Meditating on the benefits of patience.
In the eliminating the cause of anger, there is:
  - the explanation of the entity of the nature of the cause of anger
  including the shortcomings and the advice to strive in the methods to
  oppose anger
  - the actual method for opposing anger and then striving to abandon anger
  after having analyzed the cause of  anger in detail.

|2) Engaging the mind in the methods for accomplishing patience|
|a) Arresting the causes of anger                              |
|b) The benefits of cultivating patience                       |

|a) Arresting the causes of anger                              |
|i) The nature of the cause along with its disadvantages       |
|ii) Instructions on making effort in the methods for          |
|overcoming anger                                              |
|iii) The actual method for overcoming that                    |
|1’ It is unreasonable to nurture displeasure                  |
|2’ The reasons for that                                       |
|iv) Having examined in detail the causes that give rise to    |
|anger, making effort to abandon them                          |


First, we look at the nature of the cause of anger: what is the nature of
the very cause of anger including its shortcomings.

|i) The nature of the cause along with its disadvantages       |


Verse 6.7
Having found its fuel of mental unhappiness
In the doing of what I do not wish for
And in the hindering of what I wish for,
Hatred develops and then destroys me.
What is the cause of anger? What is it that makes somebody upset? We get
upset and become unhappy if somebody prevents us or our loved ones from
achieving what we want or if somebody causes problems to us or our loved
ones, we become unhappy. This unhappiness builds up, and it become stronger
and stronger, and eventually leading us to become angry.
The mental unhappiness is like the food that is eaten by a physically weak
person in order to regain his strength. A weak person needs to take
nutritious food to builds up his strength overtime, and regain his strength
to the point that he can actually overcome or defeat his enemy.
Mental unhappiness is like the food for anger. When mental unhappiness
builds up, it gives strength to the anger. Then overtime, the anger becomes
powerful. When it arises, the anger actually destroys our roots of virtue
in the way that we have seen earlier.
Here the text is saying that when we notice that we are really upset, we
should arrest it there and then. We should prevent this mental unhappiness
from continuing because if we let it continue, then it would manifest in a
form of very strong anger or hatred which will then destroy our roots of
virtue.
Mental unhappiness is the condition for the arising of anger. If we do not
stop mental unhappiness and let it grow, it will lead to the arising of
very strong hatred. When strong hatred or anger develops, it will destroy
us as it says “Hatred develops and then destroys me”. “Destroying me” means
destroying our happiness, the happiness of this life and it will also
destroy the happiness of our future lives.



