Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Engaging in the Deeds of a Bodhisattva/lesson15.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:52:21.880788
================================================================================


Student:  Referring to the Verse 3.26
   Now my life is fruitful
   I have attained a good human existence,
   Today I have been born in the Buddha lineage.
   I have become a child of the Buddha.
Since the entrance to the Mahayana has been established to be the
uncontrived bodhicitta/generation of mind of enlightenment in meditative
equipoise, it seems like the generation of bodhicitta through a ritual is
contrived bodhicitta, how would a person who generated contrived bodhicitta
be called a bodhisattva?
In this case, how a person who has not entered the Mahayana path is called
a bodhisattva?
Is there a difference between the term Buddha lineage and Mahayana lineage?

Answer: One is only the child of the Buddha when one generates bodhicitta.
So prior to generating bodhicitta, one is not a child of the Buddha.
Therefore prior to generating bodhicitta, one is not called a child of the
Buddha.
When great compassion arises in the mind, then the Mahayana lineage is
awaken, but that is not called the Buddha lineage.
Student: Is a person called a bodhisattva only upon entering the Mahayana
path? Or can he be called a bodhisattva before entering the Mahayana path?
For Mahayana path of accumulation, is the entrance the generation of
uncontrived bodhicitta?
Answer: Yes.
Student: At this stage of generating bodhicitta through a ritual, is it
still contrived bodhicitta?
Answer: The discussion in the text is in the context of someone who
develops the actual bodhicitta, the uncontrived bodhicitta.
Student: Does he generate uncontrived bodhicitta upon taking this ritual or
during calm abiding? Because I understand that uncontrived bodhicitta is
generated in meditative equipoise of calm abiding.
Answer: One needs to have developed calm abiding prior to actualizing
uncontrived bodhicitta. That discussion is not about actualizing bodhicitta
within meditative equipoise.
Khen Rinpoche (In English): You understand?  If you don’t understand,
listen again.
It is said that one needs to have calm abiding in order to actualize
bodhicitta. But there isn’t necessarily a pervasion that bodhicitta is
developed within calm abiding. That is a separate discussion.
The discussion in this chapter is adopting bodhicitta through a ritual. So
one generates the aspirational bodhicitta that comes with the commitment,
and then one takes on the bodhisattva vows. It is within that context one
generates bodhicitta. Whether the bodhicitta is developed within calm
abiding or not this can be an object of discussion for this is not stated.
What is stated in the teachings is that in order to actualize bodhicitta,
one must have calm abiding.
The discussion in chapter 3 is about adopting bodhicitta through a ritual
and on the basis of that one develops the actual bodhicitta, the
uncontrived bodhicitta.

|The potential [power] to dispel the            |
|obscurations - the causes [of suffering]       |
|1 Dispelling afflictive obscurations           |
|2 Dispelling the obscurations to knowledge     |


The text says that bodhicitta eliminates the afflictive obscurations and
knowledge obscurations.
In the previous lesson, we saw:
- how the bodhisattvas show the path of liberation to those persons of
medium capacity in order for them to achieve liberation from the cyclic
existence.
- how the bodhisattvas show the persons of small capacity the methods that
will enable them to achieve higher status - good rebirth as a human or
celestial being.
The final motive, the ultimate goal of the bodhisattva, is to lead all
these beings to the state of full enlightenment.
In order to place the sentient beings in the state of full enlightenment,
bodhisattvas have to help the sentient beings to overcome the manifest
afflictions and through that enable the sentient beings to develop
bodhicitta.

|1 Dispelling afflictive   |
|obscurations              |


Verse 3.31c,d
It is the dawning moon of the mind
That dispels the torment of afflictions of migrating beings.
This shows bodhicitta eliminates the afflictive obscurations.
The teachings liken bodhicitta to the cool moon light that can dispel the
discomfort of heat. That bodhicitta can help to protect or eliminate the
heat of the afflictions.
In this context here, the bodhicitta has the power to eliminate those
manifest afflictions such as miserliness, bad ethics, anger, attachment and
so forth. If one has bodhicitta, then these manifest afflictions (or coarse
afflictions) such as miserliness, bad ethics, anger, attachment, jealousy,
pride can be eliminated.
So this is the meaning of the last two lines of verse 3.31.

It is also said that bodhicitta can eliminate the knowledge obscurations.

[BP1 L18] According to the highest tenet system, the Prasangika-Madhyamika
school, the hearers and solitary realisers can achieve liberation through
the wisdom that realises selflessness. Although the hearer arhats and
solitary realiser pratyekabuddhas are able to achieve liberation, they are
not able to eliminate the imprints of their negative emotions. Although
they have abandoned their negative emotions from the root, they have not
abandoned the root itself. Why? This is because they do not have the
support of the vast accumulation of merit that comes from bodhicitta.
We have to be able to explain how bodhicitta can eliminate the obstructions
to omniscience. We have to say that obstructions to omniscience are removed
by the wisdom that realises selflessness that is conjoined with the vast
accumulation of merit that comes from bodhicitta. We have to explain it in
this way. The obstructions to omniscience are not abandoned on the first
seven bodhisattva grounds. Once the bodhisattvas have achieved the 8th
ground, the bodhisattvas have abandoned all the afflictions or negative
afflictions from the root. The process of abandoning the obstructions to
omniscience starts from the 8th ground. On the 8th, 9th and 10th grounds,
they require the accumulation of vast amounts of merit in order to help
them to abandon completely the obstructions to omniscience.
Whether one is able to remove the obstructions to omniscience depends on
whether one has bodhicitta or not. The bodhisattvas only start to abandon
the obstructions to omniscience from the 8th ground onwards but they have
already abandoned the afflictions. They have abandoned their afflictions
through the wisdom that realises emptiness. The hearer and solitary
realiser also have the wisdom that realises emptiness. When they achieve
liberation, they will have abandoned their afflictions from the root. But
why is it that they cannot abandon the imprints of these afflictions, which
the bodhisattva is able to do? This boils down to having bodhicitta.
Bodhicitta is likened to the great sun. In the root text, “the great sun
removes the misty ignorance.”

|2 Dispelling the obscurations to    |
|knowledge                           |


Verse 3.32 a,b
It is the great sun that annihilates
The cataracts of ignorance of migrating beings.
This is showing that bodhicitta can eliminate the knowledge obscurations.
That which interferes or hinders the achievement of omniscience is called
the knowledge obscurations. As you know, the various Buddhist philosophical
systems or the tenets posit knowledge obscurations differently.

In short, bodhicitta is said to be able to eliminate the knowledge
obscurations.
Bodhicitta can destroy the knowledge obscurations just like how the sun can
eliminate the darkness of the three billion folds world systems.

As you know, the very thing that destroys knowledge obscurations is only
the wisdom of realizing selflessness. What gives this wisdom of realizing
selflessness the power to eradicate the knowledge obscurations? It is
bodhicitta. Without bodhicitta, this wisdom of realizing selflessness does
not have the power to eliminate the knowledge obscurations. So when this
wisdom of realizing selflessness is conjoined with bodhicitta it can
eliminate the knowledge obscurations.

|The potential [power]to accomplish  |
|all benefit and bliss               |
|1 Accomplishing all benefit         |
|2 Accomplishing all bliss           |

|1 Accomplishing all benefit         |


Verse 3.32 c, d
It is the quintessential butter
From the churning of the milk of the holy Dharma.
The Buddha gave numerous teachings and there was the three turning of the
wheel of dharmas. Many teachings were given, but if one were to ask: “What
is the very heart or the essence of all those teachings?” It is the
ultimate good heart, bodhicitta.
It is commonly said that the Buddha gave 84,000 teachings. The very essence
or the heart of those teachings is bodhicitta; just as butter is the very
essence of milk. If you churn milk, what you get at the end is the essence
of the milk; which is butter.
Therefore the ultimate purpose of hearing, reflecting and practicing the
teachings is to develop the good heart and to be able to generate
bodhicitta.
The whole point of listening, hearing, studying and reflecting on so many
Buddha’s teachings is to develop the good heart and to actualize
bodhicitta. The teachings tell us that once bodhicitta is developed, this
bodhicitta will enable us to actualize or achieve all the benefits.
Bodhicitta can bring about the achievement of all happiness.

|2 Accomplishing all bliss           |


Verse 3.33
For all those guests who are migrating beings journeying on the path of
cyclic existence
Who wish to utilize the resources of happiness,
This will place the great travelers of sentient beings
In supreme happiness and satisfy them.
“The great travelers” are the limitless sentient beings - the six types of
sentient beings.
“The path of cyclic existence” is basically the entire samsara starting
from the lowest of Avici hell up to the Peak of Cyclic Existence.
Bodhicitta is that which enable these various sentient beings to partake of
all the enjoyments. So the bodhisattvas abide in the cyclic existence to
work for sentient beings.
A great traveler or frequent traveler is someone who doesn’t stay in one
place for long but travel very frequently i.e. moving from one place to
another. So the six types of sentient beings in samsara are like that; they
don’t abide in one state of existence but are constantly moving from one to
another in samsara.
Khen Rinpoche (In English): Like when you go to hotel, those who comes the
most then the owner would consider as their big guest because they come
again and again and give them business. They give money so they are called
“my big guest or my big customer or something likes that” because they come
again and again. So similar here.

[BP1 L18] In the text it says, “For all those guests travelling on the path
of samsara”. The guests here refer to us, sentient beings in samsara. Why
is the word “guests” used here? It describes the condition that we are in,
always hurrying from one place to the next, without an end in sight as to
the number of places that one has to go to. Despite having gone to many
places, we have never arrived anywhere. We are constantly on the move in
the sense that we are constantly changing.
We are always moving towards death in each and every single moment. We
think that we will be staying for a while in this life but the fact is
that, in each and every single moment, we are moving closer and closer to
death. When we reach death, we do not stop there. We have to take another
rebirth again. When we die, we immediately have to go on to another
rebirth. The number of rebirths we have taken is limitless. That is the
meaning of “guests.”
Bodhicitta can actualize all the wishes and all the benefit of these
sentient beings. These couple of verses is related to rejoicing in oneself.
The last verse, verse 3.34, is inducing others to rejoice.

|Causing others to develop joy       |


Verse 3.34
Today in the presence of all the Protectors
I invite the migrating beings to be guests
In happiness until they attain the state of Sugata.
May gods, anti-gods, and so forth be joyful.
The “I” that is mentioned here refers to the person who has developed
bodhicitta and who has adopted bodhicitta through this ritual. So this
person, the “I”, is inviting all sentient beings to be his/her guest.
In what manner does one invites all sentient beings to be one’s guests?
Here in the presence of all the buddhas and bodhisattvas and with them as
the witness, one undertakes the pledging to work for their benefit. This is
what one has done during the ritual.
When one adopts the bodhicitta with the buddhas and bodhisattvas as the
witness, one is inviting all sentient beings to be one’s guests in that one
makes the pledge to work for their benefit, and to accomplish all their
temporal and ultimate goals. As such one has done such a thing, then may
all the gods and demigods and so forth rejoice in this.
One is inducing or asking the gods and the demigods to be joyful; which
means to rejoice in what one has done.  Of course when they rejoice, they
accumulate merit. It is said that these gods and demigods will protect one
when one is doing one’s practice.
So we have completed the third chapter of the text [Thoroughly embracing
bodhicitta]

The Fourth Chapter: Teaching Conscientiousness

|The way to train in the conduct once one has     |
|developed the two bodhicittas                    |
|A Embracing bodhicitta [Chapters 2 and 3]        |
|B The way to train in the conduct of the         |
|perfections [Chapters 4 to 10]                   |

|The way to train in the conduct of the perfections                             |
|1 The way to cultivate conscientiousness: The branch that prevents the         |
|deterioration of bodhicitta and [its associated] conduct                       |
|2 The way to train in ethics: A specific explanation given with regards to     |
|mindfulness and alertness- the methods for purely guarding all virtuous dharmas|
|[Chapter 5]                                                                    |
|3 Explaining the way to train in the remaining four perfections [Chapter 6 to  |
|9]                                                                             |
|4 Explaining, by way of the branch of dedication, the way to train in giving   |
|away body, material wealth, and the roots of virtue for the welfare of others  |
|[Chapter 10]                                                                   |


If we go by the outline of the commentary by Gyaltsab Je, the outline says:

The way of training in the perfections:
1. The way in meditating on conscientiousness; which ensures that the
bodhicitta together with the practices does not degenerate
2. The way of practicing ethical discipline: Explaining vigilance and
mindfulness separately which is the method for protecting all the virtuous
dharma.
3. Explaining in the way of training in the remaining four perfections.
4. Explaining, by way of the limb of dedication, the way of practicing
generosity and offering one’s body, possessions and roots of virtues to
others.

|The way to cultivate conscientiousness: The branch that prevents the           |
|deterioration of bodhicitta and [its associated] conduct                       |
|A Explaining the chapter’s material                                            |
|B The chapter’s name                                                           |

|Explaining the chapter’s material         |
|1 A brief presentation of the way to      |
|cultivate conscientiousness               |
|2 An extensive explanation                |
|3 Synopsis                                |


The main point of chapters four and five is practicing conscientiousness
and vigilance. Earlier, one has adopted bodhicitta through ritual and in
particular, one has taken the bodhisattva vow. When one takes the
bodhisattva vow, there are many precepts and trainings to guard. One has to
guard one’s training without transgressing them. In order to be able to do
that, one needs conscientiousness and vigilance. Hence we have chapter
fours and five.
So after adopting bodhicitta through the ritual, it is important:
- to not let the bodhicitta that has been developed to degenerate
- to not transgress the trainings of the bodhisattva vow.
For that reason, therefore one needs to apply conscientiousness.

|1 A brief presentation of the way to      |
|cultivate conscientiousness               |


Verse 4.1
Having firmly upheld the mind of enlightenment in this way,
A Victors’ Child should always make effort
To not transgress the trainings
Without ever wavering.
Earlier one has generated bodhicitta. In the generation of bodhicitta,
there are:
- the preliminaries,
- the actual generation of bodhicitta
- the conclusion
After this, without postponing the intention of wanting to practice the
training and thinking “I’m going to do it in the future”, one applies
conscientiousness and thinks “I’m going to practice this right away”.
Here, it is very important to apply conscientiousness in order to
counteract distractions and laziness and so forth. Conscientiousness is
placing one’s mind on a virtuous object without letting the mind become
contaminated. This conscientiousness is essentially a derivative of joyous
perseverance. Here one applies the effort.
After taking the bodhisattva vow, one has to guard one’s training without
letting them degenerate. The training here is essentially the six
perfections and the four ways of gathering sentient beings into one’s fold.
If one has only generated the aspirational bodhicitta that comes with
commitment, one has to guard against the four black dharmas, abandon the
four black dharmas and cultivate the four white dharmas.
On top of that if one has taken the bodhisattva vow, one has to guard
against the 18 root downfalls and the 46 faults.
To summarize, after taking the bodhisattva vow, there are two things to do:
   1. Not let bodhicitta that has been generated to degenerate
   2. One has to prevent the degeneration in the trainings in the
      perfections.
Without letting the mind come under the control or influence of laziness
and distraction, one applies effort and strives in such training.
So that is the brief explanation of the practice of conscientiousness.
[BP1 L19] Conscientiousness is the opposite of non-conscientiousness. Non-
conscientiousness is one of the 20 secondary afflictions and is a negative
emotion. It is a mind that does not guard or protect itself against the
afflictions and the faults that arise from such afflictions. It is the mind
that does whatever it wants without considering the consequences. That is
non-conscientiousness. The function of non-conscientiousness is to increase
negativities and to weaken positive actions.
Conscientiousness is a mental factor, which is a mind that is not under the
influence of negative emotions or afflictions. While it abides in joyous
effort or joyous perseverance, it accomplishes virtue. It is the mind that
protects from contaminated phenomena.
The opposite of conscientiousness is non-conscientiousness. Non-
conscientiousness is a mind that does not protect from afflictions and the
faults of afflictions. It is basically a mind that gives in to afflictions.
Conscientiousness is the basis for the excellent collection of all the good
things of both samsara and nirvana.
“Firmly upheld” refers to the time of taking the vows, when one has
promised that one will never give up bodhicitta and one will never
degenerate the practice even at the cost of one’s life. In the previous
chapter, we looked at how the bodhisattva vows are taken. At that time, one
has promised never to give up the practices, even at the cost of one’s
life. In that sense, one has thoroughly embraced and firmly upheld
bodhicitta in this way. After having taken the vows, bodhisattvas should
always work at keeping their vows and ensure that they do not degenerate.

|2 An extensive explanation              |
|A Cultivating conscientiousness with    |
|regards to bodhicitta                   |
|B Cultivating conscientiousness with    |
|regards to the training                 |

|A Cultivating conscientiousness with    |
|regards to bodhicitta                   |
|1 The reasons it is inappropriate to    |
|discard bodhicitta                      |
|2 The disadvantages of discarding it    |

|1 The reasons it is inappropriate to    |
|discard bodhicitta                      |


Here we mainly are talking about meditating on conscientiousness for
bodhicitta. From here it looks at the reasons why it is inappropriate to
give up this bodhicitta that one has generated.
Verse 4.2
In the case of a reckless undertaking
Or one not well examined,
Although a promise may have been made,
It is reasonable to examine, “Shall I do it or leave it?”
Verse 4.3
But how can I ever withdraw
From what has been examined by the great wisdom
Of the buddhas and their children,
And has been examined and examined by myself?
Verse 4.2 is saying that there are people who undertake certain task
without examining the pros and cons of that particular course of action.
Some people also undertake some tasks without a proper examination. They do
a little bit and think a little bit but not well thought out. But they do
undertake such tasks as well.
Whether is the first or second example, there are people who also give up
whatever they have started to undertake. Such cases in general, whether
they follow up with what they have decided to do or they give up after
starting on what they have decided to undertake, whatever it is in these
cases, it doesn’t really matter much.
But if you are talking about bodhicitta then it is a completely different
matter. This is because the pro and con of generating bodhicitta and what
bodhicitta really is have already been examined or analyzed well by those
possessing great wisdom such as the bodhisattva Manjushri, Maitreya and so
forth. Likewise here:
  “I have thought about the benefits of bodhicitta and the qualities of
  bodhicitta, and I have a heartfelt appreciation for it. On that basis, I
  generated bodhicitta and I took the bodhisattva vow”. Now, if I am to not
  train in the bodhisattva vow due to being distracted by something else or
  due to my laziness then that would be incorrect and that would be
  inappropriate. For that reason, I myself have to strive in practicing”.
So, the point is one must strive and one must rely on conscientiousness.
Great disadvantages, shortcoming and faults if one gives up the bodhicitta
after generating it. It is said that one would be born in the lower realms
if one does that.

|2 The disadvantages of discarding       |
|[bodhicitta]                            |
|A The disadvantage of going to the lower|
|realms                                  |
|B One ceases to work for the sake of    |
|others                                  |
|C Attainment of the grounds is postponed|

|A The disadvantage of going to the lower|
|realms                                  |
|1 The reasons one migrates to the lower |
|realms                                  |
|2 Stating the proof for that            |
|3 Abandoning contradictions             |

|1 The reasons one migrates to the lower |
|realms                                  |


Verse 4.4
If, having made such a promise,
I do not accomplish it through action,
Then by deceiving all those sentient beings
What kind of rebirth will I take?
At the time of adopting bodhicitta through a ritual, and at that time of
generating bodhicitta and taking the vow, one took the oath and made the
pledge to work for the benefit of all sentient beings. If after taking the
oath, if one does not act on one’s promise then one would have deceived all
sentient beings.
If one has deceived all sentient beings, the text asked “What kind of
rebirth will I take?” Of course, there is no way one will get a good
rebirth. If that is the case, one will only get rebirth in the lower
realms.
At the time of taking the bodhisattva vow, one invites all the sentient
beings to be one’s guests. One is making the oath to actualize all their
temporal and ultimate wishes to work for their benefits. If one discards
bodhicitta, one is discarding the oath and the promise to work for one’s
guests – the migrating sentient beings. If one breaks one’s promise to all
these numberless sentient beings then the ensuing misdeed/fault would be
great because one would have deceived all sentient beings. The result of
that is only rebirth in the lower realms. Keeping this in mind, one should
never ever give up bodhicitta.
One has to depend and rely on conscientiousness after generating bodhicitta
in order to stop bodhicitta for degenerating.

|2 Stating the proof   |
|for that              |


Verse 4.5
If it has been taught
That he who does not give away
The smallest thing he mentally thought to give
Will become a hungry ghost,
Verse 4.6
Then if I should deceive all migrating beings
After having from my heart invited them
To unsurpassable happiness,
What kind of happy migration will I go to?
It is mentioned in the sutra [The Close Placement of Mindfulness] that one
will be born as a hungry ghost if one did not actually give what one has
intended to give, even though it could be a small little thing such as a
plate of vegetable or something. If you have intended to give but you
didn’t act on it that would be a cause for one to be born as a hungry
ghost.
If one has bound by the bond of miserliness and due to that one does not
give what one has intended to give then one will be born as a preta or
hungry ghost. This is stated in the sutras.
If that is the case then how is it possible that one will get a good
rebirth after having invited all sentient beings to be one’s guests and
after having made the oath sincerely from the depth of one’s heart to
fulfill, actualize and accomplish all their welfares.
After making the promise, one does not act on one’s oath and promise then
one will have deceived all these sentient beings, isn’t it? If that is the
case then what kind of good rebirth will you get? Or one would have
deceived all the buddhas and bodhisattvas and all the gods and demigods and
so forth. With this thought in mind one should not let one’s bodhicitta
then one has generated to degenerate.
Next, is refuting any objections to this.

|3 Abandoning          |
|contradictions        |


Some people may object that one would be born in the lower realms if one
gives up bodhicitta.
In one of the historical account, it is said that after Shariputra having
generating bodhicitta and was engaging in the practice of perfection he was
approached by a Brahmin who was an emanation of Mara. The Mara came and
demanded his right hand. Shariputra then cut off his right hand.
As Shariputra had cut off his right hand, he had to give his hand to the
Mara using his remaining left hand. Because of giving the cut off right
hand with his left hand to the Mara, the Mara was very unhappy as in the
cultural context that is considered disrespectful. Shariputra was then
being severely abused, criticized and reprimanded by this Mara. Shariputra
then becomes disheartened and he gave up his bodhicitta. Although
Shariputra gave up his bodhicitta, later on he still became a foe destroyer
– an arhat. Based on this account there are people who say this is a
contradiction, as it shows clearly that if one gives up the bodhicitta it
doesn’t mean that one is going to the lower realms.
Khen Rinpoche (In English): If we give with the left hand, is it
disrespectful?
Verse 4.7
Only the Omniscient Ones can discern
The inconceivable manner of the action of
Those who give up the mind of enlightenment
But are liberated.
Khen Rinpoche (In English): Answer is that. That is all.
If one’s bodhicitta degenerates it is a very heavy downfall and that will
cause one’s activities that one does for the welfare of others to
degenerate too.

[BP1 L19] Why did Shariputra not go to the lower realms? The answer is
“beyond the scope of (ordinary) thought”. This is because the subtle
details of karma are the sole objects of knowledge of the buddhas alone and
are beyond the understanding of us ordinary beings.

|B One ceases to work for the sake of others                            |
|1 As the deterioration of bodhicitta involves a serious [lit. heavy]   |
|downfall, the welfare of others deteriorates                           |
|2 It is equivalent to obstructing the virtue of another bodhisattva    |
|[and thus] one migrates to the lower realms                            |
|3 The reasons for that                                                 |

|1 As the deterioration of bodhicitta involves a serious [lit. heavy]   |
|downfall, the welfare of others deteriorates                           |


Verse 4.8
This, for a bodhisattva,
Is the heaviest of downfalls.
If it were to occur, the welfare of
All sentient beings would be weakened.
Degenerating one’s bodhicitta is one of the 18 root downfalls of the
bodhisattva vow. When one’s bodhicitta degenerate, one commits a root
downfall which is a very heavy transgression. Due to committing this root
downfall one will not be able to accomplish extensive works for others.
Keeping this in mind then one applies conscientiousness to not let one’s
bodhicitta degenerates.
The text called The Superior Compendium states that although one has
practiced the paths and ten grounds for ten millions eons but if one
generates the wish to be a self-liberator or solitary realizer or arhat
then at that moment, one’s ethical discipline has received a fault and
degenerate. So this mind generation is much heavier than the root downfall.

The explanation to this verse is from The Superior Compendium which states
that if a bodhisattva who possesses the vow gives up his aspirational
bodhicitta then he receives a root downfall. If this bodhisattva who does
not have the bodhisattva vow then his negativity is still heavier than a
root downfall of the pratimoksha vow.
What Gyaltsab Je’s commentary is saying that if a bodhisattva who has a
bodhisattva vow gives up the aspirational bodhicitta then he incurs a root
downfall. But in a case of a bodhisattva who doesn’t have a bodhisattva vow
the negativities that he incurs from giving up bodhicitta is still heavier
than committing a root downfall of the pratimoksha vow. This seems to be
saying that one can generate bodhicitta and have the actual bodhicitta
without the bodhisattva vows. This is what the text seems to be implying
when you read it.
Is there such a thing as having generated bodhicitta when one does not have
the bodhisattva vow?
If this exists and if this is possible then the person who generates
bodhicitta but doesn’t have the bodhisattva vows then that bodhicitta in
his mind is an aspirational bodhicitta.
It is clear in the texts that if engaged bodhicitta is present, the
bodhisattva vow is necessarily present. Going by this then the so-called
bodhisattva who has bodhicitta but does not have the bodhisattva vows then
that bodhicitta in his mind would be an aspirational bodhicitta.
Is there such a thing as having the bodhicitta without the bodhisattva vow?
Khen Rinpoche (In English): What do you think?
This is what Gyaltsab Je’s commentary says. He says very clearly that if a
bodhisattva who has the vow gives up bodhicitta then he receives a root
downfall of the bodhisattva vow. That was clear. But if he has no vow then
his negativities is still heavier than the root downfall of the pratimoksha
vow. How are you going to read this?

|2 It is equivalent to obstructing the virtue of another bodhisattva [and|
|thus] one migrates to the lower realms                                  |


If one obstructs the virtue of another bodhisattva, the ensuing fault is
also said to be very heavy and also a cause to go to the lower realms.
Verse 4.9
Should others for even a single instant
Hinder or obstruct his merit,
By weakening the welfare of sentient beings
There will be no end to their unfortunate rebirths.
If a bodhisattva obstructs the work or the virtue of another bodhisattva,
the ensuing fault is also very heavy and that can even be a cause for lower
realms.
In Gyaltsab Je’s commentary, he cites The Sutra of Magical Emanation That
Definitely Pacifying which says that it is heavier to obstruct the virtue
of a bodhisattva of offering one morsel of food or drink to an animal than
to rob all sentient beings of this Southern Continent world of all their
food and kill them. Since it is said like that one should be careful
regarding this point. One does not know where there are bodhisattvas and so
it is very easy to make this mistake. If one is able to protect one from
this then one will be able to abandon the door of accumulating or creating
faults with regards to others.
The point here is that we should not obstruct or cause hindrance when
others are engaging in virtuous activities. The commentary also saying that
since we do not know who is or who is not a bodhisattva, one has to be
careful about this point not to interrupt the virtuous activities of
others.

|3 The reasons  |
|for that       |


Verse 4.10
If I shall degenerate
By destroying the happiness of even one sentient being,
Then what need is there to mention destroying the happiness
Of all embodied beings vast as space without exception?
If one interrupts the virtue that someone is accumulating that will enable
that person to be born as a god or a human being, the ensuing negativity is
very heavy. If that is the case, then it goes without saying that the
negativity will be very heavy if one is doing something to hinder or to
interrupt bodhicitta which is the cause of the happiness of all the
sentient beings.
[BP1 L19] In some other commentaries, the reasons why we go to the lower
realms when we obstruct the virtue of another bodhisattva are explained in
two ways:
   1. Reasoning employing scriptural authority
   2. Reasoning employing logic
Verse 4.10 establishes the reason using logic. Destroying the happiness of
just one sentient being will cause us not to be reborn in the higher
realms. It goes without saying then that there will be much more suffering
if we destroy the happiness of all sentient beings. Why is it such a
negative action to obstruct the activities of a bodhisattva? Because, by
causing obstacles to the bodhisattva’s practice of virtue, we are actually
causing obstacles to the cause of a buddha; the cause of enlightenment. By
obstructing the works of a bodhisattva, we are creating obstacles to the
cause of happiness of all sentient beings, the enlightenment of all
sentient beings.

|The disadvantages of discarding  |
|[bodhicitta]                     |
|A The disadvantage of going to   |
|the lower realms                 |
|B One ceases to work for the sake|
|of others                        |
|C Attainment of the grounds is   |
|postponed                        |

|C Attainment of the grounds is   |
|postponed                        |


If one abandons bodhicitta then one becomes very far from actualizing or
attaining the grounds.
Verse 4.11
Thus if those who have the force of a downfall
And the force of the mind of enlightenment
Were to stay revolving within cyclic existence,
For a long time they would be hindered from attaining the grounds.
It is said that those who have taken the bodhisattva vow, and if they were
to incur a root downfall of abandoning bodhicitta, even after that if they
were to generate very strong virtue and again generate bodhicitta, they
would be still in cyclic existence; sometimes going to the lower realms,
sometimes getting a good rebirth but would still remain very far away from
actualizing the 1st bodhisattva ground which is called Very Joyous.
The point is after one has generated bodhicitta and has taken the
bodhisattva vow, it is important to strive from the beginning not to be
stained by the downfall, and not to let one’s bodhicitta degenerated.
You may think “The bodhicitta may degenerate but I can get it back again.”
It is true that you may get the bodhicitta back again but even then,
because having incurred the downfall earlier, the consequence is that one
will be very far from actualizing the bodhisattva grounds.
If one incurs a root downfall, one can purify the negativity accumulated
through the practice of confession whereby one applies the four powers. As
a result of purifying the negativity one don’t have to experience the
result of going to the lower realms but nevertheless because of having
incurred that root downfall in the first place, that acts as a hindrance
and a great obstacle to achieving the realization and the higher qualities.
Therefore it is important not to be stained by a downfall from the
beginning.
Up to here at this point, it is a discussion of how importance it is not to
let one’s bodhicitta degenerates by applying conscientiousness. One does
that by thinking of the great faults and negativities that will ensue from
letting one’s bodhicitta degenerates. So, one has to try to always
strengthen and to increase the bodhicitta that one has already generated.

