Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Engaging in the Deeds of a Bodhisattva/lesson34.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:52:14.564838
================================================================================


|(iii) Once one understands all migrators to be like emanations (they see   |
|that it is) unreasonable to be angry (with them)                           |


Verse 6.31
Hence all are governed by others,
And through the power of that, they have no power.
Having understood in this way, I shall not become angry
At all things that are like emanations.
We have looked at verse 6.31 which talks about how it is inappropriate to
become angry based on the understanding of how “all things are like an
emanation”. That is when we looked a little bit at the presentation of
causality; how effects are produced in dependence upon their causes. Since
effects are produced in dependence upon their causes, they are other-
powered. Effects or products are other-powered. They do not have any
independence. Based on that, one can think about dependent arising on a
subtler level; by understanding how all things are empty of existing
inherently.

|(1) An extensive explanation                                  |
|(a) As both fury and the one who is furious, etc. rely upon   |
|causes, they are not independent                              |
|(b) Refuting the existence of independent causes              |
|(c) The need to overcome fury (anger)                         |

|(c) The need to overcome fury (anger)                         |


Verse 6.32
OPINION: What will counteract it?
Counteraction would also be inappropriate.
RESPONSE: In dependence upon it the continuity of suffering will be
severed;
It is not inappropriate.
Verse 6.32 is an indication of qualms that are raised by most of the
proponents of the Buddhist tenets. When they hear the presentation of the
emptiness of inherent existence, and how all things do not exist
inherently, they cannot accept it. Because, to them, if things do not exist
inherently, then the methods and the antidotes to counteract anger would
not be valid; it would not work.
Since many of you have already studied the Tenets module, you should have
some ideas of what I have just said. In short, it is only the Consequence
Middle Way School (CMWS) asserts that all phenomena are empty of existing
inherently. Everybody else starting from the Autonomy Middle Way School
(AMWS) and all the tenets below it assert the contrary.
For the CMWS, anything and everything that exists, it exists in mere name,
merely imputed by thought, merely designated. As such, everything and
anything that exists cannot exist inherently. So they are empty of existing
inherently. This is the fundamental assertion of the CMWS. But this
assertion cannot be accepted by the rest of the proponents of Buddhist
tenets because it cannot fit their mind.
Basically the CMWS asserts that anything and everything that exists, it
exist in mere name, merely designated by thought, merely imputed by
thought. This is something that the rest of the proponents of Buddhist
tenets cannot accept because it cannot fit their mind.
According to the proponents of the Buddhist tenets, with the exception of
the CMWS, they feel that if things only exist as something merely imputed
by thought, it is the same as saying that everything is just made up by
mind. That means you can make up anything with your mind; as long as you
make it up it exists. This is what most of the proponents of the Buddhist
tenets believe. As such, if things are just made up by the mind, then how
do you classify something as the truth and others as false? Then how you
can coherently explained that in dependence on these set of causes, you
will have these effects, or you will definitely have these effects because
there are these set of causes? If you assert that everything is just merely
imputed by mind, then you will not be coherently posit cause and effect,
truth and falsity and so forth.
The vast majority of the proponents of Buddhist tenets, with the exception
of the highest school (CMWS), believe that anything and everything that
exists, it exists from their own side; there is something right there from
its own side, something that makes it different from another phenomenon.
What is the clear sign of that?
For example, a seed exists from its own side, and it functions to produce a
sprout. That ability to produce a sprout is inherent in the seed, and it is
a special quality and feature of the seed. Otherwise, according to them, if
things were just merely imputed by the mind, you could then make up
anything, then why can't the seed produce a horse or an elephant? The very
fact that a seed can only produce a sprout is a clear sign that there is
something right from the side of the seed that makes it different. It is
the seed. Therefore things are not merely imputed by mind. There is
something right there from the side of the object.
These are the common general viewpoints of the vast majority of Buddhist
tenets, with the exception of the highest school (CMWS). What they assert
is basically what we think. This is what we think, isn’t it? When we think
of a seed, how does it produce a sprout? We think that the seed really
produces a sprout from its own side right there. We cannot even imagine how
that is something that is merely imputed by thought. It cannot fit our
mind. There is no way we will think that it is merely imputed by thought.
There is something right there, and there is a seed that has a special
potential to produce a sprout. What we think are exactly what most
proponents of the Buddhist tenets would assert.
In Nagarjuna’s Fundamental Treatise on Wisdom, there is an objection raised
by the lower tenets which says:
“If things do not exist inherently, they do not exist by their own nature.
Then there is no way you can posit causality. There is no way you can
coherently explain the Four Noble Truths.”
This is the position of the lower tenets.
The lower tenets assert that:
-  if things do not exist inherently, there is nothing right there from the
side of the object,
-  then there is no way you can talk about causality,
-  then there is no way you can talk about Four Noble Truths, and
-  if you cannot coherently explain Four Noble Truths, there is no way you
can present the Three Jewels.
This is the objection raised by the lower tenets.
This is essentially what the first two sentences of verse 6.32 are saying.
The objection raised here is that:
-If things do not exist inherently, then there is no way you can coherently
explained how in dependence on by cultivating the antidotes that you can
counteract anger. There is no way.
Everybody else, except the CMWS, raised the objection by saying:
“If you say that things do not exist inherently, there is nothing right
there from the side of the object, everything is merely imputed by thought,
then:
- there is no way you can explain the creation of things,
- there is no way to explain how things disintegrate,
- there is no way to explain the Four Noble Truths,
- as such you cannot explain causality, and
- as such you cannot coherently posit the Three Jewels.
This is what most proponents of Buddhist tenets say.
The CMWS has a completely different stand on this. In fact the CMWS turned
it back on their opponents and says:
 “In reality, if thing existed inherently from their own side, then:
- there is no way you can posit causality,
- there is no way you can posit the production or disintegration of things,

- there is no way that you can coherently explain the Four Noble Truths,
and
- as such there is no way you can explain the Three Jewels.
This is the assertion of the CMWS. They said that if you assert inherent
existence, you cannot posit all of these things. It is only when you assert
the emptiness of inherent existence then you can posit arising and
disintegration, Four Noble Truths, Three Jewels, causality and so forth.
This debate is between CMWS and the rest of the proponents of the Buddhist
tenets. That is their debate. According to your view, which is a better
position?  All of you will say that the Consequence Middle Way School
position is the best. But it is not sufficient to just say that they are
the best. You have to prove it. Why? It is of no use by just saying that
the CMWS are the best or they are the only truth.
Khen Rinpoche (spoke in English): Somebody explains a little bit why.
Before we can figure it out, we first have to think about the meaning of
the emptiness of inherent existence and inherent existence. What do they
mean? What is inherent existence? What is the emptiness of inherent
existence? What do they mean on their own?
Everybody has to think for themselves the meaning of inherent existence. If
there is such a thing as inherent existence, what does it mean? By looking
at the word “inherent existence” itself, what is it trying to tell you?
Inherent existence means existing from its own side, existing inherently.
What is it trying to tell you? Isn’t it trying to tell you that it can
exist on its own independent of other factors i.e. it can exist without
depending on other factors?
The meaning of inherent existence is if something exists inherently,
- it can exist by its own entity,
- it exists from its own side,
- it exist on its own power,
- self-instituting
- it does not have to depend on any other factors.
If things existed inherently, then how does cause and effect possibly work?
If there is such a thing as inherent existence, that means something can
exist in and of itself without depending on any other factors, it can stand
alone, self-instituting, existing from its own side right there without
depending on any other things. So it is independent.
If something can exist independently, there is no need for dependency.
If there is no need for dependency, then how are you going to talk about
cause and effect?
Don’t effects depend on causes?  Then causality cannot work if things are
inherent existent.
Precisely because the view of reality is that things are dependently
originated, there is dependent arising, therefore it cannot exist
inherently.
While things are empty of existing inherently, they exist as dependently
originated.
Therefore only when you assert emptiness of inherent existence, then can
you coherently posit dependent arising.
As such by depending on the antidote, the practice of patience and so
forth, one can achieves the result of the abandonment of whatever objects
of the abandonment such as anger. That is basically the meaning of the 3rd
and 4th line of verse 6.32.
Although the antidote and the process of counteracting anger do not exist
inherently, the process of applying the antidotes exist conventionally. In
dependence on that, one is able to counteract the object of abandonment
(here is anger). If you counteract anger then you will not experience the
results of anger.

[BP1 Part 2 L8] In response to the previous verse, a qualm may arise, “If
all phenomena are like apparitions, since they do not exist truly, how can
the meditation on patience be the antidote to anger?”
All lower tenet systems assert that phenomena exist inherently because they
do not know how to posit the functioning of cause and effect in any other
way. According to the Prasangika-Madhyamika tenet system, we will be able
to stop the continuum of the effects of anger conventionally – such as
rebirths in the hell realms - through the practice of patience. Using the
analogy of mistaking a coil of rope for a snake, once we understand that it
is actually a rope, the fear of a snake is eliminated. Similarly, by
understanding that our enemy is not inherently existent, we will be able to
eliminate our anger towards him.
The Prasangika-Madhyamika School refutes the argument of the lower tenets
in this way: “We are only able to abandon the objects of abandonment and to
cultivate the relevant antidotes because phenomena do not exist inherently.
If one asserts that things exist truly, this assertion has to apply to the
objects of abandonment as well. This means that they exist without
depending on causes and conditions and are, therefore, not subject to
change. That being the case, how would we be able to abandon such objects?”

|(2)      |
|Synopsis |


Verse 6.33
So when seeing an enemy or even a friend
Doing something incorrect,
By thinking, “It arises from such conditions,”
I shall remain in a happy frame of mind.
Verse 6.34
If things were established with one’s freedom,
Then since no one wishes to suffer,
Suffering would not occur
To any embodied creature.
We have seen:
- how things and events arise from their own causes and conditions,
- how things are dependently originated at the level of causality, and
- how there is something being dependently designated.
As such, you apply it to a situation in which involves somebody, be a
friend or an enemy, harming us or do something incorrect. We have to apply
the understanding to the situation and come to understand that they are
doing something that we don’t like or doing thing that harms us, or doing
thing that we think is incorrect, is because there must be certain causes
and conditions which lead them to doing such things. The whole situation of
whatever we think is inappropriate has arisen in dependence on some other
factors.
Verse 6.33 is saying that as such we should remain calm and happy in spite
of these different difficult situations.  These situations have arisen
because of various causes and conditions. If things and events do not arise
due to their own causes and conditions but rather if they can arise out of
a choice, (i.e. if there is freedom and one can make a choice), then why
are we suffering? Although all of us are the same in not wanting any
suffering and we want only happiness, but how come things don’t go our way?
So obviously things and events don’t arise because we want it to, or we
have freedom or we have choice. No, it is not by choice. Things and events
arise due to the coming together of their own respective causes and
conditions. As such whatever situations we meet or whatever experience, it
is a result of the coming together of many causes and conditions. As such
they are not independent, and they are dependently arisen.
[BP1 Part 2 L8] When we are harmed, that situation does not arise without a
cause. When we grasp strongly at the enemy as solid, independent and not
subject to other causes and conditions, we continue to be angry. For
example, when we mistake a coil of rope for a snake, fear arises. Only
through understanding that there is no snake are we be able to overcome our
fear. In the same way, by understanding how the enemy does not exist
inherently but exists in dependence on other factors, are we able to pacify
our anger towards the enemy. Understanding and meditating on dependent
arising, on how phenomena are empty of inherent existence, is the supreme
antidote for overcoming any afflictions. It not only stops manifest
afflictions but can also destroy their seeds.
In summary, why is it that we experience suffering despite our wish to be
happy? This shows that all phenomena – including our enemies and the harm
they inflict on us - do not exist inherently or independently of causes and
conditions. The more we familiarise ourselves with meditating on emptiness,
the weaker our anger and other negative emotions will be. When we achieve
the direct realisation of emptiness, we can uproot all our negative
emotions, such as anger, together with their seeds.
With that, we have finished with the patience of certitude about the
teachings.
The next division of patience is the patience that disregards harm.
Here in cultivating the patience that disregards harm as a method for
disregarding the harm that is done to us. In order to disregards the harm
that is done to us, we have to stop ourselves from getting angry with the
harms that we received. One of the methods for doing that is to bring about
compassion.

|c” Cultivating the patience that pays no heed to those who cause harm   |
|(1) Engaging the mind in the method of compassion                       |
|(2) Arresting the causes of fury                                        |
|(3) Reflecting on unwanted occurrences being due to one’s own faults    |

|(1) Engaging the mind in the method of compassion                       |
|(a) Some sentient beings cause you harm due to the lack of understanding|
|(b) If one can kill even oneself due to lack of understanding, it is not|
|amazing that they can cause harm to others                              |
|(c) Therefore, it is reasonable to feel compassion for them             |

|(a) Some sentient beings cause you harm due to the lack of understanding|


Verse 6.35
Through lacking conscientiousness
People even harm themselves with thorns and other things,
And for the sake of obtaining women and the like
They become obsessed and starve themselves.
Verse 6.36
And there are some who harm themselves
By hanging themselves, leaping from cliffs,
Eating poison and incompatible food
And unmeritorious deeds.
These two verses are saying that when we experience harm from somebody, we
have to focus on how they actually are harming themselves. Put aside in
getting angry, actually there are only reasons to have concerns and
generate compassion towards them.
[BP1 Part 2 L8] Sometimes, people harm themselves due to lack of
conscientiousness. When they are obsessed with women (or men), wealth and
possessions, etc., they may even starve themselves. Controlled by strong
afflictions, they commit suicide by hanging themselves, leaping from
buildings or taking poison and they engage in all sorts of negative actions
such as killing, stealing, sexual misconduct, lying, harsh speech etc.
Their negative actions become the causes of suffering in this and future
lives. Despite their wish for self-preservation, they uncontrollably
indulge in such foolish actions. This shows that they are not free and
independent. Instead of anger, it would be more appropriate for us to feel
compassion for them.

|(b) If one can kill even oneself due to lack of understanding, it is not |
|amazing that they can cause harm to others                               |


Verse 6.37
If, when under the influence of afflictions,
People will even kill their treasured selves,
How can they not cause harm
To the bodies of others?
If people can harm themselves or takes their own life, the most treasured
possession, under the influence of afflictions, then why are we so surprise
when we see them harming others including ourselves. Why are we so
surprise?

|(c) Therefore, it is reasonable to feel compassion for them              |


Verse 6.38
Even if I virtually cannot develop compassion for such people
Who through the arisal of afflictions
Set out to kill me and so forth,
The last thing I should do is to become angry with them.
The verse is saying that it is extremely inappropriate to be angry with
those who harm us under the influence of their own afflictions. In reality,
it is only appropriate to generate compassion towards such harm doers. Even
if we can't generate compassion towards the harm doers, the least we could
do is to not become angry at them.
Next section is about stopping the cause of anger.

|(2) Arresting the causes of fury                                   |
|(a) It is unreasonable to be angry with a child if it is in his    |
|nature (to lack understanding and act so)                          |
|(b) It is unreasonable to be furious even if the conditions that   |
|brought about harm are adventitious                                |
|(c) By examining the direct and/or indirect causes, [one comes to  |
|see that] being furious is unreasonable                            |

|(a) It is unreasonable to be angry with a child if it is in his    |
|nature (to lack understanding and act so)                          |


Verse 6.39
Even if it were the nature of the childish
To cause harm to other beings,
It would be inappropriate to be angry with them,
For this would be like begrudging fire for having the nature to burn.
When somebody, an ordinary being, is harming us, the first thing to analyze
is “Is the nature of that person childish or not? “ If it is in the nature
of the person to be childish, then it is obvious that that person will harm
us. Then there is no need to begrudge the person for harming us, because
that is his nature; just like you won't get angry at the fire for burning
your hand if you put your hand in the fire. What can you do about it? It is
the nature of fire to burn, so what can we expect?
If it is in the nature of the person to act in that way, since it is the
very nature of that person, then it is inappropriate and incorrect to be
angry with him. Even if it is not in the nature of that person, still it is
inappropriate.

|(b) It is unreasonable to be furious even if the conditions that   |
|brought about harm are adventitious                                |


Verse 6.40
And even if the fault were incidental
In sentient beings of definite nature,
It would be inappropriate to be angry,
For this would be like begrudging space for allowing smoke to rise in it.
The analysis is on the harm-doer, somebody who causes us problems or
difficulties. We should analyze and check that whether it is in the nature
of that person to harm or not. It is either in the nature of that person or
it must due to some temporary conditions. If it is in the nature of that
person to harm then it inappropriate to get angry because that would be
like begrudging fire for burning your hand if you put your hand in the
fire.
If the person is of definite nature and is not in the nature of the person
to harm, that means the person generally by nature good hearted, calm, and
patient person. But due to certain causes and conditions, people do
sometimes get upset and these are incidental or temporary. If it is not in
the nature of person to harm and the harm is really incidental, then all
the more it is also inappropriate to be angry with that person.
If that harm done to you is incidental and it is not actually the general
nature of the person to harm you; but due to whatever reason that harms did
happened. You know that is incidental and temporary, as said here, all the
more we should not be angry with the person. Because being angry with such
a person is like being angry at the sky itself rather than getting angry at
the smoke that is covering up the sky. Sometimes, for whatever reason, when
you burn something smoke arises. What we are unhappy is with the smoke,
isn’t it? But the smoke is temporary. But instead of getting angry at the
smoke, we get angry at the sky. Getting angry at the sky is like getting
angry at the person who is generally by nature calm and good hearted.
Next is analyzing how anger is inappropriate by looking at the actual
causes that brought about the anger or the supporting causes or the
indirect causes.

|(c) By examining the direct and/or indirect causes, [one comes to see|
|that] being furious is unreasonable                                  |


Verse 6.41
If I become angry with the wielder,
Although I am directly harmed by the stick and so forth,
Then since he too is incited by hatred,
I should be angry with the two or with the hatred.
When somebody hits us with a stick, we experience pain and then immediately
get upset. Who do we get upset with? We don’t get upset with the stick that
is the actual thing that is causing the pain, but rather, we get upset and
angry with the person. Because we think that that stick is wielded by that
harm doer and the stick doesn’t have any choice. It is actually the person
who is wielding the stick that is at fault. This is what we think. If we
accept this reasoning then we should also then accept that likewise the
person who is harming us is under the control of his own afflictions such
as his anger. Why are we getting upset with him and not his anger? If we
really want to be upset, we should be upset with the harm doer’s anger and
not the harm-doer himself.
The next section is about understanding that whenever we get something that
we don’t like, it is our own doing, and it is our own fault.

|(3) Reflecting on unwanted occurrences being due to one’s own faults           |
|(a) The meaning of the actual                                                  |
|(b) Abandoning objections                                                      |

|(a) The meaning of the actual                                                  |
|(i) Reflecting on the harm brought upon you by another as one’s own fault      |
|(ii) The cause of suffering is a disadvantage of having taken a body           |
|(iii) [Seeing it as] a disadvantage of having created the causes of suffering  |
|in a former life                                                               |
|(iv) As it is one’s own karma that presses others into bringing suffering upon |
|us, it is unreasonable to be furious with them                                 |
|(v) fury itself is erroneous and thus unreasonable                             |

|(i) Reflecting on the harm brought upon you by    |
|another as one’s own fault                        |


Verse 6.42
Previously I caused similar harm
To sentient beings.
Therefore it is right for this harm to occur
To me who is the agent of harm to sentient beings.
Whatever undesirable experience befalls upon us, at the end of the day, it
is the result of our own doing in the past. Because we have caused similar
harm to others in our past lives, and as a result the karma is now ripening
upon us.

|(ii) The cause of suffering is a disadvantage of  |
|having taken a body                               |


Verse 6.43
Both the weapon and my body
Are causes of my suffering.
Since he gave rise to the weapon and I to the body,
With whom should I be angry?
When somebody hits us with a weapon and we feel the pain, this experience
of pain is the coming together of the attacker (the harm doer) and our own
body. We have this body so it experience pain. When this body that can
experience pain is hit by somebody else wielding a weapon, then pain
arises. The harm doer and we ourselves (the victim), are both causes of the
suffering that we experience.
The harm doer who is wielding the weapon is like the cooperative condition
for producing the pain in us. We ourselves are like the substantial cause
for the arising of this painful experience.
In order for anything to arise, there must be the substantial cause and the
cooperative conditions. In fact, all these various factors coming together.
So the person who is attacking us and the stick are like the co-operative
conditions and our body, we ourselves are like the substantial cause for
the experience of that pain. Essentially we are the main cause.
If both the harm doer and we ourselves are equally responsible for the
arising of this painful experience, then why are we particularly upset with
the harm doer only? If we really feel justified being upset, we should be
equally upset with ourselves since we have a role to play in this
experience of suffering.
We have to ask ourselves: “Why are we only particularly upset with the harm
doer?” We should also take some responsibility. If we feel justified, then
we should be equally angry with ourselves since we have a role to play in
this painful experience. Why do we feel particularly justified and being
angry with the harm doer? So there is no justification and there is no real
reason.
Verse 6.44
If in blind attachment I cling
To this suffering abscess of a human form
That cannot bear to be touched,
With whom should I be angry when it is hurt?
The nature of our body is such that it is easily harmed and is difficult to
sustain. This body of ours is like a huge boils and all it takes is some
small little condition for you to feel discomfort and pain. When the
temperature goes up a little bit, just a little bit of heat, we start to
feel very hot and uncomfortable. But if the weather turns a bit cold then
we also feel very uncomfortable. So that is the nature of our body.
The body that we have is in the nature of suffering. It is something that
is easily lost and something very difficult to keep alive and to sustain.
That is the nature of this body of ours. But due to ignorance we develop
very strong attachment towards our body and we cling on to it very strongly
of the notion that “This is “mine””. Due to that clinging, we find it very
difficult to tolerate any harm that is done to this body.
Here the verse is saying that problem originates with us. We are clinging
on to this body which is in the nature of suffering which is very easily
lost and is very difficult to sustain. Due to ignorance we attach to it and
cling on to it perversely having very strong notion that “This is mine”. As
such we cannot tolerate it when it suffers.  The problem lies with us
because we have this boils in the first place, and we have this suffering
body.  Why is it that we are angry at the harm doer when in fact the
problem lies with us?

|(iii) [Seeing it as] a disadvantage of having created the  |
|causes of suffering in a former life                       |


Verse 6.45
The childish do not wish to suffer,
And are greatly attached to its causes,
Thus they are harmed by their own misdeeds;
Why should they begrudge others?
Although nobody likes to suffer and everybody wants happiness, however most
people run after the causes of suffering. Although they don’t like
suffering, they run after the causes of suffering. Our problems, our
sufferings, are the ripening results of the non-virtuous actions that we
have accumulated in the past. Although we don’t like suffering, but in the
past we craved and ran after the causes of suffering; we killed lives of
others, we stole possessions of others and so forth. As a result of these
non-virtuous actions, now we are experiencing problems.
Verse 6.46
For example, just like the guardians of hell
And the forest of sword leaves,
So this is produced by my actions;
At what should I be angry?
All the experience of burning in hell, being tortured by hell guardians and
having to encounter the forest of sword leaves in the hells and so forth,
are the results of our own non-virtuous karma. In short, every suffering
and every single problem that we experience is a result of our own non-
virtue accumulated in the past. As such, it is inappropriate to be upset
with the situation or with the harm doer. Rather, we have to understand
that all these problems are the results of our own doing.
In fact, when somebody harms us, we are responsible for that person
engaging in non-virtue. Because we are the condition, we are the cause for
the person who is harming us to harm us in the first place because it is
our own karma that instigated it. In fact we are causing somebody else to
create non-virtue.

|(iv) As it is one’s own karma that presses others into bringing suffering upon |
|us, it is unreasonable to be furious with them                                 |


Verse 6.47
Having been instigated by my own actions,
Those who cause me harm come into being.
If due to this they should proceed to sentient beings’ hell
Am I not destroying them?
It is due to the instigation, so to speak, of our own non-virtue
accumulated in the past then we have somebody - the harm doer - causing
problems to us. Actually that harm doer causing of harm to us is actually
the instigation, so to speak, of our own non-virtuous karma. As such, we
are the ones causing our enemies or harm doers to cause harm to us due to
the instigation of our own non-virtue. If that is the case, aren’t we the
ones who are sending others to the lower realms such as the hells?
If we analyze and think about this, isn’t it the case that we are the harm
doers, not the person that we consider to be the harm doer?  We are
actually the harm doer because it is our non-virtue that caused that person
to harm us and through that the person is accumulating negative karma and
will go to the hells. Basically we are the ones who are sending them to the
lower realms. If we think about this, it can really help us to practice
patience.

|(v) fury itself is erroneous and  |
|thus unreasonable                 |


Verse 6.48
By taking them as objects
I purify much negativity through patience.
But in dependence upon me they will proceed
To hell suffering for a long time.
Verse 6.49
So since I am causing harm to them
And they are benefiting me,
Why, unruly mind, do you become angry
Erroneously?
If we are able to practice patience in relation to an enemy or a harm doer,
then in dependence on the harm doer, we are able to practice patience.
Besides being able to develop patience, we are also able to purify much non-
virtue/ negativities accumulated in the past. As such, that enemy then
becomes a benefactor for oneself.

Due to our own non-virtue, a harm doer comes into our life and causes us
problems. It is at the instigation, so to speak, of our own non-virtue.
Then the harm doer causes harm to us and in so doing accumulates great non-
virtue. As a result he will have to suffer in the lower realms such as the
hells for a very long time. So if we think about it, we have become the
harm doer.
We have become harm doer of our harm doer and our harm doer can become our
benefactor if we are able to practice patience. If we are able to cultivate
patience by dependence upon that person then when we develop our own
patience, we will finish accumulation of our merit and purify our
negativities. We receive all these benefits from that harm doer. Then that
harm doer has now become our benefactor and we have become the harm doer of
our harm doer.
If the harm doer is really very beneficial for us, if we are able to
cultivate patience, then getting angry at him would be a mistake. So here
the verse is asking: “Why are we angry with our benefactor?”
Put aside getting angry with that person, we should in fact be very happy
with that person and to like the person.
These are the various arguments that we can used to develop patience that
disregards any harm done to us. If we really think about them, they are
pretty useful and definitely it will help in controlling our anger.
Firstly, to recognize that when we experience harm from somebody, it is
incorrect to just to point and put all the blame on the harm doer because
we ourselves are responsible as well. The person holds the weapon but
because we have the body therefore we can feel pain. We are equally
responsible for the experience of pain when we are harmed by somebody.
Secondly, we have to think about karma. At the end of the day, whatever
problems and sufferings that we experience is a result of our own non-
virtue. As such, we cannot point any finger at anybody else out there. We
can only point the finger at ourselves.
On top of that, if we think about how we are the ones who are actually the
cause of harm doers going to hell, and how we receive benefit from that so-
called harm doer in terms of being able to practice patience and so forth,
and if we put all these reasons together, then I guess it is very useful to
cultivate the patience that disregards harm.
There are many reasons or arguments here. The thing that we have to do is
to sit down, reflect and think about it.
If we don’t use it, and we don’t reflect on it, then nothing can be done.
It is just words. But if we think about it, then it is quite useful because
our instinctive reaction is that whenever we experience a problem or harm,
instinctively we never think we are at fault, we are never responsible, it
is always something out there,  somebody out there or somebody out there or
situation out there. That is the instinctive reaction. But if we sit down
and think about it, if we can even come to acknowledge that we have a role
to play, and we have some responsibility. That itself alone is really very
helpful to control our anger.
If we have the ability to think a little bit deeper, how in fact we are the
harm doer and that our enemy, the harm doer, has become our benefactor in
that the harm doer is the best teacher for patience and so forth, then the
practice of patience becomes more profound and deeper. It is then even
possible to view that person as a teacher and to be able to respect the
harm doer. Of course, for those who have reached that level, and able to
regard or see the harm doer as their benefactor, then come that day, I
think from that day onwards, probably enemy will not exist, and harm doer
will not exist for that person.
Q&A:
Student: In the Lesson 25, as stated in the Treasury of Manifest Knowledge
that afflictions such as ignorance, view of the transitory collection could
be unspecified, what is the meaning of “unspecified”?
Khen Rinpoche: In the case of ignorance, the view of the transitory
collection and the view holding on to an extreme, they were not specified
by the Buddha in his teachings to be either virtuous or non-virtuous. That
means it is unspecified, i.e. it is neither virtuous nor non-virtuous.
Student: If it is unspecified which means it is not specified as to whether
it is virtue or non-virtue, how different is this term from neutral karma?
Is there a term for something that can be virtuous or non-virtuous like a
changeable mental factor like sleep for example?
Khen Rinpoche (in English): Yeah, I will think about it.
