Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Engaging in the Deeds of a Bodhisattva/lesson32.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:52:12.853400
================================================================================


Just to reiterate the measure of the destruction of root of virtue:
- when a non-bodhisattva is angry with a bodhisattva, he destroys the merit
accumulated over a thousand eons.
- when a higher bodhisattva gets angry with a lower bodhisattva, he
destroys the roots of merits accumulated over a hundred eons
- when a lower bodhisattva gets angry with a higher bodhisattva, he has to
meditate on the path again.
When a lower bodhisattva gets angry with a higher bodhisattva, that
bodhisattva has to meditate on the path all over again. What is the meaning
of that? It is mentioned in the text that they have to train again for
eons. It doesn’t say how many eons, but it says for eons (many eons).
Khen Rinpoche (in English): So can be 200 eons, 300 or 500 eons. I am not
sure.

|A non-bodhisattva gets angry at a   |destruction of merit accumulated over a  |
|bodhisattva                         |thousand great eons                      |
|A higher level bodhisattva gets     |destruction of merit accumulated over a  |
|angry at a lower bodhisattva        |hundred great eons                       |
|A lower level bodhisattva who gets  |his achievement of the next path is      |
|angry at a higher bodhisattva       |delayed e.g. A bodhisattva on the great  |
|(A bodhisattva who has not received |Mahayana Path of Accumulation is due to  |
|prediction of his enlightenment were|enter the Mahayana Path of Preparation   |
|to get angry at a bodhisattva who   |gets angry at another bodhisattva who is |
|has received prediction of his      |already at the Path of Preparation,      |
|enlightenment)                      |instead of entering the Path of          |
|                                    |Preparation, his realization is delayed  |
|                                    |for an great eon and he has to meditate  |
|                                    |on this path all over again              |
|A non-bodhisattva gets angry at a   |destruction of merit that comes from     |
|non-bodhisattva                     |making a full prostration to a stupa (The|
|                                    |sutras say that however many atoms are   |
|                                    |covered by the body during such a        |
|                                    |prostration is equal to the number of    |
|                                    |times to be reborn as a Wheel Turning    |
|                                    |King).                                   |

|a” Cultivating the patience that accepts suffering                             |
|(1) Reflecting on the fact contaminated phenomena are not beyond being of the  |
|nature of suffering                                                            |
|(2) Reflecting on the benefits of meditating on suffering                      |
|(3) Reflecting on the fact that, if one is familiar [with such attitudes] they |
|are not difficult to implement                                                 |
|(4) The benefits of making effort in abandoning the afflictions                |
|(5) An extensive explanation of the meditations on suffering                   |


We have started looking at the patience of accepting suffering. The
teaching tells us that when we experience suffering, we should accept it
voluntarily. One of the reasons is that we are in cyclic existence/samsara.
The nature of cyclic existence is such that it does not transcend
suffering. Cyclic existence is in the nature such that life to be beset
with problems and suffering. Remembering this, then one comes to accept
problems and sufferings as part of one’s life or one’s existence. Another
way of putting up and accepting suffering is to reflect on the benefits and
the advantages of suffering. One is to look at it from the positive angle.
For someone who is really a practitioner of the Buddhadharma, in particular
if you are someone who is looking for permanent happiness - liberation from
cyclic existence. In order to develop that aspiration and the wish to be
free of all the problems, first you need to have problems. The existence of
sufferings is an essential condition upon which you can develop
disenchantment and disillusionment with cyclic existence, and that spurs an
individual to seek once and for all a total freedom - liberation from
cyclic existence. Without suffering as a condition, there is no way to
develop disenchantment of cyclic existence, and without which there is no
real wish for freedom from samsara. For such a person whose intent is
achieving liberation, it is better to have suffering, and suffering is a
good thing.
We saw in the last lesson that suffering acts as a condition for someone to
develop disenchantment with cyclic existence. Therefore, base on that
develop an attitude of definite emergence or renunciation.
For someone who doesn’t see the faults of contaminated existence (to exist
in the state that is made up of contaminated body and mind) and has a view
that the world is nice, pleasant, and samsara is pleasurable like a
beautiful garden, then there is no end to samsara for such a person. If you
don’t see the problem with it, then you won’t want to develop a wish to get
out of it. Because there is suffering and if you recognize that as an
essential condition for an individual to develop disenchantment with such a
contaminated existence, that will spur you to develop the wish or intent to
get out of such a contaminated existence. Because of suffering and you
recognize suffering, then comes the day when you develops disenchantment
with samsara, which is like the door for you to enter into renunciation,
and to develop the thought of definite emergence. So having problems and
sufferings actually persuade you and makes you think about doing things
that are beneficial and virtuous.
You got to also realize that whatever problems or sufferings you are
experiencing is the result of the non-virtuous karma that you have
accumulated in the past. So when you are experiencing suffering, it is the
ripening of the non-virtuous karma accumulated in the past.

As such you can look at suffering as a broom that sweeps away all the dirt.
So the experience of suffering is like a broom that clears away the
negativities that we have accumulated in the past. So in that sense it is
something beneficial and positive to experience suffering.
If you are able to look at the problem or suffering that you are
experiencing from this perspective, then it will helps you to be able to
voluntarily accept the problem or the suffering. If you are able to
voluntarily accept the problem or suffering through realizing the benefits
of suffering, and looking at the difficult situation with a positive
perspective, it will make a huge difference in that you would not be as
unhappy as before, and you will not be mentally disturbed.  Your mind is
able to stay calm and relax without becoming overly disturbed.
When you experience problem or when you are suffering, and if you refuse to
accept them, then what happens? The only result is that you will be very
unhappy inside. If you are unhappy inside, your mind gets disturbed and
this mental unhappiness will build up and become anger. When you get angry,
you will look at yourself and everything around you through that view.
Everything appears as unpleasant. You even see everybody as bad, as enemy
or a problem. The problem may be very small but this is what can happen if
you refuse to put up with it and making up the choice of not wanting to
voluntarily accept it. You just react with unhappiness and this is what you
get.
So when a problem arises or when you experience discomfort or unhappiness,
you should remind yourself that this is the nature of contaminated life. As
long as you are in samsara, it will be always like that. Then what is the
point of begrudging the nature? That is life, and there is nothing you can
do about it.
You should also remind yourself that whatever problem or unhappiness or
suffering that you are experiencing is the ripening result of the non-
virtue that you yourself have created in the past. By reminding yourself of
these points, so when the problem arises then it will makes it easier for
you to voluntarily accept the problem and put up with it. In doing so, you
are able to stop yourself becoming more and more unhappy, and you are able
to protect your mind and not getting disturbed. That is very important to
stop anger from arising.

|(2) Reflecting on the benefits of meditating on  |
|suffering                                        |


    . Verse 6.13  
If the followers of Durga and the people of Karnata
Endure the feelings of burns, cuts, and the like meaninglessly,
Then for the sake of liberation,
Why have I no courage?
It is said that the faithful followers of the Indian goddess Uma do things
like burn their bodies and so forth in order to please the goddess. There
are also followers of certain religious beliefs where they jump into the
fire, or pierce their body with all kinds of weapons and so forth. In this
world of ours there are people who undergo many physical hardships and
endure all kinds of physical austerities like piercing and cutting their
bodies in order to achieve what they believe is to achieve the state of
celestial beings called Brahma. If these people can put up with so much
hardship in order to achieve their goals, shouldn’t those who say they want
to achieve liberation also put up with hardships and difficulties in the
process to achieve liberation?
The point is that if there are so many people in this world who put up with
so much hardship in order to achieve goals that are not as meaningful as
achieving liberation from cyclic existence, then those who are intent on
achieving liberation, all the more they should put up with even more
difficulties and hardship because achieving liberation is a much more
meaningful and of higher goal.  What this verse is driving at is that it is
appropriate and important to put up with suffering.
If there is a need to tolerate and put up with difficulties and sufferings,
then the question is “Is it possible to do such a thing?” The answer is
“Yes it is possible.” The reason is in the next verse.

|(3) Reflecting on the fact that, if one is familiar [with such     |
|attitudes] they are not difficult to implement                     |
|(a) An extensive explanation                                       |
|(b) Synopsis                                                       |

|(a) An extensive explanation                                       |
|(i) Establishing that if one has familiarized oneself [with such   |
|attitudes] they are easily applied                                 |
|(ii) Establishing that by means of an analogy                      |
|(iii) The object towards which one is patient                      |
|(iv) An example of how the strength of patience arises if one      |
|familiarizes [oneself with it]                                     |

|(i) Establishing that if one has familiarized oneself [with such   |
|attitudes] they are easily applied                                 |


    . Verse 6.14  
    . There is nothing whatsoever
    . That is not made easier through acquaintance.
    . So through becoming acquainted with small harms,
    . I will become patient with great harms.
This verse is just stating the reality. Whatever the object or situation
may be, once we are accustomed with something, whatever it may be, it
becomes easier. We could be talking about bad habit or fault or we may be
talking about a good quality. Whatever it may be, good or bad, once we get
used to it, it becomes easier and we becomes much more familiar with it.
Therefore, we should start to acquaint ourselves with tolerating smaller
discomfort or problem, and becoming accustomed to putting up with small
discomfort or difficulties. Then gradually we will be tolerant and be
patience with bigger problem.
In the Compendium of Trainings, it says that we, the ordinary sentient
beings, find samsara so wonderful. We like samsara. Although the nature of
samsara is problems and suffering, we like it so much. We don’t think it is
suffering, and we think it is wonderful. Although that is not the reality,
why do we find samsara so wonderful, beautiful and nice?  It is a matter of
familiarity. We have been accustomed and habituated to view samsara in such
a mistaken way. Although reality is such that our existence is being
contaminated and is in the nature of suffering, and samsara is in the
nature of suffering, but we view it in a completely distorted way and
thinking it is pleasurable and it is happiness. That is through
familiarization, but nevertheless it is through bad habits.
Conversely, if we are able to put up with and accepts suffering through
familiarity and not to be disturbed with it, then it is also possible to
familiarize the mind to such a state that everything we see including
suffering in a positive light and see everything as pleasant . One is able
to develop that kind of concentration. It is matter of familiarization. For
example, it is said that those great bodhisattvas on the 1st bodhisattva
ground, because of having achieve the exalted practice of the perfection of
generosity, they are able to even give away their body and they do it
happily. Even if they have to cut off parts of their body piece by piece,
every additional piece that they cut and give away brings about more and
more joy and happiness to them. Why does it happen for them? It happens to
them because of their familiarity with such a practice.
In short, it is all a matter of familiarization in this context here of
cultivating the patience of voluntarily accepting difficult situation and
suffering. So if you are acquainted with such a practice and over time, you
will be able to tolerate problem and difficulties in that it doesn’t
disturb the mind. It is even possible to familiarize the mind to the extent
that suffering is seen as positive and as a cause of happiness. So it is
all a matter of habituation.
[BP1 Part 2 L4] It is the very nature of the mind that things become easier
for us through familiarity. When we familiarize our minds with virtue, it
becomes easier and easier to accomplish virtue. Accordingly, the more
familiar our minds are with the 3 mental poisons, the easier it becomes for
them to arise.
We may think, “I can’t do this.” But it will become easier the more
familiar we are with enduring suffering. By first putting up with small
sufferings, gradually, over time, we will be able to tolerate greater
hardships. The text suggests that we should first put up with small harms
like heat and cold or some unpleasant words. When our minds are familiar
with such practices, our ability to put up with greater harms will increase
to such an extent that we will be able to endure even the fires of hell.
The Buddha said that for bodhisattvas who have achieved a particular form
of concentration, whatever happens to them, instead of experiencing them as
problems, they only experience bliss and happiness due to their mental
habituation with such practice.

|(ii) Establishing that by means  |
|of an analogy                    |


    . Verse 6.15  
    . Who has not seen this to be so with meaningless sufferings,
    . Such as the feelings of
    . [Harms from] snakes, insects, hunger, and thirst
    . And of rashes?
Verse 6.15 is an example to illustrate what was said in the earlier verse,
which said with familiarity or habituation of putting up and tolerating
with problems and suffering, and without letting them to disturbs your
mind, and if we are able to see problem as a condition for happiness, it is
a matter of familiarization.  But if we do not put up with problems and
difficulties, then even small problem can disturb us a lot.
Verse 6.15 gave some examples that are pretty obvious to everybody such as
insect bites, feeling hot, hungry and thirsty. It is plainly obvious to
everyone that if anybody is to put up with these things, overtime these
things would not bother us as much as it would have if we have refused to
put up with it.

|(iii) The object towards which   |
|one is patient                   |


    . Verse 6.16  
    . I should not be impatient
    . With heat and cold, wind and rain, and so forth, and
    . Sickness, bondage, beatings, and so forth;
    . For if I am, the harm will increase.
The examples given here are like putting up with hot weather in the summer
and cold weather in the winter or putting up with the changes in the
weather, wind and rain or we have to experience all kinds of sicknesses.
The text is saying that we should put up with such situations. If you don’t
put up with them, they will cause you more problems, more unhappiness, and
more sufferings.
The verse here is saying do not be intolerant to these small problems and
discomfort, for if you are, then they will cause you more harm and
problems.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): I don’t know whether I have told you people.
I’m not sure. For some people when somebody teases little bit they get
upset. Some people have this character. Cannot tease even small thing, and
a little bit tease the person gets upset. This kind of people I notice,
many people tease them, continually teasing. It is also like that in the
monastery. I noticed there was one monk in the monastery. Sometime in the
debate, there are small pebbles everywhere outside and it sometime hit him.
He got so upset. He looked but he didn’t know who threw. Because he reacted
like another person threw again. Because he cannot take it, he has more
problems. Even say some nasty words or you say small thing he will gets
upset. In this way, people make fun of him. Everybody tease him. For some
people when the pebble hit them they don’t care; “This small pebble okay
never mind”. For these people they have less pebble on their head. Also
when someone teased them, they just smiled and take it easy. I notice these
people have lesser problem, less people teased them, less people disturbed
them. I saw that.  I think the verse is saying something like that. When
small problem come, you must accept. Somebody say nasty word, you just
smile and then accept. Then next time this person won’t say bad word
anymore to you. If you don’t accept and you get upset, they will come back
again. Here you must know what you want. If you don’t want more nasty
things then you smile and accept them. If you want more then react. I think
the verse is saying something like that. But good thing is that I saw that
my friend become a more patient person after everybody teased him. Because
after so many pebbles he cannot take it and after that “It’s okay”. He
became more tolerant and has lesser problem. Anyway this verse is saying
something like that.

|(iv) An example of how the strength of patience arises if|
|one familiarizes [oneself with it]                       |


    . Verse 6.17
    . Some when they see their own blood
    . Become especially brave and steady,
    . But some when they see the blood of others
    . Become unconscious and faint.
    . Verse 6.18 a,b
    . These come from the states of the mind
    . Being either steady or timid.
There are those who feel more courageous when they see their own blood is
being shed. When they are injured in the fight, when they have cuts and
bruises then they start to bleed. The shedding of blood gives them more
courage to fight, while there are others who get discouraged or lose heart
or become very timid when they see the blood of others. What accounts for
such a difference in reaction? It is nothing to do with the object blood.
It is more to do with the strength of their mind; in this case we could say
courage or lack of it.
This analogy here is to help us to understand the meaning. When you apply
the analogy to the meaning, instead of blood, here we are more focusing on
problems and sufferings. When we encounter problems and difficulties,
rather than becoming discouraged or defeated by the problems, the ideal
thing is to feel to have more determination and more courage to deal with
the problems. That is, of course, if you are a real practitioner.
It is mentioned in one of the sutras that our mind should not be like a
leaf fluttering in the wind especially, in the context here, of
transforming our minds and practicing the Dharma. Whatever practice we do,
right from the beginning we need to be very determined and also to be
firmed and stable. We must put up with difficulties and problem. We must
have that mindset right from the beginning. So it is a matter of having
that determination, courage and stability. The teachings tell us the
firmness of mind and the determination should be so strong such that we can
use the problems in our practice instead of letting it become an obstacle
for us.
In order to transform our mind and practice the Dharma, we need to be very
determined and courageous. The determination and courage has to be firm.
With that, then in the course of our practice we can deal with any problems
that come along the way. We can even transform that difficult situation
into something that is beneficial for our practice.
Right from the beginning of our mental transformation when we are
practicing the Dharma, if we do not have a strong determination and
courage, or if there is no stability of the determination that “Whatever
comes, let it come. I am going to take it”, then even if we do meet with a
small problem, it become a huge problem. We don’t have the determination
therefore we don’t want to put up with it. Then it is difficult. Even a
small problem can become a huge obstacle that prevents us from continuing
the practice and doing the practice.  Without this strong determination and
courage, even a small problem can become a great hindrance.
This is the meaning of the analogy given in the sutra where we were told
that we should not be like a piece of leaf fluttering in the wind. Rather,
we should be as firm and stable like a trunk of the tree and not like a
leaf, because if you are like a leaf then wherever the wind blows, the leaf
flutters here and there and everywhere.
Our mind shouldn’t be like a piece of leaf because when the wind blows,
just a slight breeze the leaf flutters. So our mind shouldn’t be like that.
Just because of a small problem we change in a negative way.

|b)        |
|Synopsis  |


    . Verse 6.18  c,d
    . Therefore I should disregard harms
    . And be unaffected by suffering.
    . Verse 6.19 a,b
    . Even when those who are skilled are suffering,
    . Their minds remain very lucid and undefiled.
In the course of achieving something that is greatly meaningful, we should
patiently and voluntarily put up with hardships along the way.
So it becomes very important for us in the course of our mental
transformation. In the practice of Dharma we should try not to let our
minds be affected or disturbed by various problems and difficulties.
“those who are skilled” refers to those who are really the meditators and
practitioners of the Mahayana  with the intent on developing bodhicitta and
have the thought of benefiting others. In particular for them, they should
not let their minds be disturbed and affected by difficulties and problems.
In summarizing this section, when we are talking about voluntarily
accepting problems and sufferings and developing that kind of patience, the
point here is not to be disturbed. Yes, there is a problem and difficult
situation. The point here is not to let the difficult situation, problem or
suffering increase or cause any mental unhappiness which will then lead us
into anger. On top of putting up with voluntarily accepting the problems
and sufferings, we should see how we can use the experience of the problems
or difficulties to increase our determination and courage.

|(4) The benefits of making effort in     |
|abandoning the afflictions               |


    . Verse 6.19 c,d
    . When war is waged against the afflictions
    . Much harm is caused at the time of battle.
    . Verse 6.20
    . The victorious heroes are those
    . Who, having disregarded all suffering,
    . Vanquish the foes of hatred and so forth;
    . The rest slay corpses.
In this world when countries go to war, the people who go to war know that
they will experience a lot of problems i.e. during the process there will
be many difficulties and problems. Whatever maybe the reason for going to
war, the thing is that once they have decided to go to war, they disregard
whatever problems they may meet. They know it but they disregard the
problems. They have intent on waging the war and to defeat the enemies.
We are talking about ordinary people going to war.  Dharma practitioners
are like soldiers also go to war. But who do they fight with when they go
to war? When the real Dharma practitioners go to war, they wage a war and
fight against the afflictions. They know all the problems that will come
with it. They know how difficult it is, they know the difficulties they
will experience, and they know the problems that will come along when they
start to fight the afflictions. Nevertheless, they know but they do it.
In this particular section, we specifically talk about vanquishing the foe
of anger through the practice of patience.
Here, for a person who is intent on cultivating patience, and in order to
vanquish the enemy of anger, he/she, knows the enemy – anger - very well.
He/she knows what anger can do and the damage that anger can do. He/she
knows how anger can counter attack when he/she fights them. He/she knows
the difficulties.  This practitioner understands all the problems but is
willing to disregard all the problems and willing to fight the anger.
The real heroes are those who wage a war over their own afflictions such as
anger, and those who wage a war with the strong intent and determination to
vanquish the afflictions. These people are the real heroes, the best of all
heroes and actually the real heroes.
The real hero is the person who wages a war against his/her own afflictions
and someone who vanquishes their own afflictions. Unlike the ordinary
heroes that the conventional world looks upon defeat their outer enemy. The
conventional heroes go to war to defeat their outer enemy. They are not
real heroes because what they are doing is essentially just fast forwarding
the death of the enemy when they kill their enemy. Even if they didn’t kill
their enemy, sooner or later the enemy will die on their own accord.
The ordinary worldly heroes are not really a hero. What they do is just no
different from killing a corpse because whether they actually kill the
external enemy or not, sooner or later the enemy will die one day. Since
that is the case killing them is like fast forwarding their death. That is
no big deal. There is nothing heroic in that. The real heroes are those who
conquer their own afflictions.
I think I have mentioned before. Those who are really practicing correctly
means their practice has hit the point/mark, which means they are doing it
correctly. We have to understand that such people may experience a lot of
suffering through their very pure and correct practice. A lot of their non-
virtue accumulated in the past ripens in that particular life and as the
result of that they experience problems and sufferings. You have to
understand that such things do happen. But for those people it becomes even
more important to them to realize and put up with the suffering.
A pure practitioner is someone who practicing correctly. Their practice
really hits the point/mark and basically like an external soldier who goes
to war. When an external soldier goes to war, they understand the problems
or difficulties they will face but their intent is to vanquishing their
external enemy. Nevertheless they disregard all the problems when they go
to war. They know the difficulties. They put up with all the difficulties
because they want to achieve the goal. Likewise, pure practitioner who is
really practicing correctly is somebody who intent on destroying his/her
own afflictions. He/she know how difficult it is and definitely there will
be problems. Pure practitioners will meet with problems and they
understood, recognized and are prepared for it. For them they have to be
even more determined not to give up. It is through not giving up that they
will be able to complete and achieve their goal of vanquishing the
afflictions.
There are many people who are afraid to practice Dharma because they really
think “When I practice Dharma, I get problems. Therefore I don’t want to
practice Dharma.” Many people are like that.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): I heard that. “When I read Diamond Cutter Sutra
then I get headache. That is why I don’t want to read. If I read this, I
get this problem. I don’t want to read.” I heard many people saying this.
If you don’t know the reality and if you don’t know how to think i.e. you
don’t know what is right and what is wrong, then you will really get a lot
of misunderstanding like what I have said in the last lesson. There are
many people who tell me “If I do this practice, or if I recite that text, I
get so many problems.” They tell me “I got so many problems because I
recited this text or I did that practice.” As I have told you “Please don’t
tell me these things because none of us are actual practitioners. None of
us are real practitioners and Dharma practitioners”. When you experience
problems, it is not due to you having practiced Dharma because you don’t
practice Dharma. When you experience problems, just acknowledge and just
say “It is a result of my own non-virtue that I have accumulated in the
past that ripens.” That’s it. Don’t blame it on the Dharma because we don’t
even practice the Dharma correctly and purely. Of course it is a different
matter if you are a real practitioner. But even in the case if you are a
real practitioner, in the first place you wouldn’t be complaining. You
wouldn’t even mention things like that if you are a real practitioner. When
a real and pure practitioner experience problems, they will not complain.
They will also not attribute it to their Dharma practice because
immediately they know this is the result of their own non-virtue in the
past.
Actually those people who complain are actually those who don’t practice
the Dharma. These people who attribute whatever problems they experience in
life as a result of having practiced the Dharma are a clear sign that they
are not practitioners. It is a clear sign that they do not know what Dharma
practice is. It is a clear sign that they do not practice the Dharma. How
Dharma can bring about sufferings?
Therefore, those real practitioners are the real heroes because they fight
their own afflictions; which are the real enemy. They understand and they
know exactly what it means. They know all the problems, the difficulties,
and the challenges but yet they do it with the intent to vanquish their own
afflictions. Those are the real heroes.

|(5) An extensive explanation of the     |
|meditations on suffering                |


    . Verse 6.21
    . Furthermore, suffering has good qualities:
    . Through being disheartened with it, arrogance is dispelled,
    . Compassion arises for those in cyclic existence,
    . Negativities are shunned, and joy is found in virtue.
When we think of our own problems and our own sufferings, first we can use
that experience to develop disenchantment and disillusionment with samsara.
When we suffer, or when we have problems, it is very helpful to lower our
pride. When we suffer or when we have problems, through the personal
experiences of the problems, we develop disenchantment and disillusionment
with samsara then we realize we have problems. That realization of problems
and suffering weakens our arrogance and our pride. Because of that personal
understanding of suffering, we can also come to understand how others are
in the similar situation in that everybody has problems, and everybody is
suffering. That understanding can help us to have compassion for others.
It is said in the teachings that through meditating on our own suffering we
develop definite emergence - the thought of renunciation. When we think of
the suffering of others, we develop compassion for others. When we think of
how others are suffering, we then develop a wish for them to be free of
suffering. That is compassion.
When we suffer, there is this thought that dislike suffering. We don’t like
suffering so we want to be parted from suffering. Because of that wish do
not want to experience suffering, and if we investigate what is the cause
of suffering, and through the investigation we really understand it is the
non-virtue. Because we don’t want suffering, then we would restrain
ourselves from committing non-virtue.
Since we don’t want suffering, that means we want happiness, and because we
want happiness, then if we come to understand that the cause of happiness
is virtue, we will then engage in virtue and accumulate virtue.
These are benefits of going through and experiencing suffering. When we
have problems, and because we don’t want suffering and we want happiness,
that may spur us to really think more in depth about what really the cause
of happiness is and what really the cause of suffering is. If we can think
about that in terms of karma and its effects, that will then spur us to
abandon non-virtue and to cultivate virtue.
With this, we have finish with the patience of voluntarily accepting
suffering. The next section is on developing the patience of certitude
about the teachings.
One year analytical meditation program
For those of you who are part of the one year analytical meditation
program, you can switch to the next topic on this coming Friday (13 Jun
2014). Let’s assume that you have now realized guru devotion. The next
topic is human life of freedoms and endowments and death and impermanence.
Let us do that for three months. So on Friday you switch to the topic on
human life of freedoms and endowments and death and impermanence. You
meditate on that for the subsequent three months. Approximately two months
after this Friday, we will come together again and you have a chance to
share your experience.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): I think probably most of you have received the
email by ABC about the choir, the vocal group. Anyway to chant and sing
song. Of course if you don’t have good voice then nothing can be done. You
just relax. You don’t have to join. If you have good voice then please
joins this group, if possible. The whole idea is not so much like people
singing outside. This is mainly to attract the people especially the young
ones. By listening to the chanting they are able to feel some kind of
feeling in their heart. Little bit we can change our tune. Not like very
old tune. We can change our tune to modern tune so the people like it. That
is our plan. We need you people who have good voice. So please join. If I
have good voice I will do everything but I don’t have voice to sing. I
don’t have that. Those who have it is very good. This is part of your
practice. You are offering something to other people, so this is important.
Just a different method to bring people in the Dharma. The goal is that.
This can be your exercise. At my Chinese Senior Class, a senior ask me a
question: How can you persuade somebody or your friend to take refuge in
Buddha, Dharma and Sangha. If Buddha, Dharma and Sangha is so wonderful,
how you persuade the person to take refuge in Buddha, Dharma and Sangha.
You can write down. You can think of what is the best skill. You take two
months or three months, it is up to you. So write down. I thought it is
really good.
Last Sunday, she (the senior) asked me this question: What is the quickest
way to achieve liberation? This we really need to think.
The previous Sunday she asked me how to persuade someone to take refuge. We
say Buddha is good, Dharma is good, Sangha is good, how to convince people?
Not easy. Think about it. You tell your friend “Buddha, Dharma and Sangha
is good, you take refuge.” What is your skill? May be writes it down.
I thought it is good she asked me the questions. She asked two questions
and is very good. I thought it is not easy. Maybe you can think about it
and take two months’ time to write down what is the best.






