Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Engaging in the Deeds of a Bodhisattva/lesson23.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:52:14.651311
================================================================================


Question (posted in previous lesson):
   1. Why the twelve links of dependent origination is placed in that
      particular order?
   2. How does craving and grasping nourish the karma?
Student: The twelve links of dependent origination is placed in that
particular order for meditation purpose.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): If somebody were to ask: If that is for
meditation purpose, but that is not the real order, then why they put that
kind of unreal order in the meditation process?
Student: I cannot answer this one. Regarding craving and grasping, which is
non-virtuous, how do they nourish the karma?  I think is the grasping to
the I. When we face the process of the twelve links, and when we are going
through the death process, we have this very innate grasping of the I that
will nourish the potential existence. At the time of death, we have this
grasping of the I very strongly, and because of this grasping we have a
strong attachment to have another rebirth.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): When does that happen?
Student: I am not very sure when. In order for a throwing karma into a
human rebirth; we need to have virtuous projecting karma. Then with the two
causes, the projecting causes and the actualizing causes, then we have
human rebirth.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): Everybody listening? What is the question?
What is the answer?
Aryadeva’s Four Hundred Verses states:
   Because thought exists, therefore phenomenon exists.
Essentially, if there is no thought merely positing phenomena, phenomena
cannot exist. An existence that is not merely posited/ imputed by thought
is like a dream person. What is it important for us to understand is that
all phenomena are imputed/ posited by thought.
An existence that is not merely imputed by thought is likened to an
illusory elephant or a dream person. What is a dream person? What exactly
is it when you look for this dream person? A dream person is nothing more
than the mere appearance of that person to the dreaming consciousness;
which is a mistaken consciousness. Other than that, there is nothing that
you can call the dream person. As long as that dreaming consciousness
exists, that dream person will appears to that dreaming consciousness. That
is how a dream person exists and it is nothing more than that mere
appearance.  If the dreaming consciousness ceases to exist, then the dream
person will not appear. Neither will exists.
If you think of the example of mistaking a coil of rope to be a snake, the
appearance of the snake to that mistaken consciousness that misperceives
the coil of rope to be a snake is nothing more than a mere appearance to
this mistaken mind; nothing more than that.
When we talk about a dream person or a snake that is wrongly imputed on a
coil of rope, there is an appearance of snake, and there is an appearance
of dream person. How you say that they do actually exist? Their manner of
existence is none other than their appearance to the respective
consciousness that perceives them; nothing more than that.
That dream person cannot exist without the mistaken dreaming consciousness
that it appears to. It has to depend on that dreaming consciousness.
Essentially, a dream person is just that mere appearance to the dreaming
consciousness. From this example, it is very clear that without depending
on that dream consciousness, you cannot posit or talk about a dream person.
Just like this examples, when you talk about form, sound, smell, taste and
touch, these are nothing more than the mere appearances to the thought that
apprehends them.
Form, sound, smell, taste and touch are posited through their appearance to
thought. Without form, sound, smell, taste and touch appearing to the
thought, you cannot posit them. So without the thought to which form
appears to, you cannot posit form.
We have to think about this using the earlier analogies and using form as
an example. You cannot posit form without depending on the thought to which
that form appears to. What is form? Essentially, form is none other than
that which is merely imputed by that thought to which it appears to. In
short, there is nothing that can exist without being posited by thought. If
you can point to something that can exist without being merely imputed by
thought, then that would lead to the fallacy that that particular object or
phenomena in question is truly existent or existing from its own side.
Form is merely imputed by thought. There cannot be a form that exists
without being merely imputed by thought. As such, form is something that is
merely imputed by thought. It is essential to think about how all phenomena
are merely posited by thought on a regular basis. Of course, this is a
challenging task.
Form is posited as none other than that which appears to the thought
apprehending form. So it is merely imputed by the thought consciousness
apprehending it. As it is established and imputed by thought to be form,
form exists as form, and form is form.
What is the difference between form and a dream person? Both are similar in
that form and dream person are merely imputed by thought, in that they are
merely posited through their appearance to the consciousness apprehending
them. But while form is form, a dream person is not a person. Both are
similar in that they are merely imputed by thought, but one is an existence
i.e. form exists and a dream person does not exist as a person.

What is it that determines something is an existence while others are not,
like the case of the dream person is not a person? This is something that
requires much further thought.
What I have stated to you is a brief explanation on how all phenomena are
merely imputed by thought. I have tried to explain it briefly through the
use of an analogy. First I gave you an analogy and try to apply the analogy
to the meaning. By using the analogy of a dream person, a dream person is
none other than that mere appearance to the mistaken dream consciousness
that it appears to. Other than that, there is nothing that you can posit as
a dream person. This analogy is to help you to understand how all phenomena
are merely imputed by thought. Whether is it form, sound, smell, taste and
touch, they are merely posited through their appearance to the thought
consciousness apprehending them. It is important to constantly think about
how all phenomena are merely imputed by thought by using these analogies.

Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds
In the last lesson we saw how our wisdom will degenerate if we fail to
apply mindfulness and vigilance. There are many kinds of wisdom - the
wisdom arisen from hearing, the wisdom arisen from reflection and the
wisdom arisen from meditation. If we look at the knowledge that we may have
gained through the course of our study, it is subject to degeneration and
can be forgotten if we do not have mindfulness and introspection.
Whatever we have heard or learned, we need to remember them. We need to be
mindful of the knowledge that we have gained, otherwise we will forget
them. That is why there are people who say that they have done quite a fair
bit of study but they don’t remember whatever they have studied. This is a
clear sign that they have not applied mindfulness.
If one lacks introspection, then one would not be able to develop pure
ethical discipline.

|Extensive Explanation                                       |
|1 The disadvantages of lacking alertness                    |
|2 Guarding mindfulness as a method of guarding alertness    |

|1 The disadvantages of lacking alertness                    |
|A If one is separated from mindfulness and alertness, any   |
|action one performs has little force                        |
|B Wisdom will not become pure                               |
|C Ethics will not become pure                               |
|D Virtues accumulated in the past will be destroyed         |
|E The accomplishment of virtues not previously performed    |
|will be hindered                                            |

|C Ethics will not become pure                               |


[BP1 L26] In Tibetan, alertness and introspection means the same thing; the
opposite of alertness is non-alertness or non-introspection
Verse 5.26
Even those who have plenty of hearing,
Faith and diligent endeavour
Will become sullied by a downfall
Due to the fault of lacking introspection.
The verse is saying that if you have done extensive study, you will know
the essential points of your practice in regards to what you have to
cultivate and what you have to discard. On top of that, you have faith in
karma and its effects, and you may be joyously persevering in your
practice. To a certain extent you have these qualities.
But if one lacks mindfulness and introspection, then one’s ethical
discipline will still degenerate. Even if one has all these qualities but
if one does not have introspection, one’s ethical discipline will
degenerate. In that if one is not careful, then attachment and desire will
creeps into the mind, and one’s ethical discipline will degenerate and one
becomes stained by downfalls.
The point behind this verse is that introspection is greatly needed.  Next,
without introspection, the virtues that were accumulated previously can be
destroyed.

|D Virtues accumulated in the past will be destroyed        |


Verse 5.27
The thieves of non-introspection,
In following upon the degeneration of mindfulness,
Will steal even the merits I have firmly gathered
[So that] I shall then proceed to lower realms.
Here there are robbers and thieves. The attachment and anger are likened to
robbers and jealousy and pride is likened to thieves. The verse is saying
that in the absence of introspection, one will be harmed by the robbers of
anger and attachment and harmed by the thieves of jealousy and pride.
When there is a lack of introspection, this gives anger, attachment, and
jealousy a chance to sneak into the mind. When they do sneak into our
minds, they steal or rob us of the virtues/ merits that we have accumulated
in the past. Then when our merits/ virtues are stolen or robbed, we will
not be able to get a good rebirth. As such, we have to end up in the lower
realms.
The verse is saying that if one lacks introspection, the inner robbers and
thieves of the attachment, anger, jealousy and so forth will come and steal
our virtues just like how robbers and thieves plunder the wealth and
possessions of others. When our virtues/ merits are stolen by these inner
robbers and thieves, and when we are depleted of our merits, then we will
not be able to get a good rebirth. We will end up getting a rebirth in the
lower realms.
With the lacks of introspection, besides one’s accumulated merits
depleting, it will also hinders the cultivation of new virtues.

|E The accomplishment of virtues not previously    |
|performed will be hindered                        |


Verse 5.28
This host of thieves of the afflictions
Will search for a good opportunity and occasion.
Having found it, they will steal my virtue
And destroy even life in a good migration.
Before the robbers strike their victims, they usually size up the situation
first. They look at their targets, and then they analyze whether they will
be able to overcome their targets and rob them of the wealth. If they think
that they are able to do it, they will also look for a suitable time such
that they will analyze whether it is better to strike in the day or in the
night. After much consideration and having determined that they are more
likely to succeed, only then will the robbers strike.
Likewise, the inner robbers and thieves of anger, attachment, jealousy and
pride are always on the lookout and to see when they can harm us. Once
there is an opportunity, they manifest readily. When they manifest, even we
are in the midst of doing something virtuous, they will stop and prevent us
from accumulating virtues. These afflictions are likened to robbers who are
always on the lookout. When they find an opportunity, they strike at us and
they deprive us of our merits, and as such deprive us of good rebirths.
Verse 5.26 talks about how in the absence of introspection, the
merits/virtues that we have accumulated in the past could be destroyed if
we lack introspection.
Here in verses 5.27 and 5.28, it is saying that if we lack introspection,
we will not be able to cultivate new virtues, and then not be able to
accumulate merits/virtues that we have not accumulated earlier.
That concludes the explanation of the faults of lacking introspection. Next
section is the method for guarding our introspection. The method for
guarding our introspection is said to be guarding our mindfulness.

|2 Guarding mindfulness as a method of  |
|guarding alertness                     |

|Guarding mindfulness as a method of    |
|guarding alertness                     |
|A Brief presentation                   |
|B Extensive explanation                |

|A Brief presentation                   |


Verse 5.29
Therefore, I shall never let mindfulness depart
From the doorway of my mind.
If it goes, I should recall the harms of the lower realms
And closely place it there.
Here guarding mindfulness is said to be the method for guarding our
introspection. If you talk about the mind as being the house, then there
will be an entrance door. In order to protect the house, you usually place
a security guard at the entrance of the building. The guard here is
mindfulness. What are you guarding at? You are guarding the house of the
mind to check whether the mind is engaging erroneously at the object or not
just like you place the guard in order to check whether there are any
robbers or thieves approaching or not.
Here the mindfulness is like the door that stops the mind from being
distracted outwards, attaching and involving itself with objects such as
form, sound, and so forth.
If we discovered the mind is distracted and has gone out to different kinds
of objects and engaging them erroneously, then to be mindful to pull the
mind back onto the virtuous object of observation. Through being mindful
“If I do not pull my mind back and let it just go astray, then I would have
to suffer in the lower realms”, and as such you pull the mind attention
back and place it on a virtuous object of observation and then be mindful
of that.  As such when the mindfulness degenerates, bring the mind
attention back again on the virtuous object of observation.

|Extensive explanation                     |
|1 The external condition: relying on the  |
|virtuous spiritual teacher                |
|2 The internal condition: having correct  |
|mental attention                          |
|3 The way alertness is developed through  |
|mindfulness                               |

|1 The external condition: relying on the  |
|virtuous spiritual teacher                |


Verse 5.30
Through the company of gurus,
Through the subsequent teachings of abbots, and through fear,
Mindfulness will easily be generated
In fortunate people who act respectfully.
A method to guard the mindfulness for beginner whose mindfulness is not
stable is to be in proximity of the virtuous friends, their gurus, or to
mix with friends who are abiding in pure trainings. The qualified guru
shows what is to be abandoned and what is to be cultivated. The trainee or
the disciple has to put that into practice correctly.

|2 The internal condition: having correct  |
|mental attention                          |


Verse 5.31
“I am always dwelling in the presence
Of all those buddhas and bodhisattvas
Who are endowed
With unimpeded vision in all.”
Verse 5.32 a,b
By thinking in this way,
I shall likewise obtain possession of shame, respect, and fear.
The verse is telling us that we should always remind ourselves that the
buddhas and bodhisattvas are always around us and with unimpeded vision in
all, they can see all the things that we are doing. Therefore, they know
when we are engaging in non-virtue. There is no way we can pretend
otherwise and taking them for a ride thinking that they would not see. By
keeping that in mind, we can restraint ourselves from non-virtue.
If we can think of ourselves as being in their presence all the time, just
as when we are about to engage in non-virtue;
- out of consideration for ourselves, we should abstain from committing the
  non-virtue on the account of ourselves is shame
- out of respect for our training, we should abstain from non-virtue on
  account of others plus the fear of the consequences of engaging in non-
  virtue is embarrassment
This is how we can protect and guard our mindfulness and introspection.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): I went to someone house and she has some
pictures of His Holiness and some other gurus in the room. This person puts
the pictures inside the cupboard and cover up. Then I asked the person:
“Why do you cover up?” She said “I need to watch the TV at night but the TV
is showing something not so good”. She thinks it is not appropriate so she
covered up and locked it. As I know the person so I told her: “If you cover
up they will still see. So it is better do not cover up.” I just made fun
to the person.
If you have a good understanding of what buddhas really is and understand
that they are omniscient and mindful that the buddhas have unimpeded vision
of all that exist, they are right there all the time and they see you all
the time, it does make a huge difference to your practice of restraint from
non-virtue.

|3 The way alertness is developed   |
|through mindfulness                |
|A The way mindfulness arises       |
|B The way alertness arises from    |
|that                               |

|A The way mindfulness arises       |


Verse 5.32 c,d
Also through doing this,
Recollection of the Buddha will repeatedly occur
If you are able to remember the Buddhas in the way that is suggested in the
previous verse by thinking that how the Buddhas are omniscient and they are
always there, they see everything we do and so forth, then we will be able
to remember well the Dharma and also the Sangha. With this habit of
remembering them, it is said that one will easily generate the mindfulness
of the Three Jewels.

|B The way alertness arises from    |
|that                               |


Verse 5.33
When mindfulness abides for the purpose
Of guarding against [afflictions] from the doorway of the mind,
Then introspection will come about
And even that which had gone will return.
If you place the mindfulness of not forgetting what is to be adopted and
what is to be discarded at the doorway of the mind, it is said that the
introspection that investigates whether your body, speech and mind are
actually engaging in non-virtue or not will naturally arise.  If you have a
strong mindfulness placing at the door of the mind, even if your
introspection does degenerate a bit, you will be able to bring back your
vigilance or introspection that you have lost.
If you have strong and continual mindfulness, you will be able to stop the
mind from being distracted away from the object of observation. When there
is strong and continual mindfulness, your mind will not be distracted from
the object and then stay distracted without even knowing for a long time.
That will not happen. When there is strong mindfulness, the introspection
that checks and investigates whether the mind is distracted or not will
just come of its own accord.
The point is that during the time when the mindfulness is degenerated, it
is more difficult to be vigilant. It is more difficult to have
introspection and more difficult to cognize and be aware that one’s mind is
already distracted. But when there is strong mindfulness, it is much easier
to be vigilant and is much easier to catch the mind straying away from the
object of observation.
This section talks about the relationship between mindfulness and
introspection. If one has strong and continual mindfulness, then
introspection will come about easily and naturally.
This verse 5.33 goes with the outline of “the manner of generating
introspection from that”. “That” is referring to mindfulness. When there is
strong mindfulness, introspection follows easily and naturally. That is the
point.
We have finished with the section on the manner of generating the inner
condition of mindfulness and introspection.

|An extensive explanation of the way to practice              |
|1 The method for guarding the trainings: guarding the mind   |
|2 The method for guarding the mind: guarding mindfulness and |
|alertness                                                    |
|3 The way to train in the conduct of guarding the mind by    |
|means of mindfulness and alertness                           |
|4 The branch or method of excellent trainings                |

|3 The way to train in the conduct of guarding the mind by    |
|means of mindfulness and alertness                           |
|A The way to train in the ethics of refraining from negative |
|actions                                                      |
|B The way to train in the ethics of gathering virtuous       |
|dharmas                                                      |
|C The way to train in the ethics of working for the benefit  |
|of sentient beings                                           |

|A The way to train in the ethics of refraining from negative |
|actions∗                                                     |
|1 Making effort to purify all conduct of the three doors     |
|2 Guarding against all deterioration                         |

|1 Making effort to purify all conduct of the three doors     |
|A Examining the conduct of body and speech                   |
|B Examining the conduct of the mind                          |
|C Explaining the contexts for permitted and prohibited       |
|actions                                                      |

|A Examining the conduct of body and speech                   |
|1 Examining one’s motivation before acting with the body     |
|2 Advice related to actions like looking etc                 |
|3 Application to other behaviours                            |
|4 Examining the posture                                      |

|1 Examining one’s motivation before acting with the body     |

The conduct of guarding the mind with mindfulness and introspection
   1. Training in the ethical discipline of restraint
   2. Training in the ethical discipline of gathering virtuous Dharma
   3. Training in the ethical discipline of accomplishing the welfare of
      others

1. Training in the ethical discipline of restraint
   a. Striving to purify all actions of one’s body, speech and mind
   b. Protecting them from degeneration

a. Striving to purify all the conducts/actions of one’s body, speech and
mind
   i. Investigating the conduct of one’s body and speech
  ii. Investigating the conduct of one’s mind
 iii. Explanation of those actions or conduct that are permitted and those
      that are forbidden.

i. Investigating the conduct of one’s body and speech
   a. Investigating the motivation before the action
   b. An advice in relation to the view
   c. Relating it to other actions
   d. Investigating the remaining actions
Venerable Gyurme: I think investigating the remaining actions has to do
with one’s physical demeanor.
Verse 5.34
When, at the beginning,
Having known that such a mind is with fault,
At such a time, like a piece of wood,
I should remain being able to rely [upon the antidote].
Before carrying out an action with our body and or speech, we should first
investigate what is the motivation of wanting to engage in that particular
course of action. Are the thoughts that are going through in our heads
virtuous or non-virtuous?  Upon checking the motivations and if we
discovered that it is non-virtuous and with the understanding that if we do
continue to carry out that action nevertheless, it would bring about
negative consequences in this life and in the future lives, then we should
thoroughly restrain ourselves and abide firmly. Abiding firmly here means
restraining or stopping ourselves from doing that action with either our
body or speech.
When we discover that there is a non-virtuous motivation that is driving us
to want to take a particular course of action with our body and speech, we
should immediately restrain ourselves thoroughly and not follow through
with that intention. We should restrain ourselves and at the same time we
should try to eradicate those non-virtuous thoughts.
Most of our physical and verbal actions are the manifestations of our
thoughts. As such, we should remain mindful and vigilant because if we act
out our thoughts physically and verbally, that will lead to all kinds of
negative consequences and it will lead us into hurting or harming others.
This verse is advising us to investigate and examine our motivations. When
examining our motivations and if we do discover that it is a non-virtuous
motivation that is wanting us to commit the action with our body and
speech, then we should thoroughly restrain and stop ourselves from acting
out those thoughts.

|2 Advice related to actions like      |
|looking etc                           |
|A A general presentation of where to  |
|direct one’s gaze                     |
|B How to act when fatigued            |
|C How to act when in the presence of  |
|other beings                          |
|D How to act when resting             |



|A A general presentation of where to  |
|direct one’s gaze                     |


Verse 5.35
Never should I look around
Distractedly for no purpose.
With a resolute mind
I should always keep my eyes cast downwards.
The verse is saying that at all times we should not look at things that are
not in accord with the Dharma, things that are meaningless and pointless
and things that will cause our minds to be distracted. While keeping the
mind focus on a chosen virtuous object of observation, then physically
one’s gaze should not be placed beyond the space that is just right in
front of us. One should not be looking around and looking afar but
generally just gaze in the area just in front of us.
Why is there this advice of generally just focusing our gaze just in the
area right in front of us rather than looking elsewhere?  Because if we
look around in a distracted manner, if we are not able to hold the mind
onto a virtuous object of observation, then if our gaze happens to fall
upon an object of desire or to an object or person who causes us to be
upset, then that will induce all kinds of incorrect mental attention. As
such bring about the manifestations of afflictions and suffering.
If our gaze falls upon an object that will cause the manifestation of the
afflictions, that will bring about problems and sufferings. As such,
mentally we have to be mindful and not forget the chosen object of
observation which is a virtuous one, and then physically we should just
look at the general space right in front of us without looking around and
without looking afar.

|B How to act when fatigued            |


Verse 5.36 a,b
But in order to relax the gaze
For a short while I should look around.
While the behaviour mentioned in the earlier verse is that which is to be
adopted at all times, but at times when one is feeling tired and exhausted
and if one keeps looking at things that way, then one may end up being very
mentally disturbed. At those times when one needs a rest, one can
occasionally look further ahead and look around but never ever losing
mindfulness of a virtuous object of observation.

|C How to act when in the presence of  |
|other beings                          |


Verse 5.36 c,d
If someone appears in my field of vision
I should look at him and say, “It’s good that you have come.”
Verse 5.37 a,b
To check if there is any danger on the path and so forth
I should look again and again in the four directions.
In the course of adopting such a physical demeanor in that you do not look
afar, usually you will cast your gaze downwards. If for whatever reason
someone comes into your presence, whoever the person maybe, rather than
sitting there and pretending that you do not see just because you are
engaging in such a mode of conduct, you should acknowledge the presence of
the person. The text says you could greet the person and say “It’s good
that you have come” or you can acknowledge the presence of the person by
saying “hi” or “welcome” without necessarily having to look directly and
stare into that person’s face.
When you are walking down the road which may present some dangers such as
robbery or some wild animals may be around, and if you persist to looking
downwards while walking, then you are going to end up in trouble.
In such dangerous places, you have to be vigilant and be aware of your
surroundings by looking at your surroundings. But it doesn’t mean that
while you are looking around, you are at the liberty to be mentally
distracted. You can look around but you should never be mentally
distracted.
These are all advices pertaining to the need for constant mindfulness and
awareness.

Q&A
Student: Relating to the term “merely imputed by thought”, is it synonymous
with the mind, the consciousness or are we referring specifically to a
conceptual consciousness? In Lorig, when we say “thought” or “thought
consciousness” we always think about it in the context of the conceptual
consciousness.  Can I just use “merely imputed by mind”?
Answer: In the treatises, sometimes it is written as “merely imputed by
mind”. Sometimes, for example in Aryadevas’ Four Hundred Verses, it is
written as “merely imputed by thought”. Sometimes you see “merely imputed
by name” and sometimes you see the phrase “in the nature of mind”. In the
phrase “merely imputed by thought” can we take this thought to be the
thought that is mentioned in the study of mind and awareness (Lorig) where
there is a division of consciousness into conceptual and non-conceptual? So
there is the definition of the mind that apprehends sound and meaning as
suitable to be mixed. When we talk about “thought”, thought only exists on
the level of sentient beings.
Is there any issue or problem with identifying this thought to be
conceptual thought or conceptuality? In the case of a sentient being, the
state of mind in the continuum of a sentient being is either conceptual or
non-conceptual, isn’t it? In the phrase “merely labelled by thought”, I
personally think there shouldn’t be a problem with identifying thought in
the phrase “merely labelled by thought” to be conceptuality or conceptual
consciousness.

Meditation Program Sharing Session
There will be sharing session on 04th May 2014 (Sunday) at 1.30pm for those
who have committed to the meditation program. During the sharing session
you can talk about your experiences, how is the experience so far, sharing
of problem and so forth. Session may last for about 1 ½ hours.


