Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Engaging in the Deeds of a Bodhisattva/Sample answer 1 of sample questions.pdf
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:52:18.071664
================================================================================

In depth discussion of sample questions
      Shows the change of subject, predicate or sign:
QThesisSignT/
FReasonSubjectPredicate
1Our bodyis an object of
abandonmentbecause it arose from the ignorance
belonging to the twelve links of
dependent origination.TWhatever arises from ignorance
of the twelve links is necessarily
an object of abandonment.
1aOur mindis an object of
abandonmentbecause it arose from the ignorance
belonging to the twelve links of
dependent origination.
1bOur bodyis not an object of
abandonmentbecause it arose from the ignorance
belonging to the twelve links of
dependent origination.
1cOur bodyis not an object of
abandonmentbecause it did not arise from the
ignorance belonging to the twelve links
of dependent origination.
QThesisSignT/
FReasonSubjectPredicate
2Our bodyis not an object of
abandonmentbecause it is the propelled result of
virtuous karma.FWhatever is the result of
propelled karma is necessarily
an object of abandonment.
2aOur mindis not an object of
abandonmentbecause it is the propelled result of
virtuous karma.
2bOur bodyis an object of
abandonmentbecause it is the propelled result of
virtuous karma.
2cOur bodyis not an object of
abandonmentbecause it is not the propelled result of
virtuous karma.
QThesisSignT/
FReasonSubjectPredicate
3 It [we]will be impossible to get
another good rebirthonce we fall into the lower realms. FWhatever is a contaminated
phenomena is necessarily
impermanent.
3aIt [we]will not be impossible to
get another good rebirthonce we fall into the lower realms.
1
QThesisSignT/
FReasonSubjectPredicate
4The perfection of
generosityis completedonce we are free of attachment to our
possessions.FArhats are also free of
attachment to possessions.
4aGenerosityis completedonce we are free of attachment to our
possessions.
4bThe perfection of
generosityis not completedeven if we are free of attachment to our
possessions.
4cThe perfection of
generosityis completedeven if we are not free of attachment to
our possessions.
QThesis T/
FReasonSubject Predicate
5The manner by which we are harmed
by our external enemyis similar to our internal enemy. FOur external enemy cannot
throw us into the lower realms,
whereas our internal enemy can.
5aThe manner by which we are not
harmed by our external enemyis similar to our internal enemy.
5bThe manner by which we are harmed
by our external enemyis not similar to our internal enemy.
QThesis T
/
FReasonSubject Predicate
6Our body, which is
by nature uncleanis inappropriate to be
offered to the Three
Jewels.FBy offering one's body to the Three Jewels, one willingly
accomplishes their wishes, which is to use one's body to work
fearlessly for others and avoid negativities.
6aOur mind, which is
by nature uncleanis inappropriate to be
offered to the Three
Jewels.
6bOur body, which is
by nature uncleanis appropriate to be
offered to the Three
Jewels.
QThesisT/F ReasonSubjectPredicate
7Vigilance arises from
mindfulness.TIf one places mindfulness on an object, the vigilance checking
whether such a mind stays with its object naturally arises.
7aMindfulness arises  from vigilance.
7bVigilance does not arise from
mindfulness.
2
QThesisSignT/
FReasonSubjectPredicate
8Sleep cannot be virtuous because it is a derivative of
ignorance.FWhatever is a derivative of ignorance
is not necessarily nonvirtuous.
8aConsciousness cannot be virtuous because it is a derivative of
ignorance.
8bSleep can be virtuous because it is a derivative of
ignorance.
8cSleep can be virtuous because it is not a derivative of
ignorance.
QThesis T/
FReasonSubject Predicate
9When others speak true and pleasant
words to us, we are supposed to remain silent
like a piece of wood.T'silent' refers to the mind not engaging
in the object of nonvirtue , here not
engaging in the object of pride.
9aWhen others speak false and
unpleasant words to us, we are supposed to remain silent
like a piece of wood.
9bWhen others speak true and pleasant
words to us, we are not supposed to remain
silent like a piece of wood.
QThesis T
/FReasonSubjectPredicate
10Ethical
disciplineis more exalted than
generosity.TWhen one has a generosity that is disinterested in and unattached to resources,
one is better able to cultivate ethical discipline, which is to restrain oneself
from possessing what one does not possess.
10aGenerosityis more exalted than
ethical discipline.
10bEthical
disciplineis not more exalted
than generosity.
QThesis T/
FReasonSubject Predicate
11If it is a root
of virtue,it is necessarily a root of virtue that
can be destroyed by anger.FIt is said that, roots of virtue that are included in the
collection of merit is subject to destruction by anger, but the
roots of virtue included in the collection of wisdom are not.
11aIf it is a root
of nonvirtue,it is necessarily a root of nonvirtue that
can be purified by opponent powers.
11bIf it is a root
of virtue,it is not necessarily a root of virtue that
can be destroyed by anger.
11cIf it is a root
of virtue,it is necessarily not a root of virtue that
can be destroyed by anger.
3
QThesis T/
FReasonSubject Predicate
12The object at which
one gets angrycan be an arya bodhisattva TIt is said that, anger generated by a lower bodhisattva towards a
higher bodhisattva, which can include an arya bodhisattva,
destroys roots of virtue accumulated over many eons.
12aThe object at which
one cultivates patiencecan be an arya bodhisattva
12bThe object at which
one gets angrycan be a Buddha
QThesis T/
FReasonSubject Predicate
13It is appropriate to get
angry atsomeone who creates obstacles to
one's own virtuous actionFFor one cultivating virtue, especially patience,
someone who creates obstacles to one's own virtuous
action is in fact, an object of one's patience, hence, is
one's object for accumulating virtue of patience.
13aIt is inappropriate to get
angry atsomeone who creates obstacles to
one's own virtuous action
13bIt is appropriate to get
angry atsomeone who creates obstacles to
one's own nonvirtuous action
QThesis T/
FReasonSubject Predicate
14A bodhisattva who has already
directly realized emptiness never gets
angry.TWhoever has direct realization of emptiness will never accumulate
fresh projecting karma for rebirth in cyclic existence.
14aA bodhisattva who has not
directly realized emptiness never gets
angry.
14bA bodhisattva who has already
directly realized emptiness can get
angry.
QThesis T/
FReasonSubjectPredicate
15As fields of
merit, the Buddhas and sentient
beings are not similar.FWhether it is Buddha or sentient beings, one necessarily needs them
as one's object to accumulate merit.
15aAs not fields
of merit, the Buddhas and sentient
beings are hence not similar.
15bAs fields of
merit, the Buddhas and sentient
beings are similar.
4
QThesis T
/FReasonSubject Predicate
16The objects to which
we practice patience are rarer than the objects to
which we practice generosity.TSince bodhisattvas do not harm others, it is generally
unlikely for them to encounter enemies, much rarer than
to encounter beggars.
16aThe objects to which
we practice  generosityare rarer than the objects to
which we practice patience.
16bThe objects to which
we practice patience are not rarer than the objects to
which we practice generosity.
QThesis T/
FReasonSubject Predicate
17The enemy, in acting as the observed
object condition for our patience, is as worthy of our offerings
as the holy Dharma.TWithout enemy, one can never practice
patience and bring it to completion.
17aThe friend, in acting as the observed
object condition for our patience, is as worthy of our offerings
as the holy Dharma.
17bThe enemy, in acting as the observed
object condition for our patience, is not as worthy of our
offerings as the holy Dharma.
QThesis T/
FReasonSubject Predicate
18Someone who has generated
bodhicitta in his continuum does not suffer when he
gives away his body.FOnly bodhisattva superiors do not experience pain when
giving away his body.
18aSomeone who has not generated
bodhicitta in his continuum does not suffer when he
gives away his body.
18bSomeone who has generated
bodhicitta in his continuum does suffer when he
gives away his body.
QThesis T/
FReasonSubjectPredicate
19If I engage in some virtuous
work and then find it difficult,I should
not give up.TOne sets a bad habit of not finishing one's task. One will also
experience the causally concordant behavioral results in future lives.
19aIf I engage in some virtuous
work and then find it difficult,I should
give up.
QThesis T/
FReasonSubject Predicate
20If someone hits
me with a stick, it is wise for me to get angry at
the person instead of the stick.FEven though the stick is the actual condition that caused the
pain, but one does not get angry at the stick because one knows
the stick is without choice. Likewise, the person is also without
choice as he is under the control of his anger
20aIf someone hits
me with a stick, it is wise for me to get angry at
the stick instead of the person.
5
1. In the verse of homage at the beginning of Shantideva's text, prostrations are made to the Buddhas and bodhisattvas. This 
indicates that the text belongs to the:
Vinaya collection Because, if it is a vinaya collection, homage is made to the All Omniscient One.
Sutra collection Because, if it is a sutra collection, homage is made to the Buddhas and bodhisattvas.
Abhidharma collection Because, if it is an abhidharma collection, homage is made to the Youthful Manjushri.
2. The realizational Sugata refers to:
The mind that directly realizes emptiness
The mind that directly realizes conventional truth
The great compassion in the mental continuum of
a Buddha superiorBecause a Sugata is necessarily a Buddha, who realizes all phenomena.
3. The final Sangha Jewel:
Is the true cessation in the mental continuum of a
Buddha superior
Is our Teacher, Shakyamuni Buddha Because the final Sangha Jewel refers to a Buddha superior.
Refers to all superior beings
4. The Dharma Jewel:
Is the altruistic intention to become enlightened
Is the great compassion in the mental continuum
of Buddha superiors
Is the mind that realizes emptinessBecause the Dharma Jewel refers to the realization of final reality, 
emptiness, in the continuum of a superior.
5. “It is the quintessential butter from the churning of the milk of Dharma”. “It” refers to:
The  altruistic  intention  to  become
enlightenedBecause butter is likened to the very essence of milk when it is churned, likewise 
bodhicitta is like the very essence of all of Buddha's teachings, once developed, it is 
able to benefit all.
Great compassion
The mind that realizes emptiness
6. When bodhicitta is generated in one's mental continuum:
Self grasping is stopped
Self cherishing is stopped Because bodhicitta is the mind that only cherishes others
The obstruction to liberation will 
not be generated
The obstruction to omniscience will
not be generated
6
7. The antidote to the laziness of procrastination is:
Contemplating on the difficulty of finding the leisures and 
endowmentsBecause once one reflects on this well, one would then stop 
wasting the precious opportunity that one has gained.
Contemplating that if one relies on joyous perseverance, 
enlightenment will not be difficult to attain.
Contemplating that the holy Dharma is the cause of 
accomplishing the purposes of this and future lives
8. The antidote to the attachment to ignoble activities is:
Contemplating that the body quickly disintegrates
Contemplating that ignoble activities are the causes of 
manifold sufferings in future livesBecause, with the faith of conviction in the Law of karma and
its effects, one realizes that such activities are only the causes 
of suffering in future lives.
Contemplating that those who are inferior to myself can 
attain enlightenment
9. There is no suffering feeling in the continuum of an arya bodhisattva because of having:
Directly realizes emptiness
Abandoned negativities Because without negativities, one would never experience its effects, suffering.
Generated bodhicitta
10. The method for meditating on the patience of accepting suffering is:
Contemplating that the contaminated does 
not pass beyond the nature of sufferingSince one usually creates more nonvirtues than virtues, the result would only be 
more suffering than happiness. If one reflects  on this well, one would be more 
likely to accept one's suffering and not let it disturb one's mind.
Contemplating that since anger arises in 
dependence on causes, it has no self-power
Contemplating on compassion
11. The method for meditating on the patience of certitude about the teachings is:
Contemplating on the benefits of 
meditating on suffering
Contemplating that the harm done by 
others to oneself is one's own fault
Contemplating that anger does not arise 
according to one's wishesBecause both the anger and the  harmdoer who is angry at oneself all rely upon 
causes, therefore they are not independent.
12. The method for meditating on the patience of disregarding harm done to you is:
Contemplating that the arising of undesired suffering is one's 
own faultOnce one gains faith of conviction in the Law of karma and 
its effects, one realizes that whatever harm done to one is due 
to one's own negativities accumulated in the past, one then 
willingly disregards the harm done.
Contemplating that if one familiarizes with patience then one 
will be able to bear even huge sufferings
Contemplating that undesired sufferings arise from conditions
7
1. Chapter 1: “So the wise should understand respectively t he distinction between these two .”
State: The analogy that is referred to by this statement. What is it an analogy of? 
           
1.16(cd):
The  analogy refers to wishing to go and actually going. It is an  analogy distinguishing  between aspirational mind  
generation and engaged mind generation, the former merely wishing to go towards enlightenment and the latter actually 
embarking on the journey towards enlightenment.
2. What are the benefits of aspirational mind generation?
1.17:
a) It is a cause for enlightenment 
b) One attains temporal high status
c) One eliminates all poverty
d) It gives rise to great results even in the present life
e) One immediately outshines all the Hearers and Solitary Realizers
f) One acquires the name “Bodhisattva”.
3. What are the benefits of engaged mind generation?
1.18 – 1.19:
a) A more powerful force of merit equaling to the sky will arise and be accumulated at all times.
b) One's mental virtues will also increase.
c) It completes the causes for enlightenment.
4. Explain the line:
“This is also the supreme ambrosia t hat overcomes the lord of death of migrating beings.”
3.29(a):
Bodhicitta can overcome the lord of death. With it, if one shows the path and teach sentient beings, they can be placed in the
undying state of Great/ Full Enlightenment. Bodhicitta is like the nectar that bestows this undying state. Bodhicitta can also 
stop one's own untimely death: In most cases, untimely death is caused by self-cherishing. Therefore, if one has bodhicitta, 
one will be able to avoid untimely deaths.
5. What are the faults of asserting that negative emotions exist inherently within the object and the sense powers?
4.47(ab): 
If the afflictions are coming from the side of the object like one innately believes, then according to such a logic, it follows 
that, whenever an arhat or ordinary being comes into contact with the object, he would necessarily develop afflictions of 
attachment or anger. It would also absurdly follows that, as long as it is a consciousness, a mind, there will always be an 
affliction manifesting.
If the afflictions are existing inherently within the sense powers, then according to such a logic, it would absurdly follow 
that, whenever the sense powers are in operation, whether  they belong to an arhat or an  ordinary being, they would  
necessarily be in an afflicted state. Also, whenever one sees or hears things, these experiences are necessary afflicted.
6. In Chapter 4, it is said that:
“There can be no greater deception other than this; there can be no greater confusion other than this .” 
What is the deception and confusion that is being referred to?
4.23(cd):
If one has obtained a human life of freedoms and endowments, met the teachings of Buddha, understood it and has met 
with a Mahayana virtuous friend, one has all the favorable conditions to practice. Yet, with all such fortunes, if one does 
not practice them but instead spends one's entire life being under the control of one's ignorance, anger, attachment and 
living a life filled with the eight worldly dharmas, then at the time of death , one will die with great regret.  One has then 
deceived oneself to the fullest and there is no greater confusion than this.
8
7. What is the example mentioned in the text about the inappropriateness of being attached to one's body? 
5.59 – 5.60:
The example is that, when the body being dragged around and fed to the vultures, one would not be attached to it. So why is
one so attached to one's body now?
8. What is the definition of patience? 
Patience is the mind that:
a) V oluntarily accepts suffering 
b) Has certitude about the teachings
c) Intentionally not retaliate against those who cause harm
9. What is the main result of meditating on patience? 
6.133(a) : Full enlightenment
10. Through meditation on patience, what is the result to be experienced in this life? 
6.133(cd): One will have great glory, fame and happiness.
11. Through meditation on patience, what is the fruitional result?
6.134:
a) High status
b) Pleasant appearance
c) Fame
d) Good health
e) Enjoys the possessions and happiness of a wheel-turning king
f) Full enlightenment
12. What is the definition of joyous perseverance?
7.2(a) The mind that is enthusiastic about engaging in virtue .
13. What are the three types of joyous perseverance?
7.16:
Three-fold division:
a) Armour-like joyous perseverance
b) Joyous perseverance of gathering virtue
c) Joyous perseverance of acting for the welfare of sentient beings
[If the question asked for] Four-fold division:
a) Armour-like joyous perseverance
b) Joyous perseverance of application
c) Joyous perseverance  of non-discouragement/ non-inferiority/ non-disturbance
d) Joyous perseverance  of non-contentment/ non-complacency
14. What are the four forces of the favorable conditions of joyous perseverance?
7.33 – 7.67:
a) Power of aspirational
b) Power of steadfastness
c) Power of joy
d) Power of relinquishment
9
Quotations for memorizing
3) The power to accomplish whatever one wishes [1.8]:
1.8 Those who wish to destroy the multitudes of sufferings of existence, 
Those who wish to dispel the unhappiness of sentient beings, 
And those who wish to enjoy multitudes of happiness, 
Should never forsake the mind of enlightenment. 
A. Explaining the benefits of mind generation [1.6 – 1.14]
b. Explaining the divisions by way of analogy [1.16]:
1.16 a. As is understood by the instances
b. Of desiring to go and going,
c. So the wise should understand respectively
d. The distinction between these two.
1) The benefits of aspiring mind generation [1.17]:
1.17a. Although great fruits will arise in cyclic existence
b. From the mind that wishes for enlightenment,
c. An uninterrupted flow of merit will not arise
d. As in the case of the engaging mind .
2) The benefits of engaging mind generation [1.18 – 1.19]:
1.18 a. For one who has perfectly adopted this mind
b. With the thought never to turn away
c. For the sake of totally liberating
d. The infinite realms of sentient beings,1.19 a. From that time onwards,
b. Even while asleep or lacking conscientiousness,
c. A force of merit equal to the sky
d. Will continuously ensue.
i) The power to alleviate the suffering of sentient beings [3.29 – 3.31(ab)]
1' Destroying migrators' lord of death [3.29(ab)]:
3.29 a. This is also the supreme ambrosia
b. That overcomes the lord of death of migrating beings.
2' Destroying poverty [3.29(cd)]:
3.29 c. This is also the inexhaustible treasure
d. That eliminates all poverty of migrating beings.
iii) The reasons it would be appropriate to make effort in the antidotes to negativities [4.23 – 4.27]
1' One deceives oneself, if one does not make effort in virtue once one has obtained the leisures and endowments [4.23]:
4.23 a. If, having found such leisure,
b. I do not familiarize with virtue,
c. There can be no [greater] deception other than this;
d. There can be no [greater] confusion other than this.
3' If the afflictions are completely uprooted, there is absolutely no place that supports their existence and thus, it is appropriate
to assert that they can be abandoned [4.47]:
4.47 a. If these afflictions do not abide within objects,
b. Not in the collection of sense powers, between the two nor elsewhere,
c. Then where do they abide and how do they harm all migrating beings?
d. They are like an illusion. Thus I should dispel the fear within my heart and strive for the sake of wisdom.
e. For no meaning, why am I harmed in hell and so forth?
10
f' Wisdom depends upon the mind [5.17]:
5.17 a. Even those who wish to obtain happiness and overcome suffering
b. Will wander with no aim
c. If they do not comprehend the secret of the mind –
d. The principal Dharma.
a' An example of how it is inappropriate to be attached to the body [5.59 – 5.60]:
5.59 a. If, mind, you are not made unhappy
b. When this body is dragged here and there and
c. Taken away by vultures attached to flesh,
d. Then why do you advise so now?5.60 a. Holding this body as “mine”,
b. Why, mind, do you guard it so?
c. Since you and it are separate,
d. What use can it be to you?
(1'') The reasons it is inappropriate to cause harm [6.122]:
6.122 a. Because of their happiness the Munis will be pleased. 
b. But if they are harmed they will be displeased. 
c. By making them happy I shall delight the Munis, 
d. And by harming them I shall harm the Munis.
1'' Reflecting on the way in which one will be capable of attaining enlightenment if one develops the strength of effort [7.19]:
7.19 a. Since I have been born human by race 
b. And recognize what is beneficial and what is harmful, 
c. If I do not forsake the deeds of enlightenment, 
d. Why will I not attain enlightenment?
1' The principal effects of patience [6.133(ab)]:
6.133 a. Let alone my future attainment of buddhahood,
b. Which comes from pleasing sentient beings,
2' The visible effects of patience [6.133(cd)]:
c. Why do I not see that there will be great glory,
d. Fame, and happiness in this very life?
3' Explaining the fully ripened effect of patience [6.134]:
6.134 a. While in cyclic existence patience causes
b. Beauty, freedom from sickness, and fame.
c. Because of these I shall live for a very long time
d. And win the prosperous pleasures of the wheel-turning kings.
b) Identifying joyous perseverance [7.2(a)]:
7.2 a. What is enthusiasm? It is enthusiasm about virtue.
i) Identifying the class of things that are [discordant] with joyous perseverance [7.2(bcd)]:
7.2 b. Its discordant classes should be explained.
c. They are laziness, adherence to what is negative,
d. And despising oneself out of despondency.
a' Instructions on making effort in the antidotes to being disheartened [7.16]
7.16 a. Without despondency, I should gather the masses of army
b. And diligently take control of myself.
c. Through equalizing self with others and
d. Exchanging self for others.
Gyalwa Ensapa (for Lam Rim meditation):
In short, whatever great or small realization one generates, 
This is commensurate with having meditated with little or great faith in one's fully-qualified gurus.
To the qualified valid gurus, may I be able to complete the commitment without obstacles,
And look at the gurus’ qualities with no mistakes.
11