Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Engaging in the Deeds of a Bodhisattva/Sample Answer 2.pdf
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:52:21.620493
================================================================================

GBWL exam prep  
My answer is not necessarily correct. If you think your answer is better, please stick to 
it.  
 
True or False  
1) true  
 
2) false  
 
3) false  
 
4) false  
 
MLR Root tex t: The completion of the perfection of generosity does not depend on 
having eliminated the poverty of migrating beings by giving away to others substances 
to be given. Rather it becomes the perfection of generosity through destroying the 
grasping of miserliness a nd thoroughly completing one’s familiarization with the mind of 
giving to others along with the effects of giving.  
 
5) false  
 
6) false  
 
7) true  
 
8) false  
 
F1: Sleep is  a changeable mental factor.  
 
9) False  
The advice “ remain like a piece of wood ” is to counteract when afflictions is about to 
arise.  
 
In Malay context, when some one praise you the Malay say” sama sama”. Means same 
same.  
 
10) true 
 
11) false  
 
12) true 
 
13) false  
 
14) true 
 
15) false  
The scriptures teach that sentient beings and Buddhas are comparable fields of merit 
[6.112ab]  
 
16) true 
 
17) true 
(v.109)  
 
18) false  
 
19) true 
 
20) false  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MCQ  
1) Sutra collection  
 
Lesson 1  
If the lotsawa paying homage to:  Indicate treatise belong to:  
Homage to youthful Manjugosha  Knowledge collection (Abhidharma 
pitaka)  
Homage to the Omniscient One  Vinaya  (Vinaya pitaka)  
Homage pay to all the buddhas and 
bodhisattvas  Sutra collection (Sutra pitaka)  
 
2) the  mind that directly realise emptiness  
 
Lesson 2: Sugata  
Excellent abandonment:  Excellent realisation:  
1) Abandonment – Having abandoned the 
afflictive obscurations.  
 
To differentiae from the non Buddhist 
(The non Buddhist has attain the peak of 
samsara. T hey do not have any manifest 
afflictions).  1) Exalted knower – refers to the 
omniscient wisdom of the Buddha that 
directly sees the meaning of emptiness. 
This knower is superior to the non -
Buddhists.  
2) Well abandonment – To differentiate 
from some of the  Hinayana Aryas (stream 
enterer and once returner) who still has 
innate grasping. Because of that they do 
take rebirths in cyclic existence.  2) Stable exalted knower – stream enterer 
and once returner has directly perceive 
emptiness but their realization i s not as 
stable as the Buddha’s realization. Because 
they have not abandonment the seed of 
innate self -grasping yet.  
 
 
3) Thorough abandonment –means having 
abandoned both the afflictive 
obscurations and non -afflictive 
obscurations. This kind of abandonme nt 
that the Buddha has achieved is something 
that the Hearer arhats and the Solitary 
Realizer arhats have not achieved.  
 
To differentiate from the Hearers and 
Solitary realizers arhats.  3) Through exalted knower – Buddha see 
each phenomena exactly as it is  including 
the paths of the 3 vehicles.  
 
The Sugata is thus superior to arhats.  
 
 
 
 
 
3) our teacher, Shakyamuni Buddha  
 
Lesson 2 and 7  
 Final Ultimate  Conventional  
Buddha jewel  Sugata  Dharmakaya (the 
nature body and the 
wisdom truth body)  Rupakaya (the  
complete enjoyment 
body and the supreme 
emanation body)  
Dharma jewel  Dharmakaya [ Nature 
body (ultimate true 
cessation) and  
Wisdom truth body 
(ultimate true path)]  True paths and true 
cessations  12 branches of 
scriptures. When 
condensed, we can 
have the 3  scriptural 
collections.  
Sangha jewel  Rupakaya  True paths and true 
cessations  Superiors beings  
Lesson 9: According to some commentary (Liberation in the palm of your hand pg 398):  
- the Ultimate Sangha Jewel is posited to be superior beings and  
- the Co nventional Sangha Jewel is posited to be a group of at least four fully ordained 
monks.  
 
4) the mind that realise emptiness  
 
BP1 lesson 11 and BP2 lesson 9: Hinayana tenets vs. Mahayana tenets  
 Hinayana tenets  Mahayana tenets  
Buddha 
jewel  The Path of No-more -learning, the 
true path, the realization in the 
continuum of Shakyamuni Buddha is 
the Buddha Jewel.  The form body of the Buddha can be 
posited as Buddha Jewel.  
Dharma 
jewel  The true cessation is the 
abandonment of any afflictions (be it 
an obstr uction to liberation or an 
obstruction to omniscience) in the 
mental continuum of a Superior Being.  
That state of abandonment that is 
true cessation is posited as the 
Dharma Jewel.  The true paths and true cessations in 
the mental continua of the superior 
beings are posited as the Dharma 
Jewel.  
 
 
 
Sangha 
jewel  The qualities of realizations and the 
true path in the superior being 
continuums, to be the Sangha jewel.  The superiors are posited as Sangha 
Jewel.  
 
 
5) the altruistic intention to become enlightened.  
 
Lesson 15  Verse 3.32 c d 
It is the quintessential butter  
From the churning of the milk of the holy Dharma.  
The Buddha gave numerous teachings and there was the three turning of the wheel of 
dharmas. Many teachin gs were given, but if one were to ask: “What is the very heart or 
the essence of all those teachings?” It is the ultimate good heart, bodhicitta.  
It is commonly said that the Buddha gave 84,000 teachings. The very essence or the 
heart of those teachings i s bodhicitta; just as butter is the very essence of milk. If 
you churn milk, what you get at the end is the essence of the milk; which is butter.  
Therefore the ultimate purpose of hearing, reflecting and practicing the teachings is 
to develop the good hear t and to be able to generate bodhicitta.  
The whole point of listening, hearing, studying and reflecting on so many Buddha’s 
teachings is to develop the good heart and to actualize bodhicitta. The teachings tell us 
that once bodhicitta is developed, this b odhicitta will enable us to actualize or achieve 
all the benefits. Bodhicitta can bring about the achievement of all happiness.  
 
6) self cherishing is stopped  
 
7) contemplating on the difficulty of finding the freedom and endowment.  
 
Lesson 41:  
Essentially  the remedy to the first type of laziness that is presented in this text here 
is the meditation on death and impermanence. The next couple of verses talk about 
that. I would think that you could condense all of these into the three roots that 
constitute th e medita tion on death and impermanence.  
 
8)  contemplating that ignoble activities are the causes of manifold sufferings in future 
lives.  
 
L43 V7.15: Recently we looked at the laziness of attachment to ignoble activities, which 
is a kind of laziness that is attached in doing things that are essentially quite bad or 
not beneficial. In that section, we were told that if we live our whole life distracted by 
all kind of things and if we live our life under the control of our ignorance, anger and 
attachment, th en that will be entirely inappropriate. Rather than living life in such a 
way, we should practice the dharma. The advice to abandon the laziness of attachment 
to ignoble activities is essentially an advice to practice the dharma, because the 
dharma is the real cause of happiness. Through understanding the antidote to this 
laziness that is attached to ignoble activities is to develop an enthusiasm for dharma. 
It is through such enthusiasm, one abandon or counteract the laziness of attachment to 
inferior or i gnoble activities.  
 
9) directly realised emptiness  
 
The question is asking about mental suffering.  
 
L43 Verse 7.27  
Due to having abandoned negativities there is no suffering  
And due to skill there is no unhappiness.  
Thus mind and body are harmed  
By wrong conceptions and negativities.  
Earlier on we did look at the division of mind generation. If you divide the mind 
generation into four, then there is a mind generation that is associated with the Path 
of Seeing; which is the mind generation of pure res olved; basically is the mind 
generation in the continuum those bodhisattvas. Because of having that mind 
generation, they have abandoned the non -virtue of body, speech and mind which is 
essentially the main cause of experiencing physical pain. Because they  have abandoned 
the cause of physical pain, so even when these bodhisattvas cut their body and  give 
away their body they don’t experience any physical pain.  
The bodhisattvas on the 1st ground have perceived the meaning of selflessness directly, 
therefore they are expert and skill in seeing the truth or reality directly. As such even 
when they give away their body they don’t experience any mental suffering   
For the rest of us people, we are not Superior Bodhisattva. If we do give away any part 
of our body,  we will feel both physical and mental pain and suffering. We experience 
physical suffering because we have not yet abandoned the negativities. Because we 
have not abandoned the intellectually acquired afflictions therefore we experience 
mental suffering.  
 
 
10) contemplating that the contaminated does not pass beyond the nature of suffering  
 
11) contemplating that anger does not arise according to one’s wishes  
 
 
12) contemplating that the arising of undesired suffering is one’s own fault.  
 
Reflecting on the harm brought upon you by another as one’s own fault [6.42]  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Shorts answers  
1) lesson 4  Verse 1.16  
As is understood by the instances  
Of desiring to go and going,  
So the wise should understand respectively  
The distinction between these two.  
 
For instance, someone who is seated and develops the thought “I want to go to this 
place” but he remains to be seated. Then there is another person who acts on this 
thought. He gets up and proceeds towards the destination. W hile he is proceeding 
towards the destination, there is also the thought thinking “I want to go to this place”.  
In these two instances, they are both similar in having the same thought of wanting to 
go to a place, but one is still seated but the other has  acted upon it.  
Both aspirational mind generation and engaged mind generation are similar in that both 
have the thought thinking “I must achieve full enlightenment in order to achieve the 
welfare of sentient beings”. They are similar in that, but in order to be an engaged mind 
generation, it has to be conjoined with the practice of the bodhisattva such as the 
perfection of generosity. If the mind generation is not conjoined with such a practice, 
then it is an aspirational mind generation.  
 
2) The benefits o f aspiring bodhicitta [1.17]  
Lesson 4:  
Although the aspirational mind generation is not directly conjoined with the 
bodhisattva deeds, as such:  
it is a mere aspiration and  
it is just a pledge to achieve enlightenment  
Nevertheless, it is still a cause for enlightenment. It can also give rise to great results 
even in this life.  
 
3) The benefits of engaging bodhicitta [1.18 – 1.19] 
If one’s mind generation is directly conjoined with the deeds of the bodhisattva, what 
kind of benefits will ensue? Such a person with the engaged mind generation, even if 
he/she is drunk, is asleep or is abiding in the state of non -conscientiousness, a force of 
merit equal to the sky is said to continually arise. The text is saying that for a person 
who has an engaged mind generation, whatever he/she does, there is always “a force of 
merit equal to the sky will continuously ensue”.  
 
4) Lesson 14  Verse 3.29 ab  
This is also the supreme ambrosia  
That overcomes the lord of death of migrating bein gs.  
[Venerable Gyurme: “This” – is bodhicitta, “ambrosia” - the nectar]  
Bodhicitta can overcome the lord of death.  
With bodhicitta, if one shows the path to sentient beings and teaching them, those 
sentient beings can be placed in the undying state of th e great enlightenment. The 
undying state is the state of full enlightenment and bodhicitta is like the nectar that 
bestows this undying state.  
Bodhicitta can also stop untimely death. In most cases, if you think about it, untimely 
death is caused by self -cherishing. If one has bodhicitta, one will be able to avoid 
untimely deaths.  
With bodhicitta one will be able to place others in this undying state.  
Bodhicitta also destroys the poverty of the sentient beings’ experience.  
  
5) Lesson 19  Verse 4.47a b 
If these afflictions do not abide within objects,   
Not in the collection of sense powers, between the two nor elsewhere,  
Then where do they abide and how do they harm all migrating beings?  
This is talking about how the afflictions are not inherently exi stent.  
Here is an explanation of how we can reflect on the afflictions are not being inherently 
existent when the afflictions such as anger or attachment arise in our minds.  
When an affliction such as attachment or anger arises strongly, we can check whet her 
the afflictions exist right from the side of the object of anger or attachment or not. 
Does the affliction exist inherently right there on either the enemy or the object of 
attachment?  
Our afflictions do not exist inherently on the enemy. Neither does  it exist inherently 
on the loved ones. For example, if you talk about attachment, attachment and desire 
does not exist inherently on the form that one is attached to. The form that we are 
attracted to or the enemy that we are upset with do not exist from their own side i.e. 
right from the side of the object.  
If the afflictions exist inherently on the object of attachment or object of anger, 
then whoever comes into contact with the object would necessarily have to generate 
attachment or anger. But the foe destroyers, when they come into contact with form, 
they do not generate attachment from the form that they perceive.  
 
6) Lesson 16  Verse 4.23  
If, having found such leisure,  
I do not familiarize with virtue,  
There can be no deception other than this;  
There can be no confusion other than this.  
[Ven Gyurme translated:  
 “There can be no deception other than this” as there is no greater deception.  
 “There can be no confusion other than this” as there is no greater confusion than this.]  
 
BP1 
This time, we h ave obtained this human life of leisure and opportunity, which is 
difficult to find and, once found, is able to fulfil the great purposes. We have met the 
teachings and the  Mahayana virtuous friends. At such a time, if we do not use this 
opportunity to acc omplish  virtue but, instead, we spend our lives distracted by the 
eight worldly dharmas, then our entire  lives will be empty. If this happens, we have 
deceived ourselves and there is no greater deception  than this. There is no greater 
ignorance (I assume i gnorance can mean confusion in this paragraph ) with regards to 
what is to be abandoned and what is to  be cultivated. The point is that we have to be 
conscientious with regards to what is to be  abandoned and what is to be cultivated. We 
should use this huma n life of leisure and  opportunity to practise the holy Dharma.  
 
7) An example of how it is unreasonable to be attached to the body [5.59 – 5.60]  
L26 Verse 5.59  
If, mind, you are not made unhappy  
When this body is dragged here and there and  
Taken away by v ultures attached to flesh,  
Then why do you advise so now?  
Everyone is very concern about their body. We will do everything to take care of our 
body. When we are hungry we look for food. When we are cold, we put on additional 
layer of cloths. When something  happens to the body, we get very worried. We will do 
everything to take care of it. We do all these because of the attachment to the body. 
When something happens to a specific part of the body, we get very upset and worry. 
If somebody is to point out a ce rtain fault in our body such as physical shortcoming 
that we may have, then we get upset. The reason is because we are attached to the 
body.  
At the time of death, we leave our body behind. Whether the body is given to the 
vultures, or it rot and eaten by maggots or it is burn by fire, and we are not upset at 
that time, then why are we upset now when something happens to the body.   
It is inappropriate to conceive the body as mine and hold on to it so strongly with the 
idea that the body belongs to me. For if we do so, then all kinds of problems and 
unhappiness arises.  
Verse 5.60 ab  
Holding this body as “mine”,  
Why, mind, do you guard it so?  
If you counter that by saying “Of course I have to hold this body as mine because I 
need it. It is a necessity”. Then  the answer to that will be:  
Verse 5.60 cd  
Since you and it are separate,  
What use can it be to you?  
We and our bodies are not the same. They are different. They are separate. No matter 
how we may think of our body as something that is absolutely necessary , something 
that belongs to us, and at the time of death, we have no choice but to discard it. There 
is nothing we can do to stop ourselves from discarding this body. This is the same as 
the outline in the Lamrim on the section of “Death and impermanence” where it says 
that at the time of death, the body is of no use.  
 
8) Patience is the mind that is not disturb regardless of the kind of condition that one 
might be in.  
 
BP2 6P L5 : What is patience? According to the M iddle Length Lam Rim, patience is the 
mind:  
abiding calmly without being discouraged by harm and suffering and  
abiding firmly in beliefs in the teachings  
 
9) Buddha hood 
6.133ab Let alone my future attainment of buddhahood,  
Which comes from pleasing sentient beings,  
 
10) 6.133cd Why do I not see that there will be great glory,  
Fame, and happiness in this very life?  
 
11) 6.134 While in cyclic existence patience causes  
Beauty, freedom from sickness, and fame.  
Because of these I shall live for a very long time  
And win the prosperous pleasures  of the wheel -turning kings.  
 
12) L41 Joyous perseverance is the enthusiasm for virtue.  
 
13) 3 types of joyous perseverance  
A Armor -like joyous effort  
B The joyous effort of gathering virtuous dharmas  
C The joyous effort of working for the welfare of sentient beings  
 
14) Power of aspiration  
Power of steadfastness  
Power of joy  
The power of relinquishment  
 
 
 