Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Lorig/Reference material/AK_Charts_ILTK05_updateFeb09.pdf
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:53:40.147564
================================================================================

 
MIND AND COGNITION - PART 1: 
 
AWARENESSES AND KNOWERS   
CHARTS 
 
From the Basic Program at Istituto Lama Tzong Khapa 
September 2005 
Updated October 2006 
 
 
Based on the root text, Purbuchok’s  
EXPLANATION OF THE PRESENTATION OF OBJECTS AND OBJECT POSSESSORS 
 AS WELL AS AWARENESSES AND KNOWERS 
 
Compiled and lightly edited for use in FPMT Ba sic Programs by Olga Planken, September 2005 
Updated by Emily Hsu, October 2006 
     
 
 
© Istituto Lama Tzong Khapa and FPMT Inc. 
October 2006 
 
All rights reserved 
 
  
No part of this work may be re produced in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, 
including photocopying, recording, or by an y information storage and retrieval system 
or technologies now known or later deve loped, without permission in writing 
from Istituto Lama Tzong Khapa and FPMT Inc. 
 
 
 
  Note from the editor 
This October 2006 update uses the definiti ons and divisions from  Purbuchok’s Explanation of the Presentation of 
Objects and Object-possessors as well as Awarenesses and Knowers  unless otherwise indicated.  
With many thanks to Emily Hsu, who used the charts fo r her teachings at Tse Chen  Ling and Gyalwa Gyatso 
Buddhist Center in  May and July 2006 and kindly amended them in this respect.
ILTK Basic Program - September 2005  Mind and Cognition  Part 1: Awarenesses and Knowers  - Chart 1a 
Update October 2006 
 
1 
CHART 1a - AWARENESSES AND KNOWERS 
Division of Objects of Knowledge into Objects and Object-Possessors 
 
 Definition Divisions Definitions Notes and divisions 
1. Objects That which 
is known by an 
awareness. 1. appearing 
objects  
2. determined 
objects  
3. objects of 
engagement  1. The appearing object of a particular awareness and 
apprehended object of that awar eness are synonymous. Whatever 
is an established base is necessar ily an appearing object. This is 
because whatever is a thing is nece ssarily the appearing object of 
a direct perceiver, and whatever is a permanent phenomenon is 
necessarily the appearing object of  a conceptual consciousness. 
2. Determined object of a concep tual consciousness, object of 
engagement of a conceptual cons ciousness, and object of the 
mode of apprehension of a conceptual consciousness are 
synonymous. 3. Also object of engagement of a direct perceiver and object of 
the mode of apprehension of a direct perceiver are synonymous. 
1. persons A being imputed in 
dependence upon any of its five aggregates. 1. Self, I, person, and being are synonymous. 
2. awarenesses 
 A knower.  Consciousness: That which is 
clear and knowing. 
 2. Awareness, knower, and consciousness are synonymous. 2. Object-
possessors  A thing that possesses its respective 
object.  
3. expressive 
sounds An object of hearing that causes the understanding of 
its own object of expression 
through the force of 
nomenclature . Divisions : 
1. names 2. phrases 
3. letters 
  
ILTK Basic Program - September 2005  Mind and Cognition  Part 1: Awarenesses and Knowers  - Chart 1b 
Update October 2006 
 
2 
CHART 1b - AWARENESSES AND KNOWERS 
Division of Awarenesses into Valid Cognizers and Non-Valid Cognizers 
 
 Definition Division Definition Divisions and definitions of the specific types  Further divisions 
1. direct valid 
cognizers 
 A new incontrovertible knower that is free 
of conceptuality. 
 1. Self-knowing direct valid cognizers 
A new incontrovertible knower, fr ee from conceptuality, that 
is directed only inward and is just an apprehender.  
2. Sense direct valid cognizers 
A new incontrovertible knower, fr ee from conceptuality, that 
arises in dependence upon a physi cal sense power that is  its 
uncommon empowering condition.  
3. Mental direct valid cognizers  
A new incontrovertible knower, fr ee from conceptuality, that 
arises in dependence upon a ment al sense power which is its 
uncommon empowering condition.  4. Yogic direct valid cognizers 
An other-knowing exalted know er in the continuum of a 
Superior that, in dependence upon a meditative stabilization 
that is a union of calm abiding and special insight and is its 
[uncommon] empowering c ondition, newly and directly 
realizes either subtle impermanence or the coarse or subtle selflessness of persons.    
  
2.1-5.   sense direct valid 
cognizers apprehending 
forms and so forth  3. 1-6. mental direct 
valid cognizers apprehending forms and so forth.  4. 1. directly realizing 
subtle impermanence 4.2. directly realizing the 
coarse selflessness of 
persons 4.3. directly realizing the 
subtle selflessness of persons 1. Valid 
cognizers  A new incontro- vertible 
knower. 
 
2. inferential 
valid 
cognizers A new incontrovertible determinative knower that is directly produced in dependence on a correct sign which is its basis. 1. Inferential cognizers by power of the fact  2. Inferential cognizers through renown 3. Inferential cognizers through belief 
Terminological division: 
1. Inference for oneself 
Inference for oneself and infe rential cognizer are synonyms.  
2. Inference for another Inference for another and co rrect proof statement are 
synonyms.  
Note: Direct and 
inferential cognizers are 
necessarily incontrovertible
. However, 
they are valid cognizers  
only if they are also new .  
According to Purbuchok, inferential cognizers and inferential valid cognizers are mutually inclusive.  
ILTK Basic Program - September 2005  Mind and Cognition  Part 1: Awarenesses and Knowers  - Chart 1c 
Update October 2006 
 
3 
CHART 1c - AWAREN ESSES AND KNOWERS 
Division of Awarenesses into Valid Cognizers and Non-Valid Cognizers 
 
                                                 
1 Lati Rinbochay and Elizabeth Napper, Mind in Tibetan Buddhism,  p. 103, Snow Lion Publications, 1986.   Definition  Divisions Definitions Divisions 
1. subsequent 
cognizers 
 A knower that realizes what has already been realized.  
 1. directly perceiving  subsequent cognizers (5)  
2. conceptual subsequent cognizers (2) 
3. subsequent cognizers that are neither  of 
those two 
2. correctly 
assuming consciousnesses  
 
   A factually concordant determinative 
knower that is contro vertible with regard 
to determining its object.  
 
 1. correctly assuming consciousnesses that do 
not have a reason 
2. that have a contradictory reason 
3. for which the reason is indefinite  [or lacks 
pervasion], 
4. for which the reason is not established 
5. for which a reason exists but is not settled 
3. awarenesses 
to which an 
object appears 
but is not 
ascertained  A knower that is a common locus of: 1) 
having clear appearance of the specifically characterized phenomenon 
that is its object of engagement and 2) 
being unable to induce ascertainment with respect to the specifically characterized phenomenon that is its object of engagement.  Purbuchok does not specify any divisions, but 
Geshe Jampel Sampel’s Presentation of 
Awareness and Knowledge  lists three 
divisions
1. 
1. sense direct perceivers  
2. mental direct perceivers  
3. self-knowing direct perceivers  
 
4. doubting 
consciousnesses A knower that has qualms two-pointedly 
by its own power.  
 1. doubt tending toward the factual 
2. doubt tending toward the non-factual 
3. equal doubt  2. Non-valid consciousnesses  A knower that is  not new and incontrovertible. 
  
5. wrong 
consciousnesses A knower that engages its object 
erroneously.  1. conceptual 
2. non-conceptual   
2.1. sense 2.2. mental 
ILTK Basic Program - September 2005  Mind and Cognition  Part 1: Awarenesses and Knowers  - Chart 2a 
Update October 2006 
 
4 
CHART 2a - AWARENESSES AND KNOWERS 
Division of Awarenesses into Seven Ty pes of Mind – 1. Direct Perceivers 
 Definition Divisions  Definitions  Divisions 
1. sense direct 
perceivers 1) That which is generated in dependence on 
its own uncommon empowering condition, a physical sense power, and 
2) is a knower that is free from conceptuality 
and non-mistaken. 1. valid  cognizers 
2. subsequent  cognizers  
3. awarenesses to which an object appears but is not 
ascertained   
that are sense direct perceivers 
and sense direct perceivers: 1. apprehending forms  
2. apprehending sounds  
3. apprehending odors  
4. apprehending tastes  
5. apprehending tangible objects  
2. mental 
direct 
perceivers 
 1) That which is generated in dependence on 
a mental sense power which is its own uncommon empowering condition and  
2) is a consciousness that is an other knower that is free from conceptuality and non-mistaken  1. valid  cognizers 
2. subsequent  cognizers  
3. awarenesses to which an object appears but is not 
ascertained 
that are mental direct perceivers 
3. self-knowing 
direct 
perceivers That which has the aspect of an apprehender, is free from conceptuality, and is non-mistaken.  1. valid  cognizers 
2. subsequent  cognizers  
3. awarenesses to which an object appears but is not 
ascertained 
that are self-knowing direct perceivers 1. Direct 
perceivers A knower that is free from conceptuality 
and non-
mistaken.  
 
4. yogic direct 
perceivers 
  
  
 1) That which is generated in dependence on 
its own uncommon empowering condition, a meditative stabilization that is a union of calm abiding and special insight, and 2) is an other-knowing exalted knower in the 
continuum of a Superior that is free from 
conceptuality and non-mistaken. 1. valid  cognizers 
2. subsequent  cognizers  
that are yogic direct perceivers 
Note: There is no yogic direct perceiver that is an 
awareness to which an object appears but is not 
ascertained, since yogic di rect perceivers necessarily 
realize their objects. 
ILTK Basic Program - September 2005  Mind and Cognition  Part 1: Awarenesses and Knowers  - Chart 2b 
Update October 2006 
 
5 
CHART 2b - AWARENESSES AND KNOWERS 
Division of Awarenesses into Seven Type s of Mind – 2. Inferential Cognizers 
 
 Definition Divisions  Definitions Examples 
1. inferential 
cognizers through the 
power of the 
fact *A determinative knower that is directly 
produced in dependence on a correct sign 
by the power of the fact , which is its basis, 
and is incontrovertible with respect to its 
object of comprehension, a slightly hidden  
phenomenon. 
(Geshe Jampel Sampel)  E.g.: An inferential consci ousness that realizes that 
sound is impermanent. 
2. inferential cognizers through the 
power of belief  *A determinative knower that is directly 
produced in dependence on a correct sign 
of belief , which is its basis, and is 
incontrovertible with respect to its object of 
comprehension, a very hidden  
phenomenon. 
(Geshe Jampel Sampel)  E.g.: An inferential conscious ness that realizes that the 
scripture, “From giving, re sources; from ethics, happy 
migrations,” is incontrovertible with respect to the meaning indicated by it. 
3. inferential 
cognizers through the 
power of 
renown  *A determinative knower that is directly 
produced in dependence on a correct sign 
of renown , which is its basis, and is 
incontrovertible with respect to its object of 
comprehension, a terminological 
suitability . 
(Geshe Jampel Sampel)  E.g.: The inferential consciousne ss that realizes that it 
is suitable to express an asse mblage of green leaves, 
stem, and petals by the term “flower.” 
 2. 
Inferential cognizers *A determinative 
knower that is directly produced 
in dependence on 
a correct sign that is its basis and is incontrovertible 
with respect to its 
object of comprehension, a hidden 
phenomenon.  
(Geshe Jampel 
Sampel) 
   +Note : Purbuchok asserts that all inferential cognizers are 
valid, i.e. there is no common locus between subsequent 
cognizer and inferential cognizer. A second moment of an 
inferential cognizer is not an inferential cognizer, but a 
subsequent cognizer. It is a conceptual remembering consciousness. This accords also with Jetsunpa, whereas 
according to Panchen Sonam Dragba an inferential cognizer is not necessarily a valid cognizer.   
                                                 
* Purbuchok does not list definitions here; the definitions are from Geshe Jampel Sampel’s  Presentation of Awarenesses and Knowledge , Lati Rinbochay and Elizabeth Napper, Mind 
in Tibetan Buddhism, pp. 75-82; Snow Lion Publications, 1986. 
ILTK Basic Program - September 2005  Mind and Cognition  Part 1: Awarenesses and Knowers  - Chart 2c 
Update October 2006 
 
6 
CHART 2c - AWAREN ESSES AND KNOWERS 
Division of Awarenesses into Seven Ty pes of Mind – 3. Subsequent Cognizers 
  Definition Divisions Further divisions  Examples  
1. directly 
perceiving 
subsequent 
cognizers 
 directly perceiving 
subsequent cognizers that are: 
1. sense  direct perceivers 
2. mental  direct perceivers 
3. self-knowing  direct 
perceivers  
4. yogic  direct perceivers  
5. none  of the four* 
 1. The second moment of a sense direct perceiver 
apprehending blue. 2. The second moment of a clairvoyance knowing 
another’s mind. 
3. The second moment of a self-knowing direct perceiver experiencing an eye consciousness. 4. The fourth is, for example, the second moment of an 
uninterrupted path of a path of seeing. 
5. The second moment of a direct perceiver 
(*Note : This 
division occurs only in Purbujog).  
2. conceptual 
subsequent 
cognizers  
 conceptual subsequent 
cognizers that are: 
1. induced by direct  
perceivers  
2. induced by inferential  
cognizers  1. A factually concordant as certaining consciousness 
ascertaining blue that is induced by a sense direct 
perceiver apprehending blue. 2. The second moment of an inferential cognizer realizing sound to be impermanent. 
3. subsequent 
cognizers that 
are neither of 
the two*   * Note : This division occurs only in Purbujog, but no definition 
and no example are given. 
 3. 
Subsequent cognizers A knower that realizes what has already been 
realized.  
  
Note:  There are no subsequent cognizers in an omniscient 
consciousness , although the first moment of any cognition 
realizes its object perfectly and exhaustively and therefore the 
second moment can only know what has been realized before. 
However, it does not realize by the power of the first moment , 
but by its own power , therefore it is a new valid cognizer  or 
pramana and not a subsequent cognizer . 
ILTK Basic Program - September 2005  Mind and Cognition  Part 1: Awarenesses and Knowers  - Chart 2d 
Update October 2006 
 
7 
CHART 2d - AWARENESSES AND KNOWERS 
Division of Awarenesses into Seven Types of Mind – 4. Correctly Assuming Consciousnesses 
 
 Definition Divisions Examples General notes 
1. that do not 
have a reason 
 
 An awareness that apprehends sound to be impermanent in 
dependence upon the mere words, “Sound is impermanent.”  
This is a suitable example because the words, “Sound is 
impermanent,” express a thesis  that sound is impermanent, 
but not a reason.  Note : Any wisdom arisen from 
hearing is a correctly assuming 
consciousness.  
2. that have a 
contradictory 
reason 
 An awareness that apprehends s ound to be impermanent from 
the sign of being empty of bei ng able to perform a function.  
This is a suitable example because empty of being able to 
perform a function is contr adictory with impermanence.  Note : In contrast to doubt, a 
correctly assuming 
consciousness determines its object of engagement decisively. 
3. for which 
the reason is 
indefinite [or 
lacks 
pervasion] An awareness that apprehends s ound to be impermanent from 
the sign of being an object of comprehension.  
This is a suitable example because object of comprehension is 
a reason that is indefinite in the proof of that [i.e., whatever is 
an object of comprehension is not necessarily impermanent.] Note : In contrast to inference, a 
correctly assuming 
consciousnesses is not stable 
and not incontrovertible, since it does not arise in dependence on 
a correct sign which is its basis.  
4. for which 
the reason is 
not established 
 An awareness that apprehends s ound to be impermanent from 
the sign of being an object of apprehension of an eye 
consciousness.  
This is a suitable example because object of apprehension of an eye consciousness is a reason that is not established in the proof of that.  Note : A correctly assuming 
consciousness apprehends, 
ascertains, and is mindful of its 
object, but it does not realize it, 
i.e., it is not able to eliminate 
false superimpositions with respect to it. 4. Correctly 
assuming consciousnessesA factually concordant determinative 
knower that is controvertible with regard to determining its 
object.  
5. for which the 
reason exists 
but is not settled An awareness that apprehends s ound to be impermanent from 
the sign of being a product, without its having been ascertained by a valid cogni zer that sound is a product and 
whatever is a product must be impermanent.  This is a suitable example because although product is a correct sign in the proof of s ound as impermanent, that person 
has not settled it.  
ILTK Basic Program - September 2005  Mind and Cognition  Part 1: Awarenesses and Knowers  - Chart 2e 
Update October 2006 
 
8 
CHART 2e - AWAREN ESSES AND KNOWERS 
Division of Awarenesses into Seven Types of Mind – 5. Non-ascertaining Consciousnesses 
 
                                                 
2 These divisions are according to Geshe Jampel Sampel’s  Presentation of Awareness and Knowledge . Purbuchok does not list any divisions for awarenesses to which an object 
appears but is not ascertained.  Definition Divisions2 Examples Notes 
1. sense direct 
perceivers 
 A sense direct perceiver appreh ending blue that induces 
the doubt that wonders, “Did I see blue or not?”   
2. mental direct 
perceivers  Mental direct perceivers in the continua of ordinary 
beings apprehending the five obj ects, forms and so forth. 
   5. Awarenesses to which an 
object appears 
but is not ascertained  A knower that is 
a common locus of (1)  
having clear 
appearance  of 
the specifically 
characterized 
phenomenon 
that is its object of engagement and (2)  being unable to 
induce ascertainment  
with respect to 
the specifically characterized phenomenon that is its object of engagement. 3. self-knowing 
direct perceivers Self-knowers experiencing me ntal direct perceivers. 
 
Note : There is no yogic direct 
perceiver  to which an object 
appears but is not ascertained, 
since yogic direct perceivers 
necessarily ascertain  their 
objects, because they realize 
them.  
ILTK Basic Program - September 2005  Mind and Cognition  Part 1: Awarenesses and Knowers  - Chart 2f-g 
Update October 2006 
 
9 
CHART 2 f-g - AWARENESSES AND KNOWERS 
Division of Awarenesses into Seven Types of Mi nd – 6. Doubt and 7. Wrong Consciousnesses 
 
 Definitions Divisions  Examples  Notes and examples 
1. doubt 
tending toward the factual   
 Doubt that thinks that sound is probably impermanent.   
Note : Doubt is a mental factor . “By its 
own power” is stated in the definition in 
order to exclude the main mind and other 
mental factors that have similarity with it 
from the definition.  
2. doubt 
tending toward the non-factual  Doubt that thinks that sound is probably permanent.  
Note : Doubt that is a root affliction and 
doubt in this context are not mutually 
inclusive. While the first is necessarily afflicted doubt, the latter could be: 
1. non-virtuous, 
2. neutral, or 3. virtuous. 6. Doubting 
consciousnesses 
 
   
 
   A knower that 
has qualms two-pointedly by its 
own power.  
3. equal  doubt Doubt that wonders whether sound is 
permanent or impermanent.   
1. conceptual 
wrong 
consciousness   
 e.g., a conceptual consciousness apprehending sound as permanent  Note : All conceptual consciousnesses  are 
mistaken with respect to their appearing 
object , since they take a meaning generality 
as the actual object. Wrong 
consciousnesses are mistaken with respect to the object of engagement
, the actual 
thing  that is to be understood. 7. Wrong 
consciousnesses A knower that engages its object erroneously  
2. non-
conceptual  
wrong 
consciousness  e.g., a conceptual consciousness apprehending the horns of a rabbit  Divisions
: 
1. mental  non-conceptual wrong 
consciousness  
2. sense  non-conceptual wrong 
consciousness 1. A dream consciousness that clearly 
sees as blue the blue of a dream.  
This subject is a mental consciousness, a 
non-conceptual consciousness, and a wrong consciousness. 
2. A sense consciousness that sees snow 
mountains as blue and a sense consciousness that sees a white conch 
as yellow. 
ILTK Basic Program - September 2005  Mind and Cognition  Part 1: Awarenesses and Knowers  - Chart 3a 
Update October 2006 
 
10 
CHART 3a - AWARENESSES AND KNOWERS 
Division of Awarenesses into Conceptual Cons ciousnesses and Non-conceptual Consciousnesses 
1. Conceptual Consciousnesses 
 
  Definition  Divisions  Examples etc. 
1. conceptual 
consciousnesses that apprehend only a sound  
generality Eg.: A conceptual consciousness in the continuum of a perso n who does not know 
that a bulbous flat-based thing that is  able to perform th e function of holding 
water is a pot which, generated in dependence on merely the sound “pot,” 
apprehends pot .  
2. conceptual consciousnesses that apprehend only a meaning 
generality  Eg.: A conceptual consciousness in the continuum of a perso n who does not know 
that a bulbous flat-based th ing able to perform the fu nction of holdi ng water is a 
pot which, generated in dependence on merely seeing a bulbous thing, 
apprehends a bulbous thing.  
3. conceptual consciousnesses that 
apprehend both a sound 
and a meaning generality Eg.: A conceptual consciousness th at apprehends both a sound and a meaning 
generality is a conceptual consciousn ess – in the continuum of a person who 
knows pot – apprehending a pot. 
1. conceptual 
consciousnesses that affix 
names  
 
2. conceptual consciousness that affix 
meanings  1. A thought consciousness that associates the meaning , an object, and its verbal 
convention . 
Eg.: A conceptual consciousness thin king “This is a pot” upon seeing a flat 
bottomed water holder. 2. A consciousness associating the meaning of substratum  and the meaning of 
attributes.  
Eg.: The conceptual consciousness that thinks “This person has a stick”. The 
stick is the basis and the person is the attribute. 1. Conceptual 
consciousnessesA determinative knower that apprehends a 
sound generality 
and a meaning generality as suitable to be mixed.  
1. factually concordant 
 
 2. factually discordant Def.: A factually concordant determina tive knower that apprehends a sound 
generality and a meaning generality as suitable to be mixed.  Def.: A factually discordant determina tive knower that apprehends a sound 
generality and a meaning generality as suitable to be mixed. 
  
  
ILTK Basic Program - September 2005  Mind and Cognition  Part 1: Awarenesses and Knowers  - Chart 3b 
Update October 2006 
 
11 
CHART 3b - AWARENESSES AND KNOWERS 
Division of Awarenesses into Conceptual Cons ciousnesses and Non-conceptual Consciousnesses 
2. Non-conceptual Consciousnesses 
 
  Definition Divisions Definitions Divisions and Notes 
1. non-
conceptual non-
mistaken  
consciousness  A knower having clear 
appearance  that is non-
mistaken  with regard to 
its appearing object , a 
specifically characterized 
phenomenon . 1. sense  
2. mental  
3. self-knowing   
4. yogic  
1. sense 
2. mental 
 2. Non-
conceptual consciousnessesA knower that is free from being a determinative 
knower that apprehends a sound generality and a meaning generality 
as suitable to be 
mixed. 2. non-conceptual 
mistaken 
consciousness  A knower having clear 
appearance  that is 
mistaken with regard to its 
appearing object , a non-
existent. 
Note : Non-conceptual  consciousness and collective engager  
are synonyms. 
Also non-conceptual consciousness  and  
- a knower that engages its object by the power of the thing ,  
- a knower that engages its object in a non-partial manner ,  
- a knower that engages its object by the power of the object 
casting its aspect  to the mind  
are synonyms. 
 
Conceptual consciousness  and eliminative engager  are 
synonyms. 
Also conceptual consciousness  and  
- a knower that engages its object in a partial manner ,  
- a knower that engages its object by way of its own wish ,  
- a knower that engages its object by the power of terminology  
(meaning generality) 
are synonyms  
ILTK Basic Program - September 2005  Mind and Cognition  Part 1: Awarenesses and Knowers  - Chart 4 
Update October 2006 
 
12 
CHART 4 - AWARENESSES AND KNOWERS 
Division of Awarenesses into Self-knowers and Other-knowers 
 
  Definition Divisions   Definition Further divisions and notes 
1. Self-
knowers  
 
 That which has the 
aspect of an 
apprehender. 
 1. self-knowing direct 
perceivers That which is non-
conceptual, non-mistaken, and has 
the aspect of an apprehender. 1. direct prime  cognizers 
2. subsequent  cognizers 
3. cognizers to which an object appears but is not 
ascertained  
 
Note:  
- self-knowing consciousnesses are accepted only by 
Sautrantika, Yogachara Svat antrika Madhyamika, and 
Chittamatra, they are not accepted by Vaibhashika, 
Sautrantika Svatantrika Madhy amika, and Prasangika 
- their sole function is to make memory  possible, not 
introspection, as the name might suggest  
- a self-knower  must be a mental consciousness , since it does 
not depend on a sense power as an uncommon empowering 
condition, but on the mental power 
- self-knowers are always non-conceptual 
- self-knower and consciousness which is  directed only 
inwards are synonyms  
2. Other-
knowers A consciousness that is directed outward.     1. sense direct  perceivers  
2. mental direct  perceivers 
3. yogic direct  perceivers 
4. conceptual  consciousnesses 
are necessarily other-knowers , as well as all other 
consciousnesses that are directed outward  
ILTK Basic Program - September 2005                             Mind and Cognition  Part 1: Awarenesses and Knowers  - Chart 5a-b 
Update October 2006 
 13 CHART 5a - AWARENESSES AND KNOWERS 
The Aggregates, Spheres, and Constitu ents (according to Abhidharmakosha) 
  
                                                       
 
                                                      4 smells  
 objects of                                                                                                          sense  
                                                                          objects                                                            conscious - 
                                                                                                                                  nesses 
                      8 sounds                                                       6 tastes  
                                                                  nose  
                                                    physical sense powers                                  
                                            ear                                      tongue                             
                                                                                     
 20 visible                                          nose                                      11 tangible  
        forms                                       ear               tongue                                   objects  
                                  eye           eye           sense         body     body                    
                                                       consciousnesses                                         
                                
  non-revelatory                              mental                                uncompounded 
                form           mental       consciousness         mental            phenomena  
        sphere                                   constituent   
        mental sense power  
                                                  (any of six main consciousnesses)  
                                                      
                    feeling      compositional 
                          aggregate                                              factors  
                                                                      aggregate 
 objects of                                     discrimination                               mental  
                                              aggregate                         consciousness  
 
 
  
Chart 5b- The Division of Phenomena 
 into 5 Aggregates, 2 Spheres and 18 Constituents 
5 aggregates 
(compounded phenomena )  
1. form  (11 types) 
      5 physical sense objects 
      5 physical sense powers       non-revelatory form 
2. feeling
 (5 types) 
3. discrimination  (2, 3 or 6 types) 
4. compositional factors   
     44 concomitant mental factors 
     14  non-concomitant ompositiona      factors  
5. consciousness 
 
     6 main consciousnesses 12 spheres 
(all phenomena)  
6 external  
1.-5. the five types of objects of 
        sense  consciousnesses      6. the five types of objects of the 
        mental consciousness 
              6 internal 
 
7.- 11. the five types of sense            powers     12.  the mental sphere includes 
           all  six consciousnesses
 18 constituents 
(all phenomena)  
6 external objects  
1. – 5.  the  five types of objects of the 
            sense consciousnesses         6.  the five types of objects of the 
            mental consciousness  
6 powers
 
7. – 11.  five types of sense powers 
      12.  the mental constituent is any  
            of  the six consicousnesses    6 consciousnesses 
 
13. –18. five sense and one mental               consciousness
 
ILTK Basic Program - September 2005  Mind and Cognition  Part 1: Awarenesses and Knowers  - Chart 6 
Update October 2006 
*From The Mind and its Functions,  Geshe Rabten, Tharpa Choeling, 1978. 
14  
CHART 6 - AWARENESSES AND KNOWERS 
Conditions for the Production of a Sense Consciousness* 
 
Sense 
perception Dominant condition Object condition Immediate condition 
Visual Eye sense power Visual forms 
Audio Ear sense power Sounds 
Olfactory Nose sense power Smells 
Gustatory Tongue sense power Tastes 
Tactile Body sense power Tangible objects 
Mental Mental sense power 
(equal to the immediate condition) Physical forms and subtle 
objects The immediately 
preceding moment of 
cognition 
  
 
 
ILTK Basic Program - September 2005  Mind and Cognition  Part 1: Awarenesses and Knowers  - Chart 7 
Update October 2006 
*From Cutting Through Appearances, Geshe Lhundrup Sopa & Jeffrey Hopkins, Snow Lion Publications, 1989. 
 15CHART 7 - AWARENESSES AND KNOWERS 
Sautrantika* 
Mode of Asserting Objects & Object Possessors 
Mode of Asserting Objects  
  ╔ Conventional Truths (synonyms: falsely existent, permanent phenomena, generally characterised phenomena) 
 ╔═══╣  
 ║ ╚ Ultimate Truths (synonyms: truly existent, impermanent phenomen a, specifically characterised phenomena, thing, product, substa nce) 
Existents ╣ 
 ║ ╔ Negative Phenomena ┬ Non-Affirming Negative 
 ╠═══╣  └ Affirming Negative 
 ║ ╚ Affirmative Phenomena 
 ║ ┌ False Singles 
 ║ ╔ Single Phenomena ┴ True Singles 
 ╚═══╣  
  ╚ Different Phenomena ┬ False Differents 
 └ True Differents 
 
Mode of Asserti ng Object Possessors  
 ┌ Sense Valid Direct Perceiver 
 ╓ Valid Direct Perceiver ┼ Mental Valid Direct Perceiver 
 ║ ├ Self-Cognizer Valid Perceiver   
 ║ └ Yogic Valid Direct Perceiver ┐ 
 ╔═ Valid Cognizers ╢  ├ Subtle Impermanence 
 ║ ║ ├ Gross Selflessness 
 ║ ║ └ Subtle Selflessness 
 ║ ║ ┌ Inferential cognizer by the power of the fact 
 ║ ╙ Valid Inferential Cognizer ┼ Inferential cognizer through renown 
 ║ └ Inferential cognizer through belief 
Mind ╣ 
 ║ ╓ Subsequent Cognizer ┬ Conceptual 
 ║ ║ └ Non-Conceptual 
 ╚═ Non-Valid Cognizers ╫ Wrong Consciousness ┬ Conceptual 
 ║ └ Non-Conceptual 
 ╟ Doubt ┬ Tending towards the fact 
 ║ ├ Tending away from the fact 
 ║ └ Equally tending to both sides 
 ╟ Correct Assumption 
 ╙ Inattentive Perception ┬ Sense direct perceiver 
 ├ Mental direct perceiver 
 └ Self-Cognizing direct perceiver● Initial 
● Subsequent 
● Inattentive ● Initial 
● Subsequent 
● Without a reason 
● With a contradictory reason 
● With an indefinite reason 
● With an inapplicable reason 
●With a correct but unestablished reason
ILTK Basic Program - September 2005  Mind and Cognition  Part 1: Awarenesses and Knowers  - Chart 8a 
Update October 2006 
 
 16CHART 8a - AWARENESSES AND KNOWERS 
Types of Cognizers - Definitions  
 
   ┌ Eye sense direct valid cognizer 
 ├ Ear sense direct valid cognizer 
 ┌ Sense direct valid cognizer  ┼ Nose sense direct valid cognizer 
 │ ├ Tongue sense direct valid cognizer 
 │ └ Body sense direct valid cognizer 
 │ 
 ╓ Direct Valid Cognizer  ┼ Mental direct valid cognizer  ┬ From sense direct cognizer 
 ║ │ └ Clairvoyance 
 ║ │ 
 ║ ├ Self-knowing direct valid cognizer   
 ║ │ 
 ║ │ ┌ Realising subtle impermanence 
 ╔ Valid Cognizer  ╢ └ Yogic direct valid cognizer  ┼ Realising coarse selflessness 
 ║ ║ └ Realising subtle selflessness 
 ║ ║ ┌ Fact ┌ Sense 
 ║ ╙ Inferential Valid Cognizer  ┼ Renown  ├ Mental 
 ║  └ Belief  ├ Self 
Cognizer  ╣ ├ Yogic 
 ║ ╓ Subsequent Cognizer  ┬ Directly perceiving subsequent cognizer  ┴ None 
 ║ ║ ├ Conceptual subsequent cognizer  ┬ Induced by direct cognition  
 ║ ║ └ Neither  └ Induced by inference  
 ║ ║  
 ║ ║ ┌ does not have a reason  
 ║ ║ ├ has a contradictory reason  
 ║ ╟ Correct Assumption  ┼ the reason is indefinite  
 ║ ║ ├ the reason is not established  
 ║ ║ └ the reason exists but is not settled  
 ║ ║ 
 ║ ║ ┌ Sense direct perceivers  
 ╚ Non-Valid Cognizer  ╫ Non-Ascertaining  ┼ Mental direct perceivers  
 ║ Cognition  └ Self-knowing direct perceivers  
 ║ 
 ║ ┌ Tending towards the factual  
 ╟ Doubt  ┼ Tending towards the non-factual  
 ║ └ Tending equally  
 ║ ┌ Innate  
 ╙ Wrong  ┬ Conceptual  ┴ Intellectually formed  
 └ Non-Conceptual  ┬ Sense  
 └ Mental  DEFINITIONS 
 
Valid Cognizer 
New incontrovertible knower 
Direct Valid Cognizer 
Knower, new, incontrovertib le, free from conceptuality 
Self-Knowing Direct Valid Cognizer 
New incontrovertible self-knower, free from conceptuality, 
and just and apprehender 
Sense Direct Valid Cognizer 
New incontrovertible knower , free from conceptuality, 
arising in dependence upon a physical sense power that is 
its uncommon empowering condition 
Mental Direct Valid Cognizer 
New incontrovertible knower , free from conceptuality, 
arising in dependence upon a mental sense power that is its 
uncommon empowering condition 
Yogic Direct Valid Cognizer 
Other-knowing exalted knower in the continuum of an Arya 
that, in dependence upon the union of calm abiding and 
special insight as its uncommon empowering condition, newly and directly realizes either subtle impermanence or 
the coarse or subtle selflessness of persons 
Inferential Valid Cognizer 
New, incontrovertible, determinative knower, produced in 
dependence on a correct sign as its basis 
Non-Valid Cognizer 
Knower that is not newly incontrovertible 
Subsequent Cognizer 
Knower that realizes what has already been realized 
Correct Assumption 
Factually concordant determinative knower  that is 
controvertible with regards to its determined object 
Non-Ascertaining Consciousness  
A knower  that has clear a ppearance of the specifically 
characterized phenomenon that is its engaged object and is 
unable to induce ascertainment of it 
Doubt 
Knower that has qualms tw o-pointedly by its own power 
Wrong Consciousness 
Knower that engages its object erroneously Key:  
Underline  indicates that there are non-
conceptual consciousnesses of this type. 
Italic  indicates that there are conceptual 
consciousnesses of this t ype. 
ILTK Basic Program - September 2005  Mind and Cognition  Part 1: Awarenesses and Knowers  - Chart 8b 
Update October 2006 
 
 17CHART 8b - AWARENESSES AND KNOWERS 
Types of Cognizers - Facsimiles of Direct  Cognizers & Divisions of Valid Cognizers 
 
 ┌ Eye sense direct valid cognizer 
 ├ Ear sense direct valid cognizer 
 ┌ Sense direct valid cognizer  ┼ Nose sense direct valid cognizer 
 │ ├ Tongue sense direct valid cognizer 
 │ └ Body sense direct valid cognizer 
 │ 
 ╓ Direct Valid Cognizer  ┼ Mental direct valid cognizer  ┬ From a sense direct cognizer 
 ║ │ └ Clairvoyance 
 ║ ├  Self-knowing direct valid cognizer   
 ║ │ 
 ║ │ ┌ Realising subtle impermanence 
 ╔ Valid Cognizer  ╢ └ Yogic direct valid cognizer  ┼ Realising coarse selflessness 
 ║ ║ └ Realising subtle selflessness 
 ║ ║ ┌ Fact ┌ Sense 
 ║ ╙ Inferential Valid Cognizer  ┼ Renown  ├ Mental 
 ║  └ Belief  ├ Self 
Cognizer  ╣ ├ Yogic 
 ║ ╓ Subsequent Cognizer  ┬ Directly perceiving subsequent cognizer  ┴ None 
 ║ ║ ├ Conceptual subsequent cognizer  ┬ Induced by direct cognition  
 ║ ║ └ Neither  └ Induced by inference  
 ║ ║  
 ║ ║ ┌ does not have a reason  
 ║ ║ ├ has a contradictory reason  
 ║ ╟ Correct Assumption  ┼ the reason is indefinite  
 ║ ║ ├ the reason is not established  
 ║ ║ └ the reason exists but is not settled  
 ║ ║ 
 ║ ║ ┌ Sense direct perceivers  
 ╚ Non-Valid Cognizer  ╫ Non-Ascertaining  ┼ Mental direct perceivers  
 ║ Cognition  └ Self-knowing direct perceivers  
 ║ 
 ║ ┌ Tending towards the factual  
 ╟ Doubt  ┼ Tending towards the non-factual  
 ║ └ Tending equally  
 ║ 
 ║ ┌ Innate  
 ╙ Wrong  ┬ Conceptual  ┴ Intellectually formed  
 └ Non-Conceptual  ┬ Sense  
 └ MentalKey:  
Underline  indicates that there are non-
conceptual consciousnesses of this type. 
Italic  indicates that there are conceptual 
consciousnesses of this t ype.Facsimiles of Direct Cognizers 
Conceptual 
1. Mistaken conceptions 
2. Conventional conceptions 3. Inferential conceptions 
4. Conceptions arising from inference 
5. Memory conceptions 6. Wishing conceptions
 
 
Non-Conceptual 
1. Mental consciousnesses 
2. Sense consciousnesses  
A Terminological Division of Valid Cognizers 
1. Inference for oneself and inference for another  
2. Ancillarily, minds apprehending a sign 
 - direct, inferential, or subsequent 
3. Valid cognizers that induce ascertainment by 
themselves 
1. Sense direct valid cognizer s to which the ability to 
perform a function appears 
2. Sense direct valid cogni zers that have a familiar 
object 
3. Self-knowing direct valid cognizers 
4. Yogic direct valid cognizers 
5. Inferential valid cognizers 
3. Valid cognizers that induce ascertainment by 
another 
1. Initial direct cognizers 
2. Inattentive direct cognizers 
3. Direct cognizers having a cause of error 
OR 
Valid cognizers when ascertainment… 
1. of the appearance is induced by itself but of the truth 
by another 
2. of the generality is induced by itself but of the 
particular by another 
3. of even the mere appearance is induced by another 
4. Valid cognizers that are persons, speech, and 
consciousness 
 
Definite Enumeration of Valid Cognizers 
1. Direct valid cognizers 
2. Inferential valid cognizers 
(one substance )The cause of error 
existing in the… 1. Basis 
2. Abode 
3. Object 
4. Preceding condition 
ILTK Basic Program - September 2005  Mind and Cognition  Part 1: Awarenesses and Knowers  - Chart 9 
Update October 2006 
Masters Program Middle Way  Review Class, January 2000 
*Source:  Meditation on Emptiness, Jeffrey Hopkins, Wisdom Publications, 1983. 18CHART 9 - AWARENESSES AND KNOWERS 
Minds and Mental factors* 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Consciousness (Main) 
Mind 
Mental factors Eye consciousness 
Determining 
factors (5) 
Root afflictions (6) Ear consciousness 
Nose consciousness 
Tongue consciousness 
Omnipresent factors (5) Feeling, discrimination, intention,  contact, mental engagement  Body consciousness 
Mental consciousness 
Secondary afflictions (20) Virtuous factors (11) 
Changeable factors (4) Aspiration, belief, mindfulness,  stabilization, knowledge  
Faith, shame, embarrassment, non-attachment, non-hatred, non-ignorance, effort, pliancy, 
conscientiousness, equanimity, non-harmfulness  
Desire, anger, pride, ignorance, doubt, afflicted view [(a) view of the transitory collection, 
(b) view holding to an extreme, (c) conception of  bad view as supreme, (d) conception of 
bad ethics & modes o f conduct as su preme , (e) perverse view ]
Belligerence, resentment, concealm ent, spite, jealousy, miserlin ess, deceit, dissimulation, 
haughtiness, harmfulness, non-shame, non- embarrassment, lethargy, excitement, non- faith, 
laziness, non-conscientiousness, forgetfu lness, non-introspection, distraction  
Sleep, contrition, investigation, analysis    Five similarities between main mind and mental factors 
 Similarity of: 
1. basis 
2. observed object  
3. aspect 
4. time 
5. substance 