Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Lorig/Reference material/BP-Mind Review with Jampa_Gendun.pdf
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:53:40.246310
================================================================================

Masters Program: Awareness & Knowledge ( lo rik) Review Class with Jampa Gendun – Jan & Feb, 1999 
 
1  
Awareness and Knowledge Review Class with Jampa Gendun 
 
January 22 (Friday) 
 
We begin our study of lo.rik by looking at objects and object-possessors. There are four types of objects 
and they are combined into two pairs (we will use the vocabulary that Elizabeth Napper uses although 
there are other terms used for these in other texts).  The first two are the objects that are being “operated upon.” 
1. Object of engagement (Tibetan: 
juk yül,  ’jug yul ) – this is the object that the awareness is acting or 
operating upon. For example, the object of engagement of an eye consciousness apprehending book is book. 
2. Determined object (Tibetan: 
shën yül,  zhen yul ) – this term is only used for conceptual 
consciousnesses; the book is the determined object of the conceptual consciousness apprehending book (the book is also the object of engagement for a conceptual consciousness apprehending the book). 
  
 These are the objects that are actually “appearing.” 
3. Appearing object (Tibetan: 
nang yül,  snang yul ) – this is what is actually appearing to the 
consciousness. For example, if an eye consciousness is apprehending a book, the book is the appearing object. In the case of a conceptual consciousness the appearing object is a meaning generality. For example, the appearing object of the conceptual consciousness apprehending book is the meaning generality of book. 
4. Apprehended object (Tibetan: 
sung yül,  bzung yul ) – this is what is actually apprehended by the 
consciousness. For example, if an eye consciousness is perceiving a book , the book is the apprehended object. The appearing object of a consciousness and its apprehended object are mutually inclusive. 
  
So for a direct perceiver, the object of engagement is also the appearing object and the apprehended object. As for thought consciousnesses, the appearing object for the conceptual consciousness apprehending a book is a meaning generality of the book. The meaning generality of the book is also the apprehended object for the conceptual consciousness apprehending it.  Q: What about when the conceptual consciousness apprehends a permanent phenomena such as 
unconditioned space. What is the appearing object then? 
A: According to Sautrantika, unconditioned space would actually be the appearing object (not the 
meaning generality of unconditioned space). Remember that in this school, permanent phenomena do not appear to a direct perceiver. But what would be the object of engagement in this case? Lati 
Rinpoche says in Mind in Tibetan Buddhism  (page 101), 
 
 “ I n  g e n e r a l ,  o n e  c a n  s a y  t h a t  w h a t e v e r  i s  a n  e s t a b l i s h e d  b a s e  i s  n e c e s s a r i l y  a l l  f o u r  o b j e c t s  –  a  determined object, object of engagement, appearing object, and apprehended object. For any phenomenon is necessarily the determined object and the object of engagement of the thought apprehending it. Also, whatever is permanent is necessarily the appearing and the apprehended object of the thought apprehending it, and whatever is an impermanent is necessarily the appearing and apprehended object of the direct perceiver apprehending it. This stems from the basic Sautrantika assertion that the appearing object of thought and permanent phenomenon are synonymous, and appearing object of direct perception and impermanent phenomenon are synonymous. ”  This would indicate that unconditioned space is all four objects for the thought consciousness apprehending it.  
Masters Program: Awareness & Knowledge ( lo rik) Review Class with Jampa Gendun – Jan & Feb, 1999 
 
2  
  I have a problem with this that has never been resolved. All thought consciousnesses are mistaken. Why? Because they are mistaken with respect to their appearing object. In what way are they mistaken? Their appearing object appears to be the object but is not. For example, the appearing object of thought consciousness apprehending pot is the meaning generality of pot. The meaning generality of pot is that 
factor that while appearing to be pot is not a pot. Thought consciousnesses are mistaken with respect to 
this appearance. Now, if you say that the appearing object of a thought consciousness apprehending unconditioned space is unconditioned space, in what way is the thought consciousness mistaken?   Q: If the appearing object and the apprehended object are synonymous, why are they posited as 
different objects? Does it have something to with the “function” that the object is playing for the subject that is cognizing it (i.e. the object that “appears” to the subject and the object that is “apprehended” by the subject)?  
A: It’s necessary to understand that many objects appear to a consciousness which are not the appearing 
object of that consciousness. For example, subtle impermanence appears to a direct perceiver apprehending pot but that subtle impermanence is not the appearing object of that consciousness, only pot is. Though subtle impermanence appears it is not apprehended. With respect to subtle impermanence a direct perceiver apprehending pot is a consciousness to which an object (subtle impermanence) appears but is not ascertained. 
 We can also look at wrong consciousness, a consciousness that is mistaken with regard to its object of engagement. Whether or not there is a factually concordant consciousness comes into play here. What is an example of a non-conceptual consciousness that is not factually concordant? The classic example is an eye consciousness perceiving a blue snow mountain. What is the object of engagement? The object of engagement, if you had to posit one, would be a blue snow mountain, but that object of engagement is a non-existent. What are the appearing object and the apprehended object? A blue snow mountain is also the appearing and the apprehended object.  What is an example of a conceptual consciousness that is not factually concordant? One example is a conception of a self of persons. What would you posit as the object of engagement? The object of engagement would be a self of persons, but once again, that object of engagement doesn’t exist. What are the appearing object and the apprehended object? The appearing object is a meaning generality of a self of persons and the apprehended object is that as well. So it appears that, although we’ve learned about wrong consciousness and more about these various objects, we haven’t answered the question. Perhaps Geshe-la can shed some light on it.  Q: What exactly is the object of the mode of apprehension (Tibetan: 
dzîn dang gyi yül,  ’dzin stangs kyi 
yul)? 
A: The object of the mode of apprehension was spoken of in our studies of Abhisamayalamkara , in the 
section on the path of preparation. In that section, it was stated that the objects of the mode of 
apprehension and the objective aspects were mutually inclusive while the mode of apprehension and the subjective aspects were mutually inclusive (see Review class transcript, May 25-29, 1998, page 5). In Sautrantika, the object of the mode of apprehension is mutually inclusive with the object of engagement (and determined object for a thought consciousness). The impermanence of sound that is being cognized by a conceptual consciousness, for example, the mode of apprehension is an inferential cognizer while the object of the mode of apprehension is the impermanence of sound. T h e  m o d e  o f  a p p r e h e n s i o n  i s  g e t t i n g  a t  w h a t  i s  t h e  p a r t i c u l a r  m a n n e r  t h a t  t h e  c o n s c i o u s n e s s  i s  apprehending it. In the case of the wisdom directly realizing the selflessness of persons, the mode of  
 apprehension would be a yogic direct perceiver while the object of the mode of apprehension is the 
selflessness of persons. 
 
Masters Program: Awareness & Knowledge ( lo rik) Review Class with Jampa Gendun – Jan & Feb, 1999 
 
3  
   Q: Is there an alternate term for “apprehended?” 
A: “Apprehend” ( ‘dzën ba, ‘dzen pa ) is a good term in some ways, because it is generally neutral. Here it 
simply means “hold” or “grasp” in that it could be holding its object either correctly or incorrectly. 
In the context of thought consciousnesses it could be translated as “conceive.” 
 
 
 
    Feb 10 (Wednesday)  
So far in lo rik we have looked briefly at objects and are now examining object-possessors. 
 
There are three divisions of object-possessors. The first of the three divisions is persons, the second is awareness and the third is expressive sounds. Awareness is that which is clear and knowing. Clear can be refer to consciousness being non-physical or that afflictions do not reside in the entity of consciousness. Is a person clear and knowing? Person is clear because it is not form and a person is also knowing so this would make the person consciousness if this were the definition. Is ignorance a consciousness? Yes…Is it clear and knowing? Yes. What does it know? What it the meaning of knowing? 
 
Awareness, knower and consciousness are mutually inclusive.  
 
There are many divisions in lo rik, one of them being dividing cognizers into two, prime and non-prime 
cognizers. Prime cognizer is defined (p.12) as a new incontrovertible knower.  
〈 “New” eliminates subsequent cognizers. New refers to first moment and 
〈 “Incontrovertible” is defined on p. 10 as that “which gets at its object of analysis.” This means that 
as long as a knower maintains this understanding of the object, it cannot be removed or supplanted 
by another consciousness knowing in an opposite manner. It is a firm and stable type of consciousness, as opposed to correct assumption, which is not incontrovertible. It is “non-deceptive,” but not everything that is non-deceptive is incontrovertible, because a correctly assuming consciousness is non-deceptive but it is controvertible. 
〈 And as it says in the text, “knower” eliminates that physical sense powers are prime cognizers.” 
 
Q: With subsequent cognition is there some sort of memory operational in the process? Where does the 
memory for an eye consciousness exist? A: Subsequent moments in a continuum do not realize objects by their own power but rather by the power of the previous moment of cognition. Geshe-la seems to have said last week that once you have a prime cognition of a table, for example, a valid eye direct perceiver of table, all later cognitions of that same object (whether within the continuum of this original cognition or not) would be subsequent cognitions. This is at odds with other teachings on this same subject in that each initial cognition in a new continuum would be prime, even if the object had been cognized in a previously. In other explanations, merely realizing what has already been realized, is not taken the to be the meaning of subsequent cognizer. In these explanations the meaning of subsequent cognizer comes down to a 
realizer realizing its object induced by a former valid cognizer . Thus it is realizing it object not through its 
own power but through the power of a previous realization. There is an element of the present 
cognition being influenced by a former cognizer. We’ll be looking at this again later (see also Mind in  
 
Masters Program: Awareness & Knowledge ( lo rik) Review Class with Jampa Gendun – Jan & Feb, 1999 
 
4 Tibetan Buddhism , by Lati Rinpoche pp. 117-118). A valid cognizer or prime cognizer is the best or idea 
cognizer. It is the standard by which other cognizers are judged valid or not. In Sautrantika the best 
possible cognizers are necessarily new and incontrovertible, that is, arising under their own power and stable..  
There are two types of prime cognizers: direct prime cognizer  and inferential prime cognizer .  
 
A direct prime cognizer  is a new incontrovertible knower that is free from conceptuality and non-mistaken. 
Conceptual consciousness is always mistaken with regard to its appearing object . In what way? The 
appearing object is not established as it appears. The appearing object of a conceptual consciousness 
apprehending pot is a meaning generality of pot. The definition of meaning generality of pot is: that imputed factor that, although it is not a pot, appears to the thought apprehending a pot as a pot. The appearing object appears to be a pot but is not. But, still, the conceptual consciousness can validly realize pot in dependence upon this mistaken appearance. It is not mistaken with respect to pot. It is mistaken with respect to the appearance of pot. If it were this cognizer were mistaken with respect to pot it would be a wrong consciousness, since it would be mistaken with respect to its object of engagement, that is, pot. We can use symbols and representation of the world to understand the world but we should be mindful that the “map is not the territory,” the meaning generality that we use to understand a thing is not the thing itself.     
 