Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Lorig/Edited/BP2 M2 L01(final).pdf
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:53:48.085665
================================================================================

Amitabha Buddhist Centre                              Second Basic Program – Module 2  
                                The Study of Mind and Its Functions  
 
 
Lesson 1  
Page 1 of 10 
 Transcript of teachings by Khen Rinpoche Geshe 
Chonyi  
 
Lesson No: 1       Date: 19th June 2012  
 
Studying  and understand ing the subjects that are taught in the Basic 
Program are the foundation for you to gain an unmistaken understanding 
of the Great T reatises that you may have an opportunity to study in the 
future. When you are able to gain  an unmistaken understanding of these 
Great Treatises , you can  share your understanding of th ose teachings 
with others. In this way, y ou will be able to benefit many people .  
 
Due to your unmistaken understanding of those great Buddhist 
teachings , you will also benefit on an individual  level because you will be 
able to use those teachings to bring about a change in your  own mind , 
especially when you have developed the convic tion in and gained an 
ascertainment of the validity of those teachings.  
 
As Buddhists, we always make prayers for the teachings of the Buddha to 
flourish but it is insufficient to make prayers alone. We have to 
understand that we  as individuals also have a  responsibility to cause the 
teachings of the Buddha flourish.  
 
What do es this mean  – to cause the teachings of the Buddha to flourish? 
It means that we have to cause both the scriptural teachings and the 
realisational teachings to flourish.  
 
How can we cause the scriptural teachings to flourish? On an individual  
level, having learn t and gained an unmistaken understanding of the 
teachings of the Buddha , we share our knowledge with others . This is 
how one causes the scriptural teachings of the Buddha to fl ourish.  
 
In a similar way, a s an individual, on the basis of having gained an 
unmistaken understanding of the teachings of the Buddha, we put those 
teachings i nto practice  and e ffect some positive change in our heart and 
mind. That is what is meant by cau sing the realisational teachings of the 
Buddha to flourish.  
 
Just as we continue to pray for the  teachings of the Buddha to flourish, 
we should also put those prayers into action by learning th ose teachings  
through listening , studying , and analysing th em to gain an understanding  
of them . Therefore, it is very important to make the constant effort in 
learn ing and reflect ing on the teachings.  
 
As I have often mentioned  before , we all accept that we accumulate merit 
when we recite OM MANI PADME HUM. We also accept that we accumulate 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                              Second Basic Program – Module 2  
                                The Study of Mind and Its Functions  
 
 
Lesson 1  
Page 2 of 10 
 merit when we circumambulate holy objects. By applying logic and 
reasoning, we conclude that when we engage in these activities , we will 
create merit.  
 
Likewise when we study the teachings of the Buddha, we will also create 
merit . Simply reading the teachings of the Buddha is in itself a virtuous 
activity . It brings about the accumulation of merit. On the basis of 
learning and gain ing an understanding of the  teachings of the  Buddha, 
the merit we accumulate will be even greater.  
 
We have to remember this all the time. We should think , “Every time I 
read and study the text, I am creating virtue and accumulating merit. ” By 
keeping this in mind, you should strive to come to class . Of course all of 
you have busy lives. But since all of  us have obtained this human life and 
now have the opportunity to learn about the teachings of the B uddha, we 
should seize th is opportunity to do so.  
  
His Holiness the Dalai Lama always says that we all have to be 21st 
century Buddhist s. What does he mea n by that? He says that it is 
insufficient to just have faith and belief in the teachings of the Buddha .   
Rather we should study and actually discover  for ourselves what the 
Buddha taught. T he kind of faith that we should develop is the faith that 
arises from understanding what the Buddha taught. This is very 
important.  
 
The teachings of the Buddha are such that when you put effort into 
studying them, you will be able to understand them . From studying the 
Buddha’s teaching s, you will be able to discover fo r yourself that the y are 
truly special and are in a class of their own. They are v ery different from 
other instructions or teachings you can find in this world. But this 
discovery can only come about when you actually study the teaching s 
yourself. Once you  see that, you will have an understanding  of how the 
Buddha is so special and unique. With this comes a very strong faith in 
the Buddha. Once you have found such faith in the Buddha, gaining the 
positive experiences of the path and  the realisations w ill be easy.  
 
Another thing to note is that during the course of your studies, it is 
possible that you may feel there is not much use in studying because you 
do not see the purpose  and benefits of doing so. Y ou may have such 
thoughts. You may not see the point in learning some of the topics that 
are taught.  
 
At that time, y ou have to remember what I mentioned earlier : the purpose 
of learning the subjects in the Basic Program is to enable you to be able to 
learn and understand the profound treati ses in the futur e. So keep this 
goal in mind. Whenever there is something you do  not  understand such 
as new terminologies and so forth, simply tell yourself that this is 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                              Second Basic Program – Module 2  
                                The Study of Mind and Its Functions  
 
 
Lesson 1  
Page 3 of 10 
 something you must learn and memori se as this will become the tools for 
and foundation of study ing those advanced subjects in the future.  
 
Khen Rinpoche : It is not easy to learn the terms in these philosophy texts. I 
will share with you my own experience.  
 
From the time I was twelve years old to the time I was eighteen, I studied  
these basics, what is g oing to be covered in the class today. I was studying 
them for six years, but I had no idea of what these basic points were 
referring to throughout those 6 years! Maybe it was because I was young 
and I was not paying attention. I had no idea. I didn’t know  anything. I had 
zero knowledge. I knew the words but I didn’t know their meaning.  
 
After that I moved to Sera at the age of eighteen. For the first three to six 
months, when I went to class, I had no idea what they were talking about. I 
went to class to receive teachings but, again, I didn’t understand a single 
word of that the teachers said. This is my story.  
 
Even though I spoke Tibetan, the Dharma terms  and how the texts were 
written w ere completely different from spoken Tibetan. It was very difficult  
to understand the meaning of the words. It took me a very long time to get 
into the philosophical subjects.  
 
Only after one year in Sera, only after that did I have some slight interest in 
philosophy because I understood some words and learnt how to deba te a 
little.  From then on I had more interest in study ing more deeply into the 
subjects.  
 
But in the very beginning I had no interest at all because I didn’t 
understand a single thing. I went through that for six to seven years (at 
Kopan). I didn’t under stand even the very basic topics. But somehow after 
one year (in Sera) I had some interest to do more. Once you have the 
interest, that will push you to continue further. That was how I completed 
my studies. Starting with some small interest on my part, it  pushed me 
through eighteen, nineteen years to the completion of my studies.  
 
There is no age limit with regard to studying philosophy. But studying it 
when you are young is much better because your mind is sharper. You can 
think better. As you get older you cannot think so much. That is a fact.  
 
I will tell you my mother’s story. Many people know this story already. My 
mother could not read or write as she had never been to school. Until the 
age of 70, she didn’t know how to read or write. But at the age  of 70, she 
developed some interest in studying Tibetan and learning how to read.  
 
How did she have this interest? It was because she went to do Nyung Na 
with the lay people . Everyone else could read and chant the prayers. She 
felt so discouraged because she was the only one who was unable to do 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                              Second Basic Program – Module 2  
                                The Study of Mind and Its Functions  
 
 
Lesson 1  
Page 4 of 10 
 that. She was  very un happy. Everyone was of the same age and she 
wanted to be able to do what they could do. She was inspired by that.    
 
So she went to study how to read the Tibetan language so that she could 
read the text and chant the prayers. That was her wish. She did two to 
three years of Tibetan classes. Every morning she would walk one hour to 
class, study for two hours and then walk one hour to come home. She told 
me when she went to class, she would know h ow to read but when she 
came home, she would have forgotten everything. She didn’t know how to 
read. Sometimes she felt discouraged and stressed.  
 
A few years ago she showed me the Tibetan text. She could read the text. 
She read it out to me. It was not p erfect but it was ok. She could read a bit 
here and there. After that she was quite happy.  
 
My auntie was exactly like my mother and didn’t know how to read or 
write either . My mother became her teacher and became quite proud. 
Sometimes she would even sho ut at my auntie! She did manage to achieve 
her goal. She could do some prayers and she was happy with that. .  
 
So when you put in the effort, I think everyone can learn something. When 
you really wish to learn and you have the interest to do so, I think y ou can 
make it, according to your level of intelligence. Not everyone can be the 
same. That is not possible. Everyone have different levels of intelligence, 
different backgrounds, different interests, different effort, different amount 
of time , and so fort h. Everyone cannot be the same. But the point is that 
when you have the interest and you have some enthusiasm, you can make 
something out of th is. Think about the reasons I ha ve mentioned for why 
we are studying the Basic Program. Keep them in mind. So let ’s start our 
journey.  
 
**********************  
 
With regard to the exam, 110 people sat for the exam. That is very good 
and very encouraging. You must know that whether you did well or badly, 
that doesn’t matter. If you got a good mark, wonderful, and rejoi ce in  that. 
If you didn’t do so well, also rejoice and encourage yourself to do better the 
next time round.  
 
We will keep a record of the marks because in order to get the Final 
Certificate at the end of the five years, you must complete all the exams 
held before that. So those of who want to take the Final Exam, you must 
take all the exams before that. Keep this in mind. If you don’t want to take 
the Final Exam, that is your choice. You don’t want the certificate.  You 
don’t want the degree. You don’t wan t enlightenment. That’s ok.  (Laughter)   
I am joking.  
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                              Second Basic Program – Module 2  
                                The Study of Mind and Its Functions  
 
 
Lesson 1  
Page 5 of 10 
 This is why we conduct the exam. It is in accordance with the rule set by 
the FPMT. We need to follow that. So whether you did well or not, it is all 
right because this is a learning process. We can di scuss the questions 
further to gain a better understanding of them. If we got the wrong answer, 
we have to question why we got it wrong and to find out what is the correct 
answer. From there you can learn more and share with each other. There 
will be a dis cussion on the exam questions this Sunday from 1.30 to 
3.30pm.  
 
*******************  
 
Before we can start with the actual subject matter, you have to grasp 
some philosophical concepts and the ir terminologies because the y will 
come up all the time in your study of Buddhist philosophy. It is crucial for 
you to understand these concepts as the words used i n the terminolog ies 
will be new to most of you. You have no choice . You have to memori se all 
these terms and understand the se concepts.  
 
Established base  
Established base  is mutually inclusive with : 
 an object of knowledge  
 an existent  
 an object of comprehension  
Mutually inclusive  means  that although they have different names , they 
are referring to the same thing and have the same meaning.  Established 
base, obj ect of knowledge, existent and object of comprehension  all refer 
to a phenomenon that is established by a valid cogni ser.  
 
Existent and non -existent  
What is the difference between an existent and a non-existent?  
 An existent  exists because it can be reali sed by a valid cogni ser (or 
a valid mind). Whatever exists is reali sed (or verified) to be existing 
by a valid cogni ser.  
 A non-existent  is a phenomenon that does not exist because it 
cannot be verified by any valid  cogni ser. Its existence is not reali sed 
by a valid cognition . Therefore it does not exist . It is non -existent.  
 
Impermanent phenomenon and permanent phenomenon  
Established base can be divided into:  
 impermanent phenomenon  
 permanent phenomenon  
If a phenomenon is an existent, it is either an impe rmanent phenomenon 
or a permanent phenomenon. For an existent, if it is not an impermanent 
phenomenon, it is necessarily  a permanent phenomenon. These two 
possibilities are exhaustive. There isn’t a third possibility whereby there is 
a phenomenon that is a n existent that is neither impermanent nor 
permanent.   
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                              Second Basic Program – Module 2  
                                The Study of Mind and Its Functions  
 
 
Lesson 1  
Page 6 of 10 
 An impermanent phenomenon  is mutually inclusive with : 
 functioning thing  
 product   
 ultimate truth  
 specifically characteri sed phenomenon  
 composed phenomenon.  
 
What is an impermanent phenomenon? It is cal led an impermanent 
phenomenon because it undergoes momentary change , i.e., it undergoes 
change in each  and every single moment.  
  
 An impermanent phenomenon can also be referred to as a product .  
It is called a product because it is a created or produced 
phenomenon.  
 An ultimate truth  is a phenomenon that is u ltimately able to 
perform a function.  
 What is a specifically characterised phenomenon ? It is a 
phenomenon that is established by way of its own character without 
being imputed by term or thought consci ousness , i.e., it is not 
imputed through conceptuality.  
 An impermanent phenomenon can be known as a composed 
phenomenon  because that phenomenon comes about or is 
composed through causes and conditions.  
 
What we have mentioned so far is based on the view of the Sutra School.  
 
You have to understand that these different terms are various ways of 
referring to impermanent phenomen on. They are not separate from 
impermanent phenomen on but are simply different ways of saying the 
same thing. Impermanent phenomeno n, functioning thing, product, 
ultimate truth, specifically characteri sed phenomenon and composed 
phenomenon are mutually inclusive.  
 
What is a permanent phenomenon ? It is a permanent phenomenon  
because  it does not undergo momentary change.  Permanent pheno menon 
covers every single phenomenon that is not impermanent.  
 
Question from Khen Rinpoche : If it is not an impermanent  phenomenon , is 
it necessar ily a permanent  phenomenon ? 
 
Khen Rinpoche: For those who answered, “yes,” here is another question 
for you.  
 
Question from Khen Rinpoche : Is a sky-flower a permanent phenomenon?  
 
The point is  this: Just because it is not an impermanent  phenomenon , it 
does not necessarily m ean that it is a permanent  phenomenon . However, 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                              Second Basic Program – Module 2  
                                The Study of Mind and Its Functions  
 
 
Lesson 1  
Page 7 of 10 
 if you  were to say that it is an existent and it is not an impermanent  
phenomenon , then that means it is necessarily a permanent  
phenomenon .  
 
A permanent phenomenon is mutually inclusive with : 
 non-produced  phenomenon  
 conventional truth  
 generally characteri sed phenomenon  
 uncomposed phenomenon  
 
A permanent phenomenon does not undergo momentary change.  
 
 A permanent phenomenon can also be known as a non-produced 
phenomenon . A non -produced phenomenon is a non -created 
phenomenon.  
 A conventional truth  refers to a phenomenon that is ultimately 
unable to p erform a function  
 A generally characterised phenomenon  is a phenomenon that is 
merely imputed by term or thought consciousness  and it is not 
established as a specifically characteri sed phenomenon.  
 An uncomposed phenomenon  is a phenomenon that does not com e 
into existence through the gathering of causes and  conditions.  
 
Let us review what we have covered so far:  
 
 
 
Established Base  
(mutually inclusive 
with object of 
knowledge, existent , 
and object of 
comprehension)  Impermanent phenomenon  
 Functioning thi ng 
 Product  
 Ultimate truth  
 Specifically characteri sed phenomenon  
 Composed phenomenon  
Permanent phenomenon   
 Non-produc ed phenomenon  
 Conventional truth  
 Generally characteri sed phenomenon  
 Uncomposed phenomenon   
 
An established base refers to any phenomen on that exists. To help us 
better understand and clarify what an existent covers, there is the 
division of established base/existent into two: (1) impermanent 
phenomenon and (2) permanent phenomenon.  
 
Likewise, to help us gain an even better understanding  of what 
impermanent phenomena entail, there are also many divisions.  
 
Divisions of impermanent phenomenon  
An impermanent phenomenon refers to a phenomenon that undergoes 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                              Second Basic Program – Module 2  
                                The Study of Mind and Its Functions  
 
 
Lesson 1  
Page 8 of 10 
 momentary change. It can be divided into:  
1. Matter  
2. Consciousness  
3. Non-associated comp ositional factor  
 
If it is an impermanent phenomenon, it is necessar ily one of these three : 
matter, consciousness, or non-associated compositional factor . 
 
Matter  
 According to the Sutra School, form and matter are mutually 
inclusive.  
 Matter is atomically established , i.e., it is established through  the 
gathering of many atoms.  
 
Consciousness  
 Consciousness i s an impermanent phenomenon but it is not matter.  
 Consciousness is non -obstructive , i.e., i t does not have colo ur and 
shape  
 It is able to have a clear apprehension of objects  appearing to it.  
 Consciousness, awareness , and knower are mutually inclusive.   
 
Non-associated compositional factor  
When an impermanent phenomenon is neither matter nor consciousness, 
then it is necessarily a non -associated compo sitional factor.  
 
What we have discussed so far is a presentation of what reality is. In 
technical Buddhist language, it is called the basis .  
 
Matter and consciousness are different entities. Matter is atomically 
established and is composed of many parti cles or atoms. On the other 
hand, consciousness is non -obstructive  with neither colour nor shape. It 
is like a void and has the factors of clarity and knowing.  
 
We are now examining what reality is, the basis. At the level of the basis, 
matter and conscio usness are radically different entities because of how 
they come into existence .  
   
How is matter o r form established? It comes into existence by depending 
on a concordant cause , i.e., a cause of a similar type. It is established by 
a former moment of matter or f orm. In the same way, consciousness is 
established in dependence on  its concordant cause .  
   
 Whether it is matter or consciousness, both are impermanent 
phenomen a. The refore they are product s. The fact that they are 
product s means that they are pr oduced.  
 Matter and consciousness are also composed phenomena because 
they are composed of causes and conditions .  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                              Second Basic Program – Module 2  
                                The Study of Mind and Its Functions  
 
 
Lesson 1  
Page 9 of 10 
 Therefore, according to the Buddhist view, if it is an impermanent 
phenomenon, it cannot exist without depending on causes and 
conditions. If  it is an impermanent phenomenon, it has to come into being 
by depending on causes and conditions. Not only that, it has to depend 
on a concordant cause or a cause of a similar type.   
 
Therefore, whether it is matter or consciousness, they have to be 
established through causes and conditions.  
 
With regard to the word, cause, there are two types of c auses:  (1) the 
substantial cause and (2) the cooperative condition.  
 
Matter or f orm cannot  act as the substantial cause of consciousness. 
Likewise, consciousne ss cannot  act as the substantial cause of matter. 
This is because , in reality as we know it at the level of the basis, matter  
and consciousness are established as distinct  or different entities. 
Therefore , they must come  about from their respective causes.   
 
Matter has to come into existen ce in dependence on former moment s of 
matter. Likewise, consciousness has to come into existence from previous 
moments of consciousness. Based on this line of reasoning with regard to 
the substantial cause of consciousness , this is how we establish 
reincarnation  and how we establish that there are past lives and there will 
be future lives.  
 
Based on our observation of reality, that matter and consciousness are 
different entities that come about through their own substantia l causes ,  
on the basis of that understanding, we can  then conclude that there is 
reincarnation, that there are past lives and that there will be future lives. 
From this you can see how an understanding of reality is so important. 
Based on your understandi ng of what constitutes reality, you can then 
think about some of these issues such as reincarnation.  
 
In the case of consciousness, it has to come into being in dependence on 
some factor other than itself , i.e., it has to come about as the result of a 
cause. It cannot come about in dependence on a discordant cause . It has 
to come about in dependen ce on a concordant cause. From this, you can 
establish  reincarnation, past , and future lives.  
 
But even before you can begin to ascertain this for yourself, you m ust 
first have a good understanding of the basis, of reality, starting with the 
individual entities of matter and consciousness: how their distinct entities 
exist in reality. An ascertainment of how liberation exists, how the 
Buddha exists , and how enlight enment exists can only be arrived at 
based on the fundamental understanding of what constitutes reality, the 
basis.   
 
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                              Second Basic Program – Module 2  
                                The Study of Mind and Its Functions  
 
 
Lesson 1  
Page 10 of 10 
 As I have mentioned earlier, there is no other way of going about this 
other than by learning these terms. In preparation for the stud y of future 
subject s, you have to memori se and understand the se terms . You must 
think big here and understand what the goal  is. The goal is what you 
want to achieve in the future.  
 
This is the preparation to help you to understand the teachings of the 
Buddha  in the future. Please keep this in mind. On the basis of making 
these preparation s now, when you gain some understanding of the 
teachings of the Buddha in the future, you will also gain mental 
satisfaction and happiness. Only then can you say that you hav e made 
this human life of freedoms and endowments meaningful.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Translated by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme  
 
Transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek, Vivien Ng and Patricia Lee  
 
Edited by Cecilia Tsong  
 
 
 