Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Lorig/Edited/BP2 M2 L14 (final).doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:53:47.174830
================================================================================


Transcript of teachings by Khen Rinpoche Geshe Chonyi

Lesson No: 14                      Date: 2nd August 2012

There are the concepts of generalities and instances. An illustration  of  a
generality will be an object of knowledge.  An  object  of  knowledge  is  a
generality. Why is it called a generality? Because an  object  of  knowledge
pervades many types of phenomena. For example, a horse  is  an  instance  of
and is pervaded by an object of knowledge. An object of  knowledge  pervades
a horse.

What makes something  an  instance  of  a  particular  generality?  In  this
instance, a horse is an object of  knowledge  not  only  because  it  is  an
existent. There are three criteria for something to  be  established  as  an
instance of a generality. How do we determine that a horse  is  an  instance
of an object of knowledge?

1. The horse has to be an object of knowledge.
2. The horse has to be related to an object of knowledge by reason of  being
   of one nature or one entity with it.
3. One should be able to posit that there is something that is not  a  horse
   but is an object of knowledge

When these three conditions are fulfilled, then a horse can be  an  instance
of an object of knowledge.

For the time being, keep these concepts of  generalities  and  instances  in
mind based on this example of a horse being an  instance  of  an  object  of
knowledge due to the presence of these three conditions.

As for explaining the relationship between the two, i.e., a  generality  and
an instance, there are two  kinds  of  relationship:  either  (1)  they  are
related causally or (2) they are related because they have the  same  nature
and are of one nature or one entity. If you have the interest, we  can  talk
about these two types of relationships in the future but not now.

There seems to  be  some  confusion  between  a  generality  and  a  meaning
generality. They are not the same. If someone were to ask you, “Is  a  horse
a generality?” what would you say? We saw how a horse is an instance  of  an
object of knowledge. Is a horse itself also a generality?

(Students answer: “Yes.”)

If a horse is a generality, what would be an instance of horse?

(Students answer: “A white horse.”)
A horse  is  a  generality  and  a  white  horse  is  an  instance  of  this
generality.

Some students were asking  about  generalities  and  instances  so  this  is
something for you to think about.

                             ******************
We were talking about inferential cognisers. How is an inferential  cogniser
produced? An inferential cogniser is produced in dependence upon  a  correct
sign. If an inferential cogniser is generated in dependence upon  a  correct
sign, what is a correct sign?

Correct signs
A correct sign is that which is the three modes.  If  the  three  modes  are
present, you have a correct sign or reason.

When we state a syllogism, there are three elements:
1. the subject
2. the predicate to be proven
3. the sign

When a syllogism is stated, you  have  a  subject  and  a  predicate  to  be
proven. You are trying to prove that the subject  is  the  predicate  to  be
proven in dependence upon stating a sign.

How do you determine whether it is a correct sign  or  not?  You  do  so  by
analysing whether the three modes are fulfilled. The three modes have to  be
established in order for the sign to be a correct sign.

Property of the subject
Of the three modes, the first mode is the property of the  subject.  How  is
the property of the subject established? To establish the  property  of  the
subject, there are three things to look out for:

1. The subject and the sign that are stated in a particular  syllogism  must
   be different.
2. The sign stated in the syllogism must exist on  the  subject,  i.e.,  the
   subject is the sign.
3. The person to whom you are stating the syllogism has to be:
    o someone who has ascertained through a valid cognition that the subject
      is the sign and
    o someone who wishes to know whether the subject is the predicate to  be
      proven.
If these three criteria are fulfilled, you can say that the first mode,  the
property of the subject, is established.

An illustration of a  syllogism:  The  subject,  sound,  is  an  impermanent
phenomenon because of being a product.
• the subject is sound
• the sign or reason is product
• the predicate to be proven is impermanent phenomenon.
This syllogism contains a  correct  sign.  Therefore  the  three  modes  are
established. Let us use this illustration to see how  the  three  modes  are
established.

From this you can see that you will not be able to  analyse  this  syllogism
if you do not have some  rough  understanding  of  what  is  an  impermanent
phenomenon, what is a product, and their definitions.

How is the property of the subject established in this syllogism?  In  order
for the property of the subject to be established, three  criteria  have  to
be fulfilled:
1. Are the subject and the sign different? The subject is  sound.  The  sign
   is product. Sound and product are different.
2. Does the sign exist on the subject, i.e., is the subject  the  sign?  The
   subject, sound, is the sign, product.
3. It is possible that there exists a person who has ascertained with  valid
   cognition that sound is a product and who  now  wishes  to  know  whether
   sound is an impermanent phenomenon or not.
When these three criteria are  present,  the  property  of  the  subject  is
established.

Forward pervasion
The second mode is forward pervasion. The easiest way  to  see  whether  the
forward pervasion is established or not is to see whether  the  sign  exists
exclusively in the similar class or not.

The subject,  sound,  is  an  impermanent  phenomenon  because  of  being  a
product.

Does product exist exclusively in the class of  impermanent  phenomena?  The
“similar class” refers to the predicate to be proven.  Here,  the  predicate
to be proven is impermanent phenomenon. We have  to  establish  whether  the
sign, product, accords with impermanent phenomenon or not.

Counter pervasion
The third mode is counter pervasion. In the syllogism, the predicate  to  be
proven is impermanent phenomenon. The class of impermanent phenomena is  the
similar  class.  The  opposite  of  impermanent  phenomena,  non-impermanent
phenomena, is the dissimilar class.

The subject,  sound,  is  an  impermanent  phenomenon  because  of  being  a
product.
• the subject is sound
• the sign or reason is product
• the predicate to be proven is impermanent phenomenon

The similar class and the dissimilar class are related to the  predicate  to
be proven:
• The similar class is  impermanent  phenomena.  All  impermanent  phenomena
  belong to the similar class.
• The dissimilar class has  to  be  something  that  does  not  accord  with
  impermanent phenomena. The dissimilar class is the opposite of impermanent
  phenomena, i.e., permanent phenomena.

When you know what the dissimilar class is,  does  the  sign  exist  in  the
dissimilar class or not? One of the easiest way to see whether  the  counter
pervasion is established or not is to see whether the  sign  is  universally
absent from the dissimilar class or not.

Is product absent from the dissimilar class?  Does  a  product  exist  among
permanent phenomena? To see whether it  exists  or  not  in  the  dissimilar
class is to see  whether  there  is  a  common  locus  between  product  and
permanent phenomena.  There  is  nothing  that  is  both  a  product  and  a
permanent phenomenon.

Using the example of the above syllogism as  the  basis,  you  should  think
about it over and over again until  you  are  very  clear  about  the  three
modes. When we try to prove something, whatever we are trying to  prove,  we
will use different reasons. But first you have to understand the concept  of
the three modes before you can apply them  in  practice  and  check  whether
they are correct reasons or incorrect reasons.

The subject, sound, is a permanent phenomenon because of being a product.
• the subject is sound
• the sign or reason is product
• the predicate to be proven is permanent phenomenon

A person is trying to prove that sound is  permanent  by  using  the  reason
that sound is a product. Here, the sign, product, is a contradictory  reason
because whatever is a product is necessarily impermanent. So how can he  use
this reason to establish that sound is permanent?

The subject,  sound,  is  an  impermanent  phenomenon  because  of  being  a
product.
• the subject is sound
• the sign or reason is product
• the predicate to be proven is impermanent phenomenon
In this syllogism, the sign, product, is a valid or correct  reason  because
product is definitely an impermanent phenomenon.

The subject, sound, is an impermanent phenomenon because it is an existent.
• the subject is sound
• the sign or reason is existent
• the predicate to be proven is impermanent phenomenon

In this syllogism, the sign, existent, is an indefinite reason  because  you
cannot establish with  complete  certainty  that  sound  is  an  impermanent
phenomenon simply through the fact that it is an existent. This  is  because
whatever  is  an  existent  is  not  necessarily  impermanent.  It  can   be
impermanent but it is not necessarily impermanent.

The subject,  sound,  is  an  impermanent  phenomenon  because  of  being  a
product.
• the subject is sound
• the sign or reason is product
• the predicate to be proven is impermanent phenomenon

The sign, product, is a definite reason because the pervasion  is  definite.
Product as a reason is not a contradictory reason. It is a  definite  reason
because whatever is a product is necessarily impermanent.

The way to learn syllogisms is to hold on to  a  chosen  correct  syllogism,
e.g., the subject, sound, is an impermanent phenomenon because  of  being  a
product.
• Using this particular syllogism, you try to understand  the  three  modes.
  But just understanding them based on this syllogism does not mean that you
  have understood everything. That is only the beginning.
• Once you know what  the  three  modes  are,  on  the  basis  of  the  same
  syllogism, you can then change the sign to a contradictory  reason,  e.g.,
  permanent phenomenon. You then try to understand why the three  modes  are
  not established.
• Next you change the sign to an indefinite reason, e.g.  an  existent.  You
  then try to understand why the three modes are also not established here.

If you have memorised the seven-fold divisions of  consciousness  and  their
respective definitions, you can use this information to state a syllogism.

For example:
The subject, the sense consciousness  to  which  one  moon  appears  as  two
moons, is a wrong consciousness because it is  a  knower  that  engages  its
object erroneously.
• the subject is the sense consciousness to which one moon  appears  as  two
  moons
• the sign or reason is a knower that engages its object erroneously
• the predicate to be proven is wrong consciousness

If we state a knower that engages in its object erroneously as the  sign  to
establish that the sense consciousness to which  one  moon  appears  as  two
moons is a wrong consciousness, this is a correct sign.
Someone then tries to prove to you:
The sense consciousness to which one moon appears as two moons is  a  direct
perceiver because it is a sense consciousness.

The  sign,  a  sense  consciousness,  is  an  incorrect   sign.   If   sense
consciousness is  posited  to  be  the  sign  that  proves  that  the  sense
consciousness to which one moon appears as two moons is a direct  perceiver,
this sign is an indefinite reason because whatever is a sense  consciousness
is not necessarily a direct perceiver. There is no pervasion here.

When it comes to stating a reason, one can state any reason but it does  not
necessarily mean that it is a correct reason.

The sense consciousness to which one moon appears as two moons is  a  direct
valid cogniser because it is a wrong consciousness.

In this case, the sign is completely wrong  because  a  wrong  consciousness
cannot be a valid cogniser.

As long as you have  a  rough  idea  of  what  a  correct  sign  is,  it  is
sufficient for the time being. A correct sign has to be that  which  is  the
three modes. You should be able to differentiate between something  being  a
correct sign or an incorrect sign and have some understanding  of  what  the
three modes are.  You  need  to  know  this  because  an  inferential  valid
cogniser is generated in dependence upon a correct sign that is  its  basis.
In order to have some idea of how such an  inference  is  generated,  it  is
important to have some idea of what constitutes a correct reason.

Here we are trying to understand the concept and in order to understand  the
concept, we have  this  example:  The  subject,  sound,  is  an  impermanent
phenomenon because of being a product. But is that what really matters?  Are
you so interested to find out whether sound is impermanent  or  not?  It  is
good to know this but the main purpose is  to  understand  the  concept  and
apply it to our own mind and our own existence, whether we  are  impermanent
or whether we are product.  But first we have to understand the concept  and
know what a correct reason is.

Once we know the concept, we can apply it in our lam-rim meditation such  as
the meditation  on  death  and  impermanence.  You  change  the  subject  to
yourself and prove to yourself that you are definitely going to die  because
of  the  reasons  stated  in  the  nine-point  meditation   on   death   and
impermanence presented the lam-rim.

For example:
I am definitely going to die because there is nothing that can stop death.
Is that reason a correct sign?


You can change the reason to another reason since there  are  three  reasons
that prove that death is definite such as, I  am  definitely  going  to  die
because my lifespan is being constantly depleted and it cannot  be  extended
or you can say, The time of my death is uncertain, because the  lifespan  of
beings in this world is not fixed. Is this a definite reason?

During the course of your studies, in  order  to  understand  the  concepts,
there will be a lot of analysis and debate.  The  classic  example  that  is
always used is this: “Sound is impermanent  because  of  such  and  such...”
Much debate then follows to establish this. There is a saying  that  despite
being able to establish that  sound  is  impermanent  because  of  the  many
reasons used, yet, at the same time, that person establishing it feels  that
he will never die, thinking, “I am permanent.” When that  happens,  that  is
the most amazing thing.

Khen Rinpoche: It is the most surprising thing. That means that  it  is  not
good.

When we talk about  past  and  future  lives  and  reincarnation,  for  most
people, it is not something that can be directly perceived. The  first  step
in realising reincarnation  is  through  inference,  i.e.,  you  realise  it
through inferential cognition. That being the case,  you  have  to  posit  a
correct reason to establish in your own mind that  reincarnation  definitely
exists.

We can state a syllogism like this:
The subject, the mind of an infant at the time of conception,  was  preceded
by a mind of a similar type because it is mind.
This is posited to be a correct sign. This  is  what  is  mentioned  in  the
treatises. This is how one establishes past lives.

In order to prove future lives:
The subject, the last moment of the mind of an ordinary person at  the  time
of death, will lead on to a mind in the future that is  its  effect  because
it is a continuum of an awareness that is accompanied by attachment.
• The subject is the last moment of the mind of an ordinary  person  at  the
  time of death.
• The sign or reason is because it is a continuum of an  awareness  that  is
  accompanied by attachment
• The predicate to be proven is: there is an effect mind  or  consciousness.
  It is the effect of which mind? It is  the  effect  of  the  subject.  The
  effect has to exist after the cause, i.e., in the future.

If we were to state this simply but not in a fully technically correct  way:
The mind at the time of death, i.e., the last  moment  of  the  mind  of  an
ordinary person, will continue because it is mind.

Although it is the similar to the previous proof of past  lives,  why  don’t
we simply state it in  such  a  way?  This  is  because  certain  words  are
included to eliminate counter arguments.

Question: Please explain the meaning of the illustration of the  inferential
cogniser through renown. Why  is  an  inferential  cogniser  through  renown
necessarily an inferential cogniser by power of the fact  (page  2,  Handout
No. 7 dated 24 July 2012?

Answer: There are these different signs as well, such as a correct  sign  by
power of the fact. With regard to an inferential cogniser by  power  of  the
fact, power of the fact means that in reality, it exists. You are stating  a
fact as the reason. Therefore it is termed, “by power of fact.”

With regard to an inferential cogniser through renown, the syllogism can  be
stated like this: The subject,  the  rabbit-possessor,  is  suitable  to  be
expressed by the term moon because it exists among objects  of  thought.  In
the Tibetan tradition, a rabbit-possessor refers to the moon. Here  “rabbit-
possessor” is suitable to be expressed  by  the  term  moon  because  it  is
widely known and accepted as that,  i.e.,  it  is  a  correct  sign  through
renown.

The  illustration  for  an  inferential  cogniser  through  belief  is,  “an
inferential  cogniser  that  realises  that  the  scripture,  ‘From  giving,
resources,  from  ethics,  a  happy  migration,’  is  incontrovertible  with
respect to the meaning indicated by it by the sign of its being a  scripture
free from the three contradictions.”

We will leave it at that for now. Otherwise it gets complicated.

What we have been discussing so  far  is  more  related  to  an  inferential
cogniser by power of the fact. First try to understand  that  well  and,  in
the future, if there is interest, perhaps we can  look  at  the  inferential
cogniser through renown and the inferential cogniser through belief.

As to what is “a scripture that is  free  from  the  three  contradictions,”
that can be complicated. We will leave that for now.

That is it for the seven-fold divisions of consciousness. We  will  move  on
to the mind and mental factors. Please register with the office if  you  are
interested to have a copy of the root text.

Khen Rinpoche: If you need to know more about the seven  minds,  we  can  do
some question and answer in the next class. Otherwise, we will start on  the
51 mental factors.

We have only finished the divisions of  the  first  two  of  the  seven-fold
consciousnesses,  the  direct  valid  cogniser  and  the  inferential  valid
cogniser.  If  you  are  interested  in  the  divisions  of  the   remaining
consciousnesses, starting from the subsequent cogniser onwards, we can  look
at them.
Khen Rinpoche: Do you want to know the divisions or not?

Student:  Yes because we want to be fully enlightened!

Khen Rinpoche: We will have one or two classes to look at the divisions.  If
you know the divisions, I think that will make  your  understanding  of  the
different minds a little clearer.






Translated by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme

Transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek, Vivien Ng, and Patricia Lee

Edited by Cecilia Tsong

