Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Lorig/Edited/BP2 M2 L29 (upload).pdf
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:53:48.525688
================================================================================

Amitabha Buddhist Centre                               Second Basic Program – Module 2  
                                                                    The Study of Mind and Its Functions  
 
Lesson 29  
Page 1 of 12 Transcript of teachings by Khen Rinpoche Geshe 
Chonyi  on the Modes of Mind and Mental Factors  
 
Lesson No: 29                Date: 4th October 2012  
 
Root text:   A Necklace for Those of Clear Awareness Clearly Revealing the 
Modes of Minds and Mental Factors by Ye -she Gyeltsen , translated by Toh 
Sze Gee; January 2006 edition. Copyright: Toh Sze Gee & FPMT, Inc. 
September 2003.   
 
All page references refer to the root text, unless otherwise stated.  
 
The Four Changeable Mental Factors  
 
There are four changeabl e mental factors:  
(1) sleep  
(2) regret  
(3) investigation  
(4) analysis  
 
(1) Sleep  
 
Regarding sleep, the Compendium of Knowledge says:  
 
QUESTION: What is sleep?  
RESPONSE: It is a withdrawal of the mind in dependence upon sleep, its cause, with respect to:  
 virtue, non -virtue and the unspecified,  
 the timely and the untimely,  
 and the appropriate and the inappropriate,  
and is involved with ignorance. It has the function of acting as a support for failing to perform actions.  
 
Just as it has been said above, it is  an awareness that causes the engagement in objects of the sense 
consciousness to powerlessly withdraw inwards in dependence upon its causes, such as heaviness of body, 
weakness, fatigue, and attention to signs of darkness  (Pages 83 – 84). 
 
 The object of o bservation of sleep is either virtue, non -virtue , or the 
unspecified.  
 Its aspect is the withdrawal of the mind inwards and it is a withdrawal 
that happens  powerlessly .  
 Its function is that it acts as a support for failing to perform a ctions.  
 
Sleep is a mental factor so it is a consciousness  but it may be difficult for 
this to fit our mind,  i.e., the notion of thinking o f sleep as a type of mind.  
 
Next is the explanation of the words , “timely and untimely ,” so there is 
timely sleep and  untimely sleep .  
 
Here, regarding "the timely and the untimely" [in the citation above], it is just as it has been said by the 
Protector Nagarjuna [in his Letter to a Friend ] (stanza 39):  
 
Sensible ones! Occupy yourselves the entire daytime and  
Also the f irst and last parts of the night.  
Sleep with mindfulness between these;  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                               Second Basic Program – Module 2  
                                                                    The Study of Mind and Its Functions  
 
Lesson 29  
Page 2 of 12 Then even the time of sleep will not be wasted.  
 
Just as it has been said above, the middle watch of the night is the time for sleep,  …(Page 84)  
 
That is timely sleep . What follows is untimely sleep:  
 
… whereas the first and the last watches of the night, as well as daytime, not being the time for sleep, are 
times  for making effort in the application of virtue. Hence it is taught in this way for the purpose of 
comprehending these modes  (Page 84) . 
 
When w e divide the entire day into day time and night time, any kind of 
sleep during the day is considered to be untimely. The first part of the 
night and the last part of the night are also considered untimely period s 
for sleep. The time tha t is considered suitable for sleep ing is the middle 
part of the night. If we were to say that the first part of the night start s 
from 7pm till 10pm , then perhaps 10pm – 3am is the middle part of the 
night  and the l ast part of the night would be 3am – 6am. 
 
Next is the explanation of “the appropriate and inappropriate. ” 
 
Regarding "the appropriate and the inappropriate" [in the citation above],  sleeping during the middle watch of 
the night out of the wish to engage in virtue by  developing the elements of t he body is appropriate, whereas 
sleep motivated by  afflictions, even during the middle watch of the night, is inappropriate. Hence it is  taught 
for the sake of understanding this  (Page 84) . 
 
Since sleep is divided into timely and untimely  sleep, we have to  engage in 
timely sleep.  
 
There is also appropriate and inappropriate sleep. We also have to engage 
in appropriate sleep. As mentioned in the lam -rim, at this time when we 
have obtained a human life of freedoms and endowments , we should 
strive in virtue , day and night. Therefore the importance of engaging in 
timely and appropriate sleep is greatly emphasi sed in the context of 
having a human life of freedoms and endowments.  
 
If we were to live for eighty years , half of th at lifespan woul d have been 
spent in sleep . Whether our sleep is worthwhile or not depends on 
whether we have engaged in timely and appropriate sleep , and whether 
we know how to fall asleep  properly. That is why sleeping properly is 
emphasi sed. Otherwise all the time you  had spent sleeping, perhaps half 
your life  would have gone to waste.  
 
Since such a great part of our life is spent sleeping, this is essential 
advice on how we can make this time meaningful . Making sleep 
meaningful is dependent on the motivation . It is important to fall asleep 
and engage in sleep with  a virtuous state of mind.  
 
When one is about to fall asleep , one should try to do so while 
maintaining a virtuous state of mind , i.e., falling asleep with virtuous  
thought s. One should also generate the intention to be able to wake up 
early or at the right time to continue one’s virtuous practice s. When we 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                               Second Basic Program – Module 2  
                                                                    The Study of Mind and Its Functions  
 
Lesson 29  
Page 3 of 12 have this kind of intention a nd motivation , it make s those hours of 
sleep —be it two, three, four , or five hours —worthwhile and meaningful.   
 
Sleep here  is classified as a changeable mental factor  because sleep can 
either be virtuous or non -virtuous , depend ing on the motivation.  
 
Its function is specified as "failing to perform actions" because, since sleep is of two types – the virtuous and 
the non -virtuous – the non -virtuous type, afflicted sleep,  causes virtuous activities to degenerate  (Page 84) .  
 
The function specified here of "failing to perform actions" refers mainly to 
non-virtuous sleep. The essence is this: it is important to fall asleep with 
a virtuous state of mind , with the intention to wake up  to continue one’s 
virtuous practice s. 
 
Question : What is the meaning of “developing of the elements of the body , 
(Page 84)” ? 
 
Answer:  The body is made up of the four elements: earth, water, fire , and 
wind. You will be in good health when the se four elements are  in 
equilibrium and balanced. By engaging in timely sleep, the elements in 
the body will be in equilibrium . That promotes  your health and your 
ability to engage in action s.  
 
When the element s in the body are imbalance d, it affects our health and 
our ability to do engage in activities. Therefore there is a need to develop 
the elements of the body because there is a close connection between our 
body and mind.  
 
The purpose of sleeping  is so that you are rested and c an continue with 
your virtuous practice s. When we  are engaging in virtuous practice s, the 
mind must be very strong and powerful. Since the mind is  dependent and 
closely related to the state of one’s physical health , therefor e it is 
important to develop the elements of the body.  One can go to sleep with 
this motivation , thinking , “I am resting my body so that I can continue 
with my virtuous practice s.” 
 
(2) Regret  
 
Regarding regret, the Compendium of Knowledge says:  
 
QUEST ION: What is regret?  
RESPONSE: It is a remorseful mind dependent on any [proper] activity or improper activity, intended 
or unintended, with respect to:  
 virtue, non -virtue and the unspecified,  
 the timely and the untimely, and  
 the appropriate and the inappr opriate,  
and is involved with ignorance. It has the function of hindering the stability of the mind.  
 
Just as it has been said above, in dependence on:  
 oneself having performed an appropriate or inappropriate activity deliberately or  
 having been made to do  so under duress,  
being remorseful about that activity which one subsequently comes to dislike is called "generating regret"  
(Pages 84 – 85). 
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                               Second Basic Program – Module 2  
                                                                    The Study of Mind and Its Functions  
 
Lesson 29  
Page 4 of 12  The object s of observation of regret are either the activities that you 
perform ed yourself or were forced to do b y someone else.  
 
In some texts, the objects of observation are said to be activities 
performed by oneself and the activities performed by someone else. 
These two are different. I guess it is possible to develop regret for the 
actions of others. It is not mentioned in this text but some other texts 
state that you could develop regret for the actions of others. This is 
something for you to think about.  
 
 Its aspect is dislike.  
 
Regret is of three types:  
(1) virtuous  
(2) non -virtuous  
(3) unspecified  
 
(1) For instance, regret for past misdeeds belongs to the class of virtue . 
(2) For instance, regret for having created merit belongs to the class of non-virtue . 
(3) Regret for something that neither benefited nor harmed others, such as manual  work, is unspecified  
(Page 85) . 
 
Next is an explanati on of the terms, “ the timely and the untimely,  and the  
appropriate and the inappropriate ” as they appear in the definition.  
 
"The timely and the untimely, and the appropriate and the inappropriate" [in the citation above] means that 
generating regret whe n something is rectifiable is appropriate, whereas regret when it is not is inappropriate. 
Moreover, appropriateness of regret when it is rectifiable refers to, for instance, the necessity to confess 
misdeeds with regret before the fruition has been establ ished in the present. Not rectifiable refers to, for 
instance, rebirth in a bad migration due to fruition having been established; since having being born blind, 
physically disabled, and so forth are occasions where the fruition has been established, they are irreversible  
(Page 85) . 
 
Conventional ly speaking, people always talk about the importance of not 
regretting  one’s actions, that it is not good to regret . However that 
statement is made in the context of regret in a situation where everything 
that can b e done has been done already. It is finished , it is over, and you 
cannot do anything about the situation  so it is pointless to regret. It is 
untimely because the situation is not rectifiable . It is too late to regret  and 
therefore it is also inappropriate .  
 
Timely regret is appropriate when you generate regret before the 
consequences have come into being, i.e., b efore the results come to 
fruition . Then you can do something about the situation . For example, 
you can e ngage in confession and purify those nega tivities.  Regret is be ing 
remorseful about activities that subsequently one dislike s having done . 
When we have that kind of mind, it is very helpful when it com es to 
confessi ng one’s negativities be cause it makes the confession and 
purification  more power ful.  
 
So regret is a state of mind . It is not just words  or repeat ing or recit ing 
something. When we engage in confession, regret comes in the application 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                               Second Basic Program – Module 2  
                                                                    The Study of Mind and Its Functions  
 
Lesson 29  
Page 5 of 12 of the four opponent powers. At that time, it is important to apply timely 
regret.  
 
Therefore , detailed examination of these passages from the Compendium of Knowledge seems to be a 
marve llous method for generating certainty regarding the stages of the path  (Page 85) . 
 
 Regretting some one’s virtuous actions  is probably negative and non -
virtuous.  
 But if w e generate regret for the non -virtuous actions of others, that 
regret is virtuous.  
 
Regret is classified as  a changeable mental factor because regret could be 
virtuous, non -virtuous , or unspecified. There is no definite certainty 
about the nature of regre t. 
 
(3 & 4 ) Investigation and Analysis  
 
Regarding investigation and analysis, the Compendium of Knowledge says:  
 
QUESTION: What is investigation?  
RESPONSE: It is a mental expression of inquiry depending on either intention or wisdom; it is a 
coarse mind.  
 
QUESTION: What is analysis?  
RESPONSE: It is a mental expression of individual examination depending on either intention or 
wisdom; it is a fine mind.  
 
Their function is to act as a support for abiding in contact and not abiding in contact.  
 
Just as it has  been said above, investigation is an inquiry into the rough entities of objects as well as their 
names, whereas analysis analyzes with fine discrimination  (Page 86) . 
 
Investigation is a coarse mind while analysis is a “fine” mind , i.e., it is 
finer in terms of looking at the subtle detail s of the object . 
 
A Discussion of the Five Aggregates also says:  
 
QUESTION: What is investigation?  
RESPONSE: It is a mental expression of inquiry. It is a coarse mind [depending on] the 
particularities of either  intention or wisdom.  
 
QUESTION: What is analysis?  
RESPONSE: It is a mental expression of individual examination. It is a fine mind [depending on] the 
particularities of either intention or wisdom.  
 
The two brothers [Asanga and Vasubandhu] seem to agree on  this explanation  (Page 86) . 
 
 The object s of observation of investigation and analysis can be virtuous, 
non-virtuous , or unspecified.   
 The aspect of investigation is coarseness and the aspect of analysis is 
analy sing subtle detail s.  
 Their f unctio ns are the same ; they act as support for abiding in contact 
and not abiding in contact.  
 
Next is the explanation of their functions . What is the meaning of “acting 
as a support for abiding in contact and not abiding in contact ”?  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                               Second Basic Program – Module 2  
                                                                    The Study of Mind and Its Functions  
 
Lesson 29  
Page 6 of 12 Investigation and analysi s are each of two types : (1) there is virtuous 
investigation and analysis , and (2) non-virtuous investigation and 
analysis.  
 
The function of investigation and analysis is specified as "acting as a support for abiding in contact and not 
abiding in contact,"  because investigation and analysis are each of two types – the virtuous and the non -
virtuous – whereby:  
 investigation and analysis belonging to the class of virtue act to produce pleasant results, thus "acting as a 
support for abiding in contact" with hap piness, and  
 investigation and analysis belonging to the class of non -virtue act to produce unpleasant results, thus 
"acting as a support for not abiding in contact" with happiness  (Page 86) . 
 
“Abiding in contact” here means abiding in contact with happines s. 
 
 Investigation that e ngages with a virtuous object , its mode of 
engagement is coarse . That is virtuous investigation .  
 Similarly analysis that engages with a virtuous object  analy ses the 
subtle detail s of that virtuous object . That is virtuous analysis.  
 The opposite s of those  are non -virtuous  investigation and analysis . 
 
Moreover,  
 investigation and fine analysis of the meaning of selflessness with the thought to definitely emerge from 
cyclic existence, and so forth bel ong to the class of virtue , 
 investigation and fine analysis of the modes of pleasant or unpleasant objects motivated by attachment, 
anger, and so forth belong to the class of non-virtue , and  
 analysis and investigation of work, behavior and so forth that ar e neither virtuous nor non -virtuous minds 
are unspecified  (Page 86) . 
 
Most of our investigation and analysis are non -virtuous because they 
engage with pleasant or unpleasant object s, motivated by our afflictions. 
Virtuous investigation and virtuous analysi s are rare and difficult for us.  
 
[Discussion of the category of changeable mental factors]  
Why are these four – sleep, regret, investigation, and analysis – called "changeable"?  They are called 
"changeable" because they become virtuous, non -virtuous, or  unspecified through the force of being 
concomitant with the motivating thought  (Page 86) . 
 
This is something to think about : when we talk about investigation and 
analysis, are they necessarily conceptual? Personally, I wonder whether 
they are necessarily so. I think they are probably not necessarily 
conceptual but it is something that we need to think about.  
 
Afflicted sleep, regret, investigation, and analysis obscure the entire class of virtue in general, and especially 
the three trainings [in ethics, medi tative stabilization, and wisdom].  
 
The "five obscurations" are taught in sutra. They are just as they have been taught by the Protector 
Nagarjuna [in Letter to a Friend ] (stanza 44):  
 
[1] Excitement and regret,  
[2] harmful intent,  
[3] Sleep and lethargy,  
[4] aspiration for the desire realm, and [5] doubt  
Are the five obscurations. Be aware that  
They are thieves  
Who steal away the wealth of virtue  (Pages 86 – 87). 
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                               Second Basic Program – Module 2  
                                                                    The Study of Mind and Its Functions  
 
Lesson 29  
Page 7 of 12 The five obscurations are listed here . Next is the explanation o f how the y 
obscure the three higher trainings.  
 
Furthermore,  
 aspiration for the attributes of the desire realm and harmful intent mainly obscure the  higher  training in 
ethics;  
 sleep, lethargy, excitement, and regret mainly obscure the  higher training in concentration  [i.e., meditativ e 
stabilization];  
 doubt, investigation, and analysis mainly obscure the higher training in wisdom  (Page 87) . 
 
It is obvious how doubt can obscure one’s higher training in wisdom. But 
what about investigation and analysis? I am not sure how these two can 
obscure the training in wisdom.  
 
If we were to interpret the higher training in wisdom to refer specifically to 
the meditative equipoise focus sing single -pointedly on emptiness , then of 
course investigation  and analysis would be a hindrance or obstruct ion.  
Since you are supposed to be in meditative equipoise focussing on 
emptiness , while you are in that state , any kind of investigation and 
analysis will hinder your med itative stabili sation.  But I am not sure 
whether this is the explanation here. Otherwise we still have to account 
for how investigation and analysis obscure the higher training in wisdom.  
 
Khen Rinpoche : Does anyone have any ideas? 
 
The question is : how does the investigation and analysis obscure the 
higher training of wisdom?  
 
Student : If you were to investigat e and analy se things like the sciences , of 
course it will take away your time from training in wisdom.  
 
Khen Rinpoche : If that is the case , investigation and analysis would also 
obscure the higher training of concentration. Why are these t wo 
specifically mention ed as the obscuring factors for wisdom?   
 
We can understand how doubt can interfere with our training in wisdom 
but how does inv estigation and analysis hinder one’s training in wisdom? 
If we follow your explanation , then investigation and analysis will also 
obscure the higher training in concentration.  
 
The next paragraph talks about how these five obscurations obscure 
ethics and concentration.  
 
Also, the Compendium of Knowledge teaches that these five obscurations obscure ethics and meditative 
stabilization, whereas [Shantirakshita's] Commentary on the Twenty Verses on the Bodhisattva Vows 
(Samvaravimsakavrtti ) explains that only meditative stabilization is obscured. In brief, although there appear 
many modes of explanation in the upper and lower Knowledges and numerous lengthy explanati ons in other 
texts, since they are very extensive, I cannot discuss them all here  (Page 87) . 
 
Question: How can virtuous sleep and virtuous regret obscure meditative 
stabili sation?  
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                               Second Basic Program – Module 2  
                                                                    The Study of Mind and Its Functions  
 
Lesson 29  
Page 8 of 12 Answer: Whether it is virtuous or non -virtuous sleep, they are both 
obstacle s to developing concentration.  
 
Regret is posited as a remorseful mind of dislik ing. I guess you could say 
that regret can interfere with co ncentration precisely because of what 
regret is , i.e., i t is a remorseful mind of dislik ing. 
 
Student:  Going back to investigation and analysis . A non-Buddhist would 
investigat e the “I” to be permanent, unitary , and indepen dent while a 
proponent of the lower tenets would investigate and analy se the “I” to 
exist inherently . Would those be the main obstacles for training in 
wisdom?  
 
Khen Rinpoche : What is the object of analysis?  
 
Student : The “ I” that does not exist.  
 
Khen Rinpoche : We have to think about whether investigation and 
analysis  are necessarily factually concordant minds .   
 
Sleep is classified as a changeable mental factor whereas lethargy is 
classified as a secondary affliction.  When listed among the five 
obscurations, why are they count ed as one?   
 
RESPONSE: Generally, lethargy and sleep are not the same. Since lethargy is involved with ignorance and 
sleep can either be virtuous or non -virtuous, lethargy is said to be a secondary afflict ion, and sleep a 
changeable mental factor. Similarly, with regard to excitement and regret, since excitement is involved with 
attachment, and regret can either be virtuous or non -virtuous, excitement is said to be a secondary affliction 
and regret a chang eable mental factor. [Each of these two pairs of mental factors] are taken to be one in the 
context of the five obscurations because:  
 they are produced from the same cause,  
 they are abandoned by the same antidote, and  
 they accord in having the same functio n. 
 
That they are produced from the same cause refers to the following:  
 Both lethargy and sleep are produced from overeating, an unhappy mind, a discouraged mind, relishing 
taste, and so forth.  
 Both excitement and regret are produced from conceptions of ha ving indulged in the attributes of the 
desire realm, having fun, laughing, and so forth in the past,and from the notion that one will not die and the 
like. 
 
That they are abandoned by the same antidote refers to the following:  
 both lethargy and sleep are d ispelled by the discrimination of illumination, and  
 excitement and regret are dispelled by holding the mind inwards on an object of observation.  
 
That they accord in having the same function refers to the following:  
 since both lethargy and sleep cause disc ouragement within the mind, they hinder meditative stabilization 
and especially the clarity of the objects of observation, and  
 since both excitement and regret hinder single -pointed abiding, their functions accord  (Pages 87 – 88). 
 
These are the reasons for counting  sleep and lethargy as one, and 
excitement and regret as one  in the context of the five obscurations.  
 
Here I say:  
 
Having strongly tied us with thousands of nooses of karma  
To the prison of [c yclic] existence since beginningless time,  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                               Second Basic Program – Module 2  
                                                                    The Study of Mind and Its Functions  
 
Lesson 29  
Page 9 of 12 The enemies who torture us with hundreds of unbearable sufferings and agonies  
Are certainly the afflictions themselves.  
 
In the wilderness covered by thickets of [cyclic] existence,  
The intolerable thieves who ste al even the slightest benefit and happiness  
And torment us without allowing a single moment's relief  
Are just those [afflictions].  
 
Alas! Who is more foolish than one who holds this enemy from beginningless time  
As his dear friend, planting him at the cent er of his heart,  
But holds as enemies his kind father and mother sentient beings,  
The six types of migrators?  
 
Hey! Instead, if intelligent discerning people were to  
Uproot the enemy of afflictions from their hearts and  
Cherish their kind parents, planting  these wish -fulfilling gems  
At the very center of their hearts, it would be far better!  (Page 89)  
 
This is advice from the author . The reason why we study the lists of the 
afflictions —the six root afflictions and the 20 secondary afflicti ons—is to 
be able to identify  them , seeing that the y are the real enemies and not  
other  sentient beings.  
 
2. A summary of the salient points and their application to practice  
Having thus understood the presentation of min ds and mental factors, it is important to know how to use it as 
a method for subduing one's own continuum. Otherwise, if one takes delight in merely arguing with others, 
holding forth just to prove one's point or pedantically listing synonyms, then there i s not much purpose. It is 
just as it has  been said in the King of Meditative Stabilizations Sutra : 
 
Although I have explained the good doctrine,  
If you do not put it into practice correctly after having heard it,  
Then you are like a sick person who clutch es a bag of medicines,  
But is unable to cure his sickness  (Page 90) . 
 
It is just as it has been said in Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds (stanza 5.108):  
 
In brief,  
To examine the state of body and mind  
Again and again,   
Is the sole defining characteristic  of guarding introspection.  
 
The Protector Nagarjuna says [in Letter to a Friend ] (stanza 17):  
 
Know that the mind is like a drawing  
Made on water, earth, or stone.  
From among these, in regard to the afflicted, the first is best, and  
In regard to wishing f or the Dharma, the last  (Pages 90 – 91) 
 
The analogy used here is that of a drawing made on water, earth , and 
stone :  
 With regard  to virtuous minds, they should be like drawing s made on 
stone because such drawing s are very long -lasting and stable.  
 With regard  to our afflictions,  they should  be like drawing s made on  
water because drawing s made on water do  not last and can be easily 
removed.  We should deal with our afflictions in such a way.   
The essential purpose of studying about the se mind s and their mental 
factors is to be able to cultivate a very strong virtuous state of mind , 
making sure that it is stable and long -lasting . At the same time, we make 
sure that we deal with o ur afflictions  immediately when they arise  so that 
they do not last for long. 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                               Second Basic Program – Module 2  
                                                                    The Study of Mind and Its Functions  
 
Lesson 29  
Page 10 of 12 Gon-pa-wa said:  
 
In order to abandon the afflictions, you must know the drawbacks, the defining characteristics, and 
the antidotes of the afflictions, as well as the causes for their production. Having understood their 
drawbacks, regard them as faults and hold them as enemies. Without understanding their 
drawbacks, you will not understand that they are enemies  … 
 
Just as it has been said above, as soon as an affliction arises in your continuum, having forcefully recognized 
it, thinking, "This is it! It has arisen!" you must examine which causes and conditions produced it, and what 
the object of observation from which it arose is, and then, regarding it as a fault, hold it as an enemy and 
immediately  overcome it with the antidote  (Page 91) . 
 
Ye-[shes] -bar, if, tomorrow or the next day, someone were to ask all your disciples, "What are you practicing 
as the core of quintessential instructions?" they would answer that it was to attain clairvoyance or a vision of 
their personal deity.  However, they should answer, "Having become more and more certain about the cause 
and result of actions , we are practicing to guard purely whatever vows we have committed ourselves to." 
Therefore, an "attainment of meditation" refers to the afflictions, such as ignorance, becoming weaker and 
weaker  (Page 92) . 
 
What does it mean to be successful or to achieve an attainment from 
one’s daily practice  or in one’s retreat ?  
 Whether it is one’s daily practice or retreat, when we see our afflictions 
becoming weaker over  time, that is the sign of having actuali sed the 
attainments.  
 Similarly  when one’s conviction in  cause and effect  and the workings of 
karma  increase , that is a very clear sign that you have achiev ed 
something in your practice.  
 When your ability to practi se ethics increases , that is an attainment.  
So it is not about being clairvoyan t or cultivating the ability to see deities. 
The real result is that the affli ctions are weake ned. 
 
The author then confess es any mistakes he may have made in his  
explanation  so he sa ys: 
 
I, owing to inferior merit, am born at the end of time;  
My eye of awareness is hazy and my training poor.  
Therefore, whatever I have failed to explain or have explained wrongly here,  
I confess to the wise  (Pages 93 – 94). 
 
This also applies to me . During  the course of th is module , there were  
some correct explanations and perhaps there were also many more 
incorrect explanations . Even so, if there were  mistakes, they were not 
made  intentionally . So in my case, I also have to confess.  
 
Their eye of awareness polluted by unbearable dadura [poison],  
Their hearts agitated by the evil spirits of the eight worldly concerns,  
Even though they belittle me and are infuriated,  
I shall have nothing to do with them.  
 
Then there is the dedication of merits:  
[Root text: page 94]  
By this virtue, may I and all migrating beings,  
Come under the care of the holy spiritual guides of the supreme vehicle, and  
Become holders of all the modes  
Of the profound and extensive Dharma without exce ption.  
 
Attaining the eloquence of self -reliance  
In regard to what is very difficult to fathom,  
In order to liberate all migrating beings without exception,  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                               Second Basic Program – Module 2  
                                                                    The Study of Mind and Its Functions  
 
Lesson 29  
Page 11 of 12 May I become just like the supreme guru Manjushri! (Page 94).  
 
This is the dedicati on. One prays to be able to be like Lama Tsong khapa :  
to be able to engage in extensive hearing and contemplation on the 
profound and extensive teachings of the Buddha , always  to be taken care 
of by the Mahayana gurus , and to be able to be of great benefit  to sentient 
beings.   
 
Trying to study the workings of the mind and the mental factors  is not 
easy. It is challenging. In my case, it is also challenging  to think about 
these topics  although I have completed years of studies .  
 
But whatever the case  may be , all of us , including myself , have planted 
imprints in our minds . It is something we should rejoice in a nd feel happy 
about . We need to keep in mind the need to continue to learn the 
teachings of the Buddha  while we are still able to  do so . 
 
The Exam  
There is nothing much to say about the exam .  
 It always goes back  to the seven -fold division s of consciousness.  You 
should have a rough understanding of what they are.  
 What is the difference between a sense consciousness and a mental 
consciousness ?  
 What are the conditions that are required for a sense consciou sness to 
arise? 
 What are the conditions that are necessar y for the mental 
consciousness to arise ?  
 What is the difference between a non -conceptual mind and a conceptual 
mind ? 
 
I guess most of the questions will be based on these points.  
 
The function  of the exam  is to act as a support for learning. If your wish 
to take part in the exam does  not fulfil this goal , then it is better  that you 
do no t come.  
  
There may be some quest ions on the mental factors but I am not sure. I 
haven’t thought about the exam questions yet. 
 
[After the dedication prayers]  
 
Class es will only resume after about four months ’ time. It will be good if 
you can get into the habit of  constant ly reading  the texts. Otherwise when 
you don’t read ,  that can become an obstacle. Once you break the habit of 
reading the texts, it becomes an obstacle.  
 
Every now and then, perhaps those who wish to  do so, you can come 
together for discussion s.  
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                               Second Basic Program – Module 2  
                                                                    The Study of Mind and Its Functions  
 
Lesson 29  
Page 12 of 12 If you want to engage in preliminary practices for the purpose of 
accumulating merit  and purif ying negativities, such as prostration s, 
mandal a offerings , and so forth , you can also organise groups to do this 
together.  
 
As the break is quite long , during this time, if you completely break away 
from the D harma and the centre , that will become a very big obstacle. So  
it is important not to do that . You should put aside time to come and 
engage in some of these activities.  
 
 
 
 
 
Translated by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme  
 
Transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek, Vivien Ng, and Patricia Lee  
 
Edited by Cecilia Tsong  
 
 