Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Lorig/Edited/BP2 M2 L17 (final).doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:53:50.169511
================================================================================


Transcript of teachings by Khen Rinpoche Geshe Chonyi on the Modes  of  Mind
and Mental Factors

Lesson No: 17                     Date: 16th August 2012

Root text:  A Necklace for Those of Clear Awareness  Clearly  Revealing  the
Modes of Minds and Mental Factors by Ye-she Gyeltsen, translated by Toh  Sze
Gee; January 2006 edition. Copyright: Toh Sze Gee  &  FPMT,  Inc.  September
2003.

All page references refer to the root text, unless otherwise stated.

In the Heart Sutra, the following five aggregates are mentioned:
   1. the aAggregate of form
   2. the aAggregate of feeling
   3. the aAggregate of discrimination
   4. the aAggregate of compositional factors
   5. the aAggregate of consciousness
All impermanent phenomena can be subsumed underinto these  five  aggregates.
If it is an impermanent phenomenon, it is one of these aggregates.

Functioning things can be divided into:
   1. matter
   2. consciousness
   3. non-associated compositional factor (NACF)

All form is subsumed by the aggregate of form.
Functioning thing can be divided into:
   1. Matter
   2. Consciousness
   3. Non-associated compositional factor (NACF)
• All phenomena that are in the category of matter are subsumed can  be  put
  under the category,  ofthe  aggregate of form.

Consciousness can be looked at in terms of (1) main  minds  and  (2)  mental
factors. :
• Main minds
• Mental factors
• All the main minds are classified under the aggregate of consciousness.

  In general, there are fifty-one fifty one mental factors:.
   o - The mental factor of feeling comes under the aggregate of feeling.
   o - The mental factor of discrimination  comes  under  the  aggregate  of
     discrimination.
   o - The remaining forty-nine forty nine mental  factors  come  under  the
     aggregate of compositional factors.


•  -  The  third  division  of  functioning  things  –  the   non-associated
  compositional factor - comes under the aggregate of compositional factors.
















Why  are  the  mental  factor  of  feeling  and   the   mental   factor   of
discrimination are highlighted separately? Why are  and the remaining st  of
the  forty-nine  mental  factors  classified  are  under  the  aggregate  of
compositional factors? I
1. t is As mentioned in the Treasury of Kknowledge that:
the mental factor
• The aggregates of feeling is listed separately because:
    o the The pleasant feelings that  aarise due to the attachment  for  the
      object of desire becomes the a basis for conflict.
    o Due to being emotionally involved with feelings, one generates a  very
      strong desire and attachment for  this  feelings  that  then  .   This
      strong attachment for feeling then perpetuates cyclic existence.

•  tThe mental factor  aggregate  of  discrimination  is  listed  separately
  because:
    o Due to discriminating that which is  Ddharma  to  be  non-Ddharma  and
      discriminating that which is non-Ddharma to be Ddharma -, this becomes
      a basis for conflict.
    o Due to such erroneous discrimination ng erroneously with reference  to
      an object, one accumulates the projecting karma for rebirth and cyclic
      existence.

So, as mentioned in the Treasury of knowledge (Abidharmakosha),  Tthese  are
the two reasons why these two mental factors are listed  separately  because
(1) they are the bases for conflict and (2) they are the two primary  causes
for the perpetuation of cyclic existence. .
These two -mental factors of feeling and mental  factor  of  discrimination-
are:
   1. The basis for conflict and
   2. The two primary causes for perpetuating cyclic existence
So Iin order to highlight these two facts, the  mental  factors  of  feeling
and the mental factor of discrimination are listed separately.

The aggregates of form, feeling,  and  discrimination  are  straightforward.
The aggregate of compositional factors encompasses the rest  of  the  mental
factors  and  the  non-associated  compositional  factors.  In  short,   all
composed phenomenon or impermanent phenomenaon  can  be  subsumed  under  by
tthe five aggregates.

Question: Student: A cup is subsumed under the aggregate of form. How  would
a cup be my aggregate of form?

Answer: Although tKhen Rinpoche:  The aggregate of form primarily refers  to
our the coarse physical body,  that we possess. Although that  is  what  the
aggregate of form is primarily referring to, but whatever is  the  aggregate
of form is not necessarily included in your continuum,  i.e.,  it  does  not
n’t have to be your appropriated physical aggregates.

JuJust as matter is defined as that st as in the definition of  matter  that
which which is atomically established, form is a an  aggregation  collection
of many parts/ many atoms/ many  particles   coming  together.  The  literal
translation for the Tibetan word “phung po” is a heap. It is an  aggregation
with the collection of many things.


In the Heart of the Perfection of Wisdom Sutra, the  aggregate  of  form  is
primarily  refers  to  our  contaminated  appropriated  physical  body,  the
aggregate. However, all instances of form, such as a cup, would  come  under
that aggregate as well.

In an the earlier lesson, we saw that awareness, knower,  and  consciousness
are mutually inclusive. Consciousness is “shes pa” in Tibetan.

In the context of mind and mental factors, we are  talking  about  the  main
mind in which mind, sentience,  and  primary  consciousness  /perceiver  are
mutually inclusive.

So Wwe have two groups of three different phenomena:
•     -awareness, knower,  and consciousness are mutually inclusive
• -mind, sentience,   and  primary  consciousness  /perceiver  are  mutually
  inclusive
These two groups are different.[1]

Consciousness (shes pa) and primary consciousness (nam she or nam  par  shes
pa  )  are  different.  Somebody  has  translated  “nam  par  shes  pa”   as
consciousness and that is a problem because they (consciousness and  primary
consciousness) are different. That  is  why  I  started  with  the  original
translation as “primary consciousness”.
In the last lesson, we looked at the four  possibilities  between  sentience
(yid) and mental consciousness (yid she).
One comes to know well both  sentience  and  mental  consciousness  well  by
knowing  the  illustrations  for  the  four  possibilities   between   them.
sentience and mental consciousness. It would be good if you can do  this  it
as homework: .

      What are the four possibilities between an exalted wisdom (ye she) and
      a mental consciousness (yid she)?

If you think about it, the difference between a consciousness (shes pa)  and
primary consciousness (nam par shes pa), it seems that  one  would  have  to
posit athe difference between a mental consciousness (yid she) and a  mental
primary consciousness (yid nam par shes pa).

How many possibilities are  there  between  a  mental  consciousness  and  a
mental primary consciousness?
I guess Mmaybe there are three possibilities.
You are not  going  to  have  something  that  which  is  a  mental  primary
consciousness but not a mental consciousness.

How many possibilities are there between a sense consciousness and  a  sense
primary consciousness?
I think there are also three possibilities.
Something that which iis a sense  primary  consciousness  but  not  a  sense
consciousness cannot exist.
The sense consciousness and the sense  primary  consciousness  are  not  the
same. So, iWhen f you  look  at  the  number  of  possibilities  that  exist
between these two,  then your understanding of  them  se  two  would  become
clearer.

Is there something that which is a  sense  consciousness  but  not  a  sense
primary consciousness? Yes. For example,
Illustration: tThe mental factor  of  feeling  in  the  retinue  of  an  eye
consciousness apprehending blue.
•  That  mental  factor  of  feeling  accompanying  the  eye   consciousness
  apprehending blue is a sense consciousness but it is not a  sense  primary
  consciousness. ; Iit is not a main mind.
How about sSomething that is both a sense consciousness and a sense  primary
consciousness?. An
•  Illustration:  An  eye  perceiver  or  an   eye   primary   consciousness
  apprehending blue is a sense primary consciousness. It  is  also  a  sense
  consciousness.

• For sSomething that is  not  both  a  (sense  consciousness  and  a  sense
  primary consciousness, t).
• There are many things that you can posit here.

In order to be able to figure this out, you must commit to memory that:.

• Knower, awareness,  and  consciousness  are  mutually  inclusive  and,  in
  general, they encompass both the main minds and the mental factors.
• Mind, sentience, and primary  consciousness  are  mutually  inclusive  and
  they refer only to the main mind.
In general, when  we  talk  about  knower/  awareness  /consciousness,  they
actually encompass both main mind and mental factors.
When we talk about mind/  sentience/  primary  consciousness,  we  are  only
talking about main mind.

|Mutually inclusive              |Referring to…             |
|Knower, awareness, consciousness|Main mind and mental      |
|                                |factors                   |
|Mind, sentience,  primary       |Main mind                 |
|consciousness                   |                          |


Based on what we have discussed, it seems that we would   have  to  posit  a
difference between:
• A mental consciousness and a mental perceiver / primary consciousness.
• A sense consciousness and a sense perceiver / primary consciousness.

How then would you answer the question that was  brought  up  earlier  about
the seven-fold divisions of consciousness? A; are they main minds or  mental
factors?
It would be seem that besides doubt, it is possible that the  remaining  six
types of mind are both main minds and mental factors.

Questions from Khen Rinpoche:
• Are there wrong consciousnesses that are main minds?
• Are there wrong consciousnesses that are mental factors?

[Root text: page 8] Intelligent beings who have in  mind  their  welfare  in
future lives, not being content simply with acquiring food and clothing  for
the duration of this life, thinking, "What  will  become  of  me  in  future
rebirths?" should wonder, "I have circled powerlessly in  the  three  realms
of cyclic existence  since  beginningless  time,  continuously  experiencing
suffering. What is the root of this?" (Page 8)

Who should wonder about this? The intelligent ones, those who are  not  just
concerned with this life but look beyond the happiness of this life,  should
investigate the cause of circling endlessly in the three  realms  of  cyclic
existence. To this person, the profound advice in the Buddhist teachings  is
given. In order  to  answer  this  question,  then  there  is  an  extensive
presentation on Mind and Mental Factors
In this e context here, the “intelligent beings” refer  to  those  who  look
beyond the happiness of  this  life,  ;  whereas  those  who  are  concerned
primarily with the happiness of this life are not intelligent beings.
For Ssuch an intelligent person, he  should investigate  and  find  out  the
root cause of the cyclic existence.


Why does must one need to find out the root cause of cyclic existence?  This
is because when one circles in cyclic existence, one suffers.
So wWhat is the root of  cyclic  existencethis?  In  order  to  answer  this
question, the extensive presentation on  the  mind  and  mental  factors  is
given.

[Root text: page 8] Having contemplated in this manner,  you  must  come  to
understand that these sufferings of cyclic existence neither  arise  without
cause, nor arise from a discordant cause; rather, they arise from their  own
causes – actions and afflictions (Page 8).

You must come to understand that the suffering of cyclic existence that  you
experience do not arise without cause. You must have ascertainment  in  your
heart of why such suffering  suffering  of  cyclic  existence  cannot  arise
without a cause. It is innot sufficient just to know  say  the  words.  that
but Yyou must understand the reason for this. In addition to that, that.  On
top of that you must also be able to understand why the suffering of  cyclic
existence cannot arise from a discordant cause.

OnOn  the basis of understanding  the  reasons  why  (1)  the  suffering  of
cyclic existence cannot arise without a  cause and (2) that it  also  cannot
arise from a discordant cause, only then will  then you come  to  understand
that the suffering of cyclic existence must arise from  a  cause.  Not  only
that. You  will  come  need  to  understand  why  the  suffering  of  cyclic
existence arises from  a  concordant  cause.  One  must  induce  a  definite
ascertainment of these points.

In order for an  eye  consciousness  to  be  generated,  it  must  arise  in
dependence upon its own uncommon empowering condition. In  the  case  of  an
eye consciousness, its the uncommon empowering condition has to  be  an  eye
sense power. For example, an eye consciousness cannot  arise  in  dependence
upon an ear sense power.
In order to generate an eye  consciousness  apprehending  blue,  a  physical
sense power must be present.  Thate physical sense power has to be  the  eye
sense power. , and Wwithout the eye sense power, there will be  no  you  are
not going to have an eye consciousness apprehending blue.

What is it that enables  an  eye  consciousness  to  be  able  to  apprehend
visible form? It is the physical sense power,  - the eye sense power.   That
is the basis. The eye consciousness apprehending blue has  to  be  generated
in dependence upon its an  uncommon  empowering  condition,   –  anthe   eye
sense power.

When an eye consciousness apprehending blue is generated,  it  is  generated
into  the  an  entity  of  that  which  is  clear  and  knowing.  It  is   a
consciousness. What is that causes the an eye  consciousness  to  have  this
entity? This
It is not due to  the eye sense power but  rather,  it  is  the  immediately
preceding condition, i.e.,  – the consciousness that which  existed  just  a
one moment prior to the generation of this eye consciousness.

By using the production of an eye  consciousness  apprehending  blue  as  an
example, one can see that an effect  can  only  arise  from  its  concordant
cause.  With this understanding, then you then apply it to  what  it  really
matters – the suffering that we do not want. The
The suffering that we want to avoid also  arises  from  its  own  concordant
cause.

When If you analysze this it from the various angles  by  using  logics  and
reasonings, you will come to the conclusion that the primary causes  of  all
the sufferings  that  you  do  not  want  are  your  actions/karma  and  the
afflictions. So Iit is important that  you  to  gain  an  ascertainment  ofn
this.
This is something that you need to debate, not necessarily with others,  but
with yourself.

When we talk about the suffering that we do not want and the happiness  that
we do want, try to analyse figure out for  yourself  whether  the  suffering
that we do not want  arise due to some reasons or  no  reason  at  all.   or
Does it arise arbitrarily or is it simply just arbitrary or  just  bad  luck
or with no reason?

Will you accept it if if some one were to tell you body say to you that  the
suffering that you do not want arise  due  to  a  discordant  cause?  Is  it
possible for suffering to arise from an incorrect cause?

• When we say that the suffering that we experience do not arise  without  a
  cause, we are essentially establishing that the suffering that we  do  not
  want arise from a cause.
• When we say that the suffering that we do  not  want  do  not  arise  from
  discordant causes, we are essentially establishing that the suffering that
  we do not want arise from concordant causes.

At the end of the day, when we do think about it, wWhat are the two  primary
causes for our suffering?
They are basically aactions (or /karma) and afflictions.
We need to ascertain sort this out for ourselves in our own  mind.  We  need
to reach a very decisive and definite conclusion about this.

. It is not just be able to say so.
There are Mmany  quotations  are  then  being  cited  just  to  provide  the
scriptural authority for establishing that how  karma  and  afflictions  are
the primary causes of cyclic existence.

[Root text: page 8] The Protector Nagarjuna says [in  his  Precious  Garland
(Rajaparikatharatnavali)] (stanza 1.35):

      As long as the aggregates are misconceived,
      There will be the conception of an I.
      When there is conception of an I, there is also action.
      Due to that there is rebirth (Page 8).

What is  Nagarjuna is saying here? In dependence upon an apprehension  of  a
self of phenomenon, there comes to be the an apprehension of  a  self  of  a
persons that which is posited to be ignorance.
Due to that ignorance, we accumulate actions. So, Tthis is  how  the  twelve
-links of dependent- arising are set into motion. forth.
The main thesis that which is tto  be  provedn  here  is  this:  The  cyclic
existence arises primarily from karma and afflictions.

[Root   text:   page   8]    And   [his   Treatise   on   the   Middle   Way
(Madhyamakashastra)] (stanza 26.10) says:

      The root of cyclic existence is compositional actions.
      Therefore, the wise do not create compositional actions.
      Hence, the unwise are creators;
      The wise are not, because of seeing thusness (Page 8).

The  root  of  cyclic  existence   here   is   compositional   actions   (or
compositional activities), which is the second link of the twelve- links  of
dependent- arising.

• The ones who accumulate the compositional actions  are  the  unwise  ones.
  “The unwise are creators” are those who accumulate projecting karma.
• “The wise” do not accumulate projecting karma for cyclic existence.

Why is it that the wise do not accumulate projecting karma? This is  because
the wise have seen the truth directly.  Therefore  they  do  not  accumulate
projecting karma. Those who have not  seen  the  truth  directly  accumulate
projecting karma.

That is how you differentiate superior beings  from  ordinary  beings.  SThe
wise do not accumulate projecting karma.
“The unwise are creators” are those who accumulate projecting karma.
“The wise” are the ones who do not accumulate projecting  karma  for  cyclic
existence.
Why is it that the wise do not accumulate projecting karma?
This is because the wise are those who have seen the truth directly  do  not
accumulate projecting karma.
• Those who have not seen the truth directly accumulate projecting karma.
  That is how you differentiate superior beings and ordinary beings.
Superior beings do not accumulate fresh projecting karma,  whereas  ordinary
beings accumulate projecting karma.
Why do superior beings do not accumulate  fresh  projecting  karma?  Because
they no longer do not have the ignorance of the twelve- links of  dependent-
arising,  .   tTherefore,  they  do   not   accumulate   the   compositional
activities, ; the second link.

It is not that Oonce one has seen the truth  directly,  ignorance  does  not
disappears there and then. From the moment the  superior  beings  have  seen
the truth directly, they do not accumulate fresh  projecting  karma  because
they no longer do not have the ignorance that is from the twelve  -links  of
dependent- arising. However, aAfter having  seen  the  truth  directly,  the
superior beings still do have ignorance but it is not they do not  have  the
ignorance that is powerful enough that will to lead to the  accumulation  of
new projecting karma.

[Root text: page 8]  Acharya Aryadeva is says ing  the  same  time  [in  his
Treatise  of  Four  Hundred  Stanzas  (Chatuhshatakashastrakarika)]  (stanza
14.25ab):

      The consciousness that is the seed of [cyclic] existence
      Has objects as its objects of activity (Page 8).

“The consciousness that is the seed of cyclic existence has objects  as  its
objects  of  activity”“The  consciousness  that  is  the  seed   of   cyclic
existence”:   -the  seed  of  cyclic  existence   is   consciousness.    and
Cconsciousness here refers to the an affliction, the  apprehension  of  true
existence, which is an affliction.
“The consciousness that is the seed of cyclic existence has objects  as  its
objects of activity” - The “objects”  refer to forms  and  so  forth.  These
objects such as form and so forth become the objects of observation by  this
ignorance that  -  an  apprehension  of  true  existence-  apprehends  these
objects to be truly existentce. Through this, karma is accumulated.

[Root text: page 8] Acharya Chandrakirti says  [in  his  Supplement  to  the
Middle Way (Madhyamakavatara)] (stanza 6.89abc):
      The very diverse worlds of sentient beings and
      Their environments are established by the mind itself.


      It is taught that all migrating beings without exception are born from
      actions.


Almost the same thing, Chandrakirti is saying almost the  same  thing,  that
the environment, the world itself,  and its the inhabitants  of  the  world,
-the sentient beings, - are the results of actions.

[Root text: page 9]  Acharya Vasubandhu says [in his Treasury  of  Knowledge
(Abhidharmakoshakarika)] (stanza 4.1a):

      The various worlds are produced from actions.


And (stanza 5.1a):

      The root of [cyclic] existence is the six subtle-increasers.


Likewise,    Shantideva's    Engaging    in    the     Bodhisattva     Deeds
(Bodhisattvacharyavatara, stanza 5.6) says:

      The Propounder of the Truth has taught
      That in this way, all fears and
      The immeasurable sufferings
      Arise from the mind.

And (stanza 5.17-18ab):

      Those who do not understand this secret of the mind,
      The great objective of the Dharma,
      Wander aimlessly,
      Even though they wish to attain happiness and destroy suffering.


      Therefore, I should hold well and guard well
      This mind of mine (Page 9).

The reason for citing all tthese various quotations from  the  authoritative
texts of Nagarjuna and his spiritual sons and other great Indian masters  is
to  show  what  they  have  already  concluded,  i.e.,   is  that  all   the
sufferingss  of  cyclic  existence  are  is  the  results   of   karma   and
afflictions. Taking these
We take these texts to be authoritative, w. What we have to do is  to  study
and analyse  learn  these  teachings,  analyzed  them  and  develop  the  an
ascertainment for ourselves that the cause of cyclic existence is karma  and
afflictions.

[Root text: page 10]  Likewise, it has been taught that  all  the  excellent
qualities of the paths and grounds of  the  three  vehicles,  the  resultant
buddha  field,  exalted  bodies,  lifespan,  deeds,  as  well   as   exalted
activities arise solely from their own  causes,  wholesome  virtuous  minds.
Therefore, the root of all of cyclic existence and  nirvana  is  established
to be the mind itself (Page 10).

Likewise, it has been taught that all the excellent qualities of  the  paths
and grounds of the three vehicles as well as the alland   the  inconceivable
qualities of the buddhas , which are  inconceivable  for  us  and  are  very
difficult to fit into our mind. At the end of the day, these qualities  have
to come from a concordant cause.  and  That  the  concordant  cause  is  not
external. doesn’t come from outside, but itIt  has to come from the mind;  a
virtuous and wholesome state of mind.
In short, all the problems and the sufferings that we experience  in  cyclic
existence that we experience have their its origins in the  mind.  Likewise,
all  the  happiness,  up  to  the  state   of   ultimate   happiness,   full
enlightenment, has to come from within the mind itself.

In general, whatever the object appearing to our mind  may  be,  appears  to
our mind, there is this factor of  appearance,  i.e.,   there  is  something
that iis appearing to the mind. ; whatever the object may be.  Theis  object
appears in a particular way and we believe in that  appearance.  We  believe
that the object exists in question exist in the way that it appears  to  us.
Due to this belief and because we holding on to this  appearance  to  be  as
being so real, then we accumulate actions/karma:.

• This thing that is appearing to the mind which we hold onto  as  being  so
  real is an appearance to the mind.  Without  the  mind,  even  though  the
  object appears, we cannot have such an this appearance.
• Without this appearance,  we will do not grasp at it.
• Without grasping at this appearance, we cannot accumulate karma.
Without grasping at this appearance, we cannot accumulate actions/karma.

This factor of appearance to the mind is dependentce on  the  mind.  Without
the mind, we cannot have this e factor of appearance. So  in  dependence  on
this factor of appearance to the mind, we apprehend it to be as so real  and
to existing in the way it appears.  As  a  result,  w,  then  we  accumulate
karmaactions.

It is jJust like the example of a   friend  and  an  enemy.  W,  what  is  a
friend? What is  or an enemy? They are It is  basically  an  appearances  to
our mind i.e. how the person  appears.  .  Whether  the  person  appears  is
appearing as a friend or the person is appearsing as an enemy, they  are  it
is an appearances to the mind. But without  realising  this,  we  feel  that
there is something that is separate from the  mind,  that  that  is  a  real
friend or a real enemy. Then Bbased on what is appearing  to  our  mind,  we
get emotionally involved and . fFrom that, there  is  either  attachment  or
anger arises.
• By grasping at the appearance of the enemy to be as so real,  then  strong
  anger arises.
• By believing in the appearance of a friend existing in the way it  appears
  to us,  then there is strong attachment.

So this factor of appearance -the appearance of an enemy  or  a  friend-  is
something that arises from the mind. But without  realizing  this,  we  feel
that there is something separate from the mind, there is a real enemy  or  a
real friend. With that belief, we get  involve  and  then  there  is  strong
hatred or strong attachment  comes  about.  From  this,   you  can  see  how
important it is to realisze that the appearance of an  object  such  as  the
appearance of a friend or an and enemy is a  factor  of  appearance  to  the
mind. When  If you realisze that the appearance  of  these  various  objects
arises from the mind, thisdefinitely it will definitely  helps  in  reducing
our afflictions, anger, attachment,  and so forth.

Our problem is that wWe think that of the appearance to  the  mind  and  the
mind itself are as completely separate.  and notNot  understanding ing  that
actually  they  are  actually  closely  related,  we  then  react  to  those
appearances and experienceing unhappiness.

For us, this is how the mind works. However with practices,  when  the  mind
is more advanceds, then one can reach  a  point  where  such  the  dualistic
appearances subsideing.  We can talk about  dualistic  appearances  in  many
ways, e.g., for example dthe dualistic appearance of subject and  object  as
being very distinct and separate.
At this present moment, we have the feeling that the  mind  and  that  which
what is appearing to the mind to be is something different  from  the  mind.
But with practice and with some progress, advancement, one  can  narrow  the
distance between these two. , and then Oone comes to really understand  that
these two are not reallyreally  exactly separate or different.
By understanding that what is appearing to the mind is just the mere  factor
of appearance, and together with the understanding of how everything  is  in
the nature of emptiness,  then  definitely  we  can  definitely  reduce  our
negative actions.

So Bby understanding these two:
• hHow all appearances arises from the mind and
• hHow these appearances are the display of emptiness
aAnd putting  them together, this is how we turn back cyclic existence.

We have to think about how the mind is the creator of everything, all  i.e.,
how everything arises from the mind.

To reiterate Aswhat  II   hadve  said  earlier,  all  kinds  of  appearances
appearing  to our the mind. When we believe in whatever is appearing to  our
the mind to exist  in  the  way  it  they  appears,  that  is  when  we  get
emotionally involved with thate appearance. We tThen we  accumulate  actions
that which llead to the result, s - suffering. So we have to understand  and
experience of how all these different appearances to  the  mind  arise  from
the mind itself. Ultimately everything is created by the mind, including  es
the sufferings that  which we do not want. So Wwe  have  to  understand  how
suffering arises from our mistaken beliefs in all theose appearances to  the
mind.
So Ttherefore the author says:

   [Root text: page 10] Hence, it is of utmost importance to understand the
modes of minds and mental factors.  Thus,  here  I  shall  compose  a  brief
presentation on minds and mental factors. This has two parts:
2. The individual entities and divisions of minds and mental factors
3. A summary of the salient points and their application to  practice  (Page
   10).

First we will look at  the  explanation  of  the  mind  and  mental  factors
separately.

The main mind and the mental factors in its retinue are concomitant  by  way
of the five types of similarity. They have a similar support  or  bases  and
so forth.
You should read  the  following  pages  on  your  own.  There  is  a  slight
difference in what is posited to be the five types of  similarity  according
to the lower and higher Abhidharma. There is  an  explanation  according  to
the Treasury  of  Knowledge,  and  there  is  anothera   slightly  different
explanation according to the Compendium of Knowledge.; basically  the  lower
and higher Abhidharma.
So Pplease read the pages that deal with the five types of similarity.

When  If you read it, think about what you have read it for  a  few  two  to
three times. It It makes a huge difference when if you read your  text  them
before coming to  class. When you come to class,  and  when  I  explain  it,
because of you having e  read  the  text  it  beforehand,  then  whatever  I
explain in class say will make your understanding  clearer  and  better  and
clearer. If you read it before class, and then come  to  listen  to  what  I
have to say, then it is possible that a to have a subsequent  cogniszer  may
ariseing.

Khen Rinpoche spoke in English: So mMake sure your minds  become  subsequent
cogniszers!
.
Question: Student: On pPage 9 of the text,  can  I  confirm  that  “the  six
subtle- increasers” that are the root of  cyclic  existence  is  ,  the  six
subtle increases are referring to the six root afflictions?

Answer: Khen Rinpoche: Yes.

Question: Student: This presentation of mind  and  mental  factors  is  also
according to the Sutra School?

Answer: Khen Rinpoche: Yes.

Question: Student: Can we say that a factually concordant knower is  a  mind
that correctly engages its object to which exists in the way it appears?

Answer: Khen Rinpoche: If the object exists in the way the  mind  apprehends
it to be, then that mind it is a factually concordant  knower.  When  So  if
your mind apprehends an object in such a way that does not  accord  with  is
not how it exists in reality, then  it  would  not  be  n’t  bea   factually
concordant knower.

Do you agree that it is all right okay to say that  a  factually  concordant
knower is a mind that apprehends the object in the way that  it  exists?  If
the way in which the mind apprehends the  object  is  not  exactly  how  the
object exists, then it is not a  factually  concordant  knower.  Is  it  all
right okay to say this? Think about it.

Question: Student: The mental  factor  of  feeling  that  is  with  a  sense
consciousness, Aare we aware of this  mental  factor  of  ese  feeling  that
arises together  with  the  sense  consciousness?  .  For  example  the  eye
consciousness apprehending blue, when I say, “ I like blue,”   is  that  the
mental factor of the feeling  (mental  factor)  that  arises  with  the  eye
consciousness or  is  it  due  to  the  mental  factor  of  feeling  (mental
factorfeeling ) that is due to the mental consciousness apprehending blue?

Khen RinpocheAnswer: : TThere is a mental factor of feeling accompanying  or
in the retinue of this eye consciousness.

Student: Are we aware of itthat?

Khen Rinpoche (In English): I think so.

Student: I always thought it was a mental factor.  that “I like  it  when  I
see blue”.

Khen Rinpoche: It will be apparent soon. We have to posit  a  mental  factor
of feeling that is in the retinue  accompanying  an  eye  consciousness.  In
fact there  are  the  five  omnipresent  factors:  feeling,  discrimination,
intention, contact,  and  attention.  These  five  omnipresent  factors  are
necessarily accompanying all main minds.

Question: Student: What is  the  difference  among  of  these  three  terms:
appearance, factor of appearance,  and mere factor of appearance?  Is  there
a question of translations?


Answer from Ven. Gyurme: They mean the are the same thing.


TTranslated by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme;

 Transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek, Vivien Ng and Patricia Lee;

Edited by Cecilia Tsong







-----------------------
[1] Ven. Gyurme: Consciousness (she pa) and primary consciousness  (nam  she
or nam par she pa) are different. “Nam par she pa” had  been  translated  as
consciousness.  That  is  a  problem  because  consciousness   and   primary
consciousness  are  different.  That  is  why  I  kept  with  the   original
translation as “primary consciousness”.



