Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Lorig/Edited/BP2 M2 L04 (final).doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:53:48.539151
================================================================================


Transcript of teachings by Khen Rinpoche Geshe Chonyi

Lesson No: 4                             Date: 26th June 2012

All page references in the lesson refer to Handout No.  2  dated  26th  June
2012: The Study of Mind and its Functions unless otherwise stated.

You may feel sometimes that the lam-rim, i.e., the stages  of  the  path  to
enlightenment, is easier to understand compared to  the  study  of  Buddhist
philosophy such as this particular subject here, the study of mind  and  its
functions. Some people may think that it is a much  more  difficult  subject
than the lam-rim.

Actually it is not so. In order to have a good  understanding  of  the  lam-
rim, it is essential to gain a good  understanding  of  these  philosophical
treatises because the subject matter of the lam-rim is the  essence  of  all
these great philosophical treatises. Therefore in order to know the  lam-rim
well, you need  to  know  all  these  philosophical  subjects.  One  of  the
purposes of studying Lorig (the study of mind and its functions) is to  help
us gain a better understanding of the lam-rim teachings.

To illustrate this, you may recall that at the  beginning  of  the  lam-rim,
there is the section on the activities that  one  should  engage  in  during
post-meditation sessions. It talks about the causes and conditions  we  need
to gather together in order for  us  to  develop  calm-abiding  and  special
insight. The lam-rim refers to the four pre-requisites for developing  calm-
abiding and special insight, the first of which is restraining  one’s  sense
faculties.


     2B4A-2A2B-1       Controlling the sense doors

In this regard: When  the  six  consciousnesses  arise  in  dependence  upon
objects and sense powers, after that attachment and  aversion  arise  toward
the six pleasant and the six unpleasant  objects  of  mental  consciousness.
Controlling the sense doors guards against their arising  (Page  33,  Middle
Length Lam-Rim).

In  order  to  understand  the  above  statement,  you  have  to  study  the
presentation of the  mind  and  its  functions,  without  which  it  is  not
possible for you to understand this statement fully.

It says here that in order for any of the six consciousnesses to  arise,  it
must depend  on  its  respective  sensory  objects  and  the  sense  powers.
Without understanding what are the sensory objects  and  the  sense  powers,
how can one understand this particular  statement:  “…  in  dependence  upon
objects and the sense powers,  after  that  attachment  and  aversion  arise
toward  the  six  pleasant  and  the  six  unpleasant  objects   of   mental
consciousness”?

The mental consciousness produces attachment or aversion  depending  on  the
object involved. The advice in the lam-rim  for  developing  a  concentrated
mind says that we have to guard our sense powers. That means protecting  our
mind against the arising of such attachment or aversion. Therefore in  order
to develop calm-abiding and special insight, we  have  to  guard  our  sense
powers. In order to do that, you first  have  to  understand  what  are  the
sensory objects and the sense powers.

I brought up this illustration to show how important it  is  to  study  this
presentation on the mind. Without studying this topic, it  is  not  possible
to fully understand the import of the abovementioned statement.

The mind is so important in Buddhism because everything is  created  by  the
mind. There  are  different  varieties  of  the  mind.  There  are  positive
virtuous states of mind and there are negative  states  of  mind.  Different
kinds of mind work differently. The way they engage their objects  are  also
different. It is therefore very important to understand the workings of  the
mind and, in particular,  it  is  important  to  know  the  minds  that  are
considered correct or valid and the minds that are invalid or incorrect.

You will achieve your goals by  understanding  and  following  virtuous  and
valid states of  mind.  You  also  have  to  understand  that  by  following
incorrect states of mind, you will not achieve your goals. Therefore  it  is
crucial that you gain an understanding of the workings of the mind.

We also talked about karma in the lam-rim.  In  order  to  fully  understand
what karma is, you have to understand the differences between the  mind  and
mental factors because karma is a mental factor.

In a similar way, in the section on the path that is shared with the  person
of medium capacity, there  is  an  extensive  discussion  of  the  different
afflictions. In order to thoroughly understand these afflictions, again  you
have to depend on the topic we are studying now.

In this  module  we  will  be  studying  the  seven-fold  divisions  of  the
consciousness. We will go through that briefly and then  continue  with  the
51 mental factors for which there is a translated text that we  will  upload
on the website.

Studying this subject can be challenging and  difficult.  General  speaking,
it is difficult to talk about the mind because it is difficult  to  have  an
idea of what the mind is. It is also difficult  to  try  to  understand  the
nature or entity of the mind. It is even more challenging  for  you  due  to
the many new terms that most of you are encountering  for  the  first  time.
You have to learn those terms.  It  all  depends  on  whether  you  see  the
purpose of learning these terms and of studying this subject.


In the previous class, a student gave us a scientific  presentation  on  the
formation of visual images. According to his  understanding,  light  has  to
strike the object that one is looking at and this light  is  then  reflected
back into the eye through the pupil on to  the  retina.  An  image  is  then
formed in the brain. The retina is asserted to be clear form. This  is  what
the scientists say.

I am not sure whether this is the eye sense power that we have been  talking
about. According to this scientific presentation, the retina is made  up  of
many minute particles. We can call them cells. This is  form.  There  is  an
optic nerve that connects the retina to  the  brain  where  the  message  is
sent. The brain then processes the information of the  perceived  object  to
be yellow, blue, or red.

When we photograph an object with a camera,  the  image  of  the  object  is
imprinted on to the  film.  Similarly,  when  light  is  reflected  from  an
object, it goes into the eyeball and falls on to the retina. The  retina  is
a clear form made up of many cells. Modern science also  explains  that  the
different cells recognise different colours.  Some  cells  identify  colours
such as red, yellow, and so forth. Due to the deficiency of  certain  cells,
they  are  not  able  to  recognise  certain  colours.  This  causes  colour
blindness.

With regard to the eye sense power that we are discussing  here,  I  am  not
sure whether the eye sense power is the entire retina or it is only some  of
the cells that made up the retina.

There was a question in the previous class as to why the eye sense power  is
clear form. The scientific position on the nature of the retina is  that  it
is clear form. That accords with our position here as it is  also  mentioned
in the text that the eye sense power is clear form.

Question: What is the difference between a phenomenon form  source  that  is
impermanent, e.g., a dream  elephant  and  the  imputed  factor  that  is  a
meaning generality that is permanent, e.g., a visualised  elephant;  besides
one being impermanent and the other permanent?

Khen Rinpoche: I will go through this later.

Object and object possessor
Generally speaking, if it is a phenomenon or an existent, it is  necessarily
an object. Established base, existent, and object are mutually inclusive.


But in the two-fold division of an object and  an  object  possessor,  i.e.,
when we divide whatever that exists in this way:
   1. All consciousnesses (or minds) are object possessors.
   2. All other phenomena that are not consciousnesses (i.e., that  are  not
      minds) are objects.

Divisions of objects
The definition of an object is that which is known by an awareness. [1]

When we refer to the object of a consciousness, there are:
   1. the appearing object
   2. the determined object
   3. the object of engagement

Appearing object (Page 1)

      The appearing object and apprehended object refers to the object which
      is appearing to the consciousness (non-conceptual and conceptual)  and
      not necessarily to what it is comprehending (Page 1).

The appearing object and apprehended object of an awareness  are  synonymous
(or mutually inclusive).

For a direct perceiver, the following three objects are mutually inclusive:
   1. an appearing object of a direct perceiver
   2. an apprehended object of a direct perceiver
   3. a functioning thing

For a conceptual (or thought) consciousness,  the  following  three  objects
are mutually inclusive:
   1. an appearing object of a conceptual consciousness
   2. an apprehended object of a conceptual consciousness
   3. a permanent phenomenon

Object of engagement (Page 3)

For a direct perceiver, the following two objects are mutually inclusive:
   1. an object of engagement of a direct perceiver
   2. an object of the mode of apprehension of a direct perceiver

Determined object (Page 3)

For a conceptual (or thought) consciousness,  the  following  three  objects
are mutually inclusive:
   1. a determined object of a conceptual consciousness
   2. an object of engagement of a conceptual consciousness
   3. an object of the mode of apprehension of a conceptual consciousness

Based on the chart on page 5:

|Subject     |Object of   |Object of the|Appearing/  |Determined |Object of  |
|            |engagement  |mode of      |apprehended |object     |observation|
|            |            |apprehension |object      |           |           |
|            |            |             |            |           |           |
|Eye         |Blue        |Blue         |Blue        |None       |Blue       |
|consciousnes|            |             |            |           |           |
|s           |            |             |            |           |           |
|apprehending|            |             |            |           |           |
|blue        |            |             |            |           |           |
|            |            |             |            |           |           |
|Conception  |iPhone      |iPhone       |Mental image|iPhone     |iPhone     |
|of an iPhone|            |             |of iPhone   |           |           |
|            |            |             |            |           |           |
|Thought[2]  |the movie   |the movie    |Mental image|the movie  |the movie  |
|remembering |            |             |of the movie|           |           |
|a movie     |            |             |            |           |           |

Direct perceiver
An eye consciousness apprehending blue is an example of a direct perceiver:
   • What is the object of engagement of an eye consciousness  apprehending
     blue? It is blue.
   •  What  is  the  object  of  the  mode  of  apprehension  of  this  eye
     consciousness? It is blue.
   • What is the appearing object of this consciousness? It is blue.
   • What is the apprehended object of this consciousness? It is blue.

You will have noticed that the eye consciousness apprehending blue does  not
have a determined  object  because  a  determined  object  exists  only  for
conceptual  consciousnesses.  Only  conceptual  consciousnesses  conceive  a
determined object. A direct perceiver does not  have  a  determined  object.
Non-conceptual consciousnesses do not have determined objects.

Conceptual (or thought) consciousness
The conception or  thought  thinking  of  an  iPhone  is  an  example  of  a
conceptual consciousness.
   • What is the object of engagement of  this  consciousness?  It  is  the
     iPhone
   • What is the object of the mode of apprehension of this  consciousness?
     It is the iPhone.

Why is the iPhone the object of engagement and the object  of  the  mode  of
apprehension of a  conceptual  consciousness  thinking  of  an  iPhone?   As
explained  earlier,  for  a  conceptual  (or  thought)  consciousness,   the
following three objects are mutually inclusive:
 1. a determined object of a conceptual consciousness.
 2. an object of engagement of a conceptual consciousness
 3. an object of the mode of apprehension of a conceptual consciousness

The  conception  of  an  iPhone  is  a  conceptual  consciousness  but   the
difference here is that the appearing object is not the iPhone itself but  a
mental image of an iPhone.

The  thought  remembering  a  movie  is  another  example  of  a  conceptual
consciousness. Only the subject is different from the previous example.
   • As before, the object of engagement and the  object  of  the  mode  of
     apprehension is the same. It is the movie.
   • Because it is a conceptual consciousness, the appearing object and the
     apprehended  object  are  necessarily  the  same.  They  are  mutually
     inclusive. Therefore the appearing object and  apprehended  object  of
     this thought remembering a movie is the mental image of the movie, not
     the movie itself.

Conceptual consciousness and non-conceptual consciousness
One can also look at consciousness in terms of:
   1. conceptual consciousnesses
   2. non-conceptual consciousnesses
The difference lies in the way they engage their objects.

Conventional mind
In many of the  treatises  dealing  with  valid  cognition,  the  conceptual
consciousness is also called:
   1. a conventional mind or a conventional awareness or
   2. a mistaken consciousness or
   3. an obscuring consciousness or
   4. a false consciousness

A conceptual  consciousness  is  a  conventional  mind.  It  is  a  mistaken
consciousness and an obscuring consciousness but it is  not  a  conventional
(or obscurational) truth. Why? This  is  because  a  conventional  truth  is
mutually inclusive with a permanent phenomenon.

A conceptual consciousness is called  a  conventional  mind  because  it  is
obscured in the sense that it cannot directly perceive  or  see  the  actual
object without a mental  image  unlike  a  direct  perceiver  that  directly
perceives the actual  object.  What  is  it  that  obscures  the  conceptual
consciousness from seeing the actual object  directly?  It  is  the  meaning
generality (or mental image). To the conceptual  consciousness,  the  mental
image of the object is mixed with the actual object. This  mental  image  of
the object appears to be the actual object but it is not the actual  object.
This obscures the conceptual  consciousness  from  directly  perceiving  its
object.


The conceptual consciousness is therefore a false mind, i.e., it is not  the
opposite of a conventional mind, because it does not perceive the object  in
the way it exists. Therefore a conceptual consciousness is a false mind  and
it is a mistaken mind because it cannot directly perceive the actual  object
without a mental image.

Ultimate mind
A direct perceiver (or a direct valid cogniser) is called an  ultimate  mind
because it is non-mistaken. It is a mind that sees phenomena  as  they  are;
the way they appear accords with the way they exist.

Specifically   characterised   phenomenon   vs.   generally    characterised
phenomenon
You may recall that a  specifically  characterised  phenomenon  is  mutually
inclusive with a functioning thing. A functioning thing  is  a  specifically
characterised phenomenon because it  can  appear  to  the  direct  perceiver
directly without depending on the need for a mental  image  as  the  medium.
The object appears as it is to the direct perceiver perceiving it.

On the other hand, generally characterised phenomena are  those  objects  or
phenomena that cannot appear to the consciousness  without  depending  on  a
mental image.

You have to know and understand the meanings of the following terms:
   • functioning thing
   • permanent phenomenon
   • specifically characterised phenomenon
   • generally characterised phenomenon

A direct perceiver is a collective engager
A conceptual consciousness is an eliminative engager
A direct perceiver is also referred to as a collective engager. How  does  a
direct perceiver engage its object? A direct perceiver  engages  its  object
completely and fully. It engages  all  the  characteristics  of  the  object
without leaving anything behind.

As mentioned earlier, a functioning thing and a  specifically  characterised
phenomenon are mutually inclusive:
   • When a specifically characterised  phenomenon  appears  to  the  mind,
     everything about that object appears to the mind.
   • The functioning thing that is mutually inclusive with  a  specifically
     characterised phenomenon appears to a direct perceiver.  The  way  the
     functioning thing appears to the direct perceiver is  that  everything
     about the object, i.e., all its characteristics, appears to the direct
     perceiver apprehending it.
When a direct perceiver engages its object that is a functioning  thing,  it
engages the entire object with all  its  characteristics  without  a  mental
image.

However the way a conceptual  consciousness  engages  its  object  is  in  a
different way from a direct  perceiver.   The  conceptual  consciousness  is
called  an  eliminative  engager  because  it  engages  its  object  in   an
eliminative way. It eliminates whatever  is  not  the  object  in  order  to
arrive at the object itself.

The conceptual consciousness does not engage its object as a whole with  all
its characteristics and is perceiving the actual  object  through  a  mental
image. The object does not  appear  with  all  its  characteristics  to  the
conceptual consciousness. Only certain characteristics of the object  appear
to  the   conceptual   consciousness   apprehending   it.   The   conceptual
consciousness can only apprehend the  object  via  a  mental  image  of  the
object.

When a conceptual consciousness realises its object, it has to  realise  its
object via a mental image whereas a direct perceiver directly  realises  its
object. For a direct perceiver, everything is coming from the  side  of  the
object appearing to the direct perceiver perceiving it.

An eye  consciousness  apprehending  blue  is  a  collective  engager.  What
appears to an eye consciousness apprehending blue?  It  is  blue.  Not  only
does  blue  appear  to  the  eye  consciousness  apprehending  it,  all  its
characteristics  that  are  included  in  blue  also  appear,  such  as  its
impermanence and so forth. But we are not saying that the eye  consciousness
apprehending blue realises everything about the blue that  is  appearing  to
it.

A conceptual consciousness apprehending blue is an eliminative engager.
How does the conceptual consciousness apprehending blue apprehend  blue?  It
can only realise blue through the mental image of blue. What appears to  the
conceptual thought apprehending blue?  Only a likeness of blue  appears  but
not the characteristics that come along with blue, such as the  impermanence
of blue and so forth.

What does the word or term, “blue,” refer to? It is referring  to  blue.  It
does not refer to  the  characteristics  that  come  with  blue,  e.g.,  the
impermanence  of  blue  or  blue  being  a  product   although   these   are
characteristics of blue. The term “blue” can only refer to blue and  nothing
else. If the term “blue” can refer to  blue  and  all  its  characteristics,
then there will be no need to  use  terms  such  as,  “the  impermanence  of
blue,” “blue is a product,” “blue is a functioning thing,” and so forth.

Just  as  the  term  “blue”  can  only  refer  to  blue  and  not  all   its
characteristics, likewise the  conceptual  consciousness  apprehending  blue
that is induced following the sound of the  term  “blue”   can  only  engage
with and realise blue but not with all the  characteristics  that  accompany
blue.  Therefore when you realise blue, it does not  necessarily  mean  that
you realise blue is an impermanent phenomenon and so forth.

When we think of blue, we can only realise blue  via  the  mental  image  of
blue. When we think of  the  impermanence  of  blue,  in  order  to  realise
conceptually that blue is an impermanent phenomenon,  we  can  only  realise
its impermanence via a mental image of the impermanence of  blue.  Depending
on whichever characteristic of blue you are trying to realise, you  have  to
depend on its respective mental image. Therefore a conceptual  consciousness
engages its object not in a collective manner but only in parts.

Question: With regard to this discussion, when I see the  floor  now,  I  am
unable to realise its impermanence. If that is  the  case,  does  that  mean
that whatever I lay my eyes on are only conceptual images?

Answer: Let  us  use  the  example  of  a  direct  perceiver,  say,  an  eye
consciousness apprehending the floor. Everything about the floor appears  to
that eye consciousness apprehending it. Not only the floor itself  but  also
the impermanence of the floor, the floor being a product, the floor being  a
functioning thing, and so forth.

These  characteristics  of  the  floor  appear  to  the  eye   consciousness
apprehending it but it is said that it does not necessarily  mean  that  the
eye consciousness apprehends all these characteristics. The impermanence  of
the floor appears but your eye consciousness does  not  necessarily  realise
it. Not everything that appears to  the  eye  consciousness  is  ascertained
because,  in  the  seven-fold  division  of  consciousnesses,  there  is   a
consciousness that is called an awareness to which an object appears but  is
not ascertained. This will be discussed in the future.

Question:  There  are  many  phenomena  that  are  mutually  inclusive  with
established base and there are many phenomena that  are  mutually  inclusive
with permanent or impermanent phenomena. They all have different  names  but
they refer to the  same  thing.  Why  are  there  so  many  different  terms
referring to the same thing? For example, under established base, there  are
eight different terms referring to something that is  an  established  base.
Is it because these terms are used in different contexts?

Answer: There are  many  phenomena  that  are  mutually  inclusive  with  an
established base, e.g., an object of knowledge  and  an  existent.  Although
they ultimately mean the same thing, when these different  words  are  used,
your understanding of them is also different  because  you  are  approaching
the topic from a different angle.

For example, let us compare an impermanent  phenomenon  and  a  specifically
characterised  phenomenon.  They  are  mutually  inclusive.  An  impermanent
phenomenon  refers  to  a  momentary  phenomenon  that  undergoes  momentary
change. Although  a  specifically  characterised  phenomenon  has  the  same
meaning  but  I  explained  earlier  what   a   specifically   characterised
phenomenon is. So the way you understand the object is  different  when  you
are looking at it from a different angle. Although you arrive  at  the  same
understanding and the same meaning but when different words are  used,  your
way of approaching the meaning is different.

Question: It is said that a conceptual consciousness realises its object  by
eliminating everything else that is not the object and is  therefore  termed
an eliminative engager. But in practice this does not seem to be  the  case.
When I close my eyes and think of my favourite person, to me, it seems  that
I am only thinking of that person and not eliminating everyone else  who  is
not that person. Can you explain this further?

Khen Rinpoche: It takes too long to explain this now. Next time.

One way of looking at the difference  between  a  direct  perception  and  a
conceptual consciousness lies in  how  these  minds  engage  and  understand
their objects.

This is a very important topic but it is challenging and difficult even  for
me. But I try to think about it and work at gaining  a  better  and  clearer
understanding of this topic. Therefore  you  should  also  try  to  do  this
because what we are studying here now will become the foundation for you  to
be able to understand the teachings of the lamas  in  the  future.  It  will
become the seed for you to understand those  teachings  and  the  books  and
texts that you will come across in the future.

I think the vast majority of you are hearing such teachings  for  the  first
time so of course it will be difficult. But the point is not to lose  heart.
You have to develop the courage and determination to carry on and  try  your
best. You should remember this.

I said earlier that  a  conceptual  consciousness  is  a  conventional  mind
whereas a direct perceiver is an ultimate mind. Keeping this  in  mind,  try
to understand why this  is  so  and  what  it  means  when  we  say  that  a
conceptual consciousness is a conventional mind.

Direct perceivers are also known  as  non-mistaken  consciousnesses  whereas
conceptual consciousnesses are  referred  to  as  mistaken  consciousnesses.
Think about why this is so? You must understand what it means  when  we  say
that all conceptual consciousnesses are  mistaken.  This  will  come  later.
Otherwise you may think that since they are all mistaken,  that  means  they
are useless. So there is no need to think. Obviously that is not  the  case.
You have to continue with these  studies  in  order  to  understand  what  a
mistaken consciousness means.

For those of you who studied the previous module  on  the  lam-rim  you  may
recall a qualm that was brought up in the section on the path of the  person
of great capacity  when  we  discussed  wisdom  and  compassion.  The  qualm
referred to the widespread belief that all thoughts  are  obstacles  to  the
attainment of enlightenment because if it is a  conceptual  thought,  it  is
necessarily a mind apprehending signs or apprehending inherent existence.

From here you can see that when we do not fully understand  what  a  thought
is, what a conceptual consciousness is, we run into the  danger  of  joining
this group of people who believe that if it is a thought it is  useless  and
that there is no point to thinking. This  is  another  example  of  how  the
understanding of Buddhist philosophy enhances the understanding of the  lam-
rim. It makes one’s understanding of the lam-rim perfect.

Keep this in mind. This is the  goal  and  the  purpose  for  studying  this
subject. You then have to work hard and try your best.





Translated by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme

Transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek, Vivien Ng and Patricia Lee

Edited by Cecilia Tsong
-----------------------
[1] Awareness, knower and consciousness are mutually inclusive or
synonymous with each other. Ven. Gyurme also uses “mind” interchangeably
with these terms.
[2] Thought and thought consciousness means the same thing.

