Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Lorig/Edited/BP2 M2 L11 (final).doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:53:47.877594
================================================================================


Transcript of teachings by Khen Rinpoche Geshe Chonyi

Lesson No: 11                       Date: 24th July 2012

Questions related to discussion class on 22nd July 2012
Question: Is the sense consciousness and a sense direct perceiver the  same?


Answer: A sense consciousness is not necessarily a sense  direct  perceiver.
This will become apparent when we look at the different  kinds  of  mistaken
consciousnesses today. From its definition, it is clear that a sense  direct
perceiver is necessarily non-mistaken. That being the case, to say that  all
sense consciousnesses are non-mistaken is  not  tenable  because  there  are
sense consciousnesses  that  are  mistaken.  Therefore  if  it  is  a  sense
consciousness, it is not necessarily non-mistaken.

Student:  I  thought  a  sense  consciousness  that  is   a   non-conceptual
consciousness is necessarily non-mistaken.

Answer: There is something  that  is  both  a  sense  consciousness  and  is
mistaken. There are many instances of this. This will be explained soon.

Question: With regard to the sequence of the generation of the sense  direct
perceiver followed  by  the  mental  direct  perceiver  and  the  conceptual
consciousness, does the sense direct perceiver directly  become  the  mental
direct perceiver?  Do  the  three  conditions  (observed  object  condition,
uncommon empowering condition,  and  the  immediately  preceding  condition)
also apply for the production of a mental direct perceiver?

Answer: A mental direct perceiver is produced in dependence upon  the  three
conditions. Depending on which  mental  direct  perceiver  it  is,  e.g.,  a
mental direct perceiver apprehending form:
• the observed object condition is form
• the uncommon empowering condition is the mental sense power
• the immediately preceding condition is also the mental sense power

The mental direct perceiver  following  an  eye  consciousness  apprehending
form would be a mental direct  perceiver  apprehending  form.  The  observed
object condition is form. The uncommon empowering condition is mental  sense
power.

Question: For the eye consciousness apprehending blue, in the sequence of  a
sense direct perceiver, followed by  a  mental  direct  perceiver,  and  the
conceptual consciousness, the  observed  object  condition  for  the  mental
direct perceiver should not be blue because it cannot be a sense object.  Is
that correct?

Answer: Conceptual consciousnesses are necessarily  mental  consciousnesses.
For example, there is a  conceptual  consciousness  apprehending  vase.  The
conceptual consciousness apprehending vase realises vase and  not  something
else. It is the actual  vase,  i.e.,  a  form  which  is  realised  by  this
conceptual consciousness, so it is a mental consciousness realising form.

Student: If it  is  a  conceptual  consciousness,  it  realises  its  object
necessarily through a generic image which is not a form.

Answer: A  conceptual  thought  apprehending  form  realises  form  but  not
directly. It realises form via a generic image or a meaning generality.

If you were asked, “Does the thought apprehending vase realise  vase?”   the
answer is yes, it realises vase. From this, you can posit that  there  is  a
mental consciousness that can realise  form.  The  conceptual  consciousness
apprehending  vase  realises  vase.  A  vase  appears  to  this   conceptual
consciousness.

A  conceptual  consciousness  is  necessarily  a  mental  consciousness.  It
follows then that the mental consciousness  can  realise  form.  It  follows
then that form can also appear to a mental consciousness.  So  there  is  no
problem there.

The  consciousness  to  which  form  appears  is  not  necessarily  a  sense
consciousness. Form can appear  to  a  mental  consciousness.  A  phenomenon
source form is a form that can only appear to the mental  consciousness  and
not to the sense consciousness.

Khen Rinpoche: Your questions should only be related to the questions  given
for last Sunday’s discussion. You can only ask  about  those  questions  you
found difficult and unable to resolve, where no firm answer was arrived  at.
 If you already have the answer, then you don’t have to ask again.

Question: Regarding the question: If it is a consciousness  that  arises  in
dependence on a mental sense  power,  is  it  necessarily  a  mental  direct
perceiver, the answer is no, because the mental sense power can also act  as
the empowering condition for the production  of  a  sense  consciousness  in
which case it becomes a common empowering condition? Can  a  physical  sense
power act as a common empowering condition for the production  of  a  mental
consciousness?

Answer: Yes.

Question: Regarding the question: If  it  is  an  established  base,  is  it
necessarily  all  three  of  the  following:  (1)  appearing   object,   (2)
determined object, and (3) object of engagement, how  should  this  question
be approached?
Khen Rinpoche: There is no problem. First you must understand the  question.


Khen Rinpoche: The question  is:  If  it  is  an  established  base,  is  it
necessarily  all  three  of  the  following:  (1)  appearing   object,   (2)
determined object, and (3) object of engagement?

Student: No.

Khen Rinpoche: Give me an example.

Khen Rinpoche: Is there is something that  you  can  point  to  that  is  an
existent but is not one of these objects?

A human being must necessarily have life. If you say no, you  must  give  me
an example of what is a human being that does not  have life.

If it is an established base, is it necessarily an object of engagement,  is
it necessarily an appearing object,  and  is  it  necessarily  a  determined
object?
You go one by one.

If it is an established base, is it necessarily an appearing object?

Student: Yes.

Khen Rinpoche: If it is an established base, is it necessarily an object  of
engagement?

Student: Yes.

Khen Rinpoche: If it is an established base, is it necessarily a  determined
object?

Student: No.

Khen Rinpoche: Give me an example of an  established  base  that  is  not  a
determined object.

Student:  An  example  would  be  a  cup   apprehended   by   a   conceptual
consciousness because a determined object only  appears  to  the  conceptual
consciousness. That was what threw me off the question!

Khen Rinpoche: Is the consciousness your determined object? If it  is,  then
this  consciousness  is  necessarily   a   determined   object   because   a
consciousness necessarily has a thought apprehending it.

Student: Sorry. I am not getting it…

Khen Rinpoche: Why do you say that if  it  is  an  established  base  it  is
necessarily  an  appearing  object?  Why  do  you  say  that  if  it  is  an
established base it is necessarily an object of engagement?

Student: An object of engagement  is  necessarily  a  functioning  thing.  I
approached this question on the basis of whether the object is  a  permanent
or an impermanent phenomenon.

Khen Rinpoche: If it is an object of engagement, it  is  not  necessarily  a
functioning thing. If you say that an object of engagement is necessarily  a
functioning thing,  it  follows  that  emptiness  cannot  be  an  object  of
engagement and that uncomposed space cannot be realised.

Are you able to find anything that is an established base but  that  is  not
an appearing object, not an object  of  engagement,  and  not  a  determined
object? If you can find one object, of course the answer  would  be  no.  If
you cannot, then the answer is yes.

Student:  So  the  way  to  approach  this  question  is  to  check  on  the
possibilities of established base with these three objects?

Khen Rinpoche: When  you  compare  an  established  base  and  an  appearing
object, are there any possibilities between them?

Student: An established base is necessarily an appearing object.

Khen Rinpoche: So there are no possibilities. If you know they are  mutually
inclusive, then  an  established  base  is  necessarily  the  three  objects
mentioned.

Question: Does a wrong consciousness have an object of engagement?

Answer: Based on the position of Sera Je Monastery, there is  no  object  of
object  of  engagement  for  a  wrong  consciousness.  In  our  system,  the
definition is this: a wrong consciousness  is  a  knower  that  engages  its
object erroneously.

There are colleges that assert that a wrong consciousness has an  object  of
engagement. The definition of a wrong consciousness as stated  in  textbooks
from some schools is this:  a  wrong  consciousness  is  a  knower  that  is
mistaken with regard to its object of engagement.

We will be covering this topic soon.

Question: Because a self-knowing direct perceiver has three  divisions,  how
do I relate this to the fact that all consciousnesses have self-knowers?

Answer: The three divisions for self-knowing direct perceivers are:
1. valid cognisers that are self-knowing direct perceivers
2. subsequent cognisers that are self-knowing direct perceivers
3. awarenesses to which an object appears  but  is  not  ascertained  (AAAs)
   that are self-knowing direct perceivers

If this is the case, how is it that, for example, a wrong consciousness  has
a self-knower?

The first thing to note is that all consciousnesses necessarily have a self-
knower experiencing it. We are talking about valid cognisers here.  A  valid
cogniser has a self-knower experiencing it but the self-knower  experiencing
a valid cogniser is not necessarily a valid cogniser.

Likewise with regard to a wrong consciousness, since it is a  consciousness,
it   necessarily  has  a  self-knower  experiencing  it.  That   self-knower
experiencing the wrong consciousness is not a wrong consciousness. So  there
is no problem with a wrong consciousness having a  self-knower  experiencing
it.
                              *****************
Yogic direct perceiver

Definition of a yogic direct perceiver is:

   1) that which is generated in dependence on its own  uncommon  empowering
      condition, a meditative stabilization that is a union of calm  abiding
      and special insight, and

   2) is an other-knowing exalted knower in the continuum of a Superior that
      is free from conceptuality and non-mistaken.

When divided there are two which are yogic direct perceivers:

    • valid cogniser
    • subsequent cogniser

There are no awarenesses to which an object appears but is  not  ascertained
that are  yogic  direct  perceivers  because  whatever  is  a  yogic  direct
perceiver necessarily  ascertains  its  object  of  comprehension  (Page  5,
Handout No. 5 on Direct Perceivers dated 10th July 2012).

• A yogic direct perceiver is  not  simply  generated  in  dependence  on  a
  mental sense power. Its uncommon empowering condition is more exalted than
  that, i.e., it is a meditative stabilisation that  is  a  union  of  calm-
  abiding and special insight.
• A yogic direct perceiver has  to  be  free  from  conceptuality  and  non-
  mistaken.
• A yogic direct perceiver  has  to  be  included  in  the  continuum  of  a
  Superior
•  A yogic direct perceiver has to be an other-knower.

A self-knower experiencing a yogic direct perceiver is not  a  yogic  direct
perceiver  although  it  is  generated  in  dependence  upon  a   meditative
stabilisation that is a union of calm-abiding and  special  insight.  It  is
also included in the continuum of a Superior,  is  free  from  conceptuality
and is non-mistaken. This is because it is not  an  other-knower.  Therefore
the fallacy with regard to that  self-knower  experiencing  a  yogic  direct
perceiver being a yogic direct perceiver cannot arise.
In the divisions of the sense direct perceiver, the mental direct  perceiver
and the self-knowing direct perceiver, there  are  instances  of  all  these
three beings: (1) a valid cogniser, (2) a subsequent cogniser,  and  (3)  an
AAA.

However when yogic direct perceivers  are  divided,  there  are  only  yogic
direct  perceivers  that  are  (1)  valid  cognisers  and   (2)   subsequent
cognisers.
There are no yogic direct perceivers that are AAAs. Why is this so? This  is
because if it is a yogic direct perceiver,  it  necessarily  ascertains  its
object.
Because a yogic direct perceiver is necessarily  a  knower  that  ascertains
its object, therefore there isn’t a yogic direct perceiver that is an AAA.

For sense direct  perceivers,  mental  direct  perceivers  and  self-knowing
direct perceivers, there are instances of them being  an  AAA  because  they
are not necessarily minds that ascertain their objects.

When you look at the divisions of these four  types  of  direct  perceivers,
the yogic direct perceiver has only two divisions whereas  the  others  have
three divisions - valid cogniser, subsequent cogniser, and AAA - out of  the
seven-fold divisions of consciousness.

•  Why  are  there  no   sense   direct   perceivers   that   are   doubting
  consciousnesses?
  Because a doubting consciousness is a conceptual consciousness.


• Why are there no sense  direct  perceivers  that  are  correctly  assuming
  consciousnesses?
  Because a correctly assuming consciousness is a conceptual consciousness.


• Why there are no sense direct perceivers that are wrong consciousnesses?
  Because a wrong consciousness is necessarily a mistaken  consciousness.  A
  sense direct perceiver is necessarily non-mistaken. Therefore there cannot
  be any sense direct perceiver that is a wrong consciousness.


You must not forget the definitions. The definitions must always be at  your
fingertips.

Question: Due to some eye defect, an eye consciousness  apprehends  a  white
snow mountain to be a blue snow mountain. Is that a wrong consciousness?

Answer: That is a wrong consciousness. You have some doubt regarding this?

Student: I thought it is a mistaken and a wrong consciousness.

Khen Rinpoche: Yes, that is 100% confirmed.

Student: Isn’t that direct perceiver, i.e., the eye consciousness  seeing  a
white snow mountain as a blue snow mountain, wrong  and  mistaken?  Did  you
not say that all the sense consciousnesses are correct?

Khen Rinpoche: Is that a valid direct perceiver? Are  you  trying  to  prove
that there are direct perceivers that are wrong consciousness?  Is  the  eye
consciousness  apprehending  a  white  snow  mountain  as  blue   a   direct
perceiver?

Student: Yes.

Khen Rinpoche: What is the definition of a direct perceiver?

Khen Rinpoche: The consciousness to which the white  snow  mountain  appears
as blue is a consciousness that is mistaken. A direct perceiver is a  knower
that is necessarily non-mistaken and free of conceptuality. If this is  what
defines a direct perceiver, can  the  eye  consciousness  apprehending  blue
snow mountain be a sense direct perceiver?

If it is a sense  consciousness,  it  is  not  necessarily  a  sense  direct
perceiver. Of  course,  if  it  is  a  sense  direct  perceiver  it  is  not
necessarily a valid cogniser. Why is it not necessarily a valid cogniser?

When sense direct perceivers are divided, there are:
1. valid cognisers that are sense direct perceivers
2. subsequent cognisers that are sense direct perceivers
3. AAAs that are sense direct perceivers

When you memorise these divisions you will know immediately that, if  it  is
a sense direct perceiver, it is not necessarily a valid cogniser.

Give an illustration of a  sense  direct  perceiver  that  is  not  a  valid
cogniser.

Student: The illustration is the  second  moment  of  an  eye  consciousness
apprehending blue.

The definition of a sense direct perceiver and the  definition  of  a  sense
direct valid cogniser is about the same. The definition of  a  sense  direct
valid cogniser is built upon the definition of  a  sense  direct  perceiver.
You simply add in “new, incontrovertible.” [1]

Facsimile of a Direct Perceiver

The definition of a facsimile of a direct perceiver is:  a  knower  that  is
mistaken with regard to its appearing object.

Facsimile of a direct perceiver and  mistaken  consciousness  are  synonyms.
(Page 1, Handout No. 6 on Facsimile of a Direct Perceiver  dated  19th  July
2012).

• There are facsimiles of a direct perceiver that  are  conceptual  or  non-
  conceptual.
• There are facsimiles of a direct perceiver that are sense  consciousnesses
  or mental consciousnesses

Conceptual facsimiles of a direct perceiver
• A mistaken conception, a thought apprehending sound  as  permanent,  is  a
  wrong consciousness.
• A conventional conception, an inferential cogniser that realises sound  to
  be impermanent, is a valid cogniser.
These  two  consciousnesses  are  the  same  in  that  both   are   mistaken
consciousnesses.

Understanding that a wrong consciousness  is  a  mistaken  consciousness  is
straightforward. However an inferential  cogniser  that  realises  sound  is
impermanent is a valid cogniser; yet it is a mistaken consciousness. Why  is
this so? To understand why an inferential cogniser that  realises  sound  is
impermanent  is  a  mistaken  consciousness,  you  need  to  refer  to   the
definition of a mistaken  consciousness,  i.e.,  it  is  a  knower  that  is
mistaken with regard to its appearing object.

If a mistaken consciousness is a knower that is mistaken with regard to  its
appearing  object,  an  inferential  cogniser  that  realises  sound  to  be
impermanent is a mistaken consciousness because  this  inferential  cogniser
is mistaken with regard to its appearing object.

What then is the appearing object of an inferential cogniser  that  realises
sound to be impermanent? The appearing object of this  inferential  cogniser
that  realises  sound  to  be  impermanent  would  be  the   appearance   of
impermanent sound or the appearance of opposite from non-impermanent  sound.
How is this inferential cogniser mistaken  with  regard  to  this  appearing
object? These two appearances, while they are not impermanent sound,  appear
as impermanent sound. For this reason, it is mistaken.

If you  find  that  the  illustration  using  impermanent  sound  is  a  bit
confusing, you can change the object to an iPhone if you  think  this  makes
it easier for you.
• An inferential cogniser realising an iPhone is a valid cogniser.
• It is a mistaken consciousness. Why is this so?
• Because this inferential cogniser realising an  iPhone  is  mistaken  with
  regard to its appearing object.
• What is the appearing object of this consciousness? The  appearing  object
  of the inferential cogniser realising an iPhone is:
      o the appearance of an iPhone
      o appearance of opposite of non-iPhone
• How is the inferential cogniser realising an iPhone mistaken  with  regard
  to this appearing object? The inferential cogniser realising an iPhone  is
  mistaken with regard to its appearing object  because  the  appearance  of
  opposite of non-iPhone appears to be the actual iPhone although it is  not
  the actual iPhone. Therefore it is mistaken.

Khen Rinpoche: This is the final destination.

This is the process by which you arrive at the conclusion  determining  that
this consciousness is mistaken. There is nothing else to query beyond this.

Question: Is this the same reason as saying that the conceptual  thought  is
mistaken because the appearing object  is  the  meaning  generality  of  the
iPhone? Is this the same explanation?

Answer: It is mistaken because while the meaning generality of an iPhone  is
not the actual iPhone,  it appears as if it is the actual iPhone. It is  all
right to say this in such a way but we have to think  about  whether  it  is
all right to say that it is exactly the same reason.

Khen Rinpoche: It is not a problem if you say that.

In the above illustrations, one is a conceptual consciousness and the  other
is a valid cogniser, but both are  mistaken  consciousnesses.  You  can  say
that a conceptual consciousness is  necessarily  a  facsimile  of  a  direct
perceiver but is a facsimile of a direct perceiver necessarily conceptual?

Non-conceptual facsimiles of a direct perceiver

There are many non-conceptual facsimiles of a direct perceiver.

From among the two,

(1)  Non-conceptual  facsimiles  of  a  direct  perceiver  that  are  mental
consciousnesses

(2)  Non-conceptual  facsimiles  of  a  direct  perceiver  that  are   sense
consciousnesses (Page 1 of Handout No. 6)

According to the Sutra  School,  a  non-conceptual  facsimile  of  a  direct
perceiver is a mistaken consciousness but it is mistaken  due  to  temporary
conditions, i.e., it  is  a  temporary  error  and  not  a  long-lasting  or
permanent error.

There are two types of causes of errors:
1. causes of error that are internal
2. causes of error that are external

Illustrations of internal causes of error
• An eye impaired by an obscuring disease is a cause of error  for  a  sense
  consciousness that is a non-conceptual facsimile of a direct perceiver. In
  this case the cause of error is internal. In dependence on internal causes
  and conditions, one has an eye impaired by an obscuring disease.   Due  to
  that, one sees one moon as two moons. The appearance of one  moon  as  two
  moons is not due to there being two moons but is due to this impaired  eye
  condition.
• Another illustration is this: seeing your surroundings as unpleasant  when
  your mind is upset. This appearance is also due to an internal condition.

Illustrations of external causes of error
• An illustration of an external cause of  error  is  a  whirling  firebrand
  that appears to be a wheel of fire. This appearance of a fire-wheel is due
  to an external, not internal, condition.
•  Another  illustration  is  this:  seeing  trees  moving  while  you   are
  travelling in a car. The appearance of moving trees is due to an  external
  condition. This is the cause of error existing in the abode.

By understanding how you can have a mistaken  appearance  in  dependence  on
external  conditions,  one  can  also  come  to  understand   how   mistaken
appearance can arise due to internal conditions.

This  discussion  regarding  the  non-conceptual  facsimile  of   a   direct
perceiver is according to the SS. You have to understand that, according  to
the SS, such  causes  of  error  are  temporary.  The  mistaken  appearances
described here are not due to some long-lasting faults or causes.  Here  the
explanation of the mistaken consciousness is not done from  the  perspective
of a long-lasting cause of error. This is not what  is  being  taught  here.
Let’s say you have a damaged eye for your whole life. That may not  seem  to
be a temporary problem as it lasts for a long time. But,  in  this  context,
this is still considered temporary.

In order for the cause of error to be the  ultimate  long-lasting  cause  of
error, it has to relate to the grasping of a self of persons.

• A  non-conceptual  facsimile  of  a  direct  perceiver  that  is  a  sense
  consciousness can be generated in dependence on either an external  or  an
  internal condition. They are both  posited  to  be  temporary  conditions.
  Therefore they can be averted. One simply identifies the  cause  of  error
  and seeks to avert it.
• When one seeks out and tries to understand the ultimate  cause  of  error,
  one is led to the presentation of grasping at the self of  persons,  i.e.,
  the ignorance that apprehends a self of  persons.  That  is  the  ultimate
  cause of error. When you avert and destroy that, all mistaken  conceptions
  are removed.
By depending on this presentation, the presentation  of  the  path  is  also
laid out.

Non-conceptual wrong consciousness, non-conceptual  facsimile  of  a  direct
perceiver, and consciousness that has a clear appearance of  a  non-existent
are synonymous (Page 2 of Handout No. 6).
The consciousness to which there is the appearance of a fire-wheel due to  a
quickly whirling firebrand is:
• a non-conceptual wrong consciousness
• a non-conceptual facsimile of a direct perceiver
• a consciousness that has a clear appearance of a non-existent.
In reality there is no fire-wheel but you have a clear appearance of a  non-
existent fire-wheel. Therefore the eye consciousness  that  sees  the  fire-
wheel due to a quickly whirling firebrand is  a  consciousness  that  has  a
clear appearance of a non-existent.

Other illustrations of the clear appearance of a non-existent
• You see trees moving while you are travelling in a car.
• You see things falling in  front  of  your  eyes  due  to  your  defective
  vision.
• Your eye consciousness sees the ground as red due to a very  strong  anger
  arising in the mind.

Question: What is the meaning of facsimile and why  must  we  talk  about  a
facsimile of a direct perceiver? Is a facsimile of  a  direct  perceiver  an
other- knower?

Answer: There are direct  perceivers  and  there  are  “counterfeit”  direct
perceivers.

Khen Rinpoche:  A facsimile of a direct  perceiver  is  not  a  real  direct
perceiver.

The fire-wheel that appears due to a  quickly  whirling  firebrand  is  seen
very clearly by this consciousness. This  consciousness  is  non-conceptual.
It seems as if it is a direct perceiver but it is not  a  direct  perceiver.
This consciousness is generated in dependence upon a  physical  sense  power
and it is free from conceptuality but it is mistaken. Since it is  mistaken,
it cannot be  an  actual  direct  perceiver.  While  it  is  like  a  direct
perceiver, it is not a direct perceiver.

Why do we  need  to  know  about  this?  Because  there  are  many  mistaken
consciousnesses.  There  are  mistaken  consciousnesses   that   are   sense
consciousnesses and there  are  mistaken  consciousnesses  that  are  mental
consciousnesses.  The  point  here  is  to   examine   what   are   mistaken
consciousnesses, their causes, and whether these causes can be  averted  and
gradually eliminated. What we  want  are  correct  minds,  i.e.,  the  valid
cognisers and so forth.

Translated by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme
Transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek, Vivien Ng and Patricia Lee
Edited by Cecilia Tsong
-----------------------
[1] The definition of a sense direct valid cogniser is a new
incontrovertible knower, free from conceptuality, that arises in dependence
upon a physical sense power that is its uncommon empowering condition (Page
1, Handout No. 7 dated 24th July 2012)

