Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Lorig/Edited/BP2 M2 L20 (R1).doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:53:49.844181
================================================================================


Transcript of teachings by Khen Rinpoche Geshe Chonyi on the Modes  of  Mind
and Mental Factors

Lesson No: 20                     Date: 30th August 2012

Root text:  A Necklace for Those of Clear Awareness  Clearly  Revealing  the
Modes of Minds and Mental Factors by Ye-she Gyeltsen, translated by Toh  Sze
Gee; January 2006 edition. Copyright: Toh Sze Gee  &  FPMT,  Inc.  September
2003.

All page references refer to the root text, unless otherwise stated.

The five omnipresent mental factors are:
(1) feeling
(2) discrimination
(3) intention
(4) contact
(5) attention

(1)1. Feeling

Feelings  have  three  divisions:  (1)  pleasant  feelings,  (2)   suffering
feelings, and (3) neutral feelings.

In some texts, feelings have five divisions:
1. pleasant feelings
2. suffering feelings
3. neutral feelings
4. feelings of mental happiness
5. feelings of mental unhappiness

When divided in this way:
•  pleasant  and  suffering  feelings  are   associated   with   the   sense
  consciousnesses
• feelings of mental happiness  and  unhappiness  are  associated  with  the
  mental consciousness
• neutral feelings

(2)2. Discrimination

Regarding the entity of discrimination, the Compendium of Knowledge says:

      QUESTION:  What  is  the  defining  characteristic  of  discrimination
      [Tibetan:'du shes, literally, aggregation-knowing]?
      RESPONSE: It has the characteristic of knowing  upon  aggregation.  It
      has the entity of apprehending the sign  and  apprehending  the  mark,
      through which one designates an expression to objects of  perceptions,
      hearing, differentiation and knowledge.

Just as it has been said above, it is a knower that,  upon  the  aggregation
of the three – object, sense power, and primary consciousness  –  apprehends
the uncommon sign of an object.

      QUESTION: What is discrimination?
      RESPONSE: It apprehends the sign of an object.

When discrimination is divided, there are two:
(1) the apprehension of a sign and
(2) the apprehension of a mark (Page 20).

• The apprehension of a sign is related to the sense consciousness.
• The apprehension of a mark is related to the mental consciousness.

Discrimination is a knower that apprehends the uncommon sign of  an  object.
What is an uncommon sign of an object?  E.g., blue and  yellow:  tThey  each
haveold  their  own  entity.  Blue  is  not  yellow.  Yellow  is  not  blue.
Discrimination is that which apprehends this such an  uncommon  sign  of  an
object.

What is it that allows  one  to  know  that  the  object  is  bblue?  It  is
discrimination that apprehends ththat which is an uncommon,  blue.

 1) The apprehension of a sign is an apprehension of an uncommon sign of  an
    object which appears to a non-conceptual consciousness.
 2) The apprehension of a mark is an apprehension of an uncommon sign of  an
    object which appears to conceptual thought (Page 21).

The mental factor of discrimination occurs in the retinues of both  a  sense
consciousness and a mental consciousness.
• The discrimination that is in the retinue of a sense consciousness is  the
  apprehension of a sign.
• The discrimination that is in the retinue of  a  mental  consciousness  is
  the apprehension of a mark.

For example, the eye primary  consciousness  apprehending  blue  is  a  main
mind. In the retinue of  this  sense  consciousness,  there  is  the  mental
factor  of  discrimination  that  enables  this  eye  primary  consciousness
apprehending blue to apprehend the uncommon blue, the blue that is  unshared
with anything else.  other thing.

Another example is will be a conceptual consciousness apprehending blue.  In
the retinue of this conceptual consciousness  apprehending  blue,  there  is
also the mental factor of discrimination that, in this  case,  apprehends  a
mark.  This  mental  factor  of  discrimination  in  the  retinue  of   this
conceptual  consciousness  apprehending   blue   enables   this   conceptual
consciousness not tto not  mix  up  blue  and  yellow.  This  discrimination
enables  this  conceptual  consciousness  apprehending  blue  to   designate
conventionally designate that the object is blue and not yellow.

The Treasury of Knowledge explains discrimination as being twofold:
(1) the apprehension of a sign with regard to an object and
(2) the apprehension of a sign with regard to a convention (Page 21)

This is just a different way of saying of what I have just explained.

Question: Regarding the explanation of the uncommon sign, can  we  say  that
discrimination  is  the  mental  factor  that  performs  the   function   of
apprehending the opposite of whatever is not  the  object  or,  put  another
way, apprehending the isolate?

Answer: It is all right if you want to say that. Blue  is  the  opposite  of
non-blue. The opposite of non-blue is blue. That only  exists  on  blue  and
not on anything else.  other thing. Therefore it is uncommon or unshared.

Question: How  would  one  posit  a  non-conceptual  consciousness  that  is
concomitant  with  the  mental  factor  of  discrimination   labelling   and
designating the object?

Answer: This is related to what is mentioned in the the second paragraph  of
the text:

The  bases  of  engagement  for  these  two  types  of  discrimination   are
perceptions, hearing, differentiation and knowledge. Their meanings  are  as
follows.
• Perceptions  involve  designating  an  expression  to  objects  manifestly
  perceived.
• Hearing involves  designating  an  expression  in  dependence  on  hearing
  credible words.
• Differentiation involves designating an expression to objects  ascertained
  in dependence on signs.
• Knowledge  involves  designating  an  expression  to  objects  ascertained
  directly (Page 21).

Usually it is the  conceptual  consciousness  that  designates  terms,   and
determininges  this is this and that is  that.  I  don’t  know  whether  the
mental factor of discrimination in the  retinue  of  a  sense  consciousness
designates an expression (or term) , for example, to an object or not.

When we see blue,  i.e.,  the  eye  consciousness  apprehends  blue,  almost
immediately after that, the mind thinks, “This  is  blue,”  i.e.,  the  mind
designates “This is blue.”  We have to think about this: whether  this  mind
that designates, “This is blue,” is the eye consciousness or not.

Or when you hear a sound,  i.e.,  the  ear  consciousness  apprehendings   a
sound, I guess it has to be a conceptual  consciousness  that  distinguishes
the kind of sound that you heard, “I heard this” or “I heard that.”

When we talk about designating an expression or term, it is mainly  done  by
the  conceptual  consciousness.  With  regard   to   how   these   different
consciousnesses are generated, we discussed this before: the  generation  of
a sense consciousness is  followed  by  the  mental  consciousness  and  the
conceptual consciousness. T but the manner in which they  are  generated  is
very quickly.

I am not sure whether a sense consciousness designates an  expression.   but
in any case, it is mentioned here that the mental factor  of  discrimination
in the retinue of:
• a sense consciousness is a discrimination that apprehends a sign
• a conceptual consciousness is a discrimination that apprehends a mark
One  can  understand  frFrom  this  division  of  discrimination,  one   can
understand that it is mainly the mental  consciousness  that  designates  an
expression.

Further, when discrimination is differentiated  in  terms  of  its  support,
there are six:
1) discrimination arising from contact upon the  aggregation  of  a  visible
   form, an eye [sense power], and an eye consciousness;
2) discrimination arising from contact upon the aggregation of a  sound,  an
   ear [sense power], and an ear consciousness;
3) discrimination arising from contact upon the aggregation of  an  odor,  a
   nose [sense power], and a nose consciousness;
4) discrimination arising from contact upon the aggregation of  a  taste,  a
   tongue [sense power], and a tongue consciousness;
5) discrimination arising from contact upon the  aggregation  of  a  tactile
   object, a body [sense power], and a body consciousness; and
6)  discrimination  arising  from  contact  upon  the   aggregation   of   a
   phenomenon, a mental [sense power], and a mental consciousness (page 21).

(3). Intention

Regarding the entity of intention, the Compendium of Knowledge says:

      QUESTION: What is intention?
      RESPONSE: It is a compositional mental action of the mind. It has  the
      function  of  engaging  the  mind  in  virtue,  non-virtue,   or   the
      unspecified[1].

Just as it has been said above, the mental factor  which  rouses  and  moves
the mind that is concomitant with it to an  object  is  called  "intention."
This is said to be the principal among all  mental  factors;  it  is  taught
that any mind or mental factor engages an object due to the  power  of  this
mental factor. For example, just as iron is helplessly drawn  by  a  magnet,
the mind helplessly engages an object due to this  mental  factor  intention
(Pages 22 – 23).

When we talk about this mental factor of intention, it is  karma.  Karma  is
intention. The mental factor of intention moves the mind towards an  object.
There are physical, verbal, and mental karma (or actions). There is  a  mind
that moves the body to engage in a certain action.  There  is  a  mind  that
causes a certain kind of speech. We had discussed karma at  some  length  in
the previous module on the lam-rim.

This intention is  mental  action.  In  general,  there  are  two  types  of
actions:
(1) actions that are intentions
(2) intended actions

It is just as it has been said in the Treasury of Knowledge (stanza 4.1cd):

      They are intention and that produced by it.
      Intention is mental action.
      That produced by it are actions of body and speech.

Intended actions are of two types:
(1) physical actions
(2) verbal actions (Page 23)

• Therefore the three physical actions and four verbal actions are  intended
  actions.
• On the other hand, actions that are intentions are mental actions.

The main thing is to understand is what exactly what intention is:
• Intention is an  omnipresent  mental  factor  that  accompanies  all  main
  minds.
• Intention moves the main mind and all the mental factors in  the  retinues
  of this main mind towards an object. The analogy given here is a piece  of
  iron that is helplessly drawn towards a magnet.

(4). Contact

Regarding the entity of contact, the Compendium of Knowledge says:

      QUESTION: What is contact?
      RESPONSE: It distinguishes the transformation of the sense power  upon
      the aggregation of the three. It has  the  function  of  acting  as  a
      support for feeling.

Just as it has been said above, contact is a knower that,  upon  aggregation
of  the  three  –  object,  sense  power   and   primary   consciousness   –
distinguishes an object in  accordance  with  whatever  subsequent  feeling,
pleasant and so on, that is to be experienced (Page 24 – 25).

Contact is when the mind meets with  the  object.  It  is  the  knower  that
causes the mind to come into contact with or to meet the object.
• Intention moves the mind towards the object.
• Contact causes the mind to meet with the object.
•  When  contact  causes  the  mind  to  meet  with  an  unpleasant  object,
  unpleasant feelings arise.
• When contact causes the mind to meet  with  a  pleasant  object,  pleasant
  feelings arise.

That is the reason why it is said that contact, “distinguishes an object  in
accordance with whatever subsequent feeling, pleasant and so on, that is  to
be experienced.”

Question: Since these five omnipresent  mental  factors  arise,  abide,  and
disintegrate simultaneously, how does one reconcile that contact is a  cause
and the remaining four mental factors are the results? It  seems  that  they
do not share a similar time.

Answer: What we can say with certainty is what we had discussed  earlier  at
the beginning of this text. The main mind and  the  mental  factors  in  its
retinue are concomitant by way of the five similarities,  one  of  which  is
similar time.

Therefore we cannot  say  that  the  five  omnipresent  mental  factors  are
generated at different times. As soon as the main mind  is  produced,  these
five omnipresent mental factors are produced simultaneously.  This  is  what
we can say for sure because this is stated by all the main treatises.

But in the presentation of the twelve links  of  dependent-arising   —  from
the basis of contact ( feeling ( craving ( grasping ( potential existence  (
birth.  H— how are wey to ou going to explain that feeling and  contact  are
established simultaneously?

I don’t know exactly but you can say that, with contact as the basis, it  is
then possible for the mental factor of feeling to  increase  or  strengthen.
You cannot say that there is no feeling when contact  arises.  You  have  to
say that there is feeling. On the basis of contact,  feeling  manifests  and
becomes stronger. Think about this. Perhaps we can say something like  that.
When we are talking about the  mind,  it  is  very  difficult  to  pin-point
things exactly and to be able to say, “This is this”  and  “That  is  that.”
What we can say for sure is that all the great treatises had clearly  stated
very clearly that  the  five  omnipresent  mental  factors  are  established
simultaneously.

For now, if we can get some idea about these  different  mental  factors,  I
think that is enough.

• Feeling allows us to experience the object in question.
• Discrimination allows us to know and apprehend  the  uncommon  sign  of  a
  specific object, i.e., apprehending it is the  object  and  not  something
  else.
• Intention moves our mind towards the object.
• Contact allows us to distinguish the object and makes the mind  come  into
  contact with or to meet the object.

The divisions of the various mental factors are in the text.  Read  them  on
your own and if there is anything you need to clarify, you can bring  it  up
in class.

(5). Attention

Regarding attention, the Compendium of Knowledge says:

      QUESTION: What is attention?
      RESPONSE: It is an engagement of the mind.  It  has  the  function  of
      holding the mind to the object of observation.

Just as it has been said above, it is a knower that focuses the  mind  which
is concomitant with it on a particular object of observation.  What  is  the
difference between intention and attention?  Intention  moves  the  mind  to
general objects, whereas attention directs the mind to a  particular  object
(Page 25).

• Attention directs the mind to an object and causes it to hold  on  to  the
  object.
• Attention is like meditative stabilisation (sometime is translated  as  or
  concentration) but it is not meditative stabiliszation.
• It Attention allows the mind to focus and hold on to  its  object  without
  thinking about something else.

Intention moves the mind towards an object.
Attention holds the mind to that object without moving.
These are the five  omnipresent  mental  factors:  feeling,  discrimination,
intention, contact, and attention. You should just  have  a  rough  idea  of
their individual entities.

[Root text: page 26] [Discussion  of  the  category  of  omnipresent  mental
factors]
What is the reason for calling these five mental factors –  feeling  and  so
forth – "omnipresent" [Tibetan: kun 'gro, literally, go all]? They  are  so-
called because they are mental factors  that  accompany  [Tibetan:  rjes  su
'gro ba, literally, go after] all minds.
Furthermore, if any of the five  omnipresent  mental  factors  are  missing,
then the utilization of an object will not be complete:
• if feeling is absent, then there will be no experience;
• if discrimination is absent, then there will be  no  apprehension  of  the
  uncommon signs of the object;
• if intention is absent, then[the mind] will not be directed to an object;
• if attention is  absent,  then  [the  mind]  will  not  be  focused  on  a
  particular object of observation;
• if contact is absent, then there will be no support [for feeling].

Therefore, in order for the utilization of an object  to  be  complete,  all
five omnipresent mental factors must  be  present  without  exception  (Page
26).

If it  is  a  main  mind,  it  is  necessarily  accompanied  by  these  five
omnipresent mental factors. Why? Because:
• without If there is no feeling, feeling is not there  all  the  time  then
  there is no way to experience the object.
• wWithout discrimination, one will be unable not  be  able  to  distinguish
  the uncommon sign of the object.
• without If there is no intention, the mind will not be directed to the  an
  object.
• without If attention is absent, the mind will not be able to stay  on  the
  object.
• wWithout contact, the mind will not be able to meet with the object.

I guess you are fine with the five omnipresent mental factors. If you  hadve
read the text, whatever I hadve said should not n’t be difficult.  Sometimes
it is hard difficult to tell the difference between two mental factors.   as
Iit is seems as if  that we are talking about the same thing.

|Five Omnipresent Mental |Function                                   |
|Factors                 |                                           |
|Feeling                 |To enable the mind to experience the       |
|                        |object.                                    |
|Discrimination          |To enable the mind to distinguish the      |
|                        |uncommon sign of the object.               |
|Intention               |To movedirect the mind towards the an      |
|                        |object.                                    |
|Attention               |To direct enable the mind towards to stay  |
|                        |on the object.                             |
|Contact                 |To enable the mind to meet with the object.|

The next category of mental factors is called the Ffive  object-ascertaining
mental factors.










[B] The five object-ascertaining mental factors (yul nges)
[Root text: page 26] The five object-ascertaining mental factors are:
(1) aspiration
(2) belief
(3) mindfulness
(4) meditative stabiliszation
(5) wisdom


(1) A[B1] Asspiration (dun pa)
[Root text: page 26]
Regarding the entity of aspiration, the Compendium of Knowledge says:

      QUESTION: What is aspiration?
      RESPONSE: It is the  very  wish  to  be  endowed  with  this  or  that
      [attribute] of a desired thing. It has the function  of  acting  as  a
      support for making effort.

Just as it has been said above, it is a knower  that,  upon  observing  some
intended thing, seeks it. The way in which aspiration  acts  a  support  for
effort is as follows. [Maitreya's] Discrimination  of  the  Middle  and  the
Extremes (stanza 4.5ab) says:

      The support and that supported by it and
      The cause and the result (Page 26).
We can look at aspiration in terms of three  features  or  /characteristics:
(1) its object, (2) its aspect, and (3) its function.
   1. The object
   2. The aspect
   3. The function

• The feature of the object is the “attribute of a desired thing.”
• What is Tthe subjective aspect of aspiration? It is the very  wish  to  be
  endowed with that the desired object.
• What is Tthe function of aspiration? It is that  it  is  the  support  for
  making effort.
•
A knower that which  possesses  these  three  features  is  aspiration.  The
aspiration referred to that we are talking iin this  context  mainly  refers
is to the mental factor of aspiration in the  retinue  of  a  virtuous  main
mind.

There is a quotation from the Lam-Rim ChenmoRCM  that which  highlights  the
great importance of aspiration. When If there is  aspiration,   then  it  is
then  possible to have effort and all  the  excellent  qualities  that  come
from effort.

[Root text: page 27] The Great Exposition of the Stages  of  the  Path  also
says:

If you cannot stop the laziness that is a non-enthusiasm toward  cultivating
meditative stabilization, and that takes joy in its discordant  class,  then
from  the  outset  you  will  not  be  inclined  to  engage  in   meditative
stabilization. Even if you do achieve it once, it  will  quickly  degenerate
since you will be unable to sustain it. Therefore, it  is  most  crucial  to
put an end to laziness at the beginning. Regarding  this,  when  you  attain
pliancy in which your body and mind are filled with joy and bliss,  laziness
will be overcome, since no weariness  will  arise  in  your  application  to
virtue all day and night. In order to generate that [pliancy], you  must  be
able to undertake continuous effort in meditative stabilization,  the  cause
for generating pliancy. And in order to produce that [effort],  you  need  a
continuous fervent aspiration that  seeks  meditative  stabilization.  As  a
cause for that [aspiration], you must have the stable faith  of  captivation
due to having seen the  excellent  qualities  of  meditative  stabilization.
Therefore, for a start, you should meditate again and again  on  faith  that
reflects upon the excellent qualities of  meditative  stabilization.  Having
witnessed the sequence of these through your practice,  you  will  apprehend
this excellent essential point with the clearest certainty (Page 27).

With  regard  In  relation  to  achieving  this  the  single-pointedness  of
mindmeditative stabilisation (or calm-abiding),  it  is  very  important  to
have the strong aspiration for doing so. it.
The cause of such a strong aspiration  i.e.  for  wanting  to  have  single-
pointedness is the faith of conviction.
How do you develop gain this faith of conviction in  attaining  this  having
the single-pointedness of mind?

• You develop a strong fget this faith of  conviction  through  hearing  and
  then reflecting on the advantages of having such a  single-pointedness  of
  mind.
• If you have  strong  faith  of  conviction  that  come  from  hearing  and
  reflecting on the advantages of having single-pointedness  of  mind,  then
  Tthis faith of conviction becomes is the cause for you to aspire  strongly
  to really attain want to have this single-pointedness of mind.
• With strong faith of conviction then you have strong aspiration.
•   The   Sstrong   aspiration   leads   to   strong   effort   (or   joyous
  perseverance)[2], a .
• Joyous perseverance is a mind that is enthusiastic about virtue.
• With strong joyous perseverance, youone then makes effort  and  cwill  ome
  to develop gain physical and mental pliancy.
• When physical  and  mental  pliancy  is  attained,  you  gained  then  one
  overcome laziness.

The actualisation of calm-abiding is being used here Here we are just  using
single-pointedness mind as  an  example  to  understand  the  importance  of
aspiration.
When there is a  strong  aspiration  to  actualise  calm-abiding,  you  will
generate  have strong joyous perseverance to achieve this.  In  relation  to
actualizing calm-abiding, if you have strong  aspiration  for  calm-abiding,
it leads you to have strong joyous perseverance in working  to  attain  it..
When you have physical and mental pliancy, then all kinds of laziness  areis
overcome. IFor us, whatever we try to achieve, it is  always  laziness  that
blocks us from achieving whatever we want to achieve.
The text points out is saying of how important aspiration is; because it  is
only with strong aspiration that it is   then  it  is  possible  for  us  to
really engage in perfect virtue.

[Root text: page 28] When aspiration is divided, there are three types:
(1) the aspiration wishing to meet
(2) the aspiration wishing not to be separated
(3) the aspiration that seeks (Page 27)

• In essence, When if you have strong  aspiration,   tthen  you  will   have
  strong joyous perseverance.
• With strong joyous perseverance, you one will develop qualities  that  you
  one have has not yet developed.
• With strong joyous  perseverance,  the  qualities  that  one  has  already
  developed, you one will be able to maintain those qualities that you  have
  already developed  without losing them.
•  Whatever  qualities  that  you  have  accumulated  through  with   joyous
  perseverance will be , those qualities can be enhanced.

What we are seeking to achieve is:  The  essential  point  of  what  we  are
seeking to achieve is:
• to gradually reduce and then lessen or to remove the non-virtuous mind
• to generate athe virtuous mind and
• to strengthen the virtuous mind increase those  that  hasve  already  been
  generated
All this of these can only come about through joyous perseverance and .  iIn
order to have that,  joyous  perseverance,  one  needs  to  have  aspiration
beforehand. You have  to  understand  how  aspiration  functions  as  the  a
support for making such effort.

What is the cause of aspiration?
• Strong and stable jThe cause of aspiration is faith.
•  Joyous  perseverance  is  supported  by  stcomes  from  rong  and  stable
  aspiration.
• Strong and stable aspiration comes from stable faith.
• Stable fFaith comes from athe strong foundation in hearing and  reflecting
  on the teachings.
• With this you generate stable faith. Stable faith leads to  strong  stable
  aspiration which then acts as a  support  for  stable  and  strong  joyous
  perseverance.
Strong foundation in hearing and & reflecting on on inin  the   teachings  (
sStrong fFaith ( sStrong aAspiration ( sStrong jJoyous pPerseverance

That is  why  Lama  Tsongkhapa  emphasises  gave  a  strong  advice  on  the
importance of hearing  (i.e.,  studying  the  teachings),  reflection,   and
meditation.  Without  these  three,  nothing  happens.  hearing,   studying/
learning, and without reflection  then  nothing  spectacular  happens.  Why?
Because without them,  stable  learning,  reflection  and  meditation,  then
tthere is no faith. When If the faith is weak, neither here nor  there  then
the aspiration and effort are is also weak. neither  here  nor  there,  then
the effort is also neither here nor there, Tthen nothing happens.

Ultimately, At the end of the day it depends on boils down to whether  one’s
hearing, reflection, and meditation  has the stable learning and  reflection
are stable. This is something that Yyou have to think about of what we  have
discussed  so  far.  The  three-fold  process  of   hearing,   ,   learning,
reflection,  and meditation does makes sense. Even just Bby  thinking  about
this, you can gain faith in studying,  and reflection, and so forth.

(2) Belief

[B2] Belief (mos pa)
[Root text: page 28]  Regarding the entity  of  belief,  the  Compendium  of
Knowledge says:

      QUESTION: What is belief?
      RESPONSE: It holds an ascertained thing to be just the way it has been
      ascertained. It has the function of non-captivation.
Just as it has been said above, it is a knower which holds the  object  that
has been ascertained by its valid cognition,  thinking,  "It  is  just  like
this  and  not  otherwise."  Here  its  function  is  specified   as   "non-
captivation,"(Page 28).

Again wWe can can look at belief in terms of the three features:
1. The object of this mind is something that has already  been  ascertained.
   beforehand.
2. The subjective aspect of this mind, in relation to its  with  the  object
   of this mind, understands the object to be,  “It is just  like  this  and
   not otherwise.”only liked this and not something else.
3. Its The function is non-captivation.

Here its function is specified as "non-captivation," because  when  one  has
gained firm belief in the object  that  one  has  ascertained,  an  opponent
cannot steer one away from it.  The function of belief is specified as  non-
captivation.
[Root text: page 28] Here its function is  specified  as  "non-captivation,”
because when one  has  gained  firm  belief  in  the  object  that  one  has
ascertained, an opponent  cannot  steer  one  away  from  it.  For  example,
reflecting  upon  the  difference  between  the  Buddhist  and  non-Buddhist
teachers in the context of going for refuge,  one  analyses,  "Which  is  an
infallible refuge?" and ascertains that only the Teacher, the Buddha, is  an
infallible refuge. Then, when the doctrine taught by him and  the  spiritual
community properly practicing this doctrine are also  ascertained  by  valid
cognition to be infallible refuges, a firm belief in them as  final  refuges
is gained. Thereupon, Forders and so forth cannot lead one  astray  and  one
has then joined the ranks of  Buddhists.  Based  upon  this,  all  wholesome
qualities will increase. Furthermore,  Engaging  in  the  Bodhisattva  Deeds
says (stanza 7.40):

      The Muni has taught that belief is the root
      Of all that belongs to the class of virtue,
      And the root of that is
      Constant meditation on the fruitional results (Page 28).

What is belief? It  Belief is a mind that holds on to an  object  that  hads
already been ascertained earlier, holding on to it to be  and  it  holds  on
to it as it is and not something else, ; “This object  is  only  liked  this
only.”.

It is important to have stable belief in the virtuous class of phenomena.
As said by Shantideva says in Engaging  in  the  Bodhisattva  Deeds,  it  is
belief here is the “root of all that belongs to the class of belief  in  the
class of virtue.”; it is a stable belief holding on to virtue.  The root  of
such stable  belief is the strong a conviction in cause and effect  and  the
workings of karma.
Belief is the root of all virtue. In order to be able to  strive  in  virtue
you need belief in it.
In order to have stable belief,  you  need  to  have  strong  conviction  in
karma; cause and effect.

In  the  previous  lesson,   we  saw  how  conviction  in  the  workings  of
actions/karkarma is the right correct worldly view. With such conviction  in
cause and effect and karma,  then one can then generate have aspiration  and
one can have belief.
Remember that Wwe had talked about inference  through  belief.  By  thinking
about this, Tthis is how you can generate inference through belief.

Question:Student: On page 26 of the text, can you please explain  the  term,
“utilisation,” of an object? [Root text: page 26]  Furthermore,  if  any  of
the five omnipresent mental factors are missing, then the utilization of  an
object will not be complete.
Can you please explain the term ‘utilization’ here?

Answer: In the context of the  lam-rim,  this  can  be  understood  to  mean
“enjoyment.” But here in this subject, we cannot say, “enjoyment.”  We  say,
“utilisation.” Khen Rinpoche: Here “long zhe” as a verb.  As  a  noun,  long
zhe, it is translated as enjoyment. To  enjoy  means  to  long  zhe  pa.  In
Lamrim context, you can say enjoy. But in this kind of  subject  you  cannot
say “enjoy”. Here “long zhe” is to utilize.

Questions: (1) I refer to materialistic feelings.  On  page  19,  what  does
Student:  [Root text:  page  19]  QUALM:  What  do  materialistic  and  non-
materialistic mean?
RESPONSE:  Feelings  that  are  concomitant  with  the   craving   for   the
contaminated appropriated aggregates are  called  "materialistic  feelings."
Feelings that are concomitant with the  exalted  wisdom  directly  realizing
selflessness are called "non-materialistic feelings."
1. Please elaborate “craving for the contaminated  appropriated  aggregates”
mean?
(2) 2. If the mental factor of intention  can  move  the  mind  towards  the
object, can it also able to move the mind away from the object?

Answers: (1) Khen Rinpoche: You can say that  materialistic  feelings  refer
to the mental factor of feeling that  is  concomitant  with  a  contaminated
consciousness and  non-materialistic  feelings  are  the  mental  factor  of
feeling that is concomitant with an uncontaminated wisdom.

(2) Intention moves the mind towards an  object.  When  you  move  the  mind
moves towards an object, essentially you are  moving  your  mind  away  from
another object.
If You can you think about how you move away from a non-virtuous e state  of
mind towards athe virtuous e state of mind. , then that would fit  what  you
have mentioned.

Intention is a mover. ; Iit moves the mind towards an object. If you  Tthink
about this: it, in order for your  mind  to  move  towards  an  the  object,
basically your mind has to are  moveing  away  from  something  else.  There
isn’t an intention that is stagnant and ddoes not n’t move but stay there.

Question: Student: When the time of  death  is  near,  ing,  you  crave  for
yourself to continue to live longer.  and Dduring the  bardo  state,  ;  you
also crave for a body and  to be quickly reborn to take  rebirth.  Can  this
be the “craving for the contaminated appropriated aggregates”?

Answer: Khen Rinpoche: When  we  talk  about  materialistic  feelings,  they
feelings  are  concomitant  with  craving.  There  are  different  kinds  of
craving: ; craving for the body, craving for existence,  and so  forth.  The
mMental  factor  of  feeling  that  is  concomitant  with   craving   is   a
materialistic feeling.

Question: Student: The observed object of a  sense  consciousness  would  be
athe sense object whereas the observed object of a mental  consciousness  is
a phenomenon source form.
For aAn eye consciousness apprehending blue, the observed object is blue.
For a A mental direct perceiver apprehending blue, the  observed  object  is
also blue.
Both observed objects are called blue.Are they  Is it the same blue?

Answer: Khen Rinpoche: Yes, they are it is the same blue.

Question: The objects of observation for both the  sense  consciousness  and
the mental consciousness are the same then. Student: The  sense  object  for
the five sense consciousnesses  there  are  the  respective  sense  objects,
blue, sound and so forth; whereas for a mental consciousness (conceptual  or
non-conceptual), the observed object is that object itself, blue, sound  and
so forth. So, it is still the same. So there  is  no  difference  between  a
sense object and a phenomenon source form and sense object?   would  not  be
different in that sense?


Answer: Khen Rinpoche: They are different.
Student: The observed object  condition  of  that  consciousnesses  and  the
sense object and the phenomenon source form, they are not the same? How  are
they different?
Khen Rinpoche: WWhat is a phenomenon source form? It Phenomenon source  form
is a form that is not the object of apprehension of a  sense  consciousness.
It can only be the object of apprehension of a mental consciousness.

We are not saying that whatever that appears to a sense  consciousness  does
not appear to a mental  consciousness.  When  we  are  talking  about  blue,
whether  it  is  an  eye  consciousness  apprehending  blue  or   a   mental
consciousness apprehending blue, the blue that is as the observed object  is
the same blue.


The form that appears to a conceptual  consciousness  apprehending  blue  is
blue. ; Iit is not athe phenomenon source form.
The  object  of  the   conceptual   consciousness   apprehending   blue   is
apprehending is not the blue that cannot appear to a sense consciousness.
This is clear iIf you know what is a  phenomenon  source  form  then  it  is
clear. What is itthe phenomenon source form??
It is a form that cannot be an object of a sense consciousness. It can  only
be a form for  a  mental  consciousness.  For  example,  the  elephant  that
appears in athe dream. The dream elephant is athe phenomenon source form.

Please continue to read the  text  on  your  own  on  the  division  of  the
respective mental factors. If you have any  questions  then  you  can  bring
them up in class.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------
---------------------------------------------------------
(For reference only: Minds and Mental Factor by Emily Hsu)






Translated by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme

Transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek, Vivien Ng, and Patricia Lee

Edited by Cecilia Tsong


[pic]
-----------------------
[1] Unspecified can also be translated as neutral.
[2]  Ven.  Tenzin  Gyurme  prefers  effort  to  be  translated   as   joyous
perseverance.

