Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Lorig/Edited/BP2 M2 L02 (final).doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:53:50.181398
================================================================================


Transcript of teachings by Khen Rinpoche Geshe Chonyi

Lesson No: 2                            Date: 21st June 2012

All page references in this lesson refer to Handout No. I:  An  Introduction
to Certain Buddhist Philosophical Concepts unless otherwise stated.

Page 2













Most of the information in this handout were covered in the previous  class.
The above table  shows  the  phenomena  that  are  mutually  inclusive  with
established base. We discussed most of them  except  for  hidden  phenomenon
that is also mutually inclusive with established  base,  i.e.,  it  has  the
same meaning as established base.

What is a hidden phenomenon? An inferential  valid  cogniser  realises  this
hidden phenomenon through the  medium  of  a  generic  image  (or  a  mental
image). It cannot realise a hidden phenomenon directly.   Because  a  hidden
phenomenon cannot be realised  by  an  inferential  valid  cogniser  without
depending on the medium of a mental image, therefore it is hidden.

When we refer to a hidden phenomenon, we are also referring to an  existent.
A hidden phenomenon and  an  existent  are  mutually  inclusive,    i.e.,  a
hidden phenomenon has the same meaning as an existent.

Page 3 (chart on next page)
The chart mentions that  manifest  phenomenon  is  mutually  inclusive  with
functioning thing. What is a manifest phenomenon? A manifest  phenomenon  is
an object that is directly realised by  a  direct  valid  cogniser.  When  a
direct valid cogniser realises a manifest phenomenon, it does  not  have  to
do so in dependence on a  mental  image.  Rather  it  perceives  the  object
directly. Therefore such an object is called a manifest phenomenon.













The chart also shows  other  phenomena  that  are  mutually  inclusive  with
functioning  thing.  They  are  impermanent  phenomenon,  product,  composed
phenomenon,  cause,  effect,  ultimate  truth,  specifically   characterised
phenomenon, and manifest phenomenon. They all refer to the same thing.

Page 4 (chart on next page)
Functioning thing or impermanent phenomenon can be divided into:
   1. Matter
   2. Consciousness
   3. Non-associated compositional factor

If the  phenomenon  in  question  is  a  functioning  thing  or  impermanent
phenomenon, it is necessarily matter,  consciousness,  or  a  non-associated
compositional factor. These divisions are exhaustive. You will not  find  an
impermanent phenomenon or a functioning thing  that  is  not  one  of  these
three.

These three divisions of a functioning thing are mutually  exclusive,  which
means that there isn’t a common locus between any of them, i.e.,   you  will
not be able to point to any object that is all three of these divisions.  If
you are able to point to a phenomenon that is all three of them, then  these
three divisions will not be mutually exclusive.

Matter
What is matter? Its definition is  that  which  is  atomically  established.
Matter refers to a phenomenon whose existence is established  by  atoms.  In
this system, matter is mutually inclusive with form.

Matter has two divisions:
   1. External matter
   2. Internal matter
The difference between  external  matter  and  internal  matter  depends  on
whether that matter is included within the continuum of the person or not.
An external  matter  is  matter  that  is  atomically  established  and  not
included within the continuum of a person.
   • Illustrations of external matter: earth, water, fire, wind.
   • The external objects of form source, sound source, smell source, taste
     source, and tangible source are also external matter.

An internal matter is matter that is included  within  the  continuum  of  a
person.
   •  Illustrations  of  internal  matter:  an  individual’s   contaminated
     physical aggregates.
   • Internal matter is the five sense powers: eye sense power,  ear  sense
     power, nose sense power, tongue sense power,  and  body  sense  power.
     These are also called the uncommon empowering conditions. This will be
     explained later. These five are internal matter because they are  form
     and are included within the continuum of a person.

Consciousness
As mentioned in the previous class,  consciousness,  awareness,  and  knower
are mutually inclusive.

Consciousness has two divisions:
   1. Sense consciousnesses
   2. Mental consciousness

For the sense consciousness, there are five sense consciousnesses:
1. Eye consciousness
2. Ear consciousness
3. Nose consciousness
4. Tongue consciousness
5. Body consciousness

Together with the mental consciousness, there are six consciousnesses.

How a consciousness is generated
In general, in order for a consciousness to be generated,  three  conditions
must be present:
   1. the observed object condition
   2. the uncommon empowering condition
   3. the immediately preceding condition

For example, in order for an  eye  consciousness  apprehending  form  to  be
generated, it needs the observed object condition, i.e., form. In  the  same
way:
   • In order for an ear consciousness to be generated, the observed object
     condition is sound.
   • In order for a nose consciousness to be generated, the observed object
     condition is smell.
   • In order for the tongue consciousness to be  generated,  the  observed
     object condition is taste.
   • In order for the body consciousness  to  be  generated,  the  observed
     object condition is tangible object.

In order for the five sense consciousnesses to  be  generated,  first  there
must be the observed object  conditions.  The  objects  of  the  five  sense
consciousnesses are external matter.

But just having the observed object condition is insufficient. In order  for
these sense consciousnesses  to  be  generated,  their  uncommon  empowering
conditions must also be present.  The  uncommon  empowering  conditions  are
essentially the five internal matters:
1. Eye sense power
2. Ear sense power
3. Nose sense power
4. Tongue sense power
5. Body sense power

|Sense consciousness|Observed object    |Uncommon empowering       |
|                   |condition          |condition                 |
|Eye consciousness  |Form               |Eye sense power           |
|Ear consciousness  |Sound              |Ear sense power           |
|Nose consciousness |Odour              |Nose sense power          |
|Tongue             |Taste              |Tongue sense power        |
|consciousness      |                   |                          |
|Body consciousness |Tangible object    |Body sense power          |

The production of an eye consciousness is dependent on the existence of  its
uncommon empowering condition, the eye sense power. Without  the  eye  sense
power, the eye consciousness cannot be generated.

The eye sense power is also called  a  clear  form.  In  dependence  on  its
uncommon empowering condition, the eye sense  power,  an  eye  consciousness
apprehending form can then apprehend form.  An eye sense  consciousness  can
only apprehend  form.  Why?  It  can  only  apprehend  form  because  it  is
dependent on its uncommon empowering condition and in this  case  it  is  an
eye sense power.  The  eye  consciousness  cannot,  for  example,  apprehend
smell. The reason  why  an  eye  consciousness  cannot  apprehend  smell  is
because of its uncommon empowering condition.

The eye consciousness apprehending form is generated in the aspect  of  form
due to its observed object condition, form.

An eye consciousness apprehending form is also generated in  the  aspect  of
that which is clear and knowing.
An eye consciousness apprehending  form  is  in  the  nature  of  clear  and
knowing, not because of its uncommon empowering condition  but  due  to  the
third condition, the immediately preceding condition.  That  refers  to  the
consciousness that immediately  precedes  the  generation  of  such  an  eye
consciousness.

The   consciousness   immediately   preceding   the   generation   of   this
consciousness is in the nature of clear and knowing. Due to  that,  when  an
eye consciousness arises, it is generated in the aspect  of  that  which  is
clear and knowing.

From this, you can see that for any particular  sense  consciousness  to  be
generated, a few conditions must come  together,  without  which  the  sense
consciousness will not arise. These three conditions  must  be  present  for
any sense consciousness to arise:
   1. the observed object condition
   2. the uncommon empowering condition
   3. the immediately preceding condition

Dependent-arising
For any functioning thing to come into existence, it  must  be  preceded  by
its own cause. In that sense, we  say  functioning  things  are  dependently
originated or dependently arisen on the level of cause and effect.  This  is
the coarsest level of the understanding of dependent-arising  in  the  sense
of dependence on causes and conditions.

Concordant causes
An impermanent phenomenon or functioning thing can be created or  come  into
existence in dependence on  its  cause.  In  fact,  it  can  only  arise  in
dependence on its concordant cause.

As  mentioned  in  the  previous  class,  when  you   look   at   form   and
consciousness,  from  the  moment  they  come  into  existence,   they   are
established  as  having  different  entities,  i.e.,  they  are   completely
distinct entities from one another.

Unlike matter or form that is atomically established, consciousness has  the
nature of clarity and knowing in the aspect of non-obstructiveness.   It  is
likened to vacuity or voidness.

If you were  to  ask,  “Why  is  matter  atomically  established?  Why  does
consciousness have the nature of clarity and knowing?” There is  no  special
reason. They are like that by nature and are  established  as  having  those
particular natures or entities.

Ignorance and its antidote
Form and consciousness arise in dependence on their concordant causes.  When
you understand the implication of this, only then will you be able to  begin
to understand how there can be past and future lives.  One  can  then  think
more deeply about happiness, suffering, and reincarnation.

Happiness can only arise in dependence on its  concordant  cause.  Suffering
can only arise in dependence on its own cause as well. When  you  understand
the concept of causality, there is something for you  to  think  about.  All
the sufferings and problems that  we  do  not  want  arise  from  their  own
causes. They have to be the concordant causes of suffering.

When we analyse deeply, we can only conclude that the main  culprits  behind
all these sufferings are our karma and afflictions. We  have  seen  this  in
the previous module on the lam-rim.

Karma and afflictions are  the  principal  causes  of  suffering.  When  you
analyse this deeply, the very root of all  the  problems  is  the  ignorance
apprehending a self. The ignorance that is the apprehension  of  a  self  is
not just a mere state  of  not  knowing  something.  Rather  this  ignorance
apprehending a self  is  a  fundamental  misapprehension  of  the  self  and
reality.

What we have to establish is that this  ignorance  is  fundamentally  wrong.
Whether ignorance can be removed or not depends on whether we can  find  its
antidote.  This  antidote  has  to  be  the  complete  direct  opposite   to
ignorance. In this case, the antidote is a wisdom  consciousness.  If  there
is a wisdom consciousness that can  harm  ignorance,  we  can  increase  the
strength or power of this wisdom consciousness. The  more  we  are  able  to
increase the power of  this  wisdom  consciousness,  commensurate  with  the
strength of this  wisdom  consciousness,  the  more  we  are  able  to  harm
ignorance, the root of suffering.

Fruits of valid cognition
The purpose here is to realise reality through valid  cognition.  First,  we
have to realise what exactly exists in reality. By realising reality  as  it
is through a valid cogniser, we can remove all misapprehensions of  reality,
ignorance, and so forth. On the basis  of  this,  we  can  then  talk  about
becoming enlightened.

When we talk about the object of knowledge or object of comprehension,  that
is mutually inclusive with established base,  the  phenomenon  that  can  be
known and realised, that basis can  be  divided  into  the  two  truths  and
further divided into the four truths.

The object to be realised, the basis or the two  truths:  how  can  the  two
truths be realised as they  are?  The  two  truths  are  realised  by  their
respective  valid  cognisers.  Once  they  are  realised,  one   continually
familiarises with those realisations through valid cognition.  This  is  how
one can posit the possibility of achieving liberation from cyclic  existence
and full enlightenment. These are said to be the fruits of valid  cognition.
 Why? Because such states are  the  results  of  having  accustomed  oneself
continuously with reality through valid cognition.

Clear and knowing
We  usually  talk  about   the   six   consciousnesses:   the   five   sense
consciousnesses and the mental  consciousness.  A  mental  consciousness  is
generated in dependence  on  its  own  uncommon  empowering  condition,  the
mental sense power.  This is what  distinguishes  the  mental  consciousness
from the sense consciousnesses.

One can divide consciousness into: (1) sense consciousnesses and (2)  mental
consciousness, or you can look at consciousness in terms of:  (1)  the  mind
and (2) the mental factors.

When you look at the definition of consciousness,  it  is:  “That  which  is
clear and knowing.”

There are different ways of explaining how the mind  is  clear  or  has  the
entity of clarity.
   • It is clear in the sense that it is not atomically established,  i.e.,
     it is free from been atomically established (or made up of atoms).
   • Another way of explaining “clear” is related to the fact that when any
     object is brought to the attention of the mind, it can appear  to  the
     mind.
   • Some of you may have heard the statement, “The nature of the  mind  is
     clear light.” One way of explaining that is that the afflictions  that
     are adventitious have not entered into the  deepest  recesses  of  the
     mind. That means the mind by nature is not afflicted.

It is not easy to pinpoint exactly and to be able to say the  mind  is  like
this or it is like that. We can say however that the mind has the entity  of
being clear and knowing. It has clarity and it knows.

Perhaps we can say “knowing” here refers to realising an object.  Or  is  it
referring to the fact that objects can appear to the mind?

We will discuss this further when we begin with the actual  topic.  We  have
not yet started with the topic. We are just covering the preliminaries  now.
 That discussion will come later. This is only an introduction.

Non-associated compositional factor

      Definition:  A  composed  phenomenon  which  is  neither  matter   nor
      consciousness
      A. Non-associated compositional factors which  are  persons  (or  more
      exactly, all living beings)
      B. Non-associated compositional factors which are  not  persons  (e.g.
      time)


Any impermanent phenomenon or functioning thing that is neither  matter  nor
consciousness is included among non-associated compositional factor.
Illustrations of a non-associated compositional  factor  that  are  persons:
cow, horse, and so forth. In this context, “person” is not limited  to  only
human beings but includes all living beings.

Basis of designation
The implication here when we say a  horse  or  a  cow  is  a  non-associated
compositional factor is that it means a horse or cow  is  neither  form  nor
consciousness. When we look at a horse, instinctively we think its  form  or
body is the horse, but that is only the horse’s form aggregate.  It  is  not
the horse. What our eye consciousness sees is  the  horse’s  body,  a  form.
That is the basis of designation  in  dependence  upon  which  we  label  or
impute “horse.”  Therefore the horse’s body is not the horse.  It is form.

In a similar way, when we say “I,” “I” is not the body  or  mind.  The  body
and mind are the bases of designation in dependence  upon  which  we  impute
“I” or “self.”

We will talk more about the nature of the “I,” what it is  exactly  and  how
it exists  in  the  next  module  on  tenets.  Depending  on  the  different
philosophical systems,  the  Buddhist  tenets,  there  is  much  debate  and
disagreement as to who we are, the nature of the “I.”

Most of the tenets encounter the fundamental difficulty of  not  being  able
to posit an “I” that is not one with the basis of designation. Most of  them
feel that there must be one thing that is the “I.” In the end, the  majority
of the tenets assert the mental consciousness to be the “I.”

However according to the Consequence Middle Way School  that  is  the  final
view, the “I” is that  which  is  merely  imputed  in  dependence  upon  the
aggregates, the basis of designation. The “I” does not exist from  the  side
of the basis of designation. That is the fundamental difference.

There are also non-associated compositional factors that  are  not  persons,
e.g., time.

As a generality, a  product  or  composed  phenomenon  is  a  non-associated
compositional factor that is not a person.

Question: Why is a product or  impermanent  phenomena  as  a  generality  an
illustration of a non-associated compositional factor?

Answer: When we talk about an impermanent phenomenon  as  a  generality,  it
encompasses everything that is an impermanent phenomenon. Having said  that,
if I were to ask, “Is impermanent phenomena consciousness?” what would  your
answer be?

Khen Rinpoche: The question is not asking whether it is necessarily so.

Is impermanent phenomenon consciousness? Is it form?
Khen Rinpoche: Therefore there is only one answer left.

When you want to learn, you have to memorise these terms. You have  to  have
a rough idea  of  the  divisions  of  a  functioning  thing  or  impermanent
phenomenon: matter, consciousness, and non-associated compositional  factor.
You have to remember them. You also have to memorise the phenomena that  are
mutually inclusive with functioning thing: impermanent phenomenon,  product,
composed phenomenon and so forth.

Likewise,  there  are  also  phenomena  that  are  mutually  inclusive  with
permanent  phenomenon:  non-produced  phenomenon,   uncomposed   phenomenon,
conventional  truth,  phenomenon  that  is   a   non-thing   and   generally
characterised phenomenon (as shown in the chart below on page 5).


Mutually inclusive means that these are different ways of  saying  the  same
thing. Some of these words are new to you but you have no choice,  you  have
to memorise them.

Page 6

      Another way of dividing Object of Knowledge


      Singular phenomenon – a phenomenon which is not diverse e.g. existent,
      person, etc.


      One with pot – a phenomenon which is not diverse with pot, i.e. pot


      Different phenomenon – phenomena which are diverse e.g.  existent  and
      object of knowledge, pot and pillar, etc.


      Different from pot – a phenomenon which is diverse from pot

For any phenomenon that exists, when divided, it is either:
   1. a singular phenomenon (or one)
   2. a different phenomenon (or many)

If it exists, it is either single (or singular) or different. It  is  either
one of these two.
   • For example, when we say “object of knowledge,” it is  single.  It  is
     one, not many because it is one with itself.
   • When we say object of knowledge and established base,  these  two  are
     different. They  are  not  the  same.  They  are  not  one.  They  are
     different.
         o Are “object of knowledge and established base one? No, they  are
           different.
         o Are they different in meaning? No, they have the same meaning.
      So, you must  differentiate  between  being  different  and  having  a
      different meaning.

When the phenomenon in question has the same  name  and  the  same  meaning,
that means it is the same thing. It is one with itself.  It  is  a  singular
phenomenon. It is one.

When the phenomena in question have different names and different  meanings,
they are diverse. They are different. They are not  the  same  and  are  not
one.

You must memorise what I have just said:
   • A singular phenomenon: It is one with itself because it has  the  same
     name and same meaning.
   • When you compare two  objects,  when  they  have  different  names  or
     different meanings, they are different.
   • But if the two objects are different, it  does  not  necessarily  mean
     that they have different meanings.

Page 6 – 7

      THE COMPARISON OF PHENOMENA


      The boundaries of pervasion or extension of a phenomenon is its  range
      – what it pervades,  what  it  includes,  and  what  it  excludes.  By
      understanding clearly a phenomenon’s boundaries of  pervasion  one  is
      able to ascertain the scope of that phenomenon. The essential tool  in
      this investigation is the  analytical  comparison  of  phenomenon.  By
      comparing two phenomena and establishing their relative boundaries  of
      pervasion, the limits of each phenomenon in relation to the other, one
      comes to understand the points of similarity and dissimilarity between
      them.


      The comparison of  phenomena  presupposes  that  those  phenomena  are
      different in the sense that they are not exactly  the  same  from  the
      point of view of name and meaning. Phenomena which are  not  different
      are one. A pot is the only thing which is one  with  pot,  for  it  is
      exactly the same as a pot in name and meaning.  The  investigation  of
      differences does not address the cases of phenomena which are  exactly
      the same. There is no difference between a pot  and  a  pot.  Any  two
      phenomena must compare in one of the following ways:






      1. Mutually inclusive phenomena
      Things which are mutually inclusive are different phenomena which have
      all eight approaches of pervasion.  The  Tibetan  term  for  “mutually
      inclusive” literally means  “the  same  meaning”.  Mutually  inclusive
      phenomena are different only in the sense of not having the same name,
      for their meanings  –  the  objects  which  are  included  within  the
      extension of each – are exactly  the  same.  Also,  any  two  mutually
      inclusive phenomena have all eight approaches of pervasion.  That  is,
      whatever is a p is necessarily a q (and vice versa), if  a  p  exists,
      then a q exists (and vice versa).


      That  mutually  inclusive  phenomena  have  all  eight  approaches  of
      pervasion entails that there is a common  locus;  that  is,  there  is
      something which is those two mutually inclusive  phenomena.  A  common
      locus is not something that exists halfway  between  the  two  and  is
      neither. Rather, it is something which is both of them.

Mutually inclusive means having  the  same  meaning,  e.g.,  an  impermanent
phenomenon and a product. An impermanent phenomenon  is  mutually  inclusive
with a product. Although they have different names,  essentially  they  have
the same meaning. This means that:
   1. If it is an impermanent phenomenon, it is necessarily a product.
   2. If it is a product, it is necessarily an impermanent phenomenon.

The relationship exists in the form of “whatever is a p is necessarily  a  q
(and vice versa)” and in terms of existing and not existing:
      • If this exists that also exists
      • If that exists, this also exists
      • If this does not exist, that also does not exist

Page 7

      Mutually exclusive phenomena


      Mutually exclusive phenomena are  those  which  are  different  and  a
      common locus of them is not possible. There is nothing that is both  a
      p and a q.

With regard to a mutually exclusive phenomenon, the basis of  comparison  is
that there must be two different objects. There cannot  be  a  common  locus
between the two, i.e., you cannot point  to  something  that  is  both.  For
example, comparing an impermanent phenomenon  and  a  permanent  phenomenon,
these two are different. Not only are they different, you will not  be  able
to find a phenomenon that is both impermanent and permanent. In that  sense,
they are mutually exclusive.

You should take  note  however  that  this  does  not  mean  that  when  two
different objects are compared, they  are  necessarily  mutually  exclusive.
For example, when you compare an object  of  knowledge  and  an  impermanent
phenomenon, they are different but are they mutually  exclusive?  An  object
of knowledge and an impermanent phenomenon are different, but they  are  not
mutually exclusive because there is a common locus between them. That  means
there  is  a  phenomenon  that  is  both  an  object  of  knowledge  and  an
impermanent phenomenon.





      2.     Three possibilities


      If there are three possibilities between two phenomena, there must  be
      a common locus of the two and there are two points of  difference,  at
      least one of which is something which is one of the two phenomena  but
      not the other. The three possibilities are such that:


        1. There is something which is both a p and a q.


        2. There is something which is a p but not a q


        3. There is something which is a q but not a p.


      3.       Four possibilities


      If there are four possibilities between two phenomena, all the  points
      of similarity and difference are exemplified. The  four  possibilities
      are such that:


        1. There is something which is both a p and a q.


        2. There is something which is a p but not a q.


        3. There is something which is a q but not a p.


        4. There is something which is neither a p nor a q.


When  any  two  phenomena  in  comparison  are  mutually  inclusive,  it  is
unnecessary to talk about the three  or  four  possibilities  because  those
possibilities do not apply.

When any two phenomena  in  comparison  are  mutually  exclusive,  the  four
possibilities are eliminated. There may be an occasion where  there  can  be
three possibilities between them.

The purpose of investigating whether, in  the  comparison  of  two  objects,
there are three  or  four  possibilities  (or  permutations)  is  a  way  of
analysing reality so that we can gain a deeper and clearer understanding  of
exactly how things are.

Question  from  Khen  Rinpoche:  Compare  an  object  of  knowledge  and  an
impermanent phenomenon.  What  is  their  relationship?  Are  they  mutually
exclusive or mutually inclusive?  Are  there  three  or  four  possibilities
between them?

Are an object of knowledge and an impermanent phenomenon different? Yes.

Are they mutually exclusive?  No.

When I ask you, “Are an object of knowledge and  an  impermanent  phenomenon
different?” immediately you must know the reason for saying yes.

What is the reason that they are different?  They have different  names  and
different meanings.

Are they mutually exclusive? Why are they not mutually exclusive?

Khen Rinpoche: There is an object that can be both. That  is  why  they  are
not mutually exclusive.

You say they are  not  mutually  exclusive  because  you  can  point  to  an
illustration  that  is  both  an  object  of   knowledge   and   impermanent
phenomenon. Give an illustration of something that is both.

How many permutations are there  between  an  object  of  knowledge  and  an
impermanent phenomenon?  Three or four?

1.  Is  there  something  that  is  both  an  object  of  knowledge  and  an
   impermanent phenomenon? Yes.
2. Is there something  that  is  an  object  of  knowledge  but  is  not  an
   impermanent phenomenon? Yes.
3. Is there something that is an impermanent phenomenon but  not  an  object
   of knowledge? No.
4. Is there something  that  is  neither  an  object  of  knowledge  nor  an
   impermanent phenomenon? Yes.

There  is  something  that  is  not  an  object  of  knowledge  and  not  an
impermanent phenomenon.

Khen Rinpoche: A sky flower?  All right. .

Especially when it comes to comparing different objects and phenomena,  this
is a method for us to have a clearer idea of what  exactly  we  are  talking
about. It makes a real difference when we analyse in this way.

For example: comparing matter and consciousness, how many  possibilities  or
permutations are there?

   1. Is there something that is both form and consciousness? No.
   2. Is there something that is form but not consciousness?  Yes.  E.g.,  a
      microphone.
   3. Is there something that is consciousness but not form? Yes.
   4. Is there something that is neither form nor consciousness? Yes.

There isn’t anything that is both matter and consciousness. I  have  already
mentioned this very  clearly  just  now  when  we  were  talking  about  the
divisions of a functioning thing. Matter, consciousness, and  non-associated
compositional factor are mutually exclusive.

You have to study the  handouts  thoroughly.  You  have  no  choice  but  to
memorise the terms. On that basis, you then try to look at the  relationship
between two objects and compare whether they are mutually exclusive  and  if
so, how many possibilities there are between them. It is not  difficult.  It
is just a matter of getting used to it.

If you want to continue with these studies, you have to memorise the  terms.
There is no choice. It is difficult in the beginning but if you don’t do  it
now, you will never learn anything as we move on, because  you  will  always
get stuck. You cannot even get pass the terms themselves so you  can  forget
about learning their meanings. You have to memorise  these  terms  from  the
onset so that you will not be stuck when we talk about them in the future.

Page 1

     There are four Buddhist tenet systems in ascending order:


   • The Great Exposition School / Vaibhashika
         • The Sutra School / Sauntrantika (divided  into  those  following
           scripture  and those following reasoning)


   • The Mind-only School / Cittamatra
         • The Middle Way School / Madhyamika (divided  into  the  Autonomy
           Middle Way School and the Consequence Middle Way School)


     The following presentation is from the viewpoint of the  Proponents  of
     Sutra Following Reasoning.

You also have to memorise the names of the  four  Buddhist  tenets  in  both
English and Sanskrit. We will look at them in detail as we move  along.  You
must put in the effort to memorise whatever is in this handout.    You  will
see the benefit when we start with the subject proper.  Otherwise  you  will
have difficulties later on.

Question: My question refers to the three possibilities:
1. There is something that is both a p and a q
2. There is something that is a p but not a q
3. There is something that is a q but not a p
In comparing matter and consciousness, you cannot  have  something  that  is
both a p and a q. In this case, can we say,  “There  is  something  that  is
both a p and a q OR there is something that is neither a p nor a q”?

Answer: Yes.

Question: What is the mental sense power?

Answer: We will cover this later.

Question: A hidden phenomenon that is mutually  inclusive  with  established
base seems to be a subset of established base.
Answer: First thing to  remember  is  that  hidden  phenomenon  is  mutually
inclusive with established base. With  regard  to  any  illustration  of  an
established base, that object has to be a hidden phenomenon. For example,  a
horse is an illustration of an established base and therefore it has  to  be
a hidden phenomenon. Why is a horse a hidden phenomenon? That is for you  to
figure out.

Is a horse a manifest phenomenon? Yes.

A horse is both a hidden phenomenon and a manifest phenomenon:
   • A horse is a hidden phenomenon  because  when  it  is  realised  by  a
     thought consciousness realising it, that thought consciousness  cannot
     realise it directly but can only do so through the medium of a  mental
     image. Therefore a horse is a hidden phenomenon.
   • But a horse is also a manifest phenomenon because it can  be  realised
     directly by a valid cogniser. Therefore a horse  is  also  a  manifest
     phenomenon.

Question: Do all objects have to be realised by a thought consciousness?

Answer: There isn’t any  phenomenon  that  is  not  realised  by  a  thought
consciousness. If it is a  phenomenon,  it  is  necessarily  realised  by  a
thought consciousness.

It will all become clearer as we move along. Please look at your handout.




Translated by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme

Transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek, Vivien Ng and Patricia Lee

Edited by Cecilia Tsong



