Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Lorig/Edited/BP2 M2 L05 (final).pdf
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:53:49.814085
================================================================================

Amitabha Buddhist Centre                               Second Basic Pro gram – Module 2  
                                The Study of Mind and Its Functions  
Lesson 5  
Page 1 of 11 Transcript of teachings by Khen Rinpoche Geshe 
Chonyi  
 
Lesson No: 5          Date: 3rd July 2012  
 
All page references in this lesson refer to Handout No. 3 dated 3rd July 
2012: The Study of Mind and its Functions  (Object Possessor)  unless 
otherwise stated.  
 
Question:  It was mentioned i n the previous lesson  that, when an object is 
divided into object and object possessor, whatever is  a mind (or 
consciousness) is necessarily categorised as an object possessor and  
whatever is a non -mind is categorised as an ob ject.  
 
Today’s h andout s hows that when an object possessor is divided into 
three , there are: person, awareness, and expressive sound. Person and 
expressive sound are both non-mind s and yet they are not object s. How 
then are they classified?  
 
Answer:  In the two -fold division of object and object possessor, an  object 
possessor is necessarily a consciousness. Within this two -fold division of 
object and object possessor, person and expressive sound belong to 
object s.  
 
If you were to ask, “In general, aren’t  person s and expressive sound s 
object possessor s?” Yes, in general, person s and expressive sound s are 
object possessor s.  
 
****************  
 
The topic we are studying in this module, the presentation of the mind 
and its functions, is challenging because we  are talking about the mind. 
Simply having an idea of the presentation of the mind is difficult  as, 
generally speaking, this is not something most people will pay attention 
to. So this is a new subject for most people.  
 
You have to understand that wheneve r we look at the presentation of the 
mind, it is not an easy subject  and it cannot be explained by using  simple 
words. If you expect this subject to be e xplained by using simple words 
and th ink that you can understand it just by hearing these simple terms,  
that is not p ossible.  
 
I have mentioned before that all the various topics  are closely related to 
one another. W hat we are studying here, the presentation of the mind , is 
closely related to the topic of the next module  on Buddhist philosophy , 
tenets . In fact whatever subjects , be it the stages of the path to 
enlightenment or engaging in the bodhisattva deeds, all these topics are 
interlinked.  
 
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                               Second Basic Pro gram – Module 2  
                                The Study of Mind and Its Functions  
Lesson 5  
Page 2 of 11 It is extremely important to understand the mean ing of direct perception, 
i.e., r ealising an object d irectly. I t is also extremely important to 
understand how a conceptual consciousness reali ses its object. This is an 
extremely important topic and it is something we have to continue to 
learn, to think about , and to discuss  with one another .  
 
We had discussed a specifically characteri sed phenomenon. Why is it 
called this? One of the reasons is this: a  specifically characteri sed 
phenomenon is an object that has the potential from its own side to cast 
an aspect of its uncommon nature to the consciousness perceiving it . This 
is the implication  of the word s, “specifically  characteri sed,” i.e., it has the 
potential from its own side to cast an aspect of its uncommon nature to 
the consciousness that perceives it.  
 
A generally characteri sed phenomenon is not like that. A generally 
characteri sed phenomenon does not have the potential from its own side 
to cast an aspect of its uncommon nature to the consciousness perceiving 
it. Rather the mind is involved, i.e., it has to be imputed by the mind. A 
generally characterised phen omenon can only be known by involving the 
mind imputing it. You may recall the definition of a generally 
characterised phenomenon that was covered in our first two lessons1. It is 
a phenomenon whose nature is completed by the mind imputing it.  
 
So you can see that there is a difference between a specifically 
characteri sed phenomenon and  a generally characteri sed phenomenon.  
 
(Khen Rinpoche checks whether any student has memorised the 
definition of a generally characterised phenomenon).  
 
During the time w hen you are looking at blue, there is a consciousness to 
which the blue is appearing. B lue appear s very clearly to this 
consciousness.  
 
But when you close your eye s and think of blue , what comes to the mind? 
The blue that appears to the mind is not as clear  as the blue that appears 
to the eye consciousness directly perceiving it.  
 
We will talk about this later again. Seeing the difference between a 
conceptual and a non-conceptual consciousness is very important but it 
is very challenging . You have to spend a lot of time thinking about it to 
get a clear understanding of this topic . 
 
A conceptual consciousness can only  engage its object through the 
medium of a meaning generality or mental image. A  conceptual 
consciousness cannot engage its object nakedly as it  is, i.e., it cannot 
engage it directly. It has to do so through the m edium of a mental image 
unlike direct perception.  
 
                                                           
1 A phenomenon that is merely imputed by a term or thought consciousness and is not 
established as a specifically characterised phenomenon.   
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                               Second Basic Pro gram – Module 2  
                                The Study of Mind and Its Functions  
Lesson 5  
Page 3 of 11  
When you close your eye s and think of blue, for the concept of blue to 
arise, there has to be an appearance of blue before  we can conceive of 
blue. When we conceive of blue, the appearance of blue has to arise before  
the mind is able to engage blue.  
 
This appearance of blue to the conceptual (or thought ) consciousness 
apprehending blue consists of two parts: (1) one part is blue and (2) 
another part is opposite from non-blue.  
 
Page 1 : Definition of a person  
When object possessors are divided, there are three:  
 person  
 awareness  
 expressive sound  
 
Person, awareness , and expressive sound are all object possessor s 
because they possess thei r respective objects.  
 
The definition of person  is: a being imputed in dependence upon any of its five 
aggregates.  
 
An illustration is a being who possesses a basis of one of the three realms.  
 
The definition of a person is a being imputed in dependence u pon any of 
its five aggregates . The definition does not say, “in dependence upon all of 
the five aggregates. ” A person is not necessarily  a being imputed in 
dependence upon the five aggregates. Therefore the definition of a person 
is a being imputed in dep endence upon any of its five aggregates. That is 
the reason for saying “any.”  
 
Why is a person not a being imputed in dependence upon the five 
aggregates? One should be able to understand this b y looking at the 
illustration  given. The illustration of a per son is a being who possesses a 
basis of one of the three realms  that are the desire, form , and formless  
realms.  
 
For beings of the formless realm, you cannot posit a form aggregate  
because in the formless realms , there is no form. Therefore a person of a 
formless realm can only be a being that is imputed in dependence upon 
the remaining four aggregates.  
 
Self, I, person, and b eing are mutually inclusive.  
 
Question:  All the lower tenets assert that the person is a subtle 
consciousness, a mind -basis -of-all, and so forth. I t seems to me that a 
person is a consciousness for all these lower schools. Would there then be 
a contradiction if a person is classified as a non -associated compositional 
factor and a person imputed in dependence upon the five aggregates?  
 
Answer : The definition of a person  here is a being imputed in dependence 
upon any of its five aggregates. This is how all the Buddhist tenets would 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                               Second Basic Pro gram – Module 2  
                                The Study of Mind and Its Functions  
Lesson 5  
Page 4 of 11 identify a person. To them a person is a being imputed in dependence 
upon any of its five aggregates.   
 
If you were to look at the assertion s of the respective tenets as to what the 
illustration of a person is, different illustrations are posited by the 
different tenets. Many of them assert that the illustration of a person is 
the consciousness because the majority of the tenets believe that the 
imputed object when sought can be  and has to be found. They give the 
consciousness as the illustration of a person . That means a person is the 
consciousness . If that is the case, a person cannot be a non -associated 
compo sitional factor.  
 
Then how should we look at th e definition of a person given here? You can 
say that this is the general procedure of all  the tenets. One can also look 
at it as being the actual way in which a person exists.  
 
For those tenets that posit t he illustration of a person to be the 
consciousness, then you will have to say a person is the consciousness.  
 
This will be covered in more detail in the future. It is not possible to 
understand this right now because when you think about what a person 
is, it is very profound. In order to understand what a person is , you have 
to understand the assertions of the various different Buddhist 
philosophical systems or tenets.  The illustration of the person varies 
depending on the tenet system in question .  
 
Some assert the person to be the body . Many others assert the person to 
be the consciousness and among the different types of consciousnesses, it 
is the mental consciousness. What exactly then is the person? Most 
people think that it is the mental consciousness . There is one particular 
school that asserts that it is not the mental consciousness . It has to be 
something different  and that is called the mind -basis -of-all.  
 
But all these assertions are not the final view because they can be 
negated thr ough using re asoning whereby  you will arrive at the assertion s 
of the highest school, the Consequence Middle Way School (CMWS). For 
them, a person is a non-associated compositional factor . A person is the 
“I”. What is the person o r the “I”? The “I” is that which is mer ely imputed 
in dependence upon the aggregates.  
 
All these  points will be discussed further in the next module  on tenets.  
 
Page 2 : Valid cogniser  
An awareness can be divided into (1) a valid cogni ser and (2) a non-valid 
awareness.   
 
What is a valid cogni ser? The d efinition of a valid cogni ser is that it is a  
new incontrovertible knower. In order for an awareness to be a valid 
cogni ser, three features must be present :  
1. it must be n ew 
2. it is i ncontrovertible  (or infallible ), i.e., it knows the object as it is   
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                               Second Basic Pro gram – Module 2  
                                The Study of Mind and Its Functions  
Lesson 5  
Page 5 of 11 3. it is a k nower  
 
When an awareness possesses these three features , that awareness is a 
valid cogni ser.  
 
This definition of a valid cogni ser, a new incontrovertible knower , is 
accepted by the majority of the tenets, starting from the Autonomy Middle 
Way S chool (AMWS) and the tenets below it.  
 
The AMWS and all the tenets below it assert that , in order for an 
awareness to be a valid cogni ser, it has to be “new,” i.e., it refers only to 
the first  (or initial) moment of reali sing th e object.  
 
On the other ha nd the CMWS asserts that as long as the awareness 
realises its object, it is a valid cogni ser, i.e., a valid cogni ser is not 
confined to the very first moment of reali sing its object.  
 
Each feature in the definition of a valid cogni ser, i.e., a new 
incont rovertible knower , eliminates something  from being a valid 
cogniser : 
 
“New” eliminates that subsequent cognisers are valid cognisers.  
 
“Incontrovertible ” eliminates that correctly assuming consciousnesses are valid 
cognisers.  
 
“Knower ” eliminates that phys ical sense powers are valid cognisers.  
 
In order to understand what these three features mean, you first have to 
understand what are a subsequent cogni ser and a correctly assuming 
consciousness . This will come later.  
 
All other awarenesses that are not val id cogni sers are non-valid 
awarenesses. If the definition of a valid cogni ser is a new incontrovertible 
knower, the non -valid awareness is a knower that is not new and 
incontrovertible , i.e., that which is not a valid cogni ser.  
 
There are two types of val id cogni sers: 
1. a direct valid cogni ser  
2. an inferential valid cogni ser 
 
Page 3: Seven -fold division of consciousness  
 
Consciousness  Definition  
1. Direct valid cogni ser  a new incontrovertible knower that is free of 
conceptuality  
2. Inferential valid 
cogni ser  a new incontrovertible determinative knower 
that is directly produced in dependence on a 
correct sign that is its basis  
3. Subsequent cogni ser  a knower that realises what has already been 
realised  
4. Correctly assuming a factually concordant determinative knower 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                               Second Basic Pro gram – Module 2  
                                The Study of Mind and Its Functions  
Lesson 5  
Page 6 of 11 Consciousness  Definition  
consciousness  that is controvertible with regard to 
determining its object  
5. An a wareness to 
which an object 
appears and is not 
ascertained  a knower that is a common locus of (1) having a 
clear appearance of the specifically 
character ised phenomenon that is its object of 
engagement and (2) being unable to induce 
ascertainment with respect to the specifically 
characteri sed phenomenon that is its object of 
engagement .  
6. Doubting 
consciousness  a knower that has qualms two -pointedly by  its 
own power  
7. Wrong 
consciousness  a knower that engages its object erroneously  
 
1. Direct valid cogniser  
A direct valid cogni ser is a valid cogni ser but that is not sufficient. It is a 
valid cogni ser and , at the same time , it is free of conceptual ity. That 
means a direct valid cogni ser is necessarily  a non-conceptual  
consciousness .  
 
2. Inferential valid cogniser  
The other valid cogni ser is an inferential valid cogni ser that is a new 
incontrovertible determinative knower that is directly produced i n 
dependence on a correct sign that is its basis.   
 
A valid cogni tion that is conceptual in nature is an inferential valid 
cogni ser.  
 
For e xample: there is the thought thinking that there is a fire in the 
mountain pass. You don’t see the fire directly but  you reali se that there is 
a fire in the mountain pass in dependence upon seeing the presence of 
smoke. In dependence on seeing smoke as the reason, you reali se that 
there is a fire in the mountain pass. This thought reali sing that there is a 
fire in the m ountain pass that arose in dependence upon seeing the 
presence of smoke is an example of  an inferential valid cogni ser.  
 
This inferential valid cogniser is not a direct perceiver. It is a conceptual 
consciousness but it does realise fire. This inferential  valid cogniser does 
not perceive fire nakedly but it apprehends fire through a meaning 
generality (or mental image) of fire.  
 
3. Subsequent cogniser  
This is a knower that realises what has already been reali sed. A 
subsequent cogni ser does not refer to the  first moment or the initial 
realisation of the object. It is simply realising what has been reali sed 
earlier by valid cogni tion. It is the subsequent reali sation of the same 
object.  
 
A subsequent cogni ser is therefore not a valid cogni ser because it is n ot 
the initial realisation of the object . Rather  it is a knower that reali ses an 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                               Second Basic Pro gram – Module 2  
                                The Study of Mind and Its Functions  
Lesson 5  
Page 7 of 11 object that has already been reali sed, i.e., it is not  new and therefore it is 
not a valid cogni ser.  
 
There are subsequent cogni sers that are conceptual consciousnesses and 
there are subsequent cogni sers that are non -conceptual consciousnesses.  
 
4. An awareness to which an object appears and is not ascertained  
(hereinafter referred to as AAA) 
This is a knower that is a common locus of :  
(1) having a clear appearance of the sp ecifically characteri sed 
phenomenon that i s its object of engagement and  
(2) being unable to induce  ascertainment with respect to the specifically 
characteri sed phenomenon that is its object of engagement.  
 
Here is an i llustration of an AAA: imagine that your mind is completely 
engrossed due to your attachment to a particular object or you are 
focussing on someone with whom you are very angry. During that time, 
when you are either very engrossed in a particular object or very angry, 
when your mind is comp letely preoccupied , a visible form appear s to your 
eye consciousness or a sound appears to your ear consciousness. While 
they appear, you d o not ascertain either that visible form that appears to 
your eye consciousness or the sound that appears to your ear 
consciousness at that time.  
 
Khen Rinpoche: When my mother watches her favourite Indian series on 
TV, she  is totally focus ed on the TV. Even when som eone walks in front of 
her, nothing distracts her. When someone says something, she seems to 
hear and she will nod her head but I am not sure she has heard anything. 
That is an AAA. She doesn’t like all kinds of TV programmes, just that 
particular Indian serial. It is a family drama of some kind. It is like how 
some Chinese people like to follow the Korean dra mas. I noticed that when 
my mother is watching this serial, nothing can disturb her.  
 
An AAA is necessar ily a non-conceptual consciousness.  
 
5. Correctly assuming consciousness  
This is a factually concordant determinative knower that is controvertible 
with regard to determining its object.  
 
An illustration: a person has not reali sed the impermanence of sound but 
this person firmly believes , without any reason, that sound is 
impermanent.  
 
A correctly assuming consciousness is necessar ily a conceptual 
consc iousness.  
 
When we look at the definition of a correctly assuming consciousness,  
how do we know that it i s a conceptual consciousness? The clue is in the 
word, “determinative .” 
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                               Second Basic Pro gram – Module 2  
                                The Study of Mind and Its Functions  
Lesson 5  
Page 8 of 11 
In Handout No. 22 we discussed the appearing object, the object of 
engagement , and the determined  or conceived  object. It was pointed out 
then that the determined object does not exist for direct perceiver s. It only 
exists for conceptual consciousnesses.    
  
6. Doubting consciousness  
This is a knower that has qualms two -pointedly b y its own power.  
 
An i llustration: a mind that wonders , “Is sound impermanent or 
permanent?”  
 
A doubting consciousness is necessarily a conceptual consciousness . 
 
7. Wrong consciousness  
This is a knower that engages its object erroneously.  
 
An illustra tion: a mind that firmly believes that sound is permanent.  
 
A wrong consciousness can be either a conceptual  consciousness or a 
non-conceptual  consciousness.  
 
Page 4  
The table here shows the seven -fold division of consciousness in terms of:  
 whether they ar e valid cogni sers or non -valid awareness es, 
 whether they are knower s who reali se their object or knower s that 
do not reali se their object s 
 whether they are factually concordant consciousness es or whether 
they are factually discordant consciousness es 
 whethe r they are conceptual or non -conceptual consciousnesses 
and 
 whether they are mistaken or non -mistaken  consciousnesses  
 
In order to be able to understand the above table, one must first 
memori se the definitions of the consciousnesses in the seven -fold divi sion 
                                                           
2 Dated 26 June 2012  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                               Second Basic Pro gram – Module 2  
                                The Study of Mind and Its Functions  
Lesson 5  
Page 9 of 11 of consciousness. You have to know the m individually and on th at basis, 
you will be able to work out whether each of these consciousnesses is 
valid or invalid, mistaken or non -mistaken, conceptual or non -conceptual, 
and so forth. This can only come  about on the basis of having memori sed 
the definitions.  
 
Conceptual consciousness  
Let us turn our attention back to the conceptual consciousness .  
 
If it is a conceptual consciousness, it is necessarily a mistaken 
consciousness. Why  is this so ? As mentioned  in the previous lesson, a 
conceptual consciousness is also a conventional mind. Why is it a 
conventional mind ? Because it is obscured from seeing the actual object  
nakedly  and it can only see the object through a meaning generality of  the 
object.  
 
What a ppears to the conceptual consciousness apprehending its object? 
What appears is t he actual object and the meaning generality ( or mental 
image) of th at object mixed  together and appearing as one , the actual 
object . The conceptual consciousness apprehends th e object through 
such an appearance. Therefore it is a mistaken consciousness  because i t 
is a consciousness that is mistaken with regard to its appearing object.   
 
The definition of a facsimile of a direct perceiver  is: a knower that is mistaken with 
regar d to its appearing object .   
 
Facsimile of a direct perceiver and mistaken consciousness are mutually inclusive  (Page 
3).  
 
A mistaken consciousness  is necessarily a knower that is mistaken with 
regard to its appearing object.  
 
Whatever appears to a direct perceiver is necessarily the appearing object 
of th at direct perceiver. But whatever appears to a conceptual 
consciousness apprehending it is not necessarily the appearing object of 
that conceptual consciousness.  
 
An example: the c onceptual consciousnes s apprehending blue. Does blue 
appear to the c onceptual consciousness apprehending blue? Yes it 
appears bu t blue is not its appearing object.  
 
Why do we say blue appears  to that conceptual consciousness 
apprehending blue?  We say this because the conceptua l consciousness 
apprehending blue explicitly reali ses blue . Because it explicitly reali ses 
blue, therefore  we say that blue appears to th e conceptual consciousness 
apprehending it. The c onceptual consciousness apprehending blue can 
only explicitly reali se blue through blue appearing to it.  
 
What we need to think about is  this: why is blue not the appearing object  
of a conceptual consciousness apprehending blue although blue appears 
to it? To a conceptual consciousness apprehending blue, t he actual object 
blue does not appear with all its complete characteristics , i.e., its 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                               Second Basic Pro gram – Module 2  
                                The Study of Mind and Its Functions  
Lesson 5  
Page 10 of 11 complete entity, to the conceptual consciousness apprehending blue.  
 
We mentioned before the difference between a specifically characteri sed 
phenomenon and a generally characteri sed phen omenon . A specifically 
characteri sed phenomenon is a phenomen on that can cast an aspect of 
itself fully with all its characteristics only to a direct perceiver , not to a 
conceptual consciousness. Therefore not all the essential characteristics 
of blue can appear to the conceptual consciousness that is apprehending 
it and while blue does appear to the conceptual consciousness 
apprehending it, it is not the appearing object of the conceptual 
consciousness apprehending it.  
 
If it is the appearing object of a conceptual consciousness, it is 
necessarily permanent and , in this context , it has  to be a meaning 
generality (or mental image) of the object.  
 
Question : (A student tries to clarify her understanding of the difference 
between a n object appearing to a conce ptual consciousness and the 
appearing object of that conceptual consciousness ).  
 
Answer:  When you think about blue, in technical language, it is a 
conceptual consciousness apprehending blue. The conceptual 
consciousness :  
 explicitly reali ses blue  
 implici tly reali ses the opposite of non-blue  
 
When a consciousness reali ses its object, it doesn’t necessarily mean that 
it only realises it explicitly. It also reali ses something about the object 
implicitly.  
 
What is the meaning of a consciousness reali sing an  object explicitly? It 
means that it reali ses its object through the appearance of the aspect of 
the object to the consciousness. There is no problem in saying that blue 
appears to the conceptual consciousness apprehending blue. Blue  
appears to that concep tual consciousness apprehending blue.  
 
But whatever appears to the conceptual consciousness apprehending blue 
does not necessarily have to be blue. It also does  not mean that blue 
cannot appear.  
 
Question:  In relation to both a conceptual consciousness a nd a direct 
perceiver, must we already know the object beforehand? For example, a 
baby sees blue for the very first time. Is that a direct perception? 
Likewise, I see an object for the first time without knowing what it is. I 
can still have a conceptual im age of that object but I don’t know what it 
is.  Do I need to know something before I can conclude that I am a direct 
perceiver or  that is a conceptual consciousness?  
 
Answer:  There is a conceptual consciousness that apprehends : 
 only a meaning generality  
 only a sound generality  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                               Second Basic Pro gram – Module 2  
                                The Study of Mind and Its Functions  
Lesson 5  
Page 11 of 11  both the meaning and sound generalit ies  
 
An e xample of  a conceptual consciousness that apprehends only a  
meaning generality  is this: so meone realises a being is imputed  in 
dependence upon any of the five aggregates. There is a tho ught reali sing 
this but not knowing that such a being is called a person. This is 
someone who realises a person but has not associate d its meaning with 
the term , “person ,” yet.  
 
This is an e xample of a conceptual consciousness that apprehends only a  
sound  generality: someone who does  not know the meaning of a person 
but who hears and apprehends the term, “person .” So there is the 
thought apprehending the term “person” without knowing what is a 
person. That mind is a conceptual consciousness apprehending on ly a 
sound generality.  
 
An e xample of  a conceptual consciousness that apprehends both the 
meaning and sound generalities  is this : someone who reali ses that a being 
imputed in dependence upon any of its five aggregates is a person. That 
mind is a conceptua l consciousness that apprehends both the meaning 
and the sound generalit ies.  
 
This is what you need to think about: w hen your sense consciousness 
realises something, does it necessarily mean that your mental 
consciousness also reali ses it?  
 
We will conti nue with this next time. Please read the handout and think 
about it. If you have any questions, you can bring it up in the next class . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Translated by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme  
 
Transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek, Vivien Ng and Patricia Lee  
 
Edited by Cecilia Ts ong 
 
 
 
 