Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Lorig/Edited/BP2 M2 L23 (upload).pdf
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:53:49.057549
================================================================================

Amitabha  Buddhist Centre                               Second Basic Program – Module 2  
                                                                    The Study of Mind and Its Functions  
 
Lesson 23  
Page 1 of 10 Transcript of teachings by Khen Rinpoche Geshe 
Chonyi  on the Modes of Mind and Mental Factors  
 
Lesson No: 23          Date: 11th September 2012  
 
Root text:   A Necklace for Those of Clear Awareness Clearly Revealing the 
Modes of Minds and Mental Factors by Ye-she Gyeltsen , translated by Toh 
Sze Gee; January 2006 edition. Copyright: Toh Sze Gee & FPMT, Inc. 
September 2003.   
 
All page references refer to the root text, unless otherwise stated.  
 
The Eleven Virtuous Mental Factors  
 
There are eleven virtuous mental factors:  
(1) faith  
(2) shame  
(3) embarrassment  
(4) non -attachment  
(5) non -hatred  
(6) non -ignorance  
(7) effort  (or joyous perseverance)  
(8) pliancy  
(9) conscientiousness  
(10) equanimity  
(11) non -harmfulness  (Page 33)  
 
We hav e completed the first three  of these mental factors : faith, shame , 
and embarrassment.  
 
(1) Faith  
There are three types of f aith: 
1. clarifying or clear faith  
2. faith of convicti on 
3. wishing or aspir ing faith  
 
Clarifying (or clear) faith  
This is a happy mind  and a mind of faith that arises from seeing the 
qualities of the Three Jewels. In order to generate this clear faith in and 
the liking for t he Three Jewels, it is important to see the qualities of the 
Three Jewels . To see and to understand  the qualities of the Three Jewels, 
one has to learn about the qualities of the Three Jewels  without which it 
is very difficult to develop such clear faith.  In order to see the qualities of 
the Three Jewels, one has to engage in hearing and reflection. When you 
see the point  of doing this , you will strive in hearing and reflection.  
 
When we manage  to develop this clear faith in th e Three Jewels, it will 
clear away the murkiness  of the afflictions . It makes the mind suitable for 
developing the positive qualities.  
 
Amitabha  Buddhist Centre                               Second Basic Program – Module 2  
                                                                    The Study of Mind and Its Functions  
 
Lesson 23  
Page 2 of 10 Faith of conviction  
The f aith of conviction  is having conviction in , for example, reincarnation  
and  karma and its effects. In order to develop such conviction, one has to 
listen to and reflect on all the  relevant points , without which  conviction 
will not arise. When one lacks conviction in reincarnation and karma and 
its effects , real practice becomes very difficult.  
 
Wishing or aspiring faith  
This faith is explained in relation to the four noble truths. One has to see 
that true suffering s and true origin s are to be abandoned. One also has to 
see that true path s and true cessation s are what one has to actuali se and 
that they can be generated in one’s  own mind .  
 
Three types of faith are mentioned here . No matter the type of faith , it is 
clear that generating any of them in one’s  mind is dependent  on hearing 
and reflection . Without studying, learning , and reflection, it is not 
possible  to develop these three kinds of faith. When we do not  develop 
these three kinds of faith, it is very difficult for us to develop any further 
qualities because faith is the  foundation  for good qualities.  
 
(2) Shame  
 
Shame  is the avoidance of misconduct or misdeeds on account of oneself .  
 
(3) Embarrassment  
 
Embarrassment  is the avoidance of misdeeds on account of others .  
 
(4) Non-attachment  
 
Regarding non -attachment, the Compendium of Knowledge  says:  
 
QUESTION: What is non -attachment?  
RESPONSE: It is a lack of attachment to [cyclic] existence and the articles of [cyclic] existence. It 
has the function of acting as a support for non -engagement in misconduct.  
 
Just as it has been said above, it is a knower which is disenchanted and lacks attachment  (Page 37) .  
 
 The objective feature  of non-attachment  is the object of desire , i.e., the 
object for which we have develop ed desire or attachment .  
 The aspect  of this knower is non-attachment when focus sed on the 
object.  
 The function  is a support  for non -engagement in misconduct.  
 
Non-attachment is the antidote  to attach ment, miserliness, excitement, 
distraction , and haughtiness.  It is good to know how  non-attachment  
works as an antidote to the se various afflictions. It is important to develop 
faith and belief in and the aspiration for non-attachmen t.  
 
Non-attachment is an antidote to attachment. In order to develop non -
Amitabha  Buddhist Centre                               Second Basic Program – Module 2  
                                                                    The Study of Mind and Its Functions  
 
Lesson 23  
Page 3 of 10 attachment , one has to reduce one’s attachment  to those objects that one 
desire s. How do we develop such non-attachment  and reduce  our 
attachment for those various objects ?  
 
We have the desire for pleasurable feeling s. We have to see for ourselves  
that no matter how much we enjoy or partake of the desired object, it is 
never satisfy ing and fulfilling. When we think about samsaric happiness  
or pleasure s, they are never stable . They are in the nature of suffering. By 
analy sing and thinking about this, one will come to reduce one’s 
attachment for them. 
 
There are so many techniques that have been taught for turning away  or 
reducing attachment . E.g., when one has the desire for food , there is the 
reflection on the drawback s of having attachment for food. Another 
example is applying the an tidote o f ugliness. There are many such advice  
in the teachings .  
 
In the Vinaya , the code of conduct for the ordained person, there is the 
advice for practi sing contentment where by one keeps only one set of robe s 
and have simple needs with regard  to food and the place where one lives.  
All this advice  is for develop ing contentment.  
 
Non-attachment is a virtuous mind, but we have to identify what ex actly 
non-attachment  is. We have t o see for ourselves what is in it for us when 
we have non -attachment. As mentioned earlier, when we have non -
attachment , many afflictions are weaken ed as it acts as an antidote for 
miserliness, attachment, haughtiness, distraction , and excitement. The 
purpose of understanding the be nefits of having non -attachment  is to put 
this advice  into practice  and reduce  our attachment.  
 
(5) Non-hatred  
 
Regarding non -hatred, the Compendium of Knowledge says:  
 
QUESTION: What is non -hatred?  
RESPONSE: It is a lack of malice with regard to sentient beings, suffering and the sources of 
suffering. It has the function of acting as a support for non -engagement in misconduct.  
 
Just as it has been said above, it is a knower that conquers the generation of hatred within observation of any 
of the three objects that generate h atred [i.e., sentient beings, suffering and the sources of suffering] and is a 
lack of malice  (Page 37) . 
 
What is the benefit of develop ing non-hatred  that is a virtuous mind ? 
Non-hatred  is an antidote for belligerence, resentment, spite, jealousy , 
and harmfulness.  
 
The way to develop non -hatred in the mind is to try to put a stop to 
belligerence, resentment, spite , and so forth. There are many advice s 
given for developing non -hatred  and dealing with anger . When we 
experience suff ering , we are advised to remind ourselves that ultimately, 
we are responsible for that experience  because it is the ripening of our 
Amitabha  Buddhist Centre                               Second Basic Program – Module 2  
                                                                    The Study of Mind and Its Functions  
 
Lesson 23  
Page 4 of 10 own non -virtuous karma. By understanding that , we voluntarily  accept  
the suffering.  When we manage to do that, it helps  us to overcome 
belligerence , resentment, spite, jealousy , and harmfulness . 
 
The Buddha gave a set of advice on how to deal with ange r. The four 
trainings  are: 
 
Even when derided, do not deride in return.  
Even when someone gets angry at one, do not get angry in return.  
Even when hit, do not hit back.  
Even when one's faults are exposed, do not expose others' faults  (Page 49 – 50). 
 
It is important  to know how to develop non -hatred. Non -hatred can only 
arise in us when we work  on reducing  our belligerence, resentment , spite,  
jealousy, and harmfulness . It is by reducing th ese afflictions that we are 
able t o develop non -hatred . When non-hatred aris es in the mind, then all 
these different minds —belligerence, resentment , and so forth —will 
naturally subside.  
 
(6) Non-ignorance  
 
Regarding non -ignorance, the Compendiu m of Knowledge says:  
 
QUESTION: What is non -ignorance?  
RESPONSE: It is knowledge [arisen] from fruition, scripture, contemplation or realization, and is a 
wisdom of individual investigation. It has the function of acting as a support for the non -engagement  
in misconduct.  
 
Just as it has been said above, it is a wisdom of individual investigation that is able to serve as the antidote to 
ignorance [arising] from its cause – being either acquired through birth or arisen through application  (Pages 
37 – 38) 
 
Non-ignorance  is the opposite of ignorance. What exactly is ignorance? We 
dealt with this when we were studying the l am-rim. According to 
Vasubandhu and Arya Asanga, one way you  can look at ignorance is to 
see it as separate  or different f rom the view of the transitory collection.  
 From that perspective , ignorance is mere ly not knowing  something , e.g.,  
not knowing what karma is.  This ignorance is an afflicted mind  and it  
is posited to be a mind of not -knowing.  
 Non-ignorance is a derivative of wisdom.  
 Its aspect  is that of n on-confus ion.  
 Its function  is to act as a support for non -engagement in misconduct.  
 
We need  to compare non -ignorance and the mental factor  of wisdom , one 
of the five object -ascertaining mental factors . It is quite challenging but it 
is something that we should look at. Are the y the same ?   
 Mental factor of wisdom  Mental factor of  
non-ignorance  
Aspect  
of the 
knower Distinguishing what is to be 
abandoned and what is to be 
adopted  Non-confusion  
Function  Overcoming doubt  Support for non -engagement in 
misconduct  
Amitabha  Buddhist Centre                               Second Basic Program – Module 2  
                                                                    The Study of Mind and Its Functions  
 
Lesson 23  
Page 5 of 10 According to the Higher Abhidharma , ignor ance is posited to be confusion , 
a state of not knowing . If that is posited to be ignorance, then non -
ignorance would be non -confusion . Perhaps this is one of the things  we 
can look at to see if there is any difference between the se two mental 
factors . It is not easy  because they seem to be talkin g about the same  
thing.  
 
Non-ignorance is posited to be of two types : 
1. non-ignorance  that is acquired through birth  
2. non-ignorance arisen through application  
 
We can posit this illustration for the non-ignorance that is acquired 
through birth : someone  who is born with a clear intellect . That does not 
happen  without a cause . That is why it is called a fruition . It is the 
fruition  of past endeavo urs, arising from past actions in past lives.  
 
An illustration for non-ignorance through application  would be this : in 
this life, through hearing, reflection , and meditation , one generates the 
wisdom s arising from hearing, reflection , and meditation. That would be a 
case of non -ignorance that  arises in this life . It is the non-ignorance that 
arose through application.  
 
Therefore, seek much hearing on the three baskets as well as their commentaries – the basis upon 
which one engages in hearing, analyze agai n and again the meaning of what has been heard with the four 
types of reasoning, and generate an ascertaining consciousness. Put the entire path into practice by way of 
analytical and stabilizing meditation upon that very meaning which the wisdom arisen fr om contemplation has 
gained ascertainment of.  
 
These are the assertions of the Great Trailblazers.  
        
Hence, those who are intelligent should engage in such a mode of path that pleases the Conquerors. If 
you discard much hearing, the excellent cause o f wisdom of individual investigation, follow fools stupidly like a 
sheep, dwell in a relaxed and idle manner without contemplating anything whatsoever, and yet wallow in the 
conceit of being good -hearted, practicing Dharma, engaging in practice, and so for th, then you will waste your 
excellent support with its leisures, ruin others who are equal in fortune, and even become a serious condition 
contributing to the degeneration of the teachings. Therefore, those of you who wish to do yourselves good 
should gen erate belief from your hearts regarding the modes of the wisdom of individual investigation as 
explained above  (Page 40) .  
 
This advice  once again emphasises how extremely important hearing, 
reflection , and meditation are for the  development of wisdom. In order to 
develop wisdom, one has to engage in hearing, reflection , and meditation ,  
without which , there is no wisdom . Without wisdom, one would not be 
able to achieve anything significant. Hearing, reflecting , and meditating 
on the teachings is also a condition for upholding the teachings of the 
Buddha . You have to see the point behind hearing, reflecti on, and 
meditation.  
 
In this vein, the Verse Summary of the Perfection of Wisdom in Eight Thousand Lines  
(Ratnagunasancayagatha)  says:  
 
How can millions and millions of blind men, without a guide,  
Enter the city without even knowing the path?  
Without wisdom , the five perfections are without sight;  
Without a guide, they cannot contact enlightenment.  
Amitabha  Buddhist Centre                               Second Basic Program – Module 2  
                                                                    The Study of Mind and Its Functions  
 
Lesson 23  
Page 6 of 10 At such a time that they are strongly conjoined with wisdom,  
Then eyes are acquired and this name is attained.  
 
The Venerable Maitreya also says [in his Sublime C ontinuum of the Great Vehicle  (Uttaratantra) ](stanza 5.14 -
15): 
 
Conceptualizing the three spheres [of agent, action, and object]  
Is asserted to be a knowledge obscuration.  
Conceptualizations such as miserliness  
Are asserted to be afflictive obscurations.  
 
Apart from wisdom,  
None other is a cause for abandoning these.  
Therefore, wisdom is supreme. Its foundation is hearing.  
Thus, hearing is supreme.  
 
And Acharya Aryasura says [in his Compendium of the Perfections  (Paramitasamasa) ]: 
 
The blind ones of little hearing do not know the modes of meditation.  
Lacking that, what are they to contemplate?  
Therefore, you should put effort in hearing. Due to that cause,  
Contemplate and meditate, whereby vast wisdom will arise.  
 
The supreme scholar Vasubandhu also says [ in his Treasury of Knowledge ] (stanza 6.5ab):  
 
By abiding in ethics, possessing hearing and contemplation,  
There is strong application in meditation  (Pages 40 – 41). 
 
 In order to develop non -ignorance , we need wisdom .  
 In order to develop wisdom , we need to engage in the three -fold 
activit ies of hearing, reflection , and meditation.   
We have to  compare non -ignorance and wisdom. Sometimes it seem s like 
we are talking about the same thing.  
 
(7) Effort1  
 
Regarding effort, the Compendium of Knowledge says:  
 
QUESTION: What is effort?  
RESPONSE: It is a mind that is enthusiastic in regard to armoring,  application, non -inferiority, 
irreversibility, and non -complacency. It has the  function of ful filling and accomplishing the class of 
virtue.  
 
Just as it has been said above, the mind that is enthusiastic about virtue is effort. Thus  the Acharya 
Vasubandhu says [in his A Discussion of the Five Aggregates ]: 
 
QUESTION: What is effort?  
RESPONSE: It is the antidote for laziness and a mind that is enthusiastic about virtue  (Page 41) . 
 
 The object  of joyous perseverance is virtuous activity.  
 Its subjective aspec t is enthusiasm.  
 Its function  is to accomplish virtue.  
 
The Compendium of Knowledge  teaches five types:  
(1) effort of armoring  
(2) effort of application  
(3) effort of non -inferiority  
(4) effort of irreversibility  
                                                           
1 Note: Ven. Gyurme prefers to translate effort (brtson ‘grus)  as joyous perseverance.  
Amitabha  Buddhist Centre                               Second Basic Program – Module 2  
                                                                    The Study of Mind and Its Functions  
 
Lesson 23  
Page 7 of 10 (5) effort of non -complacency  (Page 42)  
 
(1) Effort of armouring  
 
(1) The effort of armoring is the donning of the great armor of preceding attitude, a mental enthusiasm prior to 
embarking on a virtuous activity  (Page 42) .  
 
What is armo ur-like joyous perseveran ce?  It is when j ust prior to 
engaging in a virtuous activity , there is strong enthusiasm for that 
activity. That is armo ur-like joyous perseverance . 
 
(2) Effort of application  
 
(2) The effort of application is a mind that is enthusiastic when engaging in practice through application. It is 
of two types: constant application and respectful application  (Page 42) . 
 
As the name implies, the joyous perseverance of application  happen s 
when one is applying oneself to a virtuous a ctivity  with an enthusiastic 
mind. There are two types  of the joyous perseverance of application  (1) 
constant appl ication  and (2) r espectful application.  
 
Khen Rinpoche : I think I explain ed how these two  applications are different  
a long time ago . I had forgot ten them myself.  Does a nyone rememb er? I did 
explain  them some  time ago, but I don’t remember now how these two are 
different . I saw it in one of the text s but I couldn’t find it anymore.  I think  it 
is in the footnotes  of a text , but I don’t know which one. If I remember then I  
will explain t hese two. I don’t remember now.  
 
(3) The effort of non -inferiority is a generation of enthusiasm when engaging in virtue without the mind being 
discouraged, thinking, "How could one such as I do this?"  
 
(4) The effort of irreversibility is an accomplished mental enthusiasm such that one cannot be diverted by 
other circumstances at the time of engaging in virtuous activities  (Pages 42 – 43). 
 
The joyous perseverance of non -inferiority  and irreversibility  occur when 
one is  engaged in the actual practice. It is a mind that is not discouraged 
when engaging in the actual practice . Therefore one will never turn away 
from the practice.  
 
(5) The effort of non -complacency is exertion that does not just rest complacent with some trifling virtue, but 
seeks higher qualities  (Page 43) . 
 
The j oyous perseverance of non -complacency  occurs after a virtuous 
activity. It refers to a mind that is not complacent  or satisfied with having  
achieved something , “I have done  it. That ’s it.” It is a mind that aims to 
achiev e more qualities.  
 Prior to engaging in a virtuous a ctivity , we need joyous perseverance , an 
enthusiastic mind.  
 When we start with th e chosen virtuous activity, we also have to start  
that activity with a mind of enthusiasm. When engag ed in a virtuous 
activity ,   it is important not to  get discourage d and to stop that activity.  
 Once the activity is accomplished, one should not be satisfied  with that  
Amitabha  Buddhist Centre                               Second Basic Program – Module 2  
                                                                    The Study of Mind and Its Functions  
 
Lesson 23  
Page 8 of 10 and think , “That it is enough .” Rather one should strive to do bette r and 
gain more qualities.  
 
The main factor that is incompatible with joyous perseverance is laziness . 
Laziness is the basis for afflictions to arise  and deprives us of our virtue . 
When we are deprived of virtue , this life degenerates and our future lives 
will also degenerate.  In one sutra, Buddha said that laziness is the basis 
for all the afflictions.  Having laziness in the mind  is like having nothing 
good at all in the mind .  
 
There are three kinds of laziness:  
1. the laziness of procrastination  
2. the laziness ignoble activit ies  
3. the laziness of discouragement  
 
Many techniques and advice  are given in the lam-rim to overcome the 
laziness of procrastination . We can ov ercome th is laziness by reflecting 
on the following topics:  
 the human life of freedom s and endowments   
 death and impermanence  
 the sufferings of the lower realms  
 
The reflectio ns that are mentioned in the section on the path that is 
shared with the person s of medium capacity , such as the reflection on the  
faults of cyclic existence , can also help us to overcome the laziness of 
procrastination .  This topic also help s us o vercome the laziness of 
ignoble activities . 
 
What about stopping the laziness of discouragement  or self-contempt ? 
One can do this by understand ing the presentation of mind , e.g., how it is 
the natur e of the mind that when it is trained , change is definitely 
possible.  As mentioned in  Engaging in the Bodhisattvas Deeds , “There is 
nothing whatsoever/ That is not made easier through acquaintance .”2 So 
by understanding the presentation of mind , in particular , how it is the 
nature  of the mind to change when your mind is familiar  with the 
process , you stop this discouragement.   
 
It is said that joyous perseverance is very important because , with joyous 
perseverance , we are able to develop qualit ies that we have not yet 
develop ed. Laziness is what stops us from developing any new qualities. 
So it is important to  apply ourselves to developing joyous perseverance.  
 
(8) Pliancy  
 
Regarding pliancy, the Compendium of Knowledge  says:  
 
QUESTION: What is pliancy?  
                                                           
2 Verse 14, Chapter 6.  
Amitabha  Buddhist Centre                               Second Basic Program – Module 2  
                                                                    The Study of Mind and Its Functions  
 
Lesson 23  
Page 9 of 10 RESPONSE: It is a serviceability of body and mind due to severin g the continuum of unfavorable 
states of body and mind. It has the function of eliminating all obscurations.  
 
Just as it has been said above, it is a knower that deposits an imprint so that the mind can be applied, 
however one wishes, to a virtuous object of observation, and that severs the continuum of unfavorable states 
of body and mind. When divided, pliancy is of two types:  
(1) physical pliancy  
(2) mental pliancy  (Page 45)  
 
 Pliancy  focuses on a virtuous object.  
 The subjective aspect  of this mind  is that you are able to use your body 
and mind in whatever way you wish , i.e., the body and mind are 
serviceable .  
 Its function  is to eliminat e all obscurations.  
 
There are five  obscurations;  
1. aspiration for a desire object  
2. malice   
3. sleep and lethargy   
4. excitement and regret   
5. doubt  
When there is pliancy, t hese five obscurations can be removed.  
 
There are two kind s of pliancy : (1) physical pliancy and (2) mental pliancy .  
Pliancy here has to be a consciousnes s. In this case , it is the primary 
mental pliancy  because physical pliancy is posited as a special form of 
tangible object.  It is mentioned in the lam-rim that mental pliancy is 
achieved before physical pliancy.  
 First comes mental pliancy .  
 Then you achieve physical pliancy .  
 This is followed by achiev ing the bliss of physical pliancy .  
 You then achieve the bliss of mental pliancy.  
This is the order : mental pliancy  physical pliancy  bliss of physical  
pliancy  bliss of mental pliancy .  
 
In order to achieve calm-abiding , it is necessary for one to achieve the 
bliss of pliancy , not simply pliancy alone. On top of pliancy , you must 
have achieve d the bliss of pliancy  before that reali sation is considered the 
realisation of calm-abiding. There are nine mental states in the process of 
develop ing calm-abiding . The ninth mental state is said to be the single -
pointedness of the mind of the de sire realm . But that is not calm -abiding 
yet. One must have developed the bliss of pliancy  before that mind can be 
called the mind of calm -abiding. When you achieve  the mind of calm -
abiding, you achieve  the mind of the higher realm,  i.e. the realm that is 
higher than the desire realm.  
 
Question:  On page 38 of the r oot text , non-ignorance  is said to have the 
“function of acting as a support for the non -engagement in miscondu ct.” 
What is the meaning of “misconduct ” here ? Does it simply  mean  avoiding 
negative karma or does it mean having a mind that is separate d from 
wisdom?  
Amitabha  Buddhist Centre                               Second Basic Program – Module 2  
                                                                    The Study of Mind and Its Functions  
 
Lesson 23  
Page 10 of 10 Answer:  An example would be because of not knowing what is karma and 
its effect s, it is possible to generate a wrong view about karma.  There are 
many kinds of misconduct.  
 
Question:  Can the comparison between non -ignorance and wisdom be 
understood in ter ms of  the various possibilit ies? Non-ignorance seemed to 
be at a lower level than wisdom.  
 
Khen Rinpoche : It is s omething  for you to think about.  
 
Question:  How do we relate non -attachment with renunciation? Are they 
the same?  
 
Answer:  I don’t think they a re the same . Renunc iation is probably 
stronger. N on-attachment is just a lack of attachment . That is its  
subjective aspect. Renunciation is a mind that wishes to turn away from 
cyclic existence . So r enunciation is not just non -attachment . It is 
something stronger than that.  
 
Question:  On page 3 4 of the root  text, it is mentioned that liking and 
respect  are separate mental factors . Is respect a derivative of faith or one 
of the  51 mental factors?   
 
Answer: Faith and respect are not the same. As said in the lam-rim, one 
develops faith through remembering the qualities  and one develops 
respect through r emembering the kindness. So respect is induce d by 
faith.  
 
As for whether respect is a derivative of one of the 51  mental factor s, in 
the first place , the 51 mental factors are not exhaustive . I don’t think 
there are only 51  mental factors . Where do you put respect? Can you 
include it under faith? You have to think about it. We cannot decisively 
say so because when you look at all the  available texts, no  one has said 
anything about this one way or the other.  
  
Read the rest on your own . We will look at conscientiousness , equanimity, 
no-harmfulness , and the six roo t afflictions . These are also the  20 
secondary afflictions. At least now you have a rough idea of each of these 
mental factors . When we talk about them, you have a rough idea of what 
is non -attachment, non-hatred, non -ignorance , and so forth.  
 
 
 
Translated by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme  
 
Transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek, Vivien Ng, and Patricia Lee  
 
Edited by Cecilia Tsong  
 