Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Lorig/Edited/BP2 M2 L03 (final2).pdf
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:53:48.230617
================================================================================

Amitabha Buddhist Centre                               Second Basic Program – Module 2  
                                The Study of Mind and Its Functions  
 
 
Lesson 3  
Page 1 of 9 Transcript of teachings by Khen Rinpoche Geshe 
Chonyi  
 
Lesson No: 3      Date: 26th June 2012  
 
As mentioned before, the main objective of th e Basic Program is to provide 
you with the foundational knowledge and understanding  of the teachings 
of the Buddha to enable you to study the Great Treatises in the future. 
Many of these Great Treatises are already available in English  so whatever 
you learn from your Basic Program studies will enable you to at least 
understand these texts when you read them in the futur e.  
 
When we are learning a philosophical subject like this for the first time, of 
course it may be a  little challenging. First you must memori se the terms 
so that at least you are able to name some of these terms. You should 
then be able to explain  the me aning of those terms. But i n the very first 
place, you must know what those terms are. You have no choice. You 
have to memori se them.  
 
We have completed two lessons. If there is anything that you do not 
understand or you need further clarification, you ma y bring it up now.  
 
Matter and consciousness are mutually exclusive  
(Matter, consciousness, and non -associated compositional factor are said 
to be mutually exclusive. A student is unclear as to whether matter and 
consciousness are mutually exclusive becau se to the student, they do 
have a common locus since they are both functioning things and are 
impermanent phenomena).   
 
Answer:  The comparison of phenomena is very important. Phenomena 
can be compared in different ways such as through the three  or four  
possibilities. Th is is very important in investigati ng phenomena. For 
example, what are the number of possibilities between object of 
knowledge and consciousness?  
 
Answer from student : Three . 
 
Khen Rinpoche : When you say that there is something that is an object of 
knowledge but not a consciousness, you can see  from this that the limit of 
pervasion of an object of knowledge is greater than the limit of pervasion  
of consciousness.  
 
 
Comparison of object of knowledge and 
consciousness   
Illustration  
 
1. Somet hing that is both  an object of  
Eye consciousness  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                               Second Basic Program – Module 2  
                                The Study of Mind and Its Functions  
 
 
Lesson 3  
Page 2 of 9  
Comparison of object of knowledge and 
consciousness   
Illustration  
knowledge and a consciousness   
 
2. Something that is an object of knowledge 
but not a consciousness  
  
 A horse  
 
Something that is a consciousness but is 
not an object of knowledge   
This is n ot possible b ecause a 
consciousness is necessarily  an 
object of knowledge .  
 
3. Something that is neither an object of 
knowledge nor a consciousness   
A sky flower  
 
There isn’t anything that is both matter and consciousness because they 
are mutually exclusive. If som eone were to say: “The subject, functioning 
thing, is both matter and consciousness ,” what are you going to say? 
There are two ways of asking the question:  
1. Are both matter and consciousness functioning thing s? 
2. Is a functioning thing both matter and conscio usness?  
 
Is a functioning thing a consciousness?  
 
Is a functioning thing a person? If you were to say that a functioning 
thing is a person, you also have to say that  a horse, a cow, or elephant is 
a functioning thing.  
 
Khen Rinpoche:  Is a functioning thin g an elephant? There is no doubt that 
an elephant is a functioning thing but the question is: Is a functioning thing 
an elephant?  
 
Khen Rinpoche : There is no problem in saying , “Matter and consciousness 
are functioning thing s.” But i f you were to say: “A functioning thing is a 
consciousness, ” then questions will be arise. Is it a horse? Is it a person? 
It becomes difficult to answer  this.  
 
Student : Both matter and consciousness are functioning thing s so they 
are not mutually exclusive.  
 
Khen Rinpoche : Are  you saying that there is a common locus between 
both matter and consciousness , i.e., that there is something that is both 
matter and consciousness? Please give an illustration.  
 
Student : An impermanent phenomenon .  
 
Khen Rinpoche : Are you saying that an impermanent phenomen on is both 
matter and consciousness?  
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                               Second Basic Program – Module 2  
                                The Study of Mind and Its Functions  
 
 
Lesson 3  
Page 3 of 9 Student : No. 
 
Khen Rinpoche : So there is nothing that is both matter and 
consciousness.  
 
The question and answer is not just between two people , i.e., myself and 
the student . It is for everyone he re. You must pay attention to what is 
being asked and what is the answer that is given. T his is an important 
part of the learning process.  
 
Eye sense power  vs. eye consciousness  
Question : What is the difference between the eye sense power and eye 
conscio usness?  
 
Answer: The Great Exposition School (GES) and Sutra School (SS) assert 
that the eye sense power is a form. Specifically it is a clear form. The eye 
sense power does not refer to the entire eyeball but  to something that is 
within the eyeball.  In the Abhidharma,  the size of the eye sense power is 
posited to be the size of  a raisin .  
 
The eye sense power is a clear form that exists within the eyeball. In 
dependence o n this eye sense power  that is form, the eye consciousness is 
generated.   
 
An eye consciousness is consciousness , not a form. Therefore you cannot 
posit the eye sense power and  the eye consciousness to be the same  
thing.  They are different.  
 
An eye consciousness apprehending form can only apprehend a form 
source . It cannot apprehend , say, sound. It can only apprehend  a form 
source because the uncommon empowering condition for the production 
of an eye consciousness is the eye sense power.  
 
In order for an eye consciousness apprehending form to be generated, it 
must depend on three conditi ons: 
1. its uncommon empowering condition , the eye sense power  
2. its observed object condition , form 
3. its immediately preceding condition , a consciousness that exists just 
prior to the production of th e eye consciousness  
 
What causes an eye consciousness appre hending form to be generated in 
the aspect of that which is in the entity of being clear and knowing ? It is 
the immediately preceding con dition, t he consciousness that exists just 
prior to the production of this particular consciousness.  
 
What causes an e ye consciousness apprehending form to be generated in 
the aspect of form? It is  its observed object condition , form.  
 
The eye sense power is a form but as to whether it is a form that can be 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                               Second Basic Program – Module 2  
                                The Study of Mind and Its Functions  
 
 
Lesson 3  
Page 4 of 9 apprehended by the naked eye , that is another question. There ar e five 
sense objects: form, sound, smell, taste , and touch. There is also a sixth 
category , a phenomenon -source  form. Is the eye sense power a form or a 
phenomenon -source  form? 
 
The eye sense power is  a form. The eye consciousness that is generated in 
dependence on the eye sense power is  a consciousness. Although the eye 
sense power is a form, I don’t think it refers to the entire eyeball but 
rather it refers to a kind of form that is located within the eyeball. That is 
posited as an eye sense power  that is the uncommon empowering 
condition for the production of the eye consciousness.  
 
Non-associated compositional factor  
Question : Is the combination of an eye sense power that is a form and the 
eye consciousness a non-associated compositional factor ? Also i s a non -
associated compositional factor a label that is affixed on to an object , e.g., 
because a person is labe lled on its aggregates, a person is a non -
associated compositional factor. When you label the concept of time  as 
“time ,” then time is  a non -associa ted compositional factor. (The student 
supplements his question with a presentation of the way an eye sees its 
object in accordance with conventional science).  
 
Answer:  When we use the word, “eye,” it either has to refer to the eye 
sense power or the eye consciousness. There isn’t an “eye” that is both the 
eye sense power and the eye consciousness. When we use the word “eye,” 
it refers primarily to the physical eye that is a form. Therefore  it is 
necessarily not  a non -associated compositional factor.  
 
It says i n the Heart Sutra , “there is no eye, no ear,  no nose ….”  These all  
refer to the physical sense bases. In that sense, the “eye” refers to the eye 
sense power. Therefore it is necessarily not a non -associated 
compositional factor.   
 
Phenomenon -source  form 
Question : What is  a phenomenon -source  form? 
 
Answer : An example of a phenomenon -source  form is a dream elephant.  
A dream elephant does not appear to the eye consciousness  or any sense 
consciousness  for that matter . It is a subtle form that can only a ppear to 
the mental consciousness.   
 
Question : Is a phenomenon -source  form atomically established , i.e., is it  
matter?  
 
Answer : This is so mething you  can think about. Matter is one of the 
divisions of functioning thing.  
 
If we adopt the position that “M atter is mutually inclusive with form ,” we 
will have to say that a phenomenon form source is atomically established.  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                               Second Basic Program – Module 2  
                                The Study of Mind and Its Functions  
 
 
Lesson 3  
Page 5 of 9 In the case of the dream elephant, we have to analy se whether it is 
atomically established or not. It is easy to understand that a form tha t 
appears to a sense consciousness is atomically established. But w hat 
about a form that appear s to the mental consciousness?  
 
This is from the perspective of the position that asserts that form and 
matter are mutually inclusive, but not all the Buddhist tenets assert th is. 
Some Buddhist tenets assert that form and matter are not mutually 
inclusive.  
 
Even then, we have to analy se whether a phenomenon form source, e.g., a 
dream elephant, is atomically established . It is very clear in many texts 
that a phen omenon -source  form is a form but t he question is whether 
that form i s atomically established?  
 
Correction to pg. 7 of Handout No. 1  
Question:  From the last lesson, we learnt that mutually exclusive 
phenomena have no common locus between them. May I confir m if this 
statement still stands, “If there are three possibilities between two 
phenomena , there must be a common locus  of the two  points of 
difference”?   
 
Answer : I don’t think it is necessary that you must have a possibility that 
is both the two objects beings compared.   
 
Student : So this statement is not so accurate.  
 
Khen Rinpoche: You can give an illustration of an object that is both the 
objects being compared or an object that is neither of the two objects being 
compared.1  
 
Mutually exclusive phenom ena  
Question: If two objects are mutually exclusive, are there necessarily  three 
possibilities as it was mentioned previously , “there can be three but not 
four possibilities”? For example, between a pillar and a pot, there are 
always three possibilities.   
 
Khen Rinpoche: You can say that. It is not possible to have four 
(possibilities).  
 
Immediately preceding condition  
Question:  With regard to the immediately preceding condition, at the 
manifest level, do the six consciousnesses manifest at the same time?  If 
each of these consciousnesses have their own respective immediately 
                                                           
1 Under “ 2. Three possibilities ,” the first possibility should then be amended to read as 
“There is something that is both a p and a q or there is something that is neither a p nor 
a q.” 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                               Second Basic Program – Module 2  
                                The Study of Mind and Its Functions  
 
 
Lesson 3  
Page 6 of 9 preceding condition s, how then do we posit a single continuum of 
consciousness within a person?  
 
Answer : The immediately preceding condition for the production of any 
consciousness ca n be any consciousness that immediately precede s it. In 
the case of the eye consciousness apprehending a form, it does  not have 
to be a former moment of eye consciousness.  
 
The uncommon empowering condition for the production of the mental 
consciousness i s the mental sense power . This mental sense power can 
also act as the empowering condition for the production of a sense 
consciousness  in which case it becomes the common empowering 
condition.  
 
Why Lorig is presented according to  the view of the Sutra Sch ool 
Question : The presentation of Lorig is according to the  view of the Sutra 
School. Why is this so since , in order to gain full enlightenment, we have 
to learn the highest view? Why are we not studying Lorig in accordance 
with the view of the highest sch ool?  
 
Answer:  There are four tenets: the Great Exposition School (GES), the 
Sutra School (SS), the Mind -only School (MOS) , and the Middle Way 
School (MWS). It is good to know why there are four tenets. In order to 
fully understand the assertions of a higher tenet, there are clear 
explanation s of the assertions of the tenets below it.  
 
The study of Lorig here is based on the perspective of the S utra School  
because the majority of the Buddhist tenets have similar assertions as to 
what constitute s a valid co gniser and so forth. The presentation with 
regard to the mind is mainly the same for the GES, SS, MOS , and the 
Autonomy Middle Way School (AMWS) . The exception is the view of the  
Consequence Middle Way School (CMWS).  
 
In order to appreciate the unique fea tures of a higher tenet, we need to 
know the assertions of the lower tenets. When we are familiar with the  
assertions of the lower tenets, it will be easier for us to appreciate the 
differences when the assertions of the higher tenet are presented.  
 
Termi nologies  
Question : With reference to the chart on established base, d o the terms 
“established ,” “observed ,” and “realized ,” by a valid cogni ser and “known 
by an  awareness ” mean different things?  
 
Answer:  These terms are synonymous with one another.   
 
Dream elephant vs. sky flower  
Question : How does the dream elephant that is a phenomenon -source  
form different from a sky flower?  
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                               Second Basic Program – Module 2  
                                The Study of Mind and Its Functions  
 
 
Lesson 3  
Page 7 of 9 Answer : Does the elephant that is conjured by an illusionist exist? 
Every one will answer “No.”  
 
Is the elephant conjured by an  illusionist a form, a consciousness , or a 
non-associated compositional factor ? Among the five senses, form, sound, 
smell, taste , and touch, which one is this  illusory elephant ? Is it 
atomically established?  
 
The elephant that is conjured by an illusionis t appears to the eye 
consciousness. It is a form and it exists.  
 
So we have to say the dream  elephant exist s. What is the reason then for 
saying the dream elephant does not exist?  A dream elephant is posited as  
an impermanent phenomenon so it has to be m atter, a consciousness , or 
a non -associated compositional factor.  
 
We also have to think about why a dream elephant is an existent?  
 
We see a cup of water as water but the hungry ghost sees the water as 
blood and pus. It has to exist in the way it appears . To us, the liquid 
appears as water. The god s will see the water as nectar. Depending on the 
power of the individual ’s karma, on that one single base, there is nectar, 
water , blood , and pus.  
 
More about phenomenon -source  form 
Question:  Is day -dreaming or  visuali sing a celestial mansion a 
phenomenon -source  form? 
 
Answer : You need to understand the difference between  a non-conceptual 
consciousness and a conceptual consciousness as they function in 
different ways.  
 
In the case of day -dreaming or visuali sations, whatever appears to the 
thought consciousness is not the actual object . It is a mental image of th e 
object that you are thinking  about .  
 
Although a sky flower does not exist, there can be a conception of a sky 
flower. When you think of a sky flower, there is a mental appearance of a 
sky flower. Although a sky flower do es not exist , the appearance of a sky 
flower to the thought  (or conceptual ) consciousness apprehending it 
exists. A sky flower that appear s to a thought consciousness 
apprehending it is a mental image ( or meaning generality ). That is not a 
form. It is a mere imputed factor .   
 
However, an object that appear s to a non -conceptual mental 
consciousness is  a form.  This will be explained later.  
 
Question : Is the mental image of a sky flower an  existent?  
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                               Second Basic Program – Module 2  
                                The Study of Mind and Its Functions  
 
 
Lesson 3  
Page 8 of 9 Answer:  Of course  
 
Question : So all mental images are existent s? 
 
Khen Rinpoche : Yes. 
 
Ven Gyurme : Because they are permanent phenomena.  
 
Internal matter and external matter  
(A student is unclear regarding the distinction between the two and 
quotes a number of examples: (1) is the foetus in a pregnant woman 
internal or external matter? (2) how about someone receiving a 
transplanted organ – is that transplanted organ internal or external 
matter?)  
 
Answer:  The body of the baby inside a womb is an  internal matter 
because it is included within the continuum of that baby  who is a person.  
 
Is the body of the baby included within the mother ’s continuum? When 
the baby is still inside the womb , it is included within the continuum of 
the mother, so it is  an internal matter.  
 
************  
It is good if you can give  feedback on the difficulties and challenges that 
you encounter in your studies. I guess one of the difficulties you are all 
facing is tackling all these new terms for the very first time. The o nly 
solution  is for you to memori se them .  
 
For example, you have to know the word s, “mutually exclusive ,” and their 
meaning. In order for any two phenomena that are being compared to be 
mutually exclusive, the objects that are to be compared must be  
existents, the two must be different , and there should not be any common  
locus between  these two , i.e. there is nothing that is both  the objects in 
question . 
 
Singular and different phenomena  
If you think more deeply about it, if it is an existent, is it neces sarily a 
singular or different phenomenon ? Having said that, do you agree that it 
has to be like that? Is this necessarily so?  
 
Question from Khen Rinpoche:  If it is an existent, is it necessarily a 
singular phenomenon or different phenomenon? Is there any existent that 
is not both these two?  
 
For e xample, a horse is a singular phenomenon. How about a horse and 
an elephant? They are different phenomen a because a horse and an 
elephant are not one. So whatever illustration is given to you, it can be 
only be  either one or many.  
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                               Second Basic Program – Module 2  
                                The Study of Mind and Its Functions  
 
 
Lesson 3  
Page 9 of 9 Can you point to something that is both one and many? Can you look at 
one and many in terms of three or four possibilities?  
 
If someone were to posit: Is the subject, “different, ” a singular or different 
phenomenon?  
 
Khen Rinpoche:  What do you think?  
 
 
 
Translated by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme  
 
Transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek, Vivien Ng and Patricia Lee  
 
Edited by Cecilia Tsong  
 