Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Lorig/Edited/BP2 M2 L08 (final).doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:53:47.487522
================================================================================


Transcript of teachings by Khen Rinpoche Geshe Chonyi

Lesson No: 8                              Date: 12th July 2012

In the twelve links of dependent-arising, the four links that are  the  four
projected results are the following four links:
   1. name and form
   2. six sources
   3. contact
   4. feeling

We studied themis in the previous module when we were looking at the  twelve
links of dependent-arising. We may be able to list them  out  but,   without
studying and understanding the presentation of the mind, it is difficult  to
be able to understand and explain them fully.  these four  links:  name  and
form, the six sources, contact, and feeling.

Name and form
The first of the four projected results is the link of name and form that  .
Name and form refer to the five aggregates. Here it is not simply  the  five
aggregates but specifically, the  five  aggregates  that  are  projected  by
karma and the afflictions. The  five  contaminated  appropriated  aggregates
are:
1. The aggregate of form
2. The aggregate of feeling
3. The aggregate of discrimination
4. The aggregate of compositional factor
5. The aggregate of consciousness

Six sources
The link of the six sources is the six sense  powers.  This  refers  to  the
time   when   the   sense   powers   are   established.   Their   respective
consciousnesses that are generated in dependence on these sense powers  have
not arisen yet. In order to understand exactly  what  are  these  six  sense
powers are, you have to study what they se six sense powers are as we  hadve
done earlier in this module.

Contact
The link of contact is really complicated. The link  of  contact  refers  to
the moment when the following three meet:
   1. The object
   2. The sense power
   3. The consciousness

If When these three are present simultaneously, how then would do you  posit
athe cause and effect relationship between them?

Feeling
Only after the meeting of the abovementioned three things do  you  have  the
link of feeling. Feeling is the result and arises from contact. There is  no
feeling without contact.

A thesis
I am simply positing a thesis now. I am not saying this is the case.

Khen Rinpoche: I am also in the process of learning..

Just as how With regard to how tthe link  of  contact  is  posited  to  come
abouthappen, using the example of an eye  consciousness  apprehending  vase,
these three things must come together:
   0. The object is the vase,
   0. The sense power is the eye sense power, and the consciousness.
The consciousness is the eye consciousness
When these three things come together, you then have the  eye  consciousness
apprehending vase.

This can be analysed further.  Do  you  agree  that  the  eye  consciousness
apprehending vase comes after these three things meet?

In the previous lessons, we  talked  about  the  three  conditions  for  the
production of a sense consciousness. In the case of  the  eye  consciousness
apprehending vase, the three conditions are:
   1. the observed object condition: the vase
   2. the uncommon empowering condition: the eye sense power
   3. the immediately preceding condition: a consciousness
In dependence on these three conditions, an eye  consciousness  apprehending
vase is produced. These three conditions are the causes  that  lead  to  the
effect, the eye consciousness apprehending vase. You can posit a  cause  and
effect relationship there.

In this case, the vase can be posited as a cause of  the  eye  consciousness
apprehending  vase  because  the  eye  consciousness  apprehending  vase  is
produced in dependence on the vase.

With the exception of the Vaibhashikas (proponents of the  Great  Exposition
School), the lowest school, the Sutra  School  and  the  tenets  above  that
accept that cause  and  effect  are  sequential,  i.e.  they  do  not   work
simultaneously. The Vaibhashikas have their own position regarding this  but
their view is not accepted by the rest of the Buddhist tenets.

Cause and effect are sequential, i.e., cause  has  to  precede  effect.  Can
cause and effect happen simultaneously?

We are positing here that there is a cause and effect relationship and  that
cause and effect are not sequential, although. w When we look at a vase,  it
is as if  the  eye  consciousness  apprehending  vase  and  the  vase  exist
simultaneously. In reality, this is not the case. The Vaibhashikas  actually
assert that the eye consciousness apprehending vase functions as  if  it  is
almost like a hand holding its grabbing an object. ; it is  like  there  and
then. For them, the physical sense power, e.g., the eye sense power  does  ,
knows  and sees  its object and it also sees its object. Of course  the  eye
consciousness also sees the object. B, but these are not the  assertions  of
the Sutra School and the tenets above it.



Based on our ordinary experience, when we  see  something,   we  don’t  feel
that there is sequence of events. : there is a  vase  followed  by  our  eye
consciousness seeing  it.  What  we  feel  is  that  our  eye  consciousness
apprehending vase and the vase seem to exist simultaneously.

But this is not what is happening in reality. This is  not  what  the  Sutra
School and the tenets above it assert. Why? This is because there has to  be
a sequence to cause and effect, i.e.,  cause  necessarily  precedes  effect.
This being the case, they cannot be simultaneous.

We have to posit  the  vase  to  be  the  cause  of  the  eye  consciousness
apprehending vase. The consciousness apprehending vase is the result of  its
observed object condition, the vase.  In  dependence  on  the  vase  as  its
observed object  condition,  the  eye  consciousness  apprehending  vase  is
generated into the aspect of vase.

Question: Doesn’t cause and effect have to belong to the  same  category  of
phenomenon, i.e., consciousness gives rise to consciousness and  form  would
give rise to form?

Khen Rinpoche: We have explained before that there are two  different  types
of causes. For example, the water is  the  cause  for  the  plant  but  this
doesn’t mean that water becomes the plant.

Student: But water and  plant  are  still  form.  Here  it  sounds  like  in
dependence on the observed object condition, the  vase,  that   which  is  a
form, is acting as a cause giving rise to an effect that  is  consciousness,
i.e., the eye consciousness apprehending the vase.

Khen Rinpoche: It is very simple. Someone plants a seed in the  garden.  The
person becomes the cause for the plant to grow. Isn’t the person who  plants
the seed the cause? This doesn’t mean the person is not form.

There are two types of causes: (1) substantial  cause  and  (2)  cooperative
conditions. The potter who makes the pot is a cause of the pot, a form.  But
the potter is not form.  SHhe  is  a  non-associated  compositional  factor.
Likewise it is not difficult to posit a  vase  to  be  a  cause  of  an  eye
consciousness apprehending vase.

The Sutra School and the tenets above it assert that cause  and  effect  are
sequential. The vase is the cause  of  the  eye  consciousness  apprehending
vase. Since they assert that cause and effect are sequential, therefore  the
vase has to precede the eye consciousness apprehending vase.

From the example of the generation of  the  eye  consciousness  apprehending
vase, we are trying to relate it to the link of contact in the twelve  links
of dependent-arising that refers to the moment the  three  things  –  ,  the
object, the sense power, and the consciousness –   come  together.  Only  in
dependence on these three things do you then have the link of feeling.

Likewise it is all right to say that  this  is  how  the  eye  consciousness
apprehending vase is produced. I am not sure but perhaps we can posit  this.
This is presenting a thesis.


But there is an issue when we say that the  eye  consciousness  apprehending
vase is produced in dependence on the three things  coming  together,  i.e.,
only after the three things meet is there then the  production  of  the  eye
consciousness  apprehending  vase.   The   next   moment   after   the   eye
consciousness apprehending vase is produced, the vase that  existed  at  the
time of the meeting of the  three  things  hasve  already  ceased  to  exist
because it is a momentary phenomenon. How then are you going to explain  the
production of an eye consciousness apprehending vase?

It is all right for you to understand only parts or nothing at all  of  this
discussion. It is presented so that you can for you to leave  some  imprints
in your mind.

This is where the GES differs from the Sutra School  and  the  tenets  above
it. The higher tenets assert that consciousnesses are aspected, but the  GES
asserts that consciousnesses are non-aspected.

(Audio 32:20– 36.40) Discussion on because the star is very  far  away  from
us, so by the time when we see the reflection of light from the  star  which
is billions of light years away from  us,  the  star  is  no  more  in  that
position but is somewhere else.

This is what I think:
    • At the moment when the three things, the vase, the  eye  sense  power,
      and the consciousness meet, the consciousness that is in the entity of
      clear and knowing is generated in the aspect of vase.
    • This consciousness has the aspect of the apprehended.
    • This consciousness that is in the aspect of  vase  is  then  generated
      into the entity of the eye consciousness apprehending vase.
    • Only then does the eye consciousness realise vase.

This may be the case and this is my thesis. It is  somewhat  like  having  a
mirror and then putting an object in front of the mirror;  it  is  something
like this but not exactly.

The mirror is likened to the consciousness. You  place  an  object,  say,  a
vaseFor example a vase,  is placed in front of the mirror. This  is  likened
to the object. When you place the object vase in front of  the  mirror,  the
object vase is reflected in the mirror.


Likewise when you bring the object a vase to the attention of the mind,  you
could say that the object vase is reflected on the mind.  Specifically  what
it means is that the consciousness is  generated  into  the  aspect  of  the
objectvase.

•
When we are apprehending vase, at the time when the three things, the  vase,
the eye sense power,  and  the  consciousness  meet,  the  consciousness  is
generated into the aspect of vase.

    • This consciousness that has the aspect of vase  then  transforms  into
      entity of consciousness realising vase.

    • In this case,  that  consciousness  that  realises  vase  is  the  eye
      consciousness apprehending vase.

When we explain it in this way, then there is  no  problem  in  saying  that
when the eye consciousness apprehending vase is  generated,  the  vase  that
was its observed object condition has already ceased  to  exist.   The  vase
has already ceased to exist because cause precedes effect.

If that is the case, how then do you  explain  the  generation  of  the  eye
consciousness apprehending vase when the vase has already ceased  to  exist?
There is no problem there because at the time when  the  three  things  come
together, the consciousness is generated into the aspect of vase. This  then
transforms in the next moment into  the  entity  of  the  eye  consciousness
apprehending vase.


I think if you think this way, it may be helpful and give  you  some  ideas.
But I am not sure if this is the right way to think  about  this  issue.  am
not saying that this is the answer. This is what I think  and  perhaps  this
is the case. It is something to think about.

Just as what the link of contact is, Tthe link of contact is posited  to  be
the moment of the gathering of the three things:   -the  object,  the  sense
power,  and theand  consciousness. - and Oonly after that,  comes  the  link
of feeling.

Likewise, iIt may be all right  to  explain  the  production  of,  say,  for
example, an eye consciousness apprehending vase in such a way.

In order for the feeling to arise, there  must  be  contact.  In  order  for
there to be contact, you need the three things -1. An object,  for  example,
a pleasant object
2. Sense object and
3. Consciousness

• All these three things must be present in order to have contact.

• Before contact, you cannot  have  feeling.  So  feeling  is  dependent  on
  contact.

I am not saying this is the reality and this is the answer. This is  what  I
think and perhaps this is the case. I cannot say for sure that this  is  the
case because I don’t have anyone to check with on this issue. But  Tthis  is
related to the issue of asserting consciousnesses as being aspected.

This is one of the core issues  in  the  study  of  the  mind.  It  is  very
important because the GES asserts that the consciousnesses are  non-aspected
whereas  the  Sutra  School  and   the   tenets   above   it   assert   that
consciousnesses are aspected. What is the  The  reason  for  asserting  that
consciousnesses are aspected? That  iis a critical  issue  that  has  to  be
understood. Using

Let us take the example of a vase and  the  eye  consciousness  apprehending
vase, i. It is asserted that something comes between“interrupts”  these  two
things.  That something is asserted to be the aspect.

The reason I brought up this example of the  four  projected  resultseffects
of the twelve links of dependent-arising is to highlight the  importance  of
studying Buddhist philosophy in more detail.

Although we hadve studied  the twelve links of dependent-arising and we  are
able to name all the links, explain  what  the  twelve  links  are,  and  so
forth, but if someone were to pursue this topic further by  asking  what  is
contact exactly, what is feeling exactly, how  are  they  produced,  and  so
forth, you may then find it very difficult to  answer  these  questions.  In
order to answer these questions, you have to understand the presentation  of
the mind. Without understanding what we are studying here and  some  of  the
other topics that we will cover in the future, it is extremely difficult  to
get a good understanding of the lam-rim.



We have to always keep in mind that the lam-rim, the stages of the  path  to
enlightenment, is a genre that  gathers the subject matter of all  the  Five
Great Treatises. They are mainly philosophical subjects so Tthe  lam-rim  is
like the essence of these major philosophical textssubjects.

In order to be able to know the lam-rim  well,  it  is  important  to  study
Buddhist philosophy. We are trying to do this here. We need to know the lam-
rim well because the lam-rim is  the  exact  roadmap  to  enlightenment.  It
tells us how to achieve enlightenment and  it  is  the  principal  means  by
which we can subdue and discipline our minds.

Anyway definitely some imprints were left. I can’t say that  is  necessarily
good. Perhaps some people may have gotten angry and upset.  I  am  not  sure
what kind of imprints were left.

Direct perceiver
The definition of  a  direct  perceiver  is  a  knower  that  is  free  from
conceptuality and is non-mistaken.

In order to know what a direct perceiver is,  you  have  to  understand  its
definition. The definition of a direct perceiver is a knower  that  is  free
from conceptuality and is non-mistaken. A direct perceiver is:
(1) a consciousness
(2)  it has to be a non-conceptual consciousness
(3) it is non-mistaken
When these characteristics are present, that knower or  consciousness  is  a
direct perceiver.

Question:  When  you  understand  this  definition  and  relate  it  to  the
definition of a direct valid cogniser, is a direct valid cogniser  a  direct
perceiver? (Definition of a direct valid cognizer:  a  new  incontrovertible
knower that is free of conceptuality)


You must be able to say “Yes” immediately because we  have  already  covered
the definition of a direct valid cogniser.  As we progress in  our  studies,
we should not forget whatever had been  covered  earlier  because  they  are
inter-connected. So if When you know the  definition  of  the  direct  valid
cogniszer and if you are asked; “Is the  direct  valid  cogniszer  a  direct
perceiver?”, then immediately  you  will  say  “Yes”.  The  only  difference
between them is “new” and “incontrovertible.”


Khen Rinpoche: Maybe I shall give  one  example.  When  you  play  the  game
chess, you must know the rules. You must recognise and know  the  individual
pieces such as the horse, the  queen,  the  minister,  the  bishop,  and  so
forth, and remember them.  Not  only  that.  You  have  to  remember   their
functions and how you can move them. There  are  certain  rules  related  to
that: some move diagonally, some move left, and  some  can  be  moved  in  a
straight line. Not every piece can do the same thing.  Each  of  them  hasve
different functions.

Once you know the rules, of course you have  to  play.  Once  you  play,  it
depends on who you are playing with. Once you start to  play  and  you  play
against  a  very  good  opponent,  you  will  always  lose.  You  will   get
discouraged. They kill you with one single move and the game is over.

In chess, you cannot simply see only what is in front  of  you.  You  really
need to have the a biggerger plan. You need to have  ten  ideas  of  how  to
move the pieces. Then you will be able to win. You  need  a  lot  of  ideas;
first this  move, followed by an other move, and so on. But you won’t  won’t
don’t know how the other person plans to move. You make your  move  and  you
need to adjust your plan idea accordingly.

Of course not everybody can do that. I also couldn’t an’t do  that.  When  I
played chess, I only sawee what wasis in front of me. Some people  are  very
clever and they trick you! They come from behind  and  checkmate  you.  Then
you lose. You don’t know even know how they came from  behind.  You  thought
you were doing very well but somehow you were caught.

It is the same here. If you really want to play chess,  you  must  know  the
rules. You must play with people of the same level  so  that  sometimes  you
win and , sometimes you lose. When you win, you will have  the  interest  to
play the second time. Even when you lose, you will have the interest  to  go
back and challenge your opponent. So win or lose you will go back and  play.


But not everyone will have be able  to  generate  that  level  of  interest.
Generating such interest is and not easy to get, that’s the  most  difficult
part. But oOnce you have the interest to play the chess,   then  that’s  it.
There will be , no problem. , yYou will get  make  it  somewhere  with  your
game. . YYou may not be the best chess player  but you can play.

We can apply It is the same logic herehere  when it comes to  you  llearning
the Buddhist philosophy. ies. It is a similar the same  kind  of  game.  You
must know all the definitions, all the rules, how the mind works,  how  many
types of minds there are, what kind of minds do  what,  and  so  forth.  You
must know all these things. After that you can  play  the  game  with  other
people. Then your mind can think faster. You  andcan  answer faster.

This is something that I think it is similar. Once you are able to do  that,
I t think you will generate get some interest in your the  mind.  Your  mind
will be sharper, faster, and maybe even happier. “I thought I was so  am  so
stupid but Iactually I am am quite  clever.,” It is it becomes possible  for
your mind to change  like that.

What I think see is that the most difficult part is to generate  the  t  the
interest. Once you have the interest, I think there  are  plenty  of  things
you can do: ; you can read, you can discuss with your  friends,  ,  you  can
come to class, and so forth. But iIt is very difficult to have this get  the
interest.

Even  in  the   monastery,  not  every  monk  has  the  interest  to   study
philosophy. I mentioned before that, , in my  class,  there  were  about  35
classmates but only six 6 or  ten  10  hadve  the  real  interest  to  study
philosophy.  ,  Nnot  everybody  can  understand.  Sometimes  it   was    is
challenging. , Ssometimes they kneow  (the  answers).  Sand  sometimes  they
didnon’t know and after that they got et discouraged. A lot  of  things  can
happen.

Here, if you want to play the game, you want to  learn  more,   and  develop
your  interest,  get  the  interest  then  you  must  learn  the  rules  and
definitions. You try to play some games and . Hhopefully  you  develop  have
some interest there. Once you have the interest, that is   the  final  goal.
and Tthen there is no problem.

What I seeThe  most  difficult  part  is  developing  getting  the  interest
because  sometimes  you  don’t  see  the  point  or  sometimes   you   don’t
understand. This is athe difficult time but if you  really  want  to  study,
then I think that there is no other way. You  must  try  and  try  and  try.
Someone saidbody say, ; “This  subject  is  not  Not  Lorig  but  lorig  but
rlunrig-rig.”. After studying Llorig they become rlung!.  Rlung  in  Tibetan
meansis stress.

As much as possibleY you have to see the purpose of  learning  this  such  a
subject. Through the examples that I  hadve  given  before,  from  that  you
should be able can reallyto  see that  there  is  this  e  close  connection
between the study of the  mind and the learning and  theand  practising  the
ce of lam-rimLamrim (The Stages of the  Path  to  Enlightenment).  When  you
understand see this e relationship, then you should  try to to act on it  as
much as possible and put in your best effort  to learn this e topic as  much
as possible.

The dThe definition of a direct perceiver: is a  knower  which  is  free  of
conceptuality and non-mistaken.
Direct perceiver has four divisions:
   1. Sense direct perceiver
   2. Mental direct perceiver
   3. Self-knowing direct perceiver
   4. Yogic direct perceiver
   5.
Sense direct perceiver
What







Uncommon empowering condition
What determines whether a mind is a sense direct perceiver or not?
One of the things to look out for is the uncommon empowering condition.
The uncommon empowering condition of the sense direct perceiver has to be  a
physical sense power.
One of the things to look out for is its uncommon empowering condition.  One
of the determining factors that makes  a particular  consciousness  a  sense
direct perceiver is its uncommon empowering condition, i.e.,  which  is  the
the physical sense power. Likewise to determine ,  whether  a  consciousness
is a mental direct perceiver or not, one of the  things  that  you  have  to
look at its for is the uncommon empowering condition. It is the  same  thing
with the yogic direct perceiver. The uncommon empowering  condition  is  one
of the factors that determine what kind of mind it is.

|                 |                      |                           |
|Types of direct  |Uncommon empowering   |Definition                 |
|perceiver        |condition             |                           |
|                 |                      |                           |
|Sense direct     |Physical sense power  |is a knower that is free   |
|perceiver        |                      |from conceptuality and is  |
|                 |                      |non-mistaken               |
|                 |                      |                           |
|Mental direct    |Mental sense power    |is a consciousness that is |
|perceiver        |                      |an other-knower that which |
|                 |                      |is free from conceptuality |
|                 |                      |and is non-mistaken        |
|                 |                      |                           |
|Yogic direct     |Meditative            |is an other-knowing exalted|
|perceiver        |stabiliszation that   |knower in the continuum of |
|                 |which is a union of   |a Superior that which is   |
|                 |calm- abiding and     |free from conceptuality and|
|                 |special insight       |is non-mistaken.           |

The above  respective definitions can be found of  these  direct  perceivers
are in the Hhandout No. 5  (dated 10th  July 2012).  You should look  at  it
on your own and memorisze them. What I am  doing  here  is  to  highlighting
some  the key points that bring them together.

One of  the  things  that  determine  whether  a  mind  is  a  sense  direct
perceiver, mental direct perceiver,  or yogic direct perceiver is  is  their
uncommon empowering  conditions.  By  depending  on  the  type  of  uncommon
empowering condition, the ,  that  consciousness  may  be  a  mental  direct
perceiver, sense direct perceiver,  or yogic direct perceiver.  These  three
minds have their own an uncommon empowering conditions.
Sense direct perceiver
The sSense direct perceiver can be divided into  five types:
1. Sense direct perceiver apprehending formss
2. Sense direct perceiver apprehending sounds
3. Sense direct perceiver apprehending odours
4. Sense direct perceiver apprehending tastes
5. Sense direct perceiver apprehending tangible objects

How are  these five sense direct perceivers are ddifferentiated?
These five sense direct perceivers are not differentiated on  the  basis  of
in having a radically different sense  powers  as  all  of  them  have  athe
physical sense power as their uncommon empowering condition.
If a mind it is a sense direct perceiver, then  they  must  have  a  similar
uncommon empowering condition. That It cannot be  different  because  it  is
the uncommon empowering condition, a physical sense power, that which  makes
the mind it a sense direct perceiver.


All five are produced in dependence upon a physical sense power  that  which
is their uncommon empowering  condition  but  the  specific  physical  sense
powerss for these five types of direct perceivers are different.


For example, a: A sense  direct  perceiver  apprehending  form  is  a  sense
direct perceiver:
.
Its has an uncommon empowering condition which iis  necessarily  a  physical
sense power.
In this case, the physical sense power has to be the an eye sense power.
• The uncommon empowering condition for the production  of  a  sense  direct
  perceiver apprehending form has to be the eye sense power.
• Then Yyou also need an  observed  object  condition,  i.e.,  a   which  is
  visible form.
• On top of that, it has to be a knower that is free from conceptuality  and
  is non-mistaken.
When If a consciousness has all these characteristics, then it is  called  a
sense direct perceiver apprehending form.

Why aret there are five sense direct perceivers?

(1) This is because they have  different  observed  object  conditions.  The
observed object condition can be a form, a sound, a smell, a  taste,   or  a
and tangible object. touch and by Ddepending on the  object,  which  it  is,
then you have its the respective sense direct perceiver.

(2) However There are also you also have the different  uncommon  empowering
conditions. Although all their uncommon empowering conditions  are  physical
sense powers,  but tthey are not the same physical sense power as there  are
the eye sense power, the ear sense power, the nose sense power,  the  tongue
sense power,  and the body sense power.

Theseat are  is the reasons why there are you have  the  five  sense  direct
perceivers.

It is important that  for  you  to  read  theis  handout  on  your  own  and
memorisze the definitions, the divisions,  and the illustrations.  Then  Oon
thatis basis, you can then bring them it up for  discussion  when  if  there
are any words or concepts that you don’t understand. Then Then it this  will
become clearer. We will cover the As for the other direct perceivers  later.
, we will talk  about  it  later  on,  especially  the  self-knowing  direct
perceiver.

                             *******************
Discussion on hHomework that was given in Lesson 7:

1. How many possibilities are there between an inferential  valid  cogniszer
   and a mistaken consciousness?

Answer from sStudent 2: There are three possibilities:.
1) There is a mind  that  is  both  an  inferential  valid  cogniser  and  a
   mistaken  consciousness  because  an  inferential   valid   cogniser   is
   necessarily  a  mistaken  consciousness.  An  illustration  is  the   eye
   consciousness that sees smoke and the thought arises thinking that  there
   is a fire.
2)  1st  possibility:  Both  an  inferential  valid  cognizer  and  mistaken
   consciousness because inferential valid cognizer  is  necessary  mistaken
   consciousness
3) Illustration:  Eye  consciousness  upon  seeing  smoke  and  the  thought
   thinking there is a fire.
4) There is a mind that 2nd  possibility: It  is  a  mistaken  consciousness
   but is  not an inferential valid cogniszer. An i
5) Illustration is a : dDoubting  consciousness.
6) There is a mind that is not an inferential valid cogniser and is  a  non-
   mistaken consciousness. An illustration is a direct perceiver such as the
   eye consciousness apprehending form.
3rd possibility: It is not an inferential valid  cognizer  and  non-mistaken
consciousness.
Illustration: A direct perceiver, eye consciousness apprehending form.
2.  How  many  possibilities  are  there  between   a   correctly   assuming
   consciousness and a conceptual consciousness?

Answer from sStudent 3:  There are three 3 possibilities:.
1) There is a mind that is  1st  possibility:  bBoth  a  correctly  assuming
   consciousness and a conceptual consciousness because a correctly assuming
   consciousness is necessarily a conceptual consciousness. .
2) There is a 2nd  possibility:  A  conceptual  consciousness  that  is  not
   necessarily  a correctly assuming consciousness.  An i
3) Illustration is : aA doubting consciousness.  - Thought thinking  whether
   someone standing there is Patricia or not. It looks like but not sure.
4)
5)  There  is  a  mind  that  is  3rd  possibility:  nNeither  a  conceptual
   consciousness nor a correctly assuming consciousness. An example will be
6) Illustration: aA direct perceiver,  – an eye  consciousness  apprehending
   vase.

Khen  Rinpoche:  Why  is  an  eye  consciousness  apprehending  vase  not  a
correctly assuming consciousness assumption?

Student 3: Because a correctly assuming consciousness is  necessarily  is  a
conceptual consciousness.

Khen Rinpoche spoke in English: ; Why is that so?

Student 3: Because it is a determinative knower.

Khen Rinpoche spoke in English: How do you know that?

Student 3: Because the definition says so.

Khen Rinpoche spoke in English: That is ’s the way.

3. How many possibilities are there between  a  wrong  consciousness  and  a
   mistaken consciousness?

Answer from sStudent 4: There are three 3 possibilities:.
1) The first 1st possibility is that there is a mind that is  :  Nneither  a
   wrong consciousness nor a mistaken consciousness. An example will be a
Illustration: A direct valid cogniszer.

Khen  Rinpoche:  Why  is  a  direct   valid   cogniszer   not   a   mistaken
consciousness?

Student:  4: Because it is an incontrovertible knower.

Khen RinpocheVen Gyurme: It follows that an inferential valid  cogniszer  is
non-mistaken because it is also an incontrovertible knower.

Student 4: It is non-mistaken with respect to its appearing object.

Khen Rinpoche: What is its appearing object?

Student 4: If it is an eye consciousness apprehending a vase, the  appearing
object is the  vase.

Khen Rinpoche: Is the appearing object of an eye consciousness  apprehending
a vase vase necessarily vase?
 necessarily the vase?

Student 4: Yes.

Khen Rinpoche: Can eEverything that appears  to  the  an  eye  consciousness
apprehending a vase can be posited to be the appearing  object  of  to  that
consciousness or not?

Student 4: The eye consciousness has to apprehend all these objects as  well
otherwise it won’t be a direct valid cogniser.

Khen  Rinpoche:  Everything  that  appears   to   this   eye   consciousness
apprehending a vase, isn’t that its its appearing object??

Student 4::  Yes. I and it necessarnecessarily y hass to apprehend it.

Khen Rinpoche: If it appears to  an  eye  consciousness  apprehending  vase,
does it necessarily have to be its’ appearing object?

Student 4: Yes.

Khen  Rinpoche:  So  everything  that  appears  to  the  eye   consciousness
apprehending vase is its appearing object. So tTherefore what if it  appears
to an eye consciousness apprehending vase, it  is  not  necessarnecessarilyy
the a vase!.

Student 4: Why is that so?

Khen Rinpoche: When  a  direct  perceiver  engages  its  object,  e.g.,  for
example an eye consciousness apprehending vase, it engages  the  its  object
in its totality. What does it mean when we say  that  a  collective  engager
engages its object collectively, entirely,  or in totality? In the  case  of
an eye consciousness apprehending vase, everything about  the  vase  appears
to the eye consciousness apprehending it, e.g., t. The impermanence  of  the
vase appears to the eye consciousness apprehending that vase.

Do you accept that?

Student: 2) The second 2nd possibility  is  that  there  is  :  Aa  mistaken
consciousness that is not a wrong consciousness. An example will be
Illustration: anAn inferential valid cogniszer.

Khen Rinpoche: Why  is  an  inferential  valid  cogniszer  is  not  a  wrong
consciousness?

Student:  4: Because it realiszes its object.

Khen Rinpoche: But iIsn’t it  mistaken? How can you realisze an object  when
ile it is a mistaken consciousness?

Student 4: It realiszes its object  inferentially via a mental image.

Khen Rinpoche: It realiszes its object,  therefore it is  not  mistaken.  In
the case of an inferential valid cogniszer apprehending vase,  isn’t  it  it
mmistaken with regard to the vase?

St with regards to vase?
Student 4: Yes.

Khen Rinpoche: If that mind is mistaken, it has gotten the  vase  wrong.  If
it is mistaken about the vase,  then how can it realisze the vase?

Student 4: It realiszes the vase through a  correct sign.

Khen Rinpoche: If it is mistaken, what is there to realisze?

Student 4: In dependence on the Through the ccorrect sign,  it  is  able  to
realisze vase viathrough reasoning.

Khen Rinpoche: Isn’t the   inferential  valid  cogniszer  apprehending  vase
mistaken with regards to vase?

Khen Rinpoche spoke in English: Think carefully. It is not easy.

Student: 4: It is mistaken with respect to its appearing object but it  does
realisze vase.

Khen Rinpoche spoke in English: That is not my question.

Khen  Rinpoche:  Is  the  inferential  valid  cogniszer  apprehending   vase
mistaken with regard to the about vase?

Student 4: No.

Khen Rinpoche spoke in English: So far you have been saying  yes. Now   then
you say no. You are not hearing the question.

The inferential valid  cognizer  apprehending  vase  is  not  mistaken  with
respect to vase.
Is the inferential valid cogniszer apprehending vase mistaken  with  respect
to the vase?

Khen Rinpoche spoke in English: This is the way  to  debate.  ,  Ffirst  you
listen to the question. When you go to court you must listen to ,  what  the
judge says! you must listen.

Is the inferential valid cogniszer apprehending vase mistaken  with  respect
to the vase?

Student 4: No.

Khen Rinpoche: Are you sure?
Ven Gyurme: Then why is it a mistaken consciousness?

It is very clear that an inferential valid cogniszer apprehending vase is  a
mistaken consciousness and it is a conceptual consciousness.  What  we  have
to think about is this: ; “Is the inferential valid  cogniszer  apprehending
vase mistaken with regards to vase?”

If the inferential valid cogniszer is mistaken with regards  to  the   vase,
then how can it then realisze vase?
It is not mistaken about  the  vase,  otherwise  it  cannot  realisze  vase.
Because it realiszes vase, it is not mistaken with respect to the  vase  but
that consciousness is a mistaken consciousness.

This is what the AMWS and the tenets schools  below  it  assert.  Of  course
when , if you bring in the assertions of the CMWS for  discussion,  then  it
is very different.

Student: The third 3rd possibility is that there is a mind that is  :  bBoth
a wrong consciousness and a mistaken consciousness.
An example is Illustration: aAn eye consciousness apprehending a blue-  snow
mountain.

Question: Are there Student 5: Is there four  possibilities  for  the  third
question? Because  a  wrong  consciousness  can  also  be  a  non-conceptual
consciousness so it is not a mistaken  three.  Something  that  is  a  wrong
consciousness but  it  is  not  mistaken  consciousnessbecause  it  is  non-
conceptual. An example  Illustrationwill be an  :  eEye  consciousness  that
which sees  a snow mountain as blue. It is non-conceptual.

Khen Rinpoche: Ven Gyurme: Is it non-mistaken?
Student 5:  If  it  is  conceptual  consciousness  then  it  is  necessarily
mistaken.
Ven Gyurme: Give an example of a mind that on  something  that  is  a  wrong
consciousness and not a mistaken consciousness .

Student 5: Didn’t Because we say a mistaken consciousness is  necessarily  a
conceptual consciousness?

Ven Gyurme: No, we did not. n’t

Student 5: Oh! Then it is ok!. Then I have to do my homework.

Question: Student 6: (Audio 103:03 – 104:12)  During  meditation,  when  one
shuts down all one’s the sense consciousness,   and  only  mental  perceiver
observing one’s thought. wWhen the thoughts  arise,  that  is  a  conceptual
consciousness. But there is also a mind that is aware of the arising of  and
observing such thoughts. What type of consciousness is that?   At  the  time
when knowing awareness is awareness and  based  on  awareness,  there  is  a
thought that separate from you. At that time that is  non-conceptual.  Which
awareness is this? It  is  not  sense  consciousness,  not  a  yogic  direct
perceiver, is it  a  mental  that  experience  non-conceptuality  as  direct
perceiver but not apprehending the thought?

Answer: Khen Rinpoche: Most of them are  conceptual  thoughts.  If  you  are
talking about a the  direct  actual  experience,  i.e.,  the  non-conceptual
experience of the nature of the experience of the mind, then you  can  posit
that to be a mental direct perceiver.

But they are mostly conceptual. If you remember the quotation from the  Lam-
Rim Chenmo, RCM about about brbringing a sign,  bringing  an  appearance  to
the mind, that is a  conceptual  appearance,  most  of  them  are  basically
conceptual.

Question: Student 7: (105:24 – 108:45) What is the relationship between  the
implicit realiszation of the opposite of non-blue and the  appearing  object
of the conceptual consciousness apprehending blue that which  is  a  meaning
generality?

Ven Gyurme: Is opposite from non-blue according impermanent or permanent?
Student 7: I don’t know.
Answer:  Khen  Rinpoche:  We   will   use   the   conceptual   consciousness
apprehending vase as the example.
Theis conceptual consciousness apprehending vase explicitly realiszes  vase.
 and It also implicitly realiszes the opposite from non-vase.

All that appears to a conceptual consciousness apprehending vase is not  its
appearing object. T, vase is not its appearing object because the  appearing
object is posited to be the meaning generality of vase.
The vVase appears to the conceptual  consciousness  apprehending  vase,  but
the vase is not its appearing object.

Why is the  vase  not  the  appearing  object  of  conceptual  consciousness
apprehending it?
The explanation for this is already been given.
Whatever appears to a conceptual  consciousness  apprehending  vase  is  not
necessarily itsthe appearing object.

We talked about the appearance of as opposite  from  non-vase.  In  general,
the appearance of as opposite from non-vase is an imputed factor,  i.e.,  it
is ; imputed by thought.

But whatever is an appearance that is  as  opposite  from  non-vase  is  not
necessarily an imputed factor.

Question from Khen Rinpoche: Is the appearance  as  opposite  from  non-vase
necessarily permanent?

Khen Rinpoche spoke in English: Think about  this  question  and  bring  the
answer.








Translated by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme

Transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek, Vivien Ng and Patricia Lee

Edited by Cecilia Tsong


