Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Lorig/Edited/BP2 M2 L13 (final).pdf
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:53:48.819528
================================================================================

Amitabha Buddhist Centre                               Second Basic Program – Module 2  
                                 The Study of Mind and Its Functions  
 
 
Lesson 13  
Page 1 of 13 Transcript of teachings by Khen Rinpoche Geshe 
Chonyi  
 
Lesson No: 13        Date: 31st July 2012  
 
All page references in this lesson refer to Handout No. 7 dated 24th July 
2012: The Study of Mind and its Functions (Direct Valid Cogniser s, 
Inferential Valid  Cognisers , and Syllogisms)   
 
An o bject of engagement  prima rily refers to the principal object  that is 
engaged or realised by a valid cogni ser. A valid cogni ser realises its object 
of engagement , its principal object . 
 
A wrong consciousness  is the opposite of a valid cogni ser because a wrong 
consciousness does not realise its principal object . For this reason , we do 
not posit  an object of engagement for a wrong consciousness.  Having said 
that, this does not mean that consciousnesses that do have object s of 
engagement are valid cogni sers. 
 
This is  the reason why we do  not posit an object of engagement for a 
wrong consciousness . This is the position of Sera Je College. There are 
different opin ions on this  as some colleges h old different position s. They 
have different definition s for a wrong consciousness. Our definition  is that 
a wrong consciousness is a knower that engages its object erroneously  
whereas other colleges defi ne a wrong consciousness to be a knower that 
is mistaken with regard  to its object of engagement . 
 
*************  
Can you remember all the seven consciousnesses now without looking at 
the handou t? Do you remember the ir definitions?  It is important to do 
test yourself every now and then to see whether you can remember the 
definition s or not . If you can’t, then take out the handout and try to 
refresh your mem ory. Try to memori se them  because you need them here. 
You can not carry  all your text books with you every day.  
 
For example, the definition of a valid cogni ser is a new  incontrovertible 
knower. Keep repeating this for a few days  and then move on to another 
definition, e.g., the subsequent cogni ser: a knower that realises what has 
already been reali sed. Keep on repeating  this until it sticks in your mind.  
 
******************  
There are two types of valid cogni sers: (1) direct valid cogni sers and (2) 
inferential valid cogni ser. 
 
When we talked about direct perceivers , there are  (1) sense direct 
perceiver s and (2) mental direct perceiver s.  
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                               Second Basic Program – Module 2  
                                 The Study of Mind and Its Functions  
 
 
Lesson 13  
Page 2 of 13 A sense direct perceiver  is generated in dependence upon three  
conditions : 
1. its uncommon empowering condition , a physical sense power  
2. its observed object condition   
3. an immediately preceding condition  
In dependence on these three conditions, a sense direct valid cogni ser is 
produced. Similarly, the sense direct perceiver  is produced as well.1 
 
The d efinition of an inferential valid cogni ser is a new incontrovertible 
determinative knower that is directly produced in dependence  on a correct 
sign that is its basis.  How is an inferential valid cogni ser generated ? It is  
generated in dependence upon a correct sign  that is its basis.  
 
 
 
An inferential valid cogni ser has three divisions:  
 Inferential cogni ser by power of the fact  
 
   e.g. an inferential cogni ser that realizes that sound is impermanent through the sign of being a product.  
 
 Inferential cogni ser through renown  
 
e.g an inferential cogni ser that realizes that it is suitable to express the rabbit -possessor by the term moon 
from the sign of its ex isting among objects of thought.  
 
 Inferential cogni ser through belief  
 
e.g an inferential cogni ser that realises that the scripture, “From giving, resources, from ethics, a happy 
migration,” is incontrovertible with respect to the meaning indic ated by it by the sign of its being a scripture 
free from the three contradictions  (Page 2 ).    
                                                           
1 The d efinition of a sense direct valid cognizer  is: a new incontrovertible knower, free 
from conceptuality, which arises in dependence upon a physical sense power that is its 
uncommon empowering condition.  The d efinition of a sense direct perceiver  is:  
1) that which is produced in dependence on its own uncommon empowering condition, a 
physical sense power, and  
2) is a knower that is free from conceptuality and non -mistaken . 
 
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                               Second Basic Program – Module 2  
                                 The Study of Mind and Its Functions  
 
 
Lesson 13  
Page 3 of 13  
Since an inferential valid cogni ser is generated in dependence on a correct 
sign that is its basis, therefore it is very important to know what a corre ct 
sign is.  
 
Elements of a Syllogism  
On page 3 of the handout , there is a brief introduction of  what a correct 
sign is. When stating a correct sign : 
 There must first be a subject  that you are trying to analy se.  
 There must be a predicate  to be proven .  
Then comes the correct sign .  
 
When you state a reason for proving something , that sign or reason could 
be correct or incorrect . It is important to identify what constitute s a 
correct sign  because it is only in dependen ce upon a correct sign  that an 
inferential valid cogni ser is generated.  
 
A syllogism is stated in this way : 
 
 
 
Product  is stated as the sign to pro ve that sound is an impermanent 
phenomena . When you put forth a syllogism, you can either try to pro ve 
that the subject is something , or that the subject has some thing  such as 
a specific propert y or characteristic .   
 
“The subject , sound , is an impermanent  phenomenon ”: in this case, you 
are trying to prove  that the subject is something, i.e.,  an impermanent 
phenomenon .  
 
There is a fire in the mountain pass because there is smoke. Here you are 
trying to establish that there is a fire. The f ire exists in the mountain pass 
because of the sign, smoke.  Here you are trying to establish that the 
subject is something  or the subject has something .  
 
Likewise you can also try to establish that the subject is not something or 
it does not have some thing.  
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                               Second Basic Program – Module 2  
                                 The Study of Mind and Its Functions  
 
 
Lesson 13  
Page 4 of 13 This may be an easier example than the one using sound : “The subject , 
the consciousness to whic h one moon appears as two moons, is a wrong 
consciousness  because it is a knower that engages its object erroneously .”  
Here we are trying to establish that the sense consciousness to which one 
moon appears as two moons is a wrong consciousness with the reason 
that a wrong consciousness is a knower that engages its object 
erroneously.  
 
Imagine that there it is a cow . A person sees th is animal but does  not 
know what a cow is.  He sees horns on the cow . He wonders, “Is that a 
horse ?” You then tell that person , “That animal over there is not a horse 
because it has horn s”.  
 
Khen Rinpoche: Is that better?  
 
Other examples:  
 A person is having doubt s as to whether there is an elephant in the 
forest. Then some one come s along  and tells this person , “There is an 
elephant in the forest because you can hear  the elephant trumpeting .” 
 Or someone is having doubt s as to whether there is a tiger in the 
forest. This person is told, “ There is a tiger in the forest because you 
can hear the tiger roar ing.” 
 
Khen Rinpoche : Is that  not a correct sign? The roar of the tiger?  
 
Correct signs 
 
The definition of a correct sign  is that which is the three modes  (Page 4) .  
 
That which is the three modes is a correct sign  and that which is not the 
three modes is not a correct sign.  What then are the three modes?   
 
The three modes are th ree criteria that a correct sign  must satisfy .  These are its being:  
 
 The property of the subject  
 
 The forward pervasion  
 
 The counter pervasion  (Page 4)  
 
The illustration is:  
The subject, sound, is an impermanent phenomenon because of being a 
product .  
This is a correct sign  that is the three modes . You have to know what the 
three modes are.  
 
1. The p roperty of the subject   
 
The property of the subject is reckoned between the sign and its basis of rela tion, the subject . (Page 4) ] 
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                               Second Basic Program – Module 2  
                                 The Study of Mind and Its Functions  
 
 
Lesson 13  
Page 5 of 13 (1) First, you need a subject that is faultless . In the above illustration, 
sound is the subject. In this case, sound is a faultless subject.  Sound can 
only be a faultless subject in relation to someone who has al ready reali sed 
that sound is a product. What that person has not reali sed is whether 
sound is an impermanent phenomenon or not.  You are trying to pro ve to 
him that sound is an impermanent  phenomenon through the sign, 
product .  
 
In the first place, th e person to whom you are trying to prove that sound 
is an impermanent phenomenon must have already reali sed that sound is 
a product. If th at person has already reali sed that sound is a product but 
is unsure whether sound is an impermanent phenomenon, for this 
person, sound become a faultless subject.  
 
(2) The p roperty of the subject  means that in order for it to be a correct 
sign, the sign (or reason ) that is stated must exist  on the subject . 
Depending on the statement , if it is pro ving that the subject  is something , 
for the sign to be the property of the subject, that subject  must be  the 
sign.  
 
In the illustration , the su bject is sound  and the sign is product. When you 
are trying to prove that  the subject is something , then the subject  is the 
sign. Here, for the sign to be the property of the sub ject, the subject , 
sound , is the sign, product, i.e., sound has to be a product.  Therefore the 
sign fulfils the criterion of being a property of the subject .  
 
If sound is not a product, then the property of the subject does not exist . 
If that is the case, then the sign, product, does not  fulfil the criteri on of 
being a correct sign.  
 
(3) The subject and the sign that are stated  must be different .  
 
With regard t o the illustration , product  is a correct sign because  it fulfils 
the three modes . First the property of the subject  must be established  as 
it is stated here in this syllogism . Why is it said that the property of the 
subject  is established ?  This is because:  
 
1. There is a faultless subject . The person to whom you are trying to 
prove that sound is a n impermanent phenomenon  has n ot yet realised 
that sound is an impermanent phenomen on. 
2. That person has already reali sed that sound is a product .  
3. The subject , sound  and the sign, product , are different . 
 
So these three criteria are satisfied.  
 
Question : What is meant by a faultless subject?  
 
Answer:  When is a subject a faultless subject? In order for it to be a 
faultless subject , it is something that one wish es to understand. In the 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                               Second Basic Program – Module 2  
                                 The Study of Mind and Its Functions  
 
 
Lesson 13  
Page 6 of 13 illustration, t his person must have reali sed that sound is a  product  but is 
unsure whether sound is an impermanent phenomenon . You are trying to 
establish this for this person , who is interest ed to know . 
 
For the property of the subject to be established, the se are the three 
conditions  you have to look out for:  
1. Whether the subject , i.e., the thing that one seek s to understand , is 
faultless . 
2. Whether the sign exists on the subject .  
3. Whether the subject and the sign are different.  
This is how you ascertain whether the sign is the propert y of the subject .   
 
In the syllogism  - the subject, sound, is an impermanent phenomenon 
because of being a product  - the subject , sound, is a faultless subject 
because th e person to whom you are stating this syllogism has already 
realised that sound is a product but has yet to reali se that sound is an 
impermanent  phenomenon. Therefore he wants to know whether sound is  
an impermanent phenomenon or not. For this person the subject, sound, 
is a faultless subject.  
 
If the syllogis m is this, “The subject , sound , is an impermanent 
phenomenon  because of being a sound ,” the subject , sound  is not a 
faultless  subject.  The faultless subject does not exist . Why isn’t there a 
faultless subject  here? If someone has already reali sed that sound is an 
impermanent phenomen on, how can that person have any doubt with 
respect to sound being an impermanent phenomenon ? For that reason, in 
this syll ogism, the faultless subject does not exist . Also the subject , sound  
and the sign , sound  are not different .  
 
2. Forward pervasion  
 
The similar class is the basis of relation of t he forward pervasion The forward pervasion is a relationship 
between the sign and the similar class  (Page 4) .  
 
If the sign is the predicate to be proven, that is the forward pervasi on.   
 
The subject, sound, is an impermanent phenomenon because of being a 
product :  
 the subject is sound  
 the sign or reason is product  
 the p redicate to be proven  is impermanent phenomenon . 
 
The sign is the predicate to be proven , i.e., product is an impermanent 
phenomen on. The forward pervasion  is established because whatever is a 
product  is necessarily an impermanent phenomenon . One way to check   
whether the forward pervasion  is established or not is to see whether the 
sign is the predicate to be proven . 
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                               Second Basic Program – Module 2  
                                 The Study of Mind and Its Functions  
 
 
Lesson 13  
Page 7 of 13 The syllogism is this: t he sense consciousness to which one moon  appears 
as two moons is a direct perceiver because of being a sense 
consciousness.   
 The su bject is the sense consciousness to which one moon appears as 
two moons  
 The s ign is sense consciousness  
 The p redicate to be proven  is a direct perceiver  
 
I am not saying that this is a correct sign.   
 
Is the property of the subject   established?  The property of the subject  is 
established because the subject, the sense consciousness to which one 
moon appears as two moons  is the sign, a sense consciousness .   
 
In order for the property of the subject  to be established, there are three 
criteria we need to look for:   
 Is the subject, the sense consciousness to which one moon appears as 
two moons, a faultless subject? Yes, it is a faultless subject because 
there can be a person who has reali sed that the sense consciousness to 
which one moon appears as two moons is a sense consciousness but is 
unsure as to whether it is a direct perceiver or not.  
 The criterion  that the sign exists on the subject  is fulfilled.  
 The criteri on that the subject and the sign are different  is also fulfilled .  
For these  reasons , in this syllogism , the property of the subject  is 
estab lished.  
 
However although the property of the subject  is established, it does  not 
necessar ily mean that it is a correct sign . In order for it to be a correct 
sign, it must also satisfy the criteri on of being a forward pervasion . In this 
case there i s no forward pervasion  because whatever is a sense 
consciousness is not necessar ily a direct perceiver .   
 
3. Counter Pervasion  
 
The main requirement of the counter -pervasion is that the sign must be universally absent in the 
dissimilar class  (Page 6) . 
 
The subject, sound, is an impermanent phenomenon because of being a 
product:  
 the subject is sound  
 the sign or reason is product  
 the p redicate to be proven is impermanent phenomenon  
 
The predicate to be proven is impermane nt phenomenon . What is the 
opposite of impermanent phenomenon? Non-impermanent phenomenon , 
i.e., t hat which is not an impermanent phenomenon  
 
What is the opposite of  the sign, product ? It is non-product .  
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                               Second Basic Program – Module 2  
                                 The Study of Mind and Its Functions  
 
 
Lesson 13  
Page 8 of 13 If it is a non -impermanent phenomenon, it is also a non -product.  
 
What is the counter pervasion?  If the opposite  of the predicate to be 
proven is the opposite  of the sign , that is the counter pervasion .  
 
Summary  
Here w e are talking about an inferential valid cogniser, a knower that is 
generated in dependence upon its basis . What is its basis? A  correct sign  
is its basis .  
 
Whenever we state a reason to pro ve something, those reasons are not 
necessar ily correct  all the time . There can be correct reasons or incorrect 
reasons. So we need to figure out what is a correct reason  or sign.  
 
In order for a sign to be a correct sign , it must be the three modes:  
1. the property of th e subject  
2. the forward pervasion  
3. the counter pervasion  
 
We will use this example to find out what are the three modes: the subject, 
sound, is an impermanent phenomenon because of being a product:  
 the subject is sound  
 the sign or reason is product  
 the p redicate to be proven is impermanent phenomenon  
 
Property of the subject  
In this syllogism, the property of the subject is established. In order for 
the property of the subject  to be established, three c riteria need to be 
fulfilled :  
 
(1) If someone were to say, “The subject sound is an impermanent 
phenomenon because it is impermanent ,” in this case , the property of the 
subject  is not established because there isn’t a faultless subject , i.e., an 
object that  you want to know . When a person  has already ascertained  
that the subject is the sign , then he  has no doubt with regard  to whether 
sound is impermanent or not. Therefore  the property of the subject  is not 
established.  
 
(2) Among the three criteria, one of the most important thing for you to 
check from the beginning is whether the subject that is  stated is the sign 
or not.  
 
If you were to say, “The  subject, sound, is an impermanent phenomenon 
because it is an object apprehended by the eye consciousness ,” is sound 
an object apprehended by the eye consciousness?  Is the subject the sign?   
 
Khen Ri npoche: Sound can be seen by your eyes?   No. 
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                               Second Basic Program – Module 2  
                                 The Study of Mind and Its Functions  
 
 
Lesson 13  
Page 9 of 13 In this case, the subject is not the sign. That being the case ,   
automatically , the property of the subject is not established.  
 
(3) Referring to the same syllogism, in this case , is the subject different 
from the sign? It is . The s ubject ,  sound  and the sign, i mpermanent , are 
different  but that is insufficient to make it a property of the subject . 
 
The forward pervasion  and the counter pervasion  
How do we determi ne th at the forward pervasion  is established?  In order 
for the sign to be a forward pervasion, th at sign must exist exclusively  in 
the similar class . The similar class  is the predicate to be proven .  
 
The subject, sound, is an impermanent phenomenon because of being a 
product:  
 the subject is sound  
 the sign or reason is product  
 the p redicate to be proven is impermanent phenomenon  
 
The sign, product  must exist exclusively in the class of impermanent  
phenomena and that which is concordant with impermanent phenomen a.  
 
Here the similar class  is impermanent ph enomen a. In order for it to be 
the forward pervasion , the sign must exist exclusively in th is similar 
class . That means product  must exist exclusively in the similar class of 
impermanent phenomen a.  
 
If the similar  class  is impermanent phenomen a, the  dissimilar class  is 
non-impermanent phenomen a. In order for the counter pervasion to be 
established, the sign must not exist in the dissimilar class . That means 
product  cannot be a non-impermanent phenomeno n. 
 
In the syllogism , the subject, sound, is an impermanent phenomenon 
because of being a product :  
 The forward pervasion  is established because product  exists  necessar ily 
only in the class of impermanent phenomen a.  
 The counter p ervasion  is also established because product  does not 
exist whatsoever in the class of non-impermanent phenomen a. Product 
is a non -existent in the dissimilar class.  
 
In order  for it to be a correct sign  for you : 
 You must have already reali sed sound .  
 You must know what an impermanent phenomenon  is. 
 You must know what a product is.  
 On top of that , you need to know that the subject  is the sign, i.e.,  the 
subject, sound  is a product , the sign.  
 
Then, i n order for it to be a correct sign for you:  
 You must have reali sed that a product is necessar ily impermanent . 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                               Second Basic Program – Module 2  
                                 The Study of Mind and Its Functions  
 
 
Lesson 13  
Page 10 of 13  You must also have reali sed that , if it is a non-product , it is necessar ily 
a non-impermanent phenomenon .  
 You must reali se that if it is a non-impermanent phenomenon , it is 
necessar ily a non-product . 
You must have ascertained th ese three  points . 
 
What is it then that the person has doubt s about? This person has doubt s 
about whether sound is a n impermanent phenomenon  or not  although  he 
has already realised all the three  criteria . So when you state the syllogism  
with the correct reason  or sign, all the conditions are there for him to 
realise that sound  is impermanent . When you state the correct sign, he 
understands immediately  and realises that sound  is an impermanent 
phenomenon . You could sa y then that he has develop ed an inferential 
valid cogni tion. 
 
Question : If a person knows that sound is a product, wouldn’t that person 
know that a product is necessarily impermanent because product comes 
from causes and conditions  and the refore is not a permanent 
phenomenon.  How can we say that this person knows product without 
understanding that a product is an impermanent phenomenon?  
 
Answer:  Product and impermanent phenomenon are mutually inclusive, 
but it  doesn’t mean that : 
 a person who reali ses product  necessarily reali ses impermanent 
phenomenon   
 a person who reali ses impermanent phenomenon  necessarily reali ses 
product  
So it doesn’t mean that a person who has reali sed that a sound  is a 
produ ct has reali sed that sound is impermanent . It is not necessar ily so. 
 
Khen Rinpoche : We have started with syllogism s. I don’t know whether 
you understand or not. We will go through this again in the next class . 
Read the handout and you can ask questions in the next class.  
 
Question:  The counter pervasion stated earlier that if it is a non-
impermanent phenomenon , it is necessarily a non-product . I was 
wond ering if this should be stated as, “non-impermanent is necessarily 
non-product ,” without the word “phenomenon” because a non-product 
can be a non-existent  whereas if you say “non-impermanent 
phenomenon ,” it just mean s permanent phenomenon ? 
 
Answer:  If it is a non-product , is it necessar ily an existent ? If it is not 
impermanent, is it necessar ily an existent? If it is a permanent 
phenomenon , it necessar ily exists . If it is not impermanent , does it 
necessar ily exist?  
 
(Feedback from students)  
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                               Second Basic Program – Module 2  
                                 The Study of Mind and Its Functions  
 
 
Lesson 13  
Page 11 of 13 Khen Rinpoche : Not necessar ily? For example?  If you don’t have any 
example s, you cannot say , “Not necessar ily.”   
 
You can  say, “The horns of a rabbit. ” Are the h orns of the rabbit 
impermanent? No , it is non -impermanent. But are they existent s? No. 
That means something that is non-impermanent  does not mean they have 
to exist. Likewise, s omething  that is non-produ ct does  not  mean it has to 
exist.  
 
Question : Someone who reali ses sound is product does not necessar ily 
realise sound is imp ermanent. Is it because the two - product and 
impermanence  - are different concepts although they are mutually 
inclusive?  
 
Answer: Basically they have different definitions. When you reali se sound 
is a product, you reali se that sound is produced  or created  but it doesn’t 
mean that you reali se that sound undergo es momentary change.  
 
Question:  Can we say that that impermanen ce and product  are different 
isolates?  
 
Answer:  You can say that.  
 
What we have covered today is in the handout. Read the notes again and 
we will look at it again.  
 
Question:  In the counter pervasion , instead of saying , “If it is a non -
impermanent phenomenon, it is  necessarily a non -product”, can we just 
say, “If it is a non -impermanent, it is necessarily a non -product” ? Can we 
leave out the word, “phenomenon ”? Is it necessary to use the word , 
“phenomenon ”? 
 
Answer:  Maybe it is not necessary.  
 
It is normal that we usually do not understand most of the things that we 
hear for the first time . But when we look at it again and again , then it 
should become clearer . So there is no need to get discourage d. 
  
Structure of 
syllogism  Subject  Predicate to be proven  Sign/ Reason/ 
Proof  
 Sound  is an impermanent 
phenomenon  because of being a 
product  
 
 
Subject  is the basis with respect to 
which on e is seek to learn something .  
What one is seeking to know is whether 
or not sound is an impermanent 
phenomenon . 
 
Predicate to be proven  with respect  
The p redicate to  be proven is  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                               Second Basic Program – Module 2  
                                 The Study of Mind and Its Functions  
 
 
Lesson 13  
Page 12 of 13 to the subject (basis of inference). 
Anything may be stated as a predicate 
to be proven  impermanent phenomenon . 
 
Thesis  is that which is to be proven .   
The t hesis is that sound is an 
impermanent phenomenon . 
 
Sign / Reason / Proof : anything may 
be put  forward as a sign, although it 
may or may not be a valid reason .    
The s ign is product . 
 
Correct Signs  
There are two types of signs: correct sign s (with valid reason) and counterfeit 
signs (with invalid reason)  
 
 
A correct sign is that 
which is the three 
modes . The three  
modes are three 
criteria that a correct 
sign must satisfy . 
(Note: A correct sign is 
not something that  
has the three modes 
but it is the three 
modes)  
   
Example: The subject, s ound, 
is an impermanent 
phenomenon because of being 
a product.  
Subject : Sound  
Predicate to be proven: 
Impermanent phenomenon  
Sign: Product 
 
1.Property of the 
subject  is reckoned 
between the sign and 
its basis of relation, 
the subject . 
 
 
 
 
  
1) Faultless subject 
(something that one 
wishes to understand.)  
  
When a person has already 
realised that sound is a 
product but is unsure 
whether so und is a 
impermanent phenomenon, 
then for this person, sound 
becomes a faultless subject .  
 
 
2) The si gn necessarily 
exists on the 
subject, The subject is 
the sign (when proving 
the subject is 
something)  
  
The subject, sound, is the 
sign, product, i.e., sound is a 
product.  
 
 
3) The s ubject  and sign 
must be different   
The subject , sound and the 
sign, product , are different . 
Example of a subject and a 
sign that are not different ::   
the subject, sound is an 
impermanent phenomenon 
because of being a sound.  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                               Second Basic Program – Module 2  
                                 The Study of Mind and Its Functions  
 
 
Lesson 13  
Page 13 of 13  
2.Forward pervasion  
The forward pervasion 
is a relationship 
between the sign and 
the similar class . The 
similar class is the 
basis of relation of the 
forward pervasion.  
  
 The sign must exist 
exclusively in the 
similar class .  
 The similar class  is 
the predicate to be 
proven . 
  
The forward pervasion  is 
established because the sign, 
product , exists necessar ily 
only in the similar class of 
impermanent phenomen a.  
 
 
3.Counter pervasion  
The main requirement 
of the counter -
pervasion is that the 
sign must be 
universally absent in 
the dissimilar class . 
  
 If a sign is the 
counter -pervasion in 
the proof of something, 
it is ascertained as a 
non-existent  in the 
dissimilar class . 
 The opposite of the 
predicate  to be proven 
is the opposite of the 
sign. 
 
 
 
 
 
 Whatever is  not 
that predicate to be 
proven is necessarily 
not that sign.   
  
 The sign, product , does 
not exist within the category 
of non -impermanent 
phenomen a, the dissimilar 
class.  
 
 The opposite of the 
predicate to be proven , 
impermanent phenomen on is 
non-imperman ent 
phenomenon .  The opposite of 
the sign, product , is non-
product . If it is a non -
impermanent phenomenon, it 
is also a non -product.  
 Whatever is not an 
impermanent phenomenon is 
necessarily not a product.  
 
Translated by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme  
 
Transcribed b y Phuah Soon Ek, Vivien Ng and Patricia Lee  
 
Edited by Cecilia Tsong  
 
 