Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Lorig/Edited/BP2 M2 L07 (final).doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:53:49.069697
================================================================================


Transcript of teachings by Khen Rinpoche Geshe Chonyi

Lesson No: 7                              Date: 10th July 2012

At the end of the previous  lesson,  there  was  a  question  regarding  the
validity of the eye consciousness seeing  a  shadow.  We  are  talking  here
about how our mind works so please pay attention.

With respect to what is  apprehending  the  shadow,  the  eye  consciousness
apprehending the shadow is valid because the shadow exists  in  the  way  it
appears. The eye consciousness apprehending the shadow  realises  and  knows
that it is a shadow.

While the eye consciousness apprehending the shadow is in operation, at  the
same time, it is possible to have a thought wondering about  the  nature  of
the shadow, “Is it a shadow of a leaf or is it a shadow of a bird?”
It is possible to have  this  two-pointed  doubting  consciousness  that  is
unsure of exactly what kind of shadow it is. This doubting consciousness  is
included within the seven-fold division of consciousness.

The eye consciousness sees the shadow but at the same time one is  wondering
what  kind  of  shadow  it  is.  These  two  different  consciousnesses  are
operating at the same time:
1. An eye consciousness apprehending the shadow  that  is  valid  as  it  is
   apprehending the shadow as it is.
2. A thought wondering what kind of shadow it is. This is doubt.

Let us say that the shadow is a shadow of a bird.  After some thinking,  you
conclude, “That is definitely the shadow of a bird. Its shape looks  like  a
shadow of a bird. Therefore it must be the shadow of a bird.”  This  is  the
conclusion that you have arrived at.

The doubt you had earlier is now transformed into a correct  assumption.  In
reality it is true that it is  a  shadow  of  a  bird.  You  have  concluded
correctly that it is a shadow of a bird but nevertheless this mind  that  is
just an assumption has not yet realised it is a shadow of the  bird.  So  it
is not a valid cognition of this object being the shadow of a bird.

You can make an assumption that accords with  reality.  You  can  also  make
assumptions with all kinds of reasons many of which can be  wrong.  You  can
use many reasons but you may arrive at a correct  conclusion  with  a  wrong
reason.  A  correctly  assuming  consciousness  is  like  that.  A   correct
assumption is a mind that arrives at  a  decisive  conclusion  that  accords
with the reality of that object but  that  conclusion  may  not  necessarily
have been reached with a correct reason.  Whatever  the  correctly  assuming
consciousness apprehends, that object has to exist in reality as it is.  The
definition of a correctly assuming consciousness is a  factually  concordant
determinative knower that is controvertible with regard to  determining  its
object. You can  see  from  here  that  it  is  important  to  memorise  the
definition of a correctly assuming consciousness in order  to  know  what  a
correct assumption is.

It is possible for the correctly assuming consciousness  to  be  transformed
into a valid cogniser. Initially you have the correct assumption that it  is
a shadow of a bird but you may not have arrived at that  assumption  through
a valid reason. Subsequently when you look up, you can see a bird and  there
is the shadow of that bird on the ground. Based on this, you  are  now  very
sure that the shadow is the shadow of the bird. Your  eye  consciousness  is
apprehending the shadow of a bird and, in your mind, you  know  that  it  is
the shadow of a bird.

Another scenario is this: while it is a shadow of a  bird,  it  is  possible
that you may apprehend  it  to  be  a  shadow  of  a  leaf.  The  mind  that
apprehends the shadow of  a  leaf  is  a  wrong  consciousness  because  the
principal object of that mind is the shadow of a leaf. The definition  of  a
wrong consciousness is a knower that engages its object erroneously.

After you generated the valid cognition realising that  the  shadow  is  the
shadow of a bird, from the second moment of that  valid  cognition  onwards,
when you remember the shadow of the bird, the second moment  of  that  valid
cognition is a subsequent cogniser. That is a knower that realises what  has
already been realised.

I remembered that there was a question about the shadow that was brought  up
at the end of the previous lesson. An  eye  consciousness  apprehending  the
shadow is valid with respect to what it is apprehending. At  the  same  time
it is possible to have doubts and you may  wonder,  “What  exactly  is  that
shadow?” At that time there is no valid cognition that  the  shadow  is  the
shadow of a bird but through the process of thinking,  you  may  generate  a
correctly  assuming  consciousness.  Then  subsequently  you  have  a  valid
cognition apprehending the shadow to be the shadow of a bird.

Based on this example, you can have a rough understanding of the  seven-fold
division of consciousness:  what  is  a  wrong  consciousness,  a  correctly
assuming consciousness, a valid cogniser, and so forth. You can then try  to
apply this understanding to other examples.

There is a shadow of a bird on the ground. The shadow  appears  to  the  eye
consciousness apprehending it.

Question from Khen Rinpoche: Does the shadow of a bird  appear  to  the  eye
consciousness apprehending it?

There is a consciousness to which the shadow of a bird appears. I have  just
explained that this consciousness is a valid  cogniser.  It  is  valid  with
respect to the shadow that is appearing to it but this consciousness is  not
a valid cogniser with respect to the shadow of the bird.

Khen Rinpoche: Do you agree with what I have said?

There are two things here. In reality it is the shadow of a bird.  When  you
first see the shadow, your  eye  consciousness  understands  that  it  is  a
shadow but your eye consciousness does not understand that it is the  shadow
of a bird. If the eye consciousness realised that the shadow is  the  shadow
of a bird, that person would not have any doubt.

But that person has a doubt. “What kind of shadow is it?”  This  means  that
he does not realise that it is the shadow of a bird.

Question from Khen Rinpoche:  To  the  eye  consciousness  apprehending  the
shadow, does the shadow of the bird appear?

It is clear that whatever appears  to  a  collective  engager  or  a  direct
perceiver  is  not  necessarily  ascertained.  Everything  appears  but  not
everything that appears is ascertained.

Question: According to past teachings by Lama Zopa Rinpoche,  he  said  that
when you see something, say a bird, for the first time, it  appears  to  you
fully. But immediately after that, what you see is  an  inherently  existent
bird. When  you  talk  about  subsequent  cognisers,  are  you  seeing  that
inherently existent bird or just the bird as it is, i.e., not an  inherently
existent object?

Answer: Firstly, I need to know from the perspective of which tenet are  you
asking this question?

According to the Sutra School, when the object  exists,  it  is  necessarily
truly established, existing from its own side, and existing  inherently.  Do
you remember the definition of a specifically characterised  phenomenon?  It
is a phenomenon that is established by way  of  its  own  character  without
being merely imputed by a term or thought consciousness.

When you think of memories,  it  is  remembering  something  that  you  have
already realised. So a remembering consciousness is a conceptual  subsequent
cogniser.

An eye consciousness apprehending blue is a direct perceiver  and  it  is  a
sense  consciousness.  It  is  a  valid  cogniser.  Specifically,   an   eye
consciousness apprehending blue is  a  sense  direct  perceiver.  After  the
generation of the sense direct perceiver apprehending blue, a mental  direct
perceiver apprehending blue  is  generated.  Following  that  you  have  the
conceptual consciousness apprehending blue.









This is the order:
1. First the sense direct perceiver apprehending blue realises blue.
2. Following that the mental direct perceiver apprehending blue  arises  but
   in the continuum of ordinary beings, blue is not realised by this  mental
   direct perceiver apprehending blue. This is  because  the  mental  direct
   perceiver apprehending blue in the continuum of an ordinary  being  lasts
   for only a very short moment. , i.e., the shortest moment of time[1].  It
   is so brief that ordinary beings cannot realise the object.
3. After the mental direct perceiver apprehending blue is generated for  the
   shortest moment of time, the conceptual consciousness  apprehending  blue
   arises, i.e., the thought thinking of blue. This conceptual consciousness
   apprehending blue realises blue.

We mentioned in  the  previous  lesson  that  the  conceptual  consciousness
apprehending blue realises blue but it can only  realise  blue  through  the
medium of the meaning generality (or mental image) of blue.

What I have mentioned here  is  for  the  purpose  of  giving  you  a  rough
understanding of how the mind works.  In reality it may not be exactly  like
this as it depends on  whose  views  you  follow.  Different  scholars  have
different views on this issue and it can be very complicated.

Question: I  am  trying  to  understand  the  logic  of  the  mental  direct
perceiver not realising blue. Can I compare this with the  first  moment  of
the sense direct perceiver apprehending blue? Can I say because  the  mental
direct perceiver in the first moment does not realise blue, it follows  that
the sense direct perceiver also does not realise blue in the  first  moment.
It is only able to realise blue through its subsequent cogniser  that  is  a
sense direct perceiver.

Answer: It depends on how you define the first moment  of  comprehension  by
the sense direct perceiver apprehending blue.

Question: I also  have  this  qualm  as  to  whether  the  first  moment  of
perception refers to the first time you see  the  object  in  this  lifetime
after which it is no longer the  first  moment  as  different  schools  have
different assertions.

Answer: The “new” in the definition of a valid cogniser refers to the  first
time in this lifetime.

As for the duration of the moment that we are talking  about  here,  we  are
not talking about the smallest moment of time but a very short time  like  a
finger snap. Literally, in Tibetan, it refers to the  instant  it  takes  to
complete an action.

Question: (The student tries to clarify what happens with the  first  moment
you look at blue that is not  the  first  time  you  realise  blue  in  your
lifetime, e.g., seeing blue as a baby and seeing the same  blue  many  years
later).

Khen Rinpoche: Are you talking about the same blue?

Student: The same blue.

Khen Rinpoche: Then that becomes the second time, not the first time.

Student: Same blue at different  times:  is  that  considered  as  a  second
moment?

Khen Rinpoche: Yes. Seeing the same blue for second  time  is  considered  a
subsequent cogniser.

As mentioned before it is very important to gain  an  understanding  of  the
seven-fold division of consciousness on the basis of  having  memorised  the
definitions. Having memorised the definitions, you can then compare the  two
valid cognisers. For example what is the difference between  an  inferential
valid cogniser and the direct valid cogniser  based  on  their  definitions?
After that  you  examine  the  subsequent  cogniser  and  so  forth.  Having
understood the definitions that you have memorised, you can take a  specific
mind  as  the  subject  and  check   whether   it   is   among   the   seven
consciousnesses.

Khen Rinpoche: Can anyone see a mind that is not one  of  the  seven  minds?
Can you give an example?

The dream elephant
Regarding the dream elephant, there is a  consciousness  to  which  a  dream
elephant appears.
   • Between a sense consciousness and a  mental  consciousness,  it  is  a
     mental consciousness
   • Between a conceptual consciousness and a non-conceptual consciousness,
     it is a non-conceptual consciousness
   • In this case  this  dream  consciousness  is  a  non-conceptual  wrong
     consciousness.  Dreaming of  an  elephant  is  a  wrong  consciousness
     because  that  is  defined  as  a  knower  that  engages  its   object
     erroneously.
   • What is the  object  of  engagement  of  this  consciousness  that  is
     dreaming of an elephant? It is the dream elephant that it perceives as
     a real elephant. But a dream elephant is not an elephant.

Wrong consciousness vs. mistaken consciousness
What is the difference then between a mistaken  consciousness  and  a  wrong
consciousness?  This  analysis  has  to  be  done  on  the  basis  of  their
definitions:
   • A wrong consciousness is a knower that engages its object erroneously.
   • A mistaken consciousness is a knower that is mistaken with  regard  to
     its appearing object.

We have to know clearly the definitions. Only then can we begin to  analyse.
Let us use as an example an inferential valid cogniser realising vase.
   •  An  inferential  valid  cogniser  realising  vase  is  not  a   wrong
     consciousness. It is a  newly  incontrovertible  determinative  knower
     that is directly produced in dependence on a correct sign that is  its
     basis.
   • It is incontrovertible with respect to its principal object.  What  is
     its principal object? It is the vase because it realises the vase.
   • Therefore with respect to the vase, it is a valid mind and it is newly
     incontrovertible.
   • Because it is  a  valid  cogniser,  it  is  necessarily  not  a  wrong
     consciousness. A valid cogniser and a wrong consciousness are mutually
     exclusive. There is no common  locus  between  them.  The  inferential
     valid cogniser is not a wrong consciousness  because  it  is  a  valid
     cogniser.

While it is not a wrong consciousness, it is a mistaken consciousness.  Why?

   • A mistaken consciousness is a knower that is mistaken with  regard  to
     its appearing object.
   • The appearing object of a conceptual  (or  thought)  consciousness  is
     necessarily permanent.
   • The appearing object of a conceptual consciousness  apprehending  vase
     is the meaning generality of vase and not the actual vase.
   • This meaning generality is  a  factor  that  is  imputed  by  thought;
     therefore  it  is  necessarily  permanent.  Whatever  appears  to  the
     conceptual consciousness apprehending vase is not posited  to  be  the
     appearing object. Rather the appearing object is the  factor  that  is
     imputed by thought, i.e., the imputed factor  that  appears  as  vase.
     That imputed factor, the meaning generality (or mental image) of vase,
     is posited to be the appearing object of the conceptual  consciousness
     apprehending vase.

The appearing object of the conceptual consciousness  apprehending  vase  or
the appearing object of the inferential valid cogniser apprehending vase  is
the  appearance  of  vase.  This  appearance  of  vase  to  the   conceptual
consciousness apprehending vase is not the actual vase.

When we visualise offering gold and diamonds  during  pujas,  the  gold  and
diamonds you are thinking about, are they actually  gold  and  diamonds?  If
this appearance of gold is actually gold, it  absurdly  follows  that  there
will be no more poverty in this world.

What is the appearing object of the  conceptual  consciousness  apprehending
vase? It is the appearance of vase. While the appearance of vase is not  the
actual vase, it appears as the actual  vase.  The  conceptual  consciousness
apprehending vase is unable to realise that the appearance of  vase  is  not
the actual vase. It is therefore  mistaken  with  regard  to  its  appearing
object.

Do you know now how a conceptual consciousness is mistaken  with  regard  to
its appearing object?

What is the appearing object  of  a  conceptual  consciousness  apprehending
vase? It is the meaning generality of vase. The  appearing  object  of  your
conceptual (or thought)  consciousness  thinking  of  vase  is  the  meaning
generality of vase. While the meaning generality of vase is  not  the  vase,
it appears as vase. That being the case, it is mistaken with regard  to  its
appearing object.

Question: What is the relationship between the conceptual consciousness  and
a mental image? Are they one entity?

Answer: The conceptual consciousness and its appearing object  are  not  one
substantiality, because one is a  functioning  thing  and  the  other  is  a
permanent phenomenon. But it is questionable if they are one entity.

Student:  It seems like they are one entity.

Khen Rinpoche:  I will need to think about this.

Question: (A student tries to clarify what  is  a  mental  sense  power  and
whether the mental consciousness  can  be  rendered  unable  of  functioning
through a defect in the mental sense power as  can  happen  with  the  sense
consciousnesses and its relevant sense powers).

Answer:  The  mental  sense  power  is  posited  to  be  any  of   the   six
consciousnesses in its immediately preceding moment.

Let us return to the example of  the  sense  direct  perceiver  apprehending
blue. The sense direct perceiver apprehending blue is  generated  and  lasts
for a moment but when that sense direct perceiver apprehending blue  ceases,
immediately the mental direct perceiver apprehending blue is generated.  The
uncommon empowering condition for this mental direct perceiver  apprehending
blue is the mental sense power. This consciousness arises due to  the  sense
direct perceiver apprehending blue that immediately preceded it.

Khen Rinpoche: Say the  sense  direct  perceiver  apprehends  blue  for  ten
minutes. At the very last moment, it becomes the mental  sense  power.  This
last moment of the sense direct perceiver apprehending blue  is  the  mental
sense power.

The last moment of the sense  direct  perceiver  apprehending  blue  is  the
mental sense power. In dependence on this last moment of  the  sense  direct
perceiver apprehending blue that acts as its uncommon empowering  condition,
in  the  next  moment  a  mental  direct  perceiver  apprehending  blue   is
generated. However in the  continuum  of  an  ordinary  being,  this  mental
direct perceiver lasts only for the shortest moment of time.

(A student misunderstands  Khen  Rinpoche’s  explanation  given  above.  The
student thinks one must look at  the  object  for  ten  minutes  before  the
mental sense power can arise!).

In the monastery, there was an example  where  the  teacher  was  giving  an
illustration of a  functioning  thing.  He  said,  “The  illustration  of  a
functioning thing is blue.” A student then thought that a functioning  thing
is necessarily blue!

Khen Rinpoche: This student is similar to you!

The mental direct perceiver is posited  to  be  the  consciousness  that  is
immediately  generated  after  any   of   the   six   consciousnesses.   The
consciousness that arises immediately  after  the  cessation  of  the  sense
direct  perceiver  apprehending  blue  is  the   mental   direct   perceiver
apprehending blue. It is said  that  for  an  ordinary  being,  this  mental
direct perceiver is an awareness to which  an  object  appears  but  is  not
ascertained (AAA).

After that comes the conceptual consciousness apprehending blue. It  is  the
conceptual consciousness that induces the ascertainment of blue  because  it
is the mind that thinks, “This is blue” or “This  is  not  blue.”  Based  on
that, comes the convention (or term) “blue.”

The handout given out today (Handout No. 5 dated 10th July  2012)  is  about
direct perceivers. Please read this  on  your  own  and  try  your  best  to
understand it. Memorise and think about the definitions. We have to look  at
direct perceivers of which there are four divisions:
   • sense direct perceivers
   • mental direct perceivers
   • self-knowing direct perceivers
   • yogic direct perceivers
These terms will come up very often especially when  we  look  at  the  next
module on tenets. You have to get some ideas about them now. Then when  they
come up again when we look at tenets, over time they will become clearer.

What  is  really  important  is  to  understand  the  way  in  which  direct
perception and conceptual consciousness work because  the  way  they  engage
their objects is different. You have to have a rough idea of this:
   • The conceptual consciousness can only apprehend its object by  way  of
     the meaning generality or mental (or generic) image of the object.
   • Direct perception does not require the help of any  mental  image  but
     rather it perceives its object as it is. Everything about  the  object
     appears to the direct perceiver.
This is the minimum that you must keep in mind.

On the basis of this rough idea of how a direct perceiver and  a  conceptual
consciousness apprehend their  objects  comes  the  seven-fold  division  of
consciousness. You need to know the names and the meanings  of  these  seven
consciousnesses. In order to know  their  meanings,  you  need  to  memorise
their definitions. On the basis of memorising  their  definitions,  you  can
then understand what these seven consciousnesses are.

When we talk about a valid cogniser, what exactly is  a  valid  cogniser?  A
valid cogniser is a new incontrovertible knower. From  its  definition,  you
then  try  to   understand   what   does   “new”   refer   to,   what   does
“incontrovertible,” and “knower” mean. You will be able to get a very  clear
idea  of  what  a  valid  cogniser  is  from  its  definition.  This   clear
understanding of the  valid  cogniser  has  to  come  by  depending  on  its
definition. That means you have to know the definition.

Using this process, you know what these seven consciousnesses  are,    their
names, and definitions. Once you know what  a  valid  cogniser  is  and  its
definition, if someone were to ask you, “What is an AAA? Is an AAA  a  valid
cogniser?” the answer is then very clear, “No!”

In order to be able to say with  certainty  that  an  AAA  is  not  a  valid
cogniser, it depends on whether you know what an AAA is,  whether  you  know
its definition: that an AAA is a knower  that  is  a  common  locus  of  (1)
having clear appearance of the specifically  characterised  phenomenon  that
is its object of engagement and (2) being  unable  to  induce  ascertainment
with respect to  the  specifically  characterised  phenomenon  that  is  its
object of engagement.

The key words, “unable to induce ascertainment with respect  to  its  object
of engagement” indicates that it is not a valid  cogniser  because  a  valid
cogniser necessarily induces ascertainment with respect  to  its  object  of
engagement, i.e., it necessarily realises its object.


In the same way, if you were  asked,  “Is  a  wrong  consciousness  a  valid
cogniser?” you must be able to say immediately, “No!” When  you  are  asked,
“Why?” your answer will be, “Because a wrong consciousness is defined  as  a
knower that engages its object erroneously. A valid cogniser  never  engages
its object erroneously.”

Is a correctly assuming consciousness a valid cogniser? The answer  is  very
clear when you look at the definition: a  correctly  assuming  consciousness
is a factually concordant determinative knower that is  controvertible  with
regard to determining its object.

A valid cogniser is  a  new  incontrovertible  knower  whereas  a  correctly
assuming consciousness is a  determinative  knower  that  is  controvertible
with regard to determining its object. There  is  no  common  locus  between
incontrovertible and controvertible, i.e., there is nothing that is both.

Is a doubting consciousness a valid cogniser? The answer has  to  come  once
again from looking at the definition: a doubting consciousness is  a  knower
that has qualms two-pointedly by its own power.

A valid  cogniser  is  never  indecisive  in  this  way.  A  valid  cogniser
completely realises its object. It never doubts nor does it have any  qualms
whatsoever regarding its object.

From this you can see that when you are comparing two consciousnesses,  when
you don’t know what they are, there is nothing to  compare.  You  only  know
what they are by depending  on  their  definitions.  Without  knowing  their
definitions there is no way to understand what they  are.  Therefore  it  is
important that you must memorise the definitions. Only then can you  compare
them.

You will then slowly know whether these consciousnesses are  mistaken,  non-
mistaken,  conceptual,  non-conceptual,  factually  concordant,  discordant,
realises its object, not realises its object, and so forth. This comes  down
to the knowing the definitions.

There are many things to think  about.  How  many  possibilities  are  there
between an inferential valid  cogniser  and  a  mistaken  consciousness?  By
knowing the number of possibilities, the result will be that it will  become
clearer  as  to  what  an  inferential  valid  cogniser   and   a   mistaken
consciousness are.

Homework:

How many possibilities are there between:
1. an inferential valid cogniser and a mistaken consciousness?
2. a conceptual consciousness and a correctly assuming consciousness?
3. a wrong consciousness and a mistaken consciousness?

Do this homework on your own. By doing this, you will get a clearer idea  of
these seven  consciousnesses.  Listening  alone  will  not  help  with  your
understanding of this topic. You have to think about it. If you don’t  think
about it, there is no way to  understand  this  topic.   When  you  do  your
homework, please do not refer  to  the  table  on  page  4  of  the  handout
(Handout No. 3 dated 3rd July 2012).  The answers are there. It  will  be  a
waste of time and defeats the purpose  of  doing  this  homework.  The  most
important thing is not so much getting the correct  answer  with  regard  to
the number of possibilities. The most important part  is  your  reasons  for
your answer.

                               ***************

(A student, Tan Seow Kheng, shares her experience of studying in  the  Basic
Program).

Khen Rinpoche: I thought it is good for some students to share with you  how
they learn, what their feelings are, and how they  encourage  themselves  to
study.

Some of them have been here a long time. They  have  some  experience.  They
have been in the last Basic Program cycle and have completed  one  round  of
the Basic Program.  Yet many of them are still coming back to  study  again.
Those who come back again have already completed the  Basic  Program.  I  am
wondering why they are coming back. They have  graduated  and  already  have
their certificates yet they still come back and seem to enjoy  the  classes.
So I thought that some of them could share how they feel and how they  enjoy
these classes.

This will happen not at every class but once in a while.  I  asked  some  of
them to share their experiences on how they study, what benefits  they  get,
why they study all these difficult topics, and what they get out  of  it  in
the end.

It is hoped that in this way it will encourage  you  to  work  hard  and  to
study Buddhist philosophy. I hope this sharing will help to encourage you.

Everyone is the same in that everyone definitely  can  study.  Some  may  be
good in their studies.  Some may not be so  good.  This  doesn’t  matter.  I
think everyone can study. You have the merit to come here  so  there  is  no
excuse that you do not have the merit to come here. I don’t  think  that  is
the case. You have the merit to study these subjects but now it  depends  on
how much effort you want to put in, how much you see the point of  studying.


By putting in some effort, hopefully you will be able to enjoy the  classes.
Once you enjoy the classes, my job is done.

That is the most difficult part of being a teacher. This topic is  extremely
difficult and I really don’t know how to make you taste the flavour  of  the
teachings in your mouth.

So this is what I am trying to do. I cannot go through  every  single  word.
That is not possible. Also I don’t see much point in doing that  because  it
will take too much time to complete the module. What I am trying  to  do  is
giving you some pointers, ideas, and trying my best  to  relate  it  to  the
subject. When you enjoy the classes, you will want  to  study  more  deeply.
You  will  read  different  books,  go  deeper  into  the  topic,  and  your
understanding will improve. Then you will be  able  to  enjoy  the  Buddha’s
teachings. That is the whole idea.

I cannot go through every single word of the text. That is impossible but  I
am trying to  give  some  flavour  (of  the  teachings).  Some  time  it  is
extremely difficult. I don’t how to make the flavour and  you  do  not  know
how to enjoy the flavour. Sometimes that makes things difficult but we  will
try. I hope you will enjoy your studies.


Translated by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme

Transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek, Vivien Ng and Patricia Lee

Edited by Cecilia Tsong








-----------------------
[1] When the duration of a finger snap is divided into 65 parts, 1/65  of  a
finger snap is the shortest moment of time. (Basic Program  –  First  Cycle:
Lesson 9 of Module 11 on the  Ornament for Clear Realisations).


-----------------------
Mental direct perceiver apprehending blue that lasts for the shortest
moment of time. Blue is not realised in the continuum of ordinary
beings.



being

Conceptual consciousness apprehending blue realises blue


Sense direct perceiver apprehending blue realises blue


