Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Lorig/Edited/BP2 M2 L24 (final).pdf
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:53:46.475735
================================================================================

Amitabha Buddhist Centre                               Second Basic Program – Module 2  
                                                                    The Study of Mind and It s Functions  
 
Lesson 24  
Page 1 of 15 
Transcript of teachings by Khen Rinpoche Geshe 
Chonyi  on the Modes of Mind and Mental Factors  
 
Lesson No: 24          Date: 13th September 2012  
 
Root text:   A Necklace for Those of Clear Awareness Clearly Revealing the 
Modes of Minds and Mental Factors by Ye-she Gyeltsen , translated by Toh 
Sze Gee; January 2006 edition. Copyright: Toh Sze Gee & FPMT, Inc. 
September 2003.   
 
All page references refer to the root text, unless otherwise stated.  
 
Question :  Is the mind that is concomitant with the mental facto r of anger 
necessarily a  non-virtuous  mind?  
 
Answer : It is taught that anger is necessarily non -virtuous. There 
probably  isn’t any instance where  anger is considered good or virtuous. 
According to the Compendium of Knowledge , the me ntal factors in the 
retinue of the mind of anger would be non -virtuous because they share 
the similar entity, similar object of observation , and similar aspect.  You 
can say that a ll the mental factors that are in the retinue with anger 
would be non -virtuous .   
 
The Compendium of Knowledge , the Higher A bhidharma , also states that 
anger is a mind of the desire realm . There is no anger in the form and 
formless realm s. Since a nger is necessarily  non-virtuous , there fore in the 
higher realms , i.e., the form and formless realms , where there is no non -
virtue, there is no anger.  This is mentioned in both the Treasury of 
Knowledge  and the Compendium of Knowledge . 
 
The Eleven Virtuous Mental Factors  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(8) Pliancy  
 
There are two types  of pliancy : (1) physical pliancy  and (2) mental pliancy . 
In th is context , pliancy refers to mental pliancy . Pliancy is achieved when 
one achieve s the ninth  mental abiding . 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                               Second Basic Program – Module 2  
                                                                    The Study of Mind and It s Functions  
 
Lesson 24  
Page 2 of 15 (1) Physical pliancy is such that, through the power of meditative stabilization,  unserviceability of the body 
is purified, whereupon the body is buoyant and light, like a ball of cotton, and can be applied to virtuous 
activity according to one's wish.  
(2) Mental pliancy is such that, through the power of meditative stabilization, the mind becomes free of 
unse rviceability, whereupon it becomes amenable to application to an object of observation without 
hindrance  (Page 45) . 
 
Mental pliancy  is a mental factor.  I am not sure whether one has to call a 
physical pliancy a tangibl e object. For the time being, we will leave it a t 
that. This is something to think about: perhaps physical pliancy is a 
special bodily tangible object.  
 
(9) Conscientiousness  
 
Regarding conscientiousness, the Compendium of Knowledge  says: 
 
QUESTION: What is conscientiousness?  
RESPONSE: It is a cultivation of virtuous qualities within abiding in non -attachment, non -hatred, 
non-ignorance, as well as effort, and guards the mind against contaminations. It has the function of 
thoroughly comp leting and fully establishing all mundane and supramundane success.  
 
Just as it has been said above, it is an awareness that accomplishes virtue within abiding in effort (joyous 
perseverance) without coming under the influence of afflictions, and it guards  the mind against 
contaminations  (Page 46) . 
 
 The object  of conscientiousness can be any virtue . 
 The aspect  of conscientiousness  is to guard  the mind against  the 
discordant class or factors incompatible with virtue.  
 The funct ion of conscientiousness is to cause  the mind to abide in 
virtue and for virtue  to increase . 
 
Conscientiousness  protect s virtue and guards the mind against the  
factors  incompatible with virtue.  Perhaps we can say that  
conscientiousness  cherishes virtue , holding it as very dear.  
 
Regarding this, [Asanga's] Bodhisattva Grounds  (Bodhisattvabhumi)  mentions five types:  
(1) conscientiousness with respect to the former  
(2) conscientiou sness with respect to the latter  
(3) conscientiousness with respect to the middle  
(4) conscientiousness prior to activity  
(5) conscientiousness of concordant application  (Page 46)  
 
(1) Conscientiousness with respect to the former  
With respect to faults, misdeeds , and negativities committed in the past, 
one generates regret and applies the remedies.  
 
(2) Conscientiousne ss with respect to the latter   
With respect to not committing non -virtue in the future , one  relies on 
mindfulness and introspection to stop engaging in any non -virtuous 
action s. 
 
(3) Conscientiousness with respect to the middle   
In the present , with mindfu lness and introspection , one realises whenever 
one is about to engage i n non-virtue and w ith conscientiousness, one 
stops oneself from engaging in it.  
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                               Second Basic Program – Module 2  
                                                                    The Study of Mind and It s Functions  
 
Lesson 24  
Page 3 of 15 (4) Conscientiousness prior to activity  
Before a non-virtuous action is committed, you already have the thought,  
“How wonderful it would be if I do not engage in non -virtue .” 
 
(5) Conscientiousness of concordant application  
At all times , one think s, “I will not engage in non -virtue and  I will guard 
my mind against doing so. ” 
 
 The first, c onscient iousness with respect to the former , has to do with 
non-virtue s that were committed in the past. 
 The second , conscientiousness with respect to the latter , relates to the 
non-virtue s that may be performed in the future. 
 The third , conscientiousness with respect to the middle , has to do with 
the present , i.e., restraining  oneself from engaging in non -virtue . 
 The fourth , conscientiousness prior to activity , is more of a motivation.  
 The fifth , conscientiousness of c oncordant application , is also a 
motivation but it extend s to all times , i.e., keeping the mind in that 
motivation  at all times.  
 
Conscientiousness is extremely important  because i t protects the mind 
and keeps it in virtue.  Once  we lose conscientiousness, afflictions creep in 
almost immediately. In order to increase one’s virtue  and qualities, one 
has to depend  on conscientiousness.  
 
(10) Equanimity  
 
Regarding equanimity, the Compendium of Knowledge  says:  
 
QUESTION: What is equanimity?   
RESPONSE: It is a discordance with afflictive states, an evenness of mind, a dwelling in a natural 
state, and a spontaneous abiding, within abiding in non -attachment, non -hatred, non -ignorance, as 
well as effort. It ha s the function of not allowing an opportunity for afflictions.  
 
Just as it has been said above, in dependence on the techniques for internally setting the mind single -
pointedly on an object of observation, the nine mental abidings1 are gradually accomplish ed. When the ninth 
is achieved, one no longer needs not strive to use the antidotes to laxity and excitement and one attains a 
spontaneous abiding of the mind .   
 
In general, there are three types of equanimity:  
(1) compositional equanimity2  
(2) equanimity which is f eeling  
(3) immeasurable equanimity  (Page 47)  
 
 The object  of equanimity can be posited to be the same as the object for 
meditative stabili sation . Therefore the object  of equanimity is posited to 
be an imputed thing.  
 The aspect of equa nimity is engaging in discriminative equanimity.   
 The function  of equanimity is that it does  not give the afflictions  of the 
desire  realm a chance to manifest.  
                                                           
1 The nine mental abidings are: (1) setting the mind, (2) continuous setting,  (3) re -setting, 
(4) close setting, (5) disciplining, (6) pacifying, (7) thorough pacifying, (8) making one -
pointed, and (9) setting in equipoise.  
2 This is also translated as the equanimity of application .  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                               Second Basic Program – Module 2  
                                                                    The Study of Mind and It s Functions  
 
Lesson 24  
Page 4 of 15 In the course  of developing meditative stabili sation  (or concentration ), 
when obstacles such as laxity or excitement arise, you have to apply the 
antidotes  to them . But when obstacle s are not arising , for example, there 
is no laxity , then i t is incorrect to apply the antidote  when there is no 
need to do so.   
  
 If you do not apply the antidote when there is a need  to do so , it is a 
fault.  
 If you apply the antidote when  there is no need to do so , it is also a 
fault.  
 
In this context, the equanimity  we are referring to is achieved  on the 
ninth mental abiding when the mind is in equilibrium  whereby you 
neither have to apply the antidotes nor not apply th e antidotes.  
 
At the eighth mental  abiding, t here is unlikely to be any laxity and 
excitement . The mind is probably free  from them but there is still some 
danger of them arising. On the eighth mental abiding , one projects the 
will or intention to stay in  session  and not be affected by laxity or 
excitement . There is no laxity or excitement during the sessio n but that 
comes through effort , i.e., one has to make an effort  for this to happen .  
 
But on the ninth mental abiding , as soon as you place  your mind on the 
chosen object of observation, the mind is able to abide in that state . The 
mind is free of laxity or excitement naturally and effortlessly.   
 
We did  not study the six perfections in the lam-rim as we did not have the 
time. These points I mentioned are in the lam-rim in the section o n the 
perfection of meditative stabi lisation  that explains:  
 the nine mental abiding  
 how one moves from one level to another  
 the obstacles that one will meet along the way  
 the difference between the coarse and subtle leve ls of excitement and 
laxity  
If we should have the chance to look at the six perfections in the future , 
we will discuss them then.   
 
Among the three types of equanimity —the compositional equanimit y (or 
the equanimity of application ), the equanimity that is feeling , and 
immeasurable equanimity —we are referring here to the equanimity of 
application  that is achieved on the ninth mental abiding.  
 
(11) Non-harmfulness  
 
Regarding non -harmfulness, the Compendium of Knowledge  says:  
QUESTION: What is non -harmfulness?  
RESPONSE: It is a mind of compassion and is involved with non -hatred. It has the function of not 
inflicting injury.  
 
Just as it has been said above, non -harmfulness is a patience that, lacking malice, observes suffering 
sentient beings, thinking, "May they be free of that [suffering]!"  (Page 48)  
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                               Second Basic Program – Module 2  
                                                                    The Study of Mind and It s Functions  
 
Lesson 24  
Page 5 of 15  The object  of non -harmfulness is a sentient being.  
 Its aspect  is compassion.  
 Its function  is not to inflict harm.  
 
Khen Rinpoche : Is there a sentient being who does not suffer?  
 
What is the problem with stating, “The object  is a sentient being, the 
aspect  is compassion and the function  is not causing harm ?” The object 
of observa tion of great compassion is all sentient beings . So the Buddha 
also cares  for the tenth ground  bodhisattvas.  
 
In order to develop non -harmfulness, we have to give up inflicting harm. 
This is the advice given in the Vinaya  for countera cting inflicting harm : 
 
And on the occasion of giving the instructions, one is cautioned about the necessity to abide in the four 
qualities that makes one a trainee -in-virtue:  
 
Even when derided, do not deride in return.  
Even when someone gets angry at one, do not get angry in return.  
Even when hit, do not hit back.  
Even when one's faults are exposed, do not expose others' faults  (Pages 48 – 49). 
 
We do  not harm sentient beings only through physical actions. We can 
also harm sentient beings verbally and mentally . Therefore we have to 
avoid harming others physically, verbally , and mentally.   
 
Therefore, if the intelligent ones analyze and understand this well, they will  be able to understand that 
abandoning harmfulness is the essence of the teachings.  
 
[Discussion of the category of virtuous mental factors ] 
QUALM: With regard to virtue, are the eleven [virtuous mental factors] which have been explain ed here 
exhaustive?  
RESPONSE: In general, virtues are taught to be of five types:  
(1) virtues by way of entity  
(2) virtues by way of relation  
(3) virtues by way of subsequent relation  
(4) virtues by way of motivation  
(5) virtues by way of ultimacy  
 
(1) The ele ven explained above – faith and so forth – are specified as being virtues by way of  entity  
because they are generated in the entity of virtue from their mere establishment without relying on 
other factors such as motivation. Hence, here I have indicated th e eleven principal virtues . 
(2) "Virtues by way of  relation " are minds and mental factors tha t are concomitant by way of the five 
similarities with the eleven – faith and so forth.  
(3) "Virtues by way of  subsequent relation " are imprints of virtue.  
(4) "Virtues by way of  motivation " are, for instance, physical and verbal actions motivated by faith.  
(5) "Virtues by way of  ultimacy " are explained to be thusnesses, because all obscurations will be 
purified if one meditates within observation of thusness; therefore, they are designated as "virtues" 
but are not actual virtues  (Page 49) . 
 
Thusness  and emptiness  refer to the same thing. Thusness and 
emptiness are not  virtue s because they are both uncomposed phenomena  
and permanent . Virtues are composed  phenomena  and impermanent.  
 
“All obscuration s will be purified if one meditates within observation of 
thusness ”: when you focus on thusness , all obscurations will be purified.  
The question s then arise . How does this happen? Why i s this so? Please 
explain how all obscuration s will be purified  when we observe thusness . 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                               Second Basic Program – Module 2  
                                                                    The Study of Mind and It s Functions  
 
Lesson 24  
Page 6 of 15 When the virtues explained above are divided from the viewpoint of circumstances, there is:  
(1) virtue by way of attainment at birth  
(2) virtue by way of application  
(3) virtue by way of activity [directed] in front  
(4) virtue by way of benefiting  
(5) virtue by way of bearing  
(6) virtue by way of acting as an antidote  
(7) virtue by way of pacificatio n 
(8) virtue by way of concordant cause  
 
(1) Virtue by way of attainment at birth  is, for instance, the faith that arises through mere rebirth due to the 
imprints from past lives without depending on familiarization in this lifetime  (Pages 49 – 50). 
 
You c an see that in some young children  who take a natural interest in 
the D harma  or who dislike killing. The y even have the thought that it is 
not good to kill.  There are some  children who are born with this mind of 
non-harmfulness.  
 
(2) Virtue by way of application  is, for instance, the generation of the wish to attain buddhahood in 
dependence on the four conditions – 
(i) relying on a virtuous spiritual guide,  
(ii) listening to the excellent do ctrine,  
(iii) properly taking such to mind, and  
(iv) practicing doctrines that are concordant with the attainment of nirvana.  
(3)  Virtue by way of activity [directed] in front  is, for instance, actions of making prostrations and making 
offerings within observation of the special field of accumulation  (Page 50) . 
 
When performing the seven  branch es of worship, “within observation of 
the special field of accumulation” means you do the se practice s by 
invok ing the field of merit before you. 
 
(4)   Virtue by way of benefiting  is, for instance, actions such as ripening sentient  beings by way of the four 
means of gathering disciples3 (Page 50) . 
 
“Four means of gathering disciple s”: by focus sing o n sentient being s, you 
have the wish to bring sentient being s into the path.  
(1) In order to attract that sentient being, you make material gifts , i.e.,  
giving gifts to make him happy  
(2) You speak  in a way that is conventionally accepted as pleasant. 
More importantly , you give advice or Dharma teaching s that fit the 
capacity and disposition of the person .  
(3) Applying the meaning means helping that  sentient be ing to put into 
practice the advice and teachings that you had given him in 
accordance with his capacity and disposition.  
(4) Acting in accord means setting a good example by practi sing what 
you teach . You practi se whatever advice you g ive to that sentient 
being.  
 
(5) Virtue by way of bearing  is, for instance, special wholesome actions which act as  the means for attaining 
high status and definite goodness.  
                                                           
3 The four means of gathering disciples are: (1)  giving Dharma and material necessities to 
disciples, (2) speaking pleasantly, (3) applying the meaning by helping them to put into 
practice the teachings that you have given, and (4) acting in accord – setting a good 
example by practicing what you teach.  
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                               Second Basic Program – Module 2  
                                                                    The Study of Mind and It s Functions  
 
Lesson 24  
Page 7 of 15 (6) Virtue by way of acting as an antidote  is, for instance, virtuous actions that  possess the special power to 
directly destroy the objects of abandonment and the  discordant class.  
(7) Virtue by way of pacification  is explained to be, for instance, true cessations, just  as it is said [in a stanza 
of homage to the Dharma]:  
 
Purity separating from attachment,  
Virtue liberating from the b ad migrations,  
Unique, ultimate, supreme - 
Pacifying Dharma…  
 
(8) Virtue by way of concordant cause  is, for instance, the five clairvoyances4 and the ten powers5 that arise 
though the force of attaining true cessations.  
 
These virtues explained above ar e either actual or designated  (Page 50) . 
 
When we talk about virtues , the re are different terms that are used: 
virtues by way of entity, by way of relation , by way of subsequent relation, 
by way of motivation , and by way of ultimacy. Some of these virtues are 
actual virtues  whereas others are just given the name , virtue , but are not 
actual  virtues   This is something for you to think ab out.  
 
Likewise  non-virtues are discussed in the same way . When we talk about 
non-virtues , for example , samsara  is said to be non -virtue. Technically , is 
samsara  a non -virtue?  
  
[Discussion of non -virtues ] 
Similarly, non -virtues are also taught to be of five types:  
(1) non -virtues by way of entity  
(2) non -virtues by way of relation  
(3) non -virtues by way of subsequent relation  
(4) non -virtues by way of motivation  
(5) no n-virtues by way of ultimacy  
 
(1) Non -virtues by way of entity  are mostly the [root] afflictions and the secondary afflictions.  
(2) Non -virtues by way of relation  are minds and mental factors that are concomitant with those afflictions.  
(3) Non -virtues by way of subsequent relation  are imprints of non -virtue.  
(4) Non -virtues by way of motivation  are the physical and verbal actions motivated by those afflictions.  
(5) Non -virtues by way of ultimacy  are [phenomena] included within cyclic existence. Since these  are the 
sources from which superiors generate despondency, they are called "non -virtues by way of ultimacy ." 
Nonetheless, it is not definite that everything included in cyclic existence is an actual non -virtue .        
(Page 51) .  
 
It also appears that with regard to the non -virtues explained above, there 
are many distinctions to be made between actual and designated  non-
virtues , their divisions , and functions.  
                                                           
4 The five clairvoyances are: (1) the clairvoyance of magical emanation, (2) the 
clairvoyance of divine eye, (3) the clairvoyance of divine ear, (4) the clairvoyance of 
recollecting previous states, and (5) the clairvoyance of knowing others' minds . 
5 According to Jetsun Chokyi Gyeltsen's Ocean of Sport: Commentary on the Ornament of 
Clear Realization , the ten powers  are: (1) the power of the exalted knower of sources and 
non-sources, (2) the power of the exalted knower of fruition of actions, (3) the powe r of 
the exalted knower of the variety of interests, (4) the power of the exalted knower of the 
many realms of the world, (5) the power of the exalted knower of superior and inferior 
faculties, (6) the power of the exalted knower of paths that proceed ever ywhere, (7) the 
power of the exalted knower of the thoroughly afflicted and the completely pure, (8) the 
power of the exalted knower recollecting previous states, (9) the power of the exalted 
knower of the varieties of death, transmigration and rebirth, an d (10) the power of 
knowing the exhaustion of contaminations.  
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                               Second Basic Program – Module 2  
                                                                    The Study of Mind and It s Functions  
 
Lesson 24  
Page 8 of 15 Question:  What would be an illustration of something that is virtuous but 
is also in cyclic existence?  
 
Answer:  Is the projecting karma to be reborn in the form or formless 
realm  non-virtuous? Maybe there is no need to go up so high . The karma 
that causes yo u to be reborn as a human being is virtuous  and it is also 
included within samsara.  
 
Question:  The eleven virtuous mental factors are said to be virtues by way 
of entity , i.e., they are virtues by their own power . Is there a relationship 
amon g the eleven virtuous mental factors themselves ? For example,  in 
order  to achieve pliancy, we have to apply effort. It seems that 
conscientiousness is also related to the cultivation of equanimity.  
 
Answer:  The eleven mental factors are discussed  individually . Each is 
said to be important and necessary. Their individual importance is 
highlighted  and is also explained through their respective functions , i.e., if 
you have this mental factor, this is what happens  to you.   
 
For example, is joyous perseverance need ed for pliancy? Without joyous 
perseverance, one cannot achieve pliancy . Yes or no?   
 
Students answer:  Yes.  
 
Khen Rinpoche : Why do you say yes?  
 
What is the object of observation of meditative stabili sation? It can be  
anything. It follows that  the mental image of the horns of a rabbit is an 
object of observation of meditative stabili sation. Do you a ccept  that? You 
have no  choice . You have to say yes.  
 
Student:  You have to make effort in generat ing this mental image.  
 
Khen Rinpoche : The object of observation of meditative stabili sation is not 
necessarily virtuous . The object of observation of joyous perseverance is 
necessarily virtuous  because it is defin ed as enthusiasm about virtue. In 
order to actuali se concentration, you do  not need a virtuous object. In 
order to achieve meditative stabili sation, do you need a mind that is 
enthusiastic  about virtue?  
 
[Student s’  feedback inaudible]  
 
Definitely there are  some connection s between these  mental factors . We 
need to analy se what they are and how they work.  
What is joyous perseverance? It is a mind that is enthusias tic about 
virtue.  
 
The object of observation of meditative stabili sation  is the imputed object . 
What is this imputed object?  What does it mean  to focus on an imputed 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                               Second Basic Program – Module 2  
                                                                    The Study of Mind and It s Functions  
 
Lesson 24  
Page 9 of 15 object? Are we talking about a generally characteri sed phenomen on or a 
specifically characterised phenomenon ?  
 
According to the Sutra School , a generally characteri sed phenomeno n is 
permanent  and a  specifically characteri sed phenomenon is impermanent . 
According to this school, an imputed object is a permanent phenomenon .  
 
We are trying to find out what exactly is an imputed object becaus e it is 
said to be the object of observation of meditative stabili sation. Going by 
the Sutra School, if we were to say that the imputed object is a generally 
characteri sed phenomenon , are we saying that you can only develop 
concentra tion by choosing a permanent phenomenon?  Does that mean  
you cannot meditate on an  impermanent  phenomenon ?  
 
The objective feature  of meditative stabili sation  is specified to be an 
imputed thing . The main reason why it is posi ted to be an imputed thing 
is because meditative stabili sation is developed in the mental and not the 
sense consciousness.   
 
That being the case, is the object of observation of  meditative 
stabili sation necessarily permanent?  I don’t think so.  All phenomena can 
be the object s of observation of meditative stabili sation. Do you agree? If 
you agree , then definitely you cannot say that only a permanent 
phenomen on can be the object of observation of meditative stabili sation .  
 
Essentially the question is  this: Is the object of observation of meditative 
stabili sation necessarily permanent? All phenomena can be the object s of 
observation of meditative stabili sation . Are all phenomena permanent?  
 
Question  from Khen Rinpoche : Is the imputed object that is observed by 
meditative stabili sation a specifically characteri sed phenomenon  or a 
generally characteri sed phenomenon ? 
 
Student:  It is a g enerally characteri sed phenomenon  and therefore 
neces sarily permanent.  
 
Khen Rinpoche : Is the object of observation of meditative stabili sation 
necessarily a permanent phenomenon? A generally characteri sed 
phenomenon and a permanent phenomenon are mutually inclusive.  
 
Student:  There is a difference betw een the appearing object to the mind 
and the object that is actually used for meditation. For example: the 
object  can be a statue or  it can be your breath , but the appearing object 
to the mind is actually a generally characteri sed phenomenon of the 
statue  or breath that is permanent.  
 
Khen Rinpoche : The movement of one’s breath is a tangible object. When 
we develop concentration through a form, we do  not do so by observing 
the form . Rather , by taking that form  as the object , we create  an image of 
that object in our mind , i.e., we create a  mental image of the form . Then 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                               Second Basic Program – Module 2  
                                                                    The Study of Mind and It s Functions  
 
Lesson 24  
Page 10 of 15 in depend ence on that , we achieve concentration . Therefore a sense  
consciousne ss cannot achieve concentration .  
 
Student:  Why can’t you create a sense of the tactile sensation in the mind  
just as you create an image of the form? 
 
Khen Rinpoche : The main thing is  this: when you are medit ating on the 
breath , are you meditating on the actual breath, the tactile object , or are 
you focusing on the mental image of the breath?  
 
Student:  It has to be the mental image of the breath.  
 
Khen Rinpoche:  The main point of th is discussion centres  on the definition 
of meditative stabili sation : “It is a one-pointedness of the mind that , 
within observing  an imputed thing , is continuously set upon it  (Page 30) .” 
The qualm we are trying to eliminate is related to , “imputed thing .” What 
is this imputed thing? It is stated clearly in the text:  
 
However, Arya Asanga clearly stated that meditative stabilization is not produced in sense consciousnesses; 
rather, it is only produced in a menta l consciousness. Moreover, its object of observation is not form 
appearing to a sense consciousness; rather, it is only a mental object imputed by the mind  (Page 31) . 
 
It is therefore wrong to posit the object of observation of concentration to 
be the fo rm that appears to the sense consciousness. Rather it has to be a 
mental object imputed by the mind.  This is stated by Arya Asanga.  
 
When we meditate, we try to dev elop a single -pointedness of mind  by 
focus sing on s omething, for example,  a form. But a ctually  we are not 
focussing on the actual form. F irst we look at it with our eye s. Then we 
close our eye s and we try to recreate an image  of that form in our mind . 
This is the object of tho ught that is a generic image , the meaning 
generality of the form. Th is is what we are focus sing on.  
 
What would be the object of observation when you are meditating on the 
breath? Going by this reasoning, it is difficult to posit the object to be the 
actual breath, a tactile object .  
 
When you say you are meditating on  the breath,  what exactly are you 
focus sing on while you focus  on the br eath?  If you posit  the actual  
movement of the breath  that is a tactile object  to be the objec t of 
observation , then one has to think  about how concentration  is achieved? 
How then is concentration achieved by focussing on something that is an 
imputed object?   
 
When you are meditating on the breath, at that time , what you are 
actually meditating or focu ssing on is the meaning generality of the 
breath . If we posit the meaning generality of the breath to be the object of 
observation , you can then explain this to be the imputed object.  
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                               Second Basic Program – Module 2  
                                                                    The Study of Mind and It s Functions  
 
Lesson 24  
Page 11 of 15 Question:  Is the  imputed object of the meditative stabili sation in the 
continuum of an ordinary being the appearing object of that 
consciousness?  
 
Answer:  You can say that it is the appearing object. If it does not appear , 
then I don’t know wh at your mind is focussing on. 
 
Question : What will be the appearing object of a non-conceptual  
meditative stabili sation?  
 
Answer:  This is s omething we can think about .  
 
Prior to achieving meditative stabili sation, the obj ect of observation is the 
imputed object.  
 
Once meditative stabili sation is achieved , perhaps one can posit the 
object of observation to be the phenomenon source form . When the 
meditative stabili sation is transformed  into the entity of direct perceptio n, 
then there should  not be any problem in positing a phenomenon source 
form to be the object of observation.  When that mind is transformed into 
the entity of direct perception , there is no mental image . There is no 
meaning generality. When there is no meaning generality , yet you have to 
posit an object . Then perhaps you can posit the object to be the 
phenomenon source form . 
 
What follows n ext will be the six root afflictions . You can read this section 
on your own . We had cover ed them in the previous module  on the  lam-
rim so we will go through the six afflictions fairly quickly . If you have any 
questions, you can bring them up in the next lesson.  
 
Question:  Once you reach the ninth mental abiding, you achieve 
meditative stabili sation and equanimity . After the ninth mental abiding, 
you achieve pliancy. Is that the sequence ? 
 
Answer:  On the ninth mental abiding, there is pliancy and the equanimity 
of application.   
 
There is mental pliancy followed by physical pliancy. After that comes  the 
bliss of physical pliancy . Only then is the bliss of mental pliancy  
achieved . After that you achieve  the mind of calm -abiding.   
 
You do not achieve calm -abiding simply by achieving mental pliancy . You 
have to achieve the bliss of pliancy.  Calm -abiding is defined as the 
concentration that is conjoined with t he bliss of physical and mental 
pliancy.  
 
Mental pliancy  physical pliancy  bliss of physical pliancy  bliss of 
mental pliancy  calm-abiding  
 
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                               Second Basic Program – Module 2  
                                                                    The Study of Mind and It s Functions  
 
Lesson 24  
Page 12 of 15 Advice by Khen Rinpoche:  
 
Cyndi  is not in a very good state . Something suddenly happen ed to he r 
today . Everyone , please pray for her  to be safe and to recover quickly.  
 
Also pray for Graeme . Maybe some of you know  that he has been sick for 
a long time . He is experiencing a lot of discomfort  and pain. So we pray 
that if there is the karma for him to recover , may he recover . If not, may 
his pain  be lessen ed and his wishes be fulfilled  in accord ance with the 
Dharma.   
 
It is very important to always make aspiration al prayer s continuously 
when one  is still up a nd about and everything is al l right. It is important 
that one strives in virtue . You have to see the point for doing so.  
 
When you are still al l right and nothing has happen ed, it is better to strive  
in virtue . It is very important to remind oursel ves that while we are still 
well, it is important to engage in virtue .  
 
All of us are the same . When nothing is wrong , all is fine b ut when 
something happens  such as when we are sick and are tormented by p ain 
and suffering, it is very difficult to remember  the D harma. Even if you  do 
remember the D harma and you want to practi se, it is very difficult to do 
so because you w ould be overwhelm ed by suffering. This is something we 
need to remind oursel ves. While we can still do it, then we better do it.  
Whatever studies  we are undertaking, we should continue with  them as 
well as our practices  and engage in as much virtue  as possible . Also be a 
good- hearted person.  
 
Keep in mind  everyone else in our cent re and our community because 
many people have problems  and various sufferings . So keep everyone in 
mind , pray for t hem to be freed from their pain and their obstacles ,  and 
for everyone to be able to lead what remains of their life in a meaningful  
way. 
 
 
 
Translated by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme  
 
Transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek, Vivien Ng, and Patricia Lee  
 
Edited by Cecilia Tsong   
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                               Second Basic Program – Module 2  
                                                                    The Study of Mind and It s Functions  
 
Lesson 24  
Page 13 of 15 THE ELEVEN VIRTUOUS MENTAL FACTORS  
DEFINITION  OBJECT OF 
OBSERVATION  SUBJECTIVE 
ASPECT  FUNCTION  REMARKS  
 (1) FAITH  
 A knower that has the aspect of conviction, clarity 
or wishing, and it serves as the direct antidote for 
non-faith.  
 It is a conviction, clarity, and wishing with respect 
to an existent that is endowed with excellent 
qualities and power. It has the function of acting as 
a support for aspiration.   For clarifying or clear 
faith, it is excellent 
qualities such as thos e 
of the Three Jewels.   
 For faith of conviction, 
it is modes of 
dependent -arising, 
workings of karma, 
and so forth.  
 For wishing faith, it is 
the four noble truths.   clarity for 
clarifying faith   
 conviction for faith 
of conviction   
 aspirational for 
wishin g or 
aspiring faith   
Support for 
aspiration   
Three types:  
(1) clarifying or clear 
faith 
(2) faith of 
conviction  
(3) wishing or 
aspiring faith  
 
(2) SHAME  
An avoidance of misdeeds on account of oneself  Misdeeds that one 
should avoid  Avoidance on 
account of oneself  Support for 
effective restraint 
from misconduct   
(3) EMBARRASSMENT  
An avoidance of misdeeds on account of others  Misdeeds that one 
should avoid  
 Avoidance on 
account of others  Support for 
effective restraint 
from misconduct   
(4) NON -ATTACHMENT  
 A knower  that is disenchanted and lacks 
attachment.  
 It is a lack of attachment to cyclic existence and 
the articles of cyclic existence.  
  
Object of desire   
Non-attachment 
when focussed on 
the object   
Support for non -
engagement in 
misconduct  Antidote to 
attachment , miser -
liness, excitement, 
distraction , and 
haughtiness . 
(5) NON -HATRED  
 A knower that conquers the generation of hatred 
within observation of any of the three  objects that 
generate hatred , i.e., sentient beings , suffering , and 
the source s of suffering , 
    and is a lack of malice.  1. sentient beings  
2. suffering   
3. source s of suffering  
  
Lack of malice   
Support for non -
engagement in  
misconduct  Antidote for 
belligerence, 
resentment, spite,  
jealousy , and 
harmfulness . 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                               Second Basic Program – Module 2  
                                                                    The Study of Mind and It s Functions  
 
Lesson 24  
Page 14 of 15 DEFINITION  OBJECT OF 
OBSERVATION  SUBJECTIVE 
ASPECT  FUNCTION  REMARKS  
(6) NON - IGNORANCE  
 It is a wisdom of indiv idual investigation that is 
able to serve as an antidote to ignorance arising 
from its cause —being either acquired through 
birth or  arisen through application . 
 It is knowledge arisen from fruition, scripture, 
contemplation or reali sation and is  a wisdom of  
individual investigation.  
  
All phenomena   
Non-confusion   
Support for non -
engagement in 
misconduct  Two types:  
o non-ignorance 
that is acquired 
through birth  
o non-ignorance 
arisen through 
application  
To be differentiated 
from the object -
ascertaining mental 
factor of wisdom  
(7) EFFORT (OR JOYOUS PERSERVERANCE)  
 
 The mind that is enthusiastic about virtue is 
effort.  
 The mind is enthusiastic in regard to armo uring, 
application, non -inferiority, irreversibility , and 
non-complacency .  
Virtuous activity  
 
 
 
 
  
Enthu siasm   
Fulfilling and 
accomplish ing the 
class of  virtue s Five types : effort of  
(1) armo uring 
(2) application  
(3) non-inferiority  
(4) irreversibility  
(5) non-compla -cency  
(8) PLIANCY  
 A knower that deposits an imprint so that the 
mind can be applied, how ever one wishes , to a 
virtuous object of observation and that severs the 
continuum of unfavo urable states of body and 
mind.  
 It is the serviceability of body and mind due to 
severing the continuum of unfavo urable states of 
body and mind .  
Virtuous object   
Serviceability of 
body and mind, i.e., 
one is a ble to use 
one’s body and mind 
in whatever way one 
wishes 
  
Eliminating all 
obscurations   
Two  types: - 
(1) physical  
(2) mental  
In this context, 
pliancy refers to 
mental pliancy  
(9) CONSCIENTIOUSNESS  
 An awareness th at accomplishes virtue within 
abiding in effort without coming under the 
influence of afflictions . It guards the mind against  
Virtuous object   
Guards the mind 
against the  
Causes the mind 
to abide in virtue Five types:  
conscientiousness  
(1) with respect to the 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                               Second Basic Program – Module 2  
                                                                    The Study of Mind and It s Functions  
 
Lesson 24  
Page 15 of 15 DEFINITION  OBJECT OF 
OBSERVATION  SUBJECTIVE 
ASPECT  FUNCTION  REMARKS  
contaminations.  
 It is a cultivation of virtuous qualities within 
abiding in non -attachment, non -hatred, non -
ignorance, as well as effort, and guards the mind 
against contaminations.  discordant class or 
incompatible factors 
with virtue  and for  virtue to 
increase  former  
(2) with respect to the 
latter  
(3) with respect to the 
middle  
(4) prior to activity  
(5) of concordant 
application  
(10) EQUANIMITY  
 It is a discordance with afflictive states, an 
evenness of mind, a  dwelling in a natural state, and 
a spontaneous abiding, within abiding in non -
attachment, non -hatred, non -ignorance, as well as 
effort.  
 In dependence on the techniques for internally 
setting the mind single -pointedly on an object of 
observation, the nine mental abidings are gradually 
accom plished. When the ninth is achieved, one no 
longer needs to strive to use the antidotes to laxity 
and excitement and one attains a spontaneous 
abiding of the mind.   
An imputed thing , i.e, 
same object as the object 
for meditative 
stabilisation   
Engaging in 
discriminative 
equanimity   
It does  not give the 
afflictions of the 
desire realm a 
chance to 
manifest . Three types:  
(1) compositional 
equanimity  or 
equanimity of 
application  
(2) equanimity which 
is feeling  
(3) immeasurable 
equanimity  
In this context, this 
mental factor  is the 
equanimity of 
application.  
(11) NON -HARMFULNESS  
It is a mind of compassion and is involved with non -
hatred.  Sentient beings  Compassion  Not inflicting harm   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 