Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Lorig/Edited/BP2 M2 L22 (final).pdf
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:53:49.611013
================================================================================

Amitabha Buddhist Centre                               Second Basic Prog ram – Module 2  
                                                                    The Study of Mind and Its Functions  
 
Lesson 22  
Page 1 of 14 Transcript of teachings by Khen Rinpoche Geshe 
Chonyi  on the Modes of Mind and Mental Factors  
 
Lesson No: 22      Date: 6th September 2012  
 
Root text:   A Necklace for Those of Clear Awareness Clearly Revealing the 
Modes of Minds and Mental Factors by Ye -she Gyeltsen , translated by Toh 
Sze Gee; January 2006 edition. Copyright: Toh Sze Gee & FPMT, Inc. 
September 2003.   
 
All page references refer to the root text, unless otherwise stated.  
 
Five object -ascertaining mental factors  
 
The five object -ascertainin g mental factors are:  
(1) aspiration  
(2) belief  
(3) mindfulness  
(4) meditative stabilization  
(5) wisdom (Page 26)  
 
(1) Aspiration  
 
In order to achieve any goal, one must have an aspiration to do so.  
Therefore  it is important to understand what exactly asp iration is:  
 What is its entity?  
 What is its object?  
 What is its function?  
 
As mentioned in the previous class, when one has aspiration, one is more  
likely to put in effort  (or generate joyous perseverance) . Joyous 
perseverance is induced by aspiration.  When one has joyous 
perseverance, one is more likely to achieve one’s desired goal : aspiration 
 joyous perseverance  achieving one’s g oal 
 
(2) Belief   
 
Belief is very important. You may have aspiration and based on that , you 
may generate joyous persever ance. But if you do not have belief, your 
aspiration and the joyous perseverance that is induced  by it is 
changeable. Therefore it is important to have stable belief.  
 
Belief is the ascertainment of the object . Whatever the object  may be,  
belief views the  object , holds on to it and believes , “It is just as I have 
determined it to be . It is like that.” With such belief, your aspiration for a 
particular goal and your joyous perseverance will not waver . 
 
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                               Second Basic Prog ram – Module 2  
                                                                    The Study of Mind and Its Functions  
 
Lesson 22  
Page 2 of 14 (3) Mindfulness  
 
But e ven if you have aspiration and b elief and your mind is familiar with 
the goal or object, when you lack mindfulness , it is difficult to sustain 
your practice of virtue. It is difficult to accomplish your goal and have 
your effort s come to fruition when you do  not have mindfulness. That wi ll 
not happen. So mindfulness is also very important.  
 
In this context, we are talking about mindfulness of a virtuous object , i.e.,  
not forgetting to focus your mind on a virtuous object. As mentioned in 
the text, the moment we forget to place our mind on a beneficial and 
virtuous object , the afflictions will creep in and manifest straight away. In 
order not to allow that to happen , it is important to be mindful .  
 
For these three mental factors - aspiration, belief , and mindfulness  - you 
should know:  
 what are their respective objects  
 what are their respective aspects  
 what are their functions  
 
By knowing the characteristics of these mental factors , you will realise 
how important they are and why they are necess ary.  
 
(4) Meditative stabilisation  
   
You al so have to know what the features of meditative stabili sation are. 
Just like aspiration, belief , and mindfulness, when you look at meditative 
stabili sation, it also has an objective feature and so forth.  
 
Meditative stabili sation ( or concentration , the single-pointedness of mind) 
is important. It is insufficient just to have mindfulness , i.e., not forgetting 
to place one’s mind on a virtuous object. When you do  not have single -
pointedness of mind, whatever antidote you may have to counteract the 
affliction s will be ineffective .   
 
But having single -pointedness of mind alone would also not enable one to  
readily destroy the afflictions. It is on the basis of having stable 
concentration that you will be able to develop the special wisdom that is 
the antidote t o the afflictions.   
 
It is true that when the mind is fully  concentrated , it is possible that the 
afflictions will not manifest . You can even remain in that meditati ve state 
of concentration f or a very long time , maybe even eons. While you are in 
that sta te of mind, your afflictions do not manifest but this does not mean 
that you have removed the m. They are still there. In order to eradicate 
these afflictions from the root, you need wisdom, specifically, the wisdom 
of individual investigation. On the basis  of developing concentration, one 
achieve s calm-abiding (or meditative serenity). On the basis of calm -
abiding , one generates special insight. It is this special insight that acts 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                               Second Basic Prog ram – Module 2  
                                                                    The Study of Mind and Its Functions  
 
Lesson 22  
Page 3 of 14 as the direct antidote to the afflictions.  
 
(5) Wisdom  
 
Regarding the entit y of wisdom, the Compendium of Knowledge  says:  
 
QUESTION: What is wisdom?  
RESPONSE: It strongly differentiates the qualities of things that are to be examined. It has the 
function of overcoming doubt.  
 
Just as it has been said above, wisdom is a knower tha t individually differentiates the faults and good 
qualities of things that are to be examined (Page 32).   
 
Wisdom also ha s its objective  feature , functional feature , and so forth:  
 The object o f wisdom is stated here in the text:  
 
Objects that are to be exa mined by wisdom are of three types: virtuous, non -virtuous, and unspecified 
(Page 32).  
 
 Its aspect is that i t distinguishes what you need to abandon and what 
you need to cultivate.  
 Its function is that it helps to overcome doubt.  
 
How does one differentia te between that which is to be abandoned and 
that which is to be cultivated , i.e., “faults and good qualities ”? One relies 
on the four ways of reasoning .  
 
[Wisdom] individually differentiates the faults and good qualities of these.  
       There are four w ays of reasoning for differentiating faults and good qualities:  
(1) functional reasoning  
(2) reasoning of dependence  
(3) logical reasoning  
(4) reasoning of nature  (Page 32)  
 
Reasoning of nature  
 
In the division s of functioning things, there are : (1) matter  (or form ), (2) 
consciousness , and (3) non-associated compositional factors. They are 
mutual ly exclusive. Why  is that so ? It is just like that. Consciousness is 
not matter and matter is not consciousness. They are different and exist 
separate ly and individ ually on their own. That is how things are. The 
reasoning of nature describ es things as they are.  
 
Reasoning of dependence  
 
When you look at their respective entities, where does consciousness 
come from ? How does matter arise?  
 The current moment of cons ciousness has to come from a previous 
moment of consciousness , its substantial cause. It arises in dependence 
on its substantial cause , i.e., also consciousness.  
 Similarly, matter comes into being in dependence on its substantial 
cause , i.e., a former mom ent of matter.  
This is how you come to understand the reasoning of dependence. The 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                               Second Basic Prog ram – Module 2  
                                                                    The Study of Mind and Its Functions  
 
Lesson 22  
Page 4 of 14 reasoning of dependence highlight s the fact that these phenomena come 
into being in dependence on their own substantial causes .  
 
Functional reasoning  
 
 Consciousness is cle ar and knowing,  i.e., it is able to illuminate and to 
know its object . 
 Matter/form  on the other hand can obstruct another matter/form .   
The reason why they are able to perform their respective functions is 
because they arose f rom a concordant cause.  That enables c onsciousness 
to function in the way it is supposed to  function. M atter is able to 
function in the way it is supposed to  function . This is functional 
reasoning or the principle of efficacy.  
 
We are trying to see  how to use these four ways of reason ing to examine 
the nature of reality : 
 reasoning of nature : the reality is that there is consciousness and 
there is matter. The reality is that they are established to be different in 
nature.   This is the observation of reality that satisfies the reasoning of 
nature ( or the principle of nature).  
 reasoning of dependence : the nature of form and consciousness come 
into being in dependence on causes.  
 functional reasoning : they produce their respective functions because 
they c ame into being in dependence on concordant causes . Therefore 
they are able to function.  
 logical reasoning : we understand all th is by using logic and reasoning , 
e.g., by comparing two phenomena through using three  or four 
possibilities , or using a correct sign to generate an inferential  
understanding of such phenomen a. Logical reasoning (or t he principle 
of valid proof) is used to gain an ascertainment of the phenomenon in 
question.  
 
We have to know that phenomena are like that by nature and that they 
come into being in dependence upon conc ordant causes. We have to 
understand that they are like that by using reasoning. In order to 
understand phenomena , we either perceive them directly or we gain an 
inferential c ognition of that phenomenon in dependence upon a sign  that 
is either an inference  through the power of fact or an inference through 
belief. This is how we generate the wisdom that differentiates between 
faults and good qualities.  By going through the process of the four ways 
of reasoning, we enhance our wisdom.  
 
The discussion of thes e five object -ascertaining mental factors is 
presented from the perspective of these five mental factors being in the 
retinue of a virtuous  main mind. These question s then arise:  
 Are these five mental factors only limited to a virtuous main mind?  
 Can the y accompany any main mind?  
 Are the object -ascertaining mental factors necessarily virtuous?  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                               Second Basic Prog ram – Module 2  
                                                                    The Study of Mind and Its Functions  
 
Lesson 22  
Page 5 of 14 You have to think about this. Generally speaking, I think it is not 
necessarily so.  
 Can these five object -ascertaining mental factors appear in the retinue 
of a sense primary consciousness?  
General ly speaking, it seems that these five  object -ascertaining mental 
factors will accompany a mental consciousness.  
 
Let’s say you have belief in the Three Jewels. This belief is in the retinue 
of a main mind. The main min d that accompan ies this mental factor is 
generally affected by this as well , i.e., the main mind will be coloured by 
this belief.  
 
In the retinue of this particular main mind, are all the other object -
ascertaining mental factors present as well?  There is  the belief in the 
Three Jewels. Are the mental factors of aspiration, mindfulness, 
meditative stabili sation , and wisdom  necessarily  also accompanying this 
main mind ?  
 
 When there is the belief in the Three Jewels, do you forget the Three 
Jewels? The thing  that makes you not forget the Three Jewels is 
mindfulness.  
 When there is the belief in the Three Jewels, is there any aspiration ?  
 Are you focus sed on the Three Jewels or not?  
 At the same time, is there a mind that is able to distinguish the good 
qualit ies of the Three Jewels?  
 
When you think about it, it seems that they are all there , even meditative 
stabili sation  or concentration. Concentration here refers to the single -
pointedness of mind. It doesn’t say that you have to sustain that for a 
long time.  Concentration here refers to being able to focus on the object  
when y our mind is placed on the object. It is also possible to have the 
wisdom that differentiates between good and bad at the same time when 
the belief in the Three Jewels is manifest.  
 
So in the retinue of a virtuous main mind, are all the five object -
ascertaining mental factors there? It is something to think about. It seem s 
that they are all there :  
 When a virtuous main mind manifest s, there is an aspiration as you 
aspire to achieve a desi red thing.   
 When a virtuous main mind manifest s, you are not forgetting the object 
that your virtuous mind is thinking about.  
 Your mind is also focus sed on the object, so there is some single -
pointedness  of mind .  
 There is also some wisdom that is able t o differentiat e the good qualities 
from the bad.  
 There is also belief . 
 
Student:  (Inaudible)  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                               Second Basic Prog ram – Module 2  
                                                                    The Study of Mind and Its Functions  
 
Lesson 22  
Page 6 of 14 Right from the start, these five mental factors are called the five object -
ascertaining mental factors . It does  not mention that they are virtuous or 
that they are focusing on something virtuous. It just says , “object -
ascertaining. ” If these five are in the retinue of a virtuous main mind , they 
become virtuous  too.  
 
You can think of these five object -ascertaining mental factors in the 
retinue of a non -virtuous main  mind. Since the main mind is non -
virtuous , these mental factors in the retinue of that main mind, I guess, 
will have to be non -virtuous. Let’s say in the retinue of a non -virtuous 
main mind , there is belief in the object of this  non-virtuous mind. Can we 
still call this mental event belief?  
 
There is also single -pointedness of mind in the non -virtuous main mind.  
 
We have to think about whether one can posit these object -ascertaining 
mental factors in the retinue of a non -virtuous main mind.  
 
In the text , the discussion of these fi ve mental factors  is done primarily 
from the perspective of a virtuous main mind . However when these five 
are grouped together , they are called the five object -ascertaining mental 
factors  and the word s, “virtuous ,” or “non-virtuous” are  not affixed  to 
them . When you look at their respective definitions , there is nothing th ere 
that implies that they are necessarily virtuous.  
 
The Eleven Virtuous Mental Factors  
 
There are eleven virtuous mental factors:  
(1) faith  
(2) shame  
(3) emb arrassment  
(4) non -attachment  
(5) non -hatred  
(6) non -ignorance  
(7) effort (or joyous perseverance)  
(8) pliancy  
(9) conscientiousness  
(10) equanimity  
(11) non -harmfulness (Page 33)  
 
(1) Faith  
 
Regarding the entity of faith, the Compendium of Knowledge  says: 
 
QUESTION: What is faith?  
RESPONSE: It is a conviction, clarity, and wishing with respect to an existent that is endowed with 
excellent qualities and power. It has the function of acting as a support for aspiration.  
 
Just as it has been said above, faith  is a knower that has the aspect of conviction, clarity, or wishing, and it 
serves as the direct antidote for non -faith. When divided, faith is of three types:  
(1) clarifying faith,  
(2) faith of conviction and  
(3) wishing faith.  
 
(1)   Clarifying faith is a clear mind engendered by seeing the excellent qualities of those so endowed, such 
as the Three Jewels. Why is it called "clarifying"? For example, when one places a water -purifying gem 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                               Second Basic Prog ram – Module 2  
                                                                    The Study of Mind and Its Functions  
 
Lesson 22  
Page 7 of 14 in dirty water, the murkiness of the water is immediately cleared awa y. Similarly, when this faith is 
generated, the murkiness of the mind is cleared away, whereupon all excellent qualities of realization 
become suitable to arise in one’s continuum.  
(2)   Faith of conviction is the gaining of conviction through contemplatin g the modes of dependent -arising, 
cause and result, and so forth that are taught by the Conqueror.  
(3)    Wishing faith, is, for instance, having contemplated the modes of the four noble truths, ascertained true 
sufferings and true origins as objects of ab andonment, and true cessations and true paths as objects of 
attainment, and having understood that these can be attained if one makes the proper effort, the faith 
thinking, "I shall definitely obtain them (Pages 33 – 34)." 
 
There are three types of f aith: 
1. clarifying faith  (also translated as clear faith)  
2. faith of conviction  
3. wishing faith (also translated as aspiring faith)  
 
Faith of conviction  
In the definition of faith, it mentions, “with respect to an existent .” 
“Existent” here refers to the object of ob servation of the faith of conviction. 
An example would be t he law of actions  (or karma ) and effect s, that 
actions have consequences. Good  action s lead to happiness . Negative 
action s lead to suffering. The f aith of conviction is having th e conviction 
that s uch a thing exists , that it is like that. You believe that there is such 
thing as karma , you believe in how it works, and that i t is infallible. 
Gaining a belief  in this is essentially the faith of conviction . 
 
Clarifying (or clear) faith  
“An e xistent that  is endowed with excellent qualities”: here “excellent 
qualities”  refer to the object o f observation of clarifying (or clear) faith.  
Clear faith is the cl arity of m ind that arises when you see the qualities  of 
the Buddha, Dharma  and Sangha. Clear faith is  literally the mind of 
liking. When you see the qualities of the Buddha, Dharma and Sangha, 
your mind becomes very clear and you develop this liking  for the Three 
Jewels . When this happens, at that moment , your mind is separated from 
all the pollutants suc h as afflictions and so forth . It gives you the mental 
space to develop the mind spiritually and make it suitable for cultivat ing 
the path.  
 
Like the example stated in the text, when chemical s are added to murky 
water , it make s the pollutants  settle . When the pollutants settle, the 
water becomes clear. Only when the water is clear , can images be 
reflected on its surface . Likewise through seeing the qualities of the Three 
Jewels, the mind is clear ed of all mental pollutants . There is then the 
possibility of develop ing the qualities of the Three Jewels within ourselves.  
Therefore the faith that comes from seeing the “excellent qualities ” is very 
important.  
 
As taught in the section o n correct rel iance on the virtuous friend in the 
lam-rim, the root of that training is developing the faith  that comes from 
seeing the qualities  of the virtuous friend . By focus sing on and seeing the 
qualities of the virtuous friend, your mind become s conducive for 
develop ing those qualities within yourself. You generate that cl arity of 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                               Second Basic Prog ram – Module 2  
                                                                    The Study of Mind and Its Functions  
 
Lesson 22  
Page 8 of 14 mind from focus sing on the qualities  of the virtuous friend . When you 
have the mind of non -faith and you think  in a negative  way, it blocks the 
mind from developing  such qualities.  
 
When you have the mind of clear faith in the virtuous friend, this  clear, 
clean, calm , and happy mind makes it easy for you to accomplish 
whatever the virtuous friend says . You will do w hatever he says . If you do 
not, t he reason is because there  isn’t this happy mind. So the mind is 
very tough.  
 
When you have faith in th e virtuous friend, through seeing his qualities , 
you will easily accomplish the work , commands , or wishes of the virtuous 
friend. You will not find them difficult to do or not do so. Without that 
kind of mind , then it becomes  very difficult.  
 
It is the sa me as in ordinary life. When you see the point of doing 
something, y ou would do it and accomplish it easily. You will not have 
any difficulty in doing so.  
 
Wishing (or aspiring) faith  
“It is a conviction, clarity, and wishing with respect to an existent t hat is 
endowed with excellent qualities and power ”: here “power” relates to 
wishing or aspiring faith.  
 
These are the three types of faith: faith of conviction, clear faith, and 
wishing faith , and they are related to “existent,” “ excellent qualities, ” and 
“power ” respectively.  
 
Faith is often thought to be the same as liking, but this  is not the case. As 
stated here, there are four possibilities between liking and faith.  
 
Nowadays, in our world, liking and faith are spoken of as if they are the same; lik ing beer is said to be "faith in 
beer," but liking and faith are nevertheless not the same. Faith is by entity a virtuous mental factor, whereas 
liking has both virtuous and non -virtuous factors. If this is explained in detail, there are the four possibili ties: 
(1) that which is liking but not faith  
(2) that which is faith but not liking  
(3) that which is both  
(4) that which is neither  
 
(1) The first, that which is liking but not faith is, for example, liking one's son, one’s wife and so forth, and 
liking sourc es of misdeeds, such as drinking alcohol and eating meals after noon [when ordained].  
(2) The second, that which is faith but not liking is, for example, fear from one's depths and faith of 
conviction regarding the drawbacks of the sufferings of cyclic existen ce. 
(3) That which is both faith and liking is, for example, faith from one's depths and liking due to contemplating  
the excellent qualities of the spiritual guide and the benefits of wholesome actions and their results.  
(4) That which is neither faith nor liking  is anger, suffering, and so forth (Page 34).  
 
Are liking and respect the same? Sometime s people think liking and 
respect are the same thing, but they are not.  
 
QUALM: Well then, are liking and respect the same or are they different?  
RESPONSE: Again, in the world we speak of them as if they are the same, but in fact they are not. Liking a 
spiritual friend is faith , but respect  for him involves contemplating his kindness, knowing shame, and valuing 
him highly. Hence, when [liking and respect] arise in the continuum, they are separate mental factors (Page 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                               Second Basic Prog ram – Module 2  
                                                                    The Study of Mind and Its Functions  
 
Lesson 22  
Page 9 of 14 34). 
 
 By recollecting the qualities of the virtuous friend, one generates faith in 
the virtuous friend.  
 By recalling the kindness of the virtuous friend, one generates respect 
for the virtuous friend.  
These two , faith and respect , are different and separate.  
 
If, in accordance with how they appear in the great treatises, you analyze these modes in detail with the 
wisdom of individual investigation, examining the way in which they are generated in the conti nuum by turning 
your mind inwards, then you will get to know them; you cannot know them merely through words. With these 
meanings in mind, the Foremost Omniscient [Tsong -kha-pa] repeatedly advises that, in order to perform 
wholehearted practice, you must r ely upon a skilful spiritual friend and acquire much hearing on the meaning 
of the scriptures. However, nowadays, when these great textual systems are explained to foolish beings who 
are deprived of the gem of intelligence and are inferior in merit, they b ecome frightened, terrified and flee 
faraway, as though a poisonous snake had sensed the odor of musk, or a little child had caught sight of a 
whirlpool. Those who view the exalted speech of the great scholars and adepts from the Land of Superiors 
[i.e., I ndia] as pith instructions seem like stars during daytime (Page 35).  
 
Studying the great treaties are difficult but , if we want to engage in  
wholehearted practice and attain fully qualified and actual reali sations, 
studying and learning the meaning of the se subjects become 
indispensable and very important . This applies particularly t o those texts 
composed by the great Indian masters without which it is extremely  
difficult to accomplish any real reali sation s or experiences.  Lama 
Tsongkhapa always gives such  advice from time to time.  
 
      Here, the function of faith is specified as "acting as a support for aspiration," because, as explained 
above, the cause of all excellent qualities is effort; in order to generate effort, one needs the aspiration that 
seeks; in order to generate aspiration, one needs to see the excellent qualities as well as possess the faith of 
conviction. For this reason, faith is praised more than once as the foundation of all virtuous qualities in the 
scriptures and their commentaries (Page 35).  
 
The function of faith is specified  as “acting as a support for aspiration. ” 
Faith is very important in order for aspiration  to arise. In order to have 
real aspiration, we need faith ; so faith is very important.  
 
How does faith arise?  Faith com es from seeing the qualities of a particular 
object. In order to have real faith in the Buddha, Dharma  and Sangha, 
you have to know exactly what they are, what are their qualities, and so 
forth. Otherwise you will not have faith  in them . So you need to 
understand and reali se the qualities of the Buddha, Dharma and Sangha.  
 
How you do that? There is no choice  other than to study, learn, and 
investigate the teachings . Therefore there is this great emphasis on 
studying . As I have mentioned before, most of the  time, people regard 
studying as an intellectual exercise , especially the study of these 
philosophical subject s. There is the strong idea that such studies have no 
real benefit or purpose.   
 
If you think about what we have discussed so far, you will reali se that 
what you need is joyous perseverance. You need to work hard in order to 
achieve your goals. That j oyous perseverance can only come  about when 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                               Second Basic Prog ram – Module 2  
                                                                    The Study of Mind and Its Functions  
 
Lesson 22  
Page 10 of 14 you have strong aspiration. In order to have strong and stable aspiration, 
you need to have faith. Faith cannot arise without reason. E.g., faith in 
the Three Jewels has to come from seeing the ir qualities . We need to 
understand exactly what the y are, their qualities, and so forth.   
 
How are you going to understand these qualities? It can only come from 
learn ing and studying the great treaties. Only then will you reali se the 
importance of and the great need for studying these topics : Learning the 
great treatises  faith  aspiration  joyous perseverance  attainment 
of all excellent qualities .  
 
Buddha mentio ned in his teachings how important faith is.  
 
In this vein, the  Formulae of the Three Jewels' Blaze  (Ratnolka -dharani)  also says:  
 
Faith is the forerunner, and, like a mother, is the procreator.  
It guards and increases all excellent qualities.  
It dispels d oubts and frees you from the four great rivers1, 
Faith signifies the city of happiness and goodness.  
 
Faith is without murkiness and clarifies the mind.  
It abandons pride and is the root of respect.  
Faith is a jewel, a treasure,  
And the best of feet.  
Like hands, it is the root of gathering virtue.  
 
Also the Ten Teachings Sutra  (Dasa -dharmaka -sutra ) says:  
 
Faith is the best of vehicles  
Through which you will be guided and definitely emerge.  
Therefore, intelligent people  
Rely on following faith.  
 
Wholesome qu alities do not grow  
In people who have no faith,  
Just as green sprouts [do not grow]  
From seeds scorched by fire.  
 
Thus, all wholesome qualities are companions of faith. [Shantideva's] Compendium of Trainings  
(Siksasamuccaya ), stating, "having made firm th e root of faith," also teaches that faith is the root of all paths. 
Even the Great Being, the Protector Nagarjuna, emphatically taught that faith is the foundation of all paths. 
With these meanings in mind, the Foremost Omniscient [Tsong -kha-pa] made the s tatement "Training in faith, 
the root" one of the outlines in his Great Exposition of the Stages of the Path, and stated that "the root of all 
happiness and goodness is the faith of conviction"  (Pages 35 – 36).  
 
Therefore f aith is very important.  
 With fa ith, y ou are able to generate whatever qualities you have not 
generated .   
 Whatever qualities you have generated  will be guarded and protected by 
your faith. 
 Those qualities that you have generated  will increase . 
 When we have faith in the virtuous friend, our “pride ” is abandoned .  
                                                           
1 From the causal point of view, the fo ur rivers are: (1) ignorance, (2) views, (3) existence, 
and (4) craving.  
From the resultant point of view, they are: (1) birth, (2) aging, (3) sickness, and (4) death.  
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                               Second Basic Prog ram – Module 2  
                                                                    The Study of Mind and Its Functions  
 
Lesson 22  
Page 11 of 14  Due to our f aith in the virtuous friend, we “respect ” the virtuous friend .   
 Faith stops the mind from looking for faults in the virtuous friend.  
 Faith is likened to having the “jewel ” of virtue in your hand.   
 Faith is like a “treasur e” because w hen you have faith, your qualities 
are unending  and inexhaustible.   
 Faith is “the best of feet ” because we depend on them to help us walk 
towards enlightenment. Without faith, it is like as if you didn’t have 
legs. Without legs, there is  no way to move towards full enlightenment.  
 
These are all advice for us. By studying and knowing the various entities 
of faith, their object s, and functions, they are the means to help us 
develop faith in our own mind. We have to think how this applies t o 
ourselves. First we have to see for ourselves whether faith is important or 
not. Then look at our own experience . When we have generated faith:   
 does it do  us any good?  
 does it reduce our pride?  
 does it increase those qualities that were mentioned in the  text?  
 
You have to look at your own experience  and see for yourself how 
important faith is . Then you can see that the more faith you have, the 
more qualities you can develop.  
 
(2) Shame  
 
Regarding shame, the Compendium of Knowledge  says:  
 
QUESTION: What  is shame?  
RESPONSE: It is an avoidance of misdeeds on account of oneself. It has the function of acting as a 
support for effective restraint from misconduct.  
 
Just as it has been said above, shame is an avoidance of misdeeds on account of oneself  (Page 3 6).  
 
What is shame? When we restrain ourselves from committing mistakes 
with our body, speech , and mind on account of ourselves,  that is shame.  
E.g., if we remember , “I have taken the pratimoksha, bodhisattva , and 
tantric vows . It would be wrong of me to engage in this action .” With that  
mind, we restrain or stop ourselves from committing that misdeed . Shame 
is the mind that avoids committing misdeeds on account of oneself.  
 
(3) Embarrassment  
 
Regarding embarrassment, the Compendium of Knowledge  says:  
 
QUESTION: What is embarrassment?  
RESPONSE: It is an avoidance of misdeeds on account of others. It has the function of just that [i.e., 
acting as a support for effective restraint from misconduct].  
 
Just as it has been said above, embarrassment is an avoida nce of misconduct on account of others  (Page 
36). 
 
Embarrassment is a restraint from non -virtue. Unlike shame, such 
restraint is done on account of others. E.g., we stop ourselves from 
engaging in misdeeds with our body, speech , and mind by thinking , “If I 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                               Second Basic Prog ram – Module 2  
                                                                    The Study of Mind and Its Functions  
 
Lesson 22  
Page 12 of 14 were to do this, the buddhas and bodhisattvas will be displeased. When 
other people know about this, they will also be unhappy and would 
disagree with my actions. ” Embarrassment puts a stop to such actions 
and is therefore “an avoidance of misdeeds o n acc ount of others .” 
 
[Discussion of the pair – shame and embarrassment]  
What is the difference between shame and embarrassment? Although both of them are similar in terms of 
avoiding misconduct, shame is such that, when one is about to engage in misconduct, o ne avoids it, thinking, 
"This is not something I should do ." In the case of embarrassment, when one comes close to engaging in 
misconduct, one avoids it on account of others, thinking, "If others were to despise me [as a result of my  
engaging in misconduct ], this would not be fitting." One avoids misconduct due to concern about the 
displeasure of one's gurus or, teachers – the principal object [causing] this avoidance. Their  function is 
specified as "acting as a support for effective restraint from miscondu ct," because shame and embarrassment 
are definitely necessary for restraining misconduct of the three – body, speech, and mind. If shame and 
embarrassment are absent, one will be unable to restrain oneself from any misconduct whatsoever, for, 
without fear about the fruition from one's own side, and lacking concern about the displeasure of one’s gurus, 
teachers, and so forth, there will be no way to cease misconduct  (Pages 36 – 37). 
 
So the difference between shame and embarrassment is  this: 
 When it is an av oidance of misdeeds on account of oneself, it is shame.  
 When it is an avoidance of misdeeds on account of others, it is 
embarrassment.  
 
(4) Non-attachment  
 
Regarding non -attachment, the Compendium of Knowledge  says:  
 
QUESTION: What is non -attachment?  
RESPONSE: It is a lack of attachment to [cyclic] existence and the articles of [cyclic] existence. It 
has the function of acting as a support for non -engagement in misconduct.  
 
Just as it has been said above, it is a knower which is disenchanted and lacks att achment  ((Page 37) . 
 
 Non-attachment is the opposite of attachment.  
 Non-hatred is the opposite of hatred  
 Non-ignorance is the opposite of ignorance.  
 
Question from Khen Rinpoche: Is non -ignorance the same as wisdom?  
  
There is a lot of discussion  on these three mental factors and also the 
subsequent mental factors. You should read this on your own before 
coming to class.  
 
Question:  Is there a difference in the strength of restraint between shame 
and embarrassment? Embarrassment is a restraint arising from co ncern 
for what others think of oneself whereas shame comes from within  
oneself.  
 
Answer:  It depends on whom you believe  in more  - yourself or others.  
 
Question : I am thinking that if embarrassment arises in dependence on 
something external to one self, the n when those external factors are no 
longer there, there would be no need to exercise such restraint?  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                               Second Basic Prog ram – Module 2  
                                                                    The Study of Mind and Its Functions  
 
Lesson 22  
Page 13 of 14 Answer:  We have to understand that whether  it is  shame or 
embarrassment , it is an avoidance of non -virtues and negativities. Is it 
possible for there to b e no embarrassment when there is  no one out 
there? Th e day would never come because the buddhas and bodhisattvas 
are always looking at us. Until the day comes when we have definite 
ascertainment that , because the buddhas and bodhisattvas are 
omniscient and  therefore have the ability to know what we are doing at all 
times , I guess it is difficult  … 
 
Khen Rinpoche: It is l ike a CCTV ! In the bank , there is the CCTV  so there is 
no need for anyone to be there.  
 
Question : What is the difference between mindfulnes s and concentration? 
I thought that when you have non -forgetfulness of the object , the mind 
necessarily holds the object single -pointed ly? 
 
Answer:  Mindfulness and concentration come together, but nevertheless 
they are different  because they perform differ ent function s. The function 
of mindfulness is non -forgetfulness of the object and the aspect of 
concentration is the single -pointedness  of mind .  
 
When you think about it, it is difficult. In the discussion at the beginning 
of this topic, we talk ed about t he mind and its mental factor s being of  one 
entity but different isolates , i.e., we are referring to one mind with 
different name s. Sometimes it seems like it is the same mind but with 
different names. But here they have different function s so they are 
different mental factors . They are n ot the same mind.  
 
Question:  Meditative stabili sation acts as a support for knowledge . 
Knowledge has been explained to be special insight. Can this be a non -
virtuous mental factor?  
 
The function of a spiration  is to act as the support for joyous 
perseverance , which is necessarily virtuous. Can a non -virtuous mental 
factor become a cause for a virtuous mental factor?  
 
Answer: This will take some time to explain . We will do it in the next 
class.  
 
Translated by Ven. Tenzin Gyur me 
 
Transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek, Vivien Ng, and Patricia Lee  
 
Edited by Cecilia Tsong  
 
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                               Second Basic Prog ram – Module 2  
                                                                    The Study of Mind and Its Functions  
 
Lesson 22  
Page 14 of 14  
Object - 
ascertaining 
mental factors   
Aspiration   
Belief   
Mindfulness   
Meditative Stabili sation   
Wisdom  
(Knowledge)  
 
Definition   
It is a knower that, 
upon observin g some 
intended things, seeks 
it.    
It is a knower that holds the 
object that has been  ascertained 
by its valid cognition , thinking , 
“It is just like this and not 
otherwise .”  
It is a non -
forgetfulness of the 
mind with respect to a 
familiar object   
It is a one -pointedness of the 
mind with respect to an 
imputed thing   
It is a knower that 
individually differentiates the 
faults and good qualities of 
things that are to be 
examined  
 
Objective 
feature   
The attribute of a 
desired thing   
An object that has been 
ascertained by valid cognition   
A familiar object   
It is specified to be an 
imputed thing.   
Three types:  
(1) virtuous  
(2) non-virtuous  
(3) un -specified  
 
Subjective 
aspect feature   
It is the very wish to 
be endowed with this 
or that attribute of a 
desire d thing .  
  
It holds an ascertained thing to 
be just the way it has been 
ascertained.   
Non- forgetfulness 
upon having observed 
that object   
It is a one -pointedness  of 
mind that, within observing 
an imputed thing, is 
continuously set upon it.   
It strongly  differentiates  the 
qualities of things that are to 
be examined.  
 
Functional 
feature   
It is the support for 
making effort.  
  
It has the function of n on-
captivation . 
  
It has the function of 
non-distraction .   
It acts  as a support for 
knowledge .  
It has the function of 
overcoming doubt . 
 
Remarks   
Three types:  
1. (1) aspiration wishing 
to meet  
2. (2) aspiration wishing 
not to be separated  
3. (3) aspiration that 
seeks   
   
Four types of object s of 
observation   are us ed for 
developing meditative 
stabili sation:  
(1) objects of observation for 
purifying behavio ur  
(2) objects of observation for 
purifying afflictions  
(3) pervasive objects of 
observation  
(4) objects of observation for 
developing skill   
Four ways of reasoning for 
differentiating faults and good 
qualiti es: 
(1) functional reasoning  (or 
principle of efficacy)  
(2) reasoning of dependence  
(or principle of dependence)  
(3) logical reasoning  (or 
principle of valid proof)  
(4) reasoning of nature  
(or principle of nature)  
 
 