Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Lorig/Edited/BP2 M2 L19 (upload).pdf
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:53:47.001245
================================================================================

Amitabha Buddhist Centre                               Second Basic Program – Module 2  
                                                                    The Study of Mind and Its Functions  
 
Lesson 19  
Page 1 of 12 Transcript of teachings by Khen Rinpoche Geshe 
Chonyi  on the Modes of Mind and Mental Factors  
 
Lesson No: 19          Date: 23rd August 2012  
 
Root text:   A Necklace for Those of Clear Awareness Clearly Revealing the 
Modes of Minds and Mental Factors by Ye -she Gyeltsen , translated by Toh 
Sze Gee; January 2006 edition. Copyright: Toh Sze Gee & FPMT, Inc. 
September 2003.   
 
All page references refer to the root text, unless otherwise stated.  
 
When we talk about the mind and its mental factors, we are not talk ing 
about something  that can be perceive d with our naked eyes . When we 
talk about something that we cannot see, it is  challenging to have a feel 
for what we are talking  about.  
 
In describing the mind and its mental factors , there are many terms in 
the text to help us understand what the y are. Many quotations are cited. 
Some of these are quite challenging. There are words and terminologies  
that are difficult to understand. Of course, it would be ideal if we can go 
through and understand thoroughly each and every single word but that 
would be quite difficult .  
 
Since th is is the case, it is possible that sometimes you may feel  
discourage d and depress ed when you read the text and f ind one or two 
words that are difficult to understand.  When th is happen s, you must 
really know how to think. You must understand that it is not right to be 
discouraged.  
 
When you compare the difference between not reading the text and having 
read the text, d efinitely there will be more benefit to having read the text 
even though you  may not understand everything. Definitely you will  stand 
to gain from learning at least some new words and new concepts. 
Everyone has to try their very best to learn , bearing in mind that it is 
impossible to know everything.  
 
**********  
 
It is said in the teachings of the Buddh a that everything is the creation of 
the mind . In particular o ur experience s of happiness and suffering are 
ultimately the creation s of our own mind.  That being the case , it is 
important to understand what a mind is.  Therefore  we are now looking at 
the presentation of the mind and mental factors .  
 
The main mind  is considered to be primary . The mental factors  that 
accompan y the main mind are said to be secondary . The main mind and 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                               Second Basic Program – Module 2  
                                                                    The Study of Mind and Its Functions  
 
Lesson 19  
Page 2 of 12 the mental fa ctors in its retinue  can be likened to a king and his 
ministers.  
 
A main mind  is posited from the perspective of it knowing the mere entity 
of an object . A mental factor  is posited from the perspective of the 
different function  that it performs  and kno wing the features of the object . 
For example , the mental factor of mindfulness  function s to enable us not 
to forget a particular object.  
 
In the last lesson, we discussed how the main mind and the mental 
factors in its retinue  are one and the same entity  but they are not the 
same. Just as you will not be able to find a main mind that is of a 
different entity from the mental factors , similarly , you will not be able to 
find a mental factor that is of a separate e ntity from the main mind.  
Therefore, t he main mind and the mental factors are one entity.  
 
Five similarities  
A main mind is concomitant by way of the five similarities with the mental 
factors in its retinue . What are the se five similarities?  
 
1. Similar support  (or basis)  
2. Similar object of observation : both the main mind and the mental 
factor s in its retinue  observe the same object .  
3. Similar [subjective] aspect : they both have the same aspect .  
4. Similar time: they are b oth produced, abide , and disintegrate at the 
same time.  
5. Similar substance :  just as there is only main mind , e.g., an eye 
primary consciousness apprehending blue, there  can only be one 
mental factor  of feeling in the retinue of th at main  mind. In that sense, 
they have similar substance s. 
 
These are the five similarities mentioned in The Treasury  of Knowledge  by 
Vasubandhu .  
 
This is a summary of what we covered  in the last lesson. For the time 
being , if you are able to understand what I have summari sed, that is 
sufficient. It is not possible to know and have the experience of everything 
right now . That takes time. Here w e are just try ing to understand what 
this topic is talking about. We are trying to understand  what the Buddha , 
and particular ly the great Indian masters such as Vasubandhu , said and 
presented in their text s. Of course it will be very good if you have some 
feeling or experiential  understanding of whatever is mentioned in the 
text, thinking, “Yes, it is like that. ” That will be ideal but even just having 
an idea of what the mind is can be challenging and difficult . Just 
understand ing the concept itse lf is difficult.  
 
The Compendium  of Knowledge , the Higher Abhidharma , has a slightly 
different presentation o f the five similarities between the main mind and 
the mental factors in its retinue . 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                               Second Basic Program – Module 2  
                                                                    The Study of Mind and Its Functions  
 
Lesson 19  
Page 3 of 12 The explanation in the Compendium  of Knowledge  regarding the five similarities is as  follows:  
(1) similar substance  
(2) similar object of observation and [subjective] aspect  
(3) similar entity  
(4) similar time  
(5) similar realm and level  
 
(1)   Similar substance  refers to the following. I n the retinue of a single main mind, there can arise only one 
mental factor, for instance, feeling, of a similar type; two [mental factors] of a similar type but of different 
substances cannot occur.  
(2-3) Similar object of observation  and [subjective]  aspect and similar entity refer to the following.  
 [A mind and the mental factors in its retinue] are similar in observing one object – the object of 
observation – and they are similar in being afflicted or non -afflicted in terms of the object of 
observation a nd the [subjective] aspect.  
 If a main mind has become afflicted, then the mental factors in its retinue also become afflicted, 
whereas if a main mind has become uncontaminated, the mental factors in its retinue also become 
uncontaminated.  
(4)   Similar time refers to the following. A main mind and the mental factors in its retinue are simultaneous in 
regard to the three – production, abiding and cessation.  
(5)    Similar realm and level  refers to the following. If a main mind is a mind of the desire realm, then it is 
impossible for a mental factor of the form or formless realms to arise in its retinue, and it is impossible 
for a mental factor of the desire realm to arise in the retinue of a mind of the form realm. That realm in 
which the main mind is include d is also necessarily the realm in which the mental factor in its retinue is 
included  (Page 13) . 
 
Here the object of observation and [subjective] aspect is grouped together 
and count ed as one  similarity . There is no need to explain similar 
substance , similar object of observation and aspect , and similar time  as 
they have been explained earlier.  
 
Similar entity  
 If the main mind  is afflicted, the mental facto rs in its retinue will also be 
afflicted.  
 If the main mind becomes  contaminated, the mental factors in its 
retinue  also become contaminated.  
 If the main mind becomes uncontaminated , the mental factors in its 
retinue  become uncontaminated as we ll.  
 
Similar realm and level  
In general, there are three realms  and nine levels.   
 
The t hree realms  are:  
1. The desire realm  
2. The form realm  
3. The formless realm  
 
The nine levels  are: 
1. The desire realm  
2. The four concent rations of the form realm : 
3. first concentration  
4. second  concentration  
5. third concentration  
6. fourth  concentration  
7. The four levels of the formless realm:  
8. Infinite space  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                               Second Basic Program – Module 2  
                                                                    The Study of Mind and Its Functions  
 
Lesson 19  
Page 4 of 12 9.    Infinite consciousness  
10. Nothingness  
11. Peak of cyclic existence  
 
You will fin d these terms , the three realms and nine levels , in the 
treatises .  
 
What does similar realm  and level mean ?  It means that the main mind 
and the mental factors in its retinue  are similar in terms of realm.  
 If the main mind is a mind of the desire realm , the mental factors in its 
retinue s are mental factors of  the desire realm . 
 If the main mind is a mind of the form realm , the mental factors in its 
retinue  are mental factors of the form realm .  
 It is the same for t he formless realm .  
From  this you can extrapolate what a similar level means . 
 
According to the Compendium of Knowledge , these are the two differences 
in term s of the five similarities ; the presentation s of similar entity  and 
similar realm and level . 
 
Five similarities according to 
Vasubandhu’s Treasury of 
Knowledge  (Abhidharmakosha):  Five similarities  according to Asanga’s 
Compendium of Knowledge 
(Abhidharmasamuchchaya) : 
1) Similar support  1) Similar substance  
2) Similar object of observation  2) Similar object of observation and 
[subjective] aspect  
3) Similar [subjective] aspect  3) Similar entity  
4) Similar time  4) Similar time  
5) Similar substance  5) Similar realm and level  
 
Question:  Since the mind and mental factors are included in the 
continuum of a person in that particular rebirth, why is it necessarily to 
mention that the main mind and its mental factors are concomitant with 
the realm and level?   
 
Answer: For a per son who is a desire realm being , it is not necessarily so 
that all his  mind s are minds of the desire realm. In order for a desire 
realm being to be reborn in the form realm, he must accumulate the 
projecting karma to be reborn a s a form realm god. Not only that. The 
actuali sing karma for that rebirth  in the form realm must also manifest.  
 
In order for a desire realm being to accumulate the karma to be reborn in  
the form realm, he must first actuali se the realisation of calm-abiding . 
Only on the basis of such a realisation  can he accumulate  the projecting 
karma for a rebirth in the form realm.  Since it is possible for a desire 
realm being to ha ve the realisation of calm-abiding , such a desire realm 
being can accumulate the projecting karma for a rebirth in the form 
realm .  
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                               Second Basic Program – Module 2  
                                                                    The Study of Mind and Its Functions  
 
Lesson 19  
Page 5 of 12 Therefore w e cannot conclude that all the minds of desire realm beings 
are necessarily minds of the desire realm.  
 
Question:  Why are there two separate presentations of the five 
similarities ?  Is it because the Compendium of Knowledge  by Asanga does 
not represent the view of the Sutra School since he was known to be a 
proponent of the M ind-only School ? 
 
Answer : They are just two different explanations . I don’t know exactly 
why there are two different explanations  but in general, many 
explanations from the higher tenets, including the explanation s of the 
mind , are usually  different.   
 
The Five Omnipresent Mental Factors  
 
The first five  mental factors  are known collectively as the five omnipresent 
mental factors . This mean s that they necessarily a ccompany all main 
minds. If it is a main mind, whether it is a sense primary consciousness 
or a mental primary consciousness, definitely you will find these five  
mental factors in its retinue .  
 
The five omnipresent mental factors are:  
(1) feeling  
(2) discrimination  
(3) intent ion 
(4) contact  
(5) attention  (Page 16)  
 
(1) Feeling  
 
The entity of feeling is just as it has been taught in the Compendium of Knowledge : 
 
QUESTION: What is the defining characteristic of feeling?  
RESPONSE: It has the characteristic  of experience; through the entity of experience, it experiences 
individually the fruitional results of virtuous and non -virtuous actions  (Page 16) . 
 
What is the entity of feeling?  It is an experience.  What is the entity of 
experience?  “It experiences i ndividually the fruitional results of virtuous 
and non -virtuous actions. ” 
 
What is to be understood from this sentence?  Whatever feelings of 
pleasure or suffering that arise in our mind are the fruitional results of 
our own karma  or actions.  
 
Here, that which is experienced by feeling is taught to be a fruition; this is taught for the purpose of making 
known that all feelings that arise within us, whether pleasant or suffering, are solely the fruitional result of 
actions ( karma) . Moreo ver, the Great Exposition of the Stages of the Path  says:  
 
The manner in which actions are definite is as follows. Regardless of whether we are ordinary 
beings or superiors, all happiness in the aspect of pleasant feelings – even as slight as that 
produced  in dependence on a cool breeze when one is born in hell – arises from virtuous actions 
accumulated in the past. Happiness cannot arise from a non -virtuous action. Also, all suffering in the 
aspect of painful feelings – even as slight as that produced in t he mental continuum of a foe -
destroyer – arises from non -virtue accumulated in the past. Suffering cannot arise from a virtuous 
action  (Page 17) . 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                               Second Basic Program – Module 2  
                                                                    The Study of Mind and Its Functions  
 
Lesson 19  
Page 6 of 12 This is related to the presentation of the general characteristics of karma 
in the lam-rim; how karma is d efinite , how we will not experience the 
result of an action that we did not do , and so forth.  Whatever experience 
of happiness or suffering in our mind , no matter how big or small , are all 
the fruitional results of our own karma . We must understand and gain 
conviction in this.  
 
We should think about this: is it possible for there to be an experience of 
happiness in our mind due to a non -virtuous action , even if that is a 
small action ?  Is it possible for a non -virtuous action to result in some 
kind of happiness?  
 
This goes back to the presentation of how karma is definite. Whatever  
result , includ ing the happiness we seek, cannot arise without a cause. 
Not only must it arise from a cause , it must arise from a concordant 
cause.  Therefore  it is impossible for a pleasurable feeling or happiness, no 
matter how big or small, to arise from non -virtue. It is just as Arya 
Nagarjuna  said i n his Precious Garland : 
 
From non -virtue comes all sufferings  
And likewise all bad migrations.  
From virtue comes all happy migrations  
And the happiness within all rebirths.  
 
Therefore, happines s and suffering neither arise without cause nor arise from discordant causes such as the 
fundamental nature, Ishvara and so forth. Rather, in general, happiness and suffering come from virtuous and  
non-virtuous actions [respectively], and even the various instances of happiness and suffering arise 
individually, without even the slightest mix -up, from the various instances of these two types of actions. 
Hence, gaining  certainty regarding this definiteness or infallibility of actions and their results is know n as "the 
correct view of all Buddhists" and is praised as the foundation of all wholesome qualities  (Page 17) . 
 
Therefore it is very important that you gain an understanding of and the 
definite  conviction in the following:  
 that karma  is definite  
 that you will never meet with the result if you have never created the 
cause in the first place  
 that non-virtue can only lead to suffering  
 that virtue can only lead to happiness  
 
So far i n our study of Lorig,  there  has been the discussion of cause and 
effect at an e xternal  level. Different kinds of minds also arise from 
different kinds of causes. This is now a more in -depth presentation of 
cause and effect. Ultimately the main purpose of understanding how the 
natural principles of cause and effect work  externally is to relate it to our 
experience s of happiness  and suffering .  
 
We had been t alking about  the eye consciousness apprehending blue .  
You may  wonder , “What does this have to do with my life? ” Using the eye 
consciousness apprehending blue  as the subject , in order for th at 
consciousness to arise, you must have  the observed object condition , 
blue.  Without blue, you cannot have an eye consciousness apprehending 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                               Second Basic Program – Module 2  
                                                                    The Study of Mind and Its Functions  
 
Lesson 19  
Page 7 of 12 blue. In the same way, without the eye sense power , you also cannot have 
an eye consciousness apprehending blue.   
 
We are talking about causality  here, i.e., an effect has to be preceded by a 
cause . Applying that to the internal world of our experience of happiness 
and suffering , the happiness we seek can only arise after  we have created 
its  cause , virtuous action s.  
 
Hence, g aining c ertainty regarding this definiteness or infallibility of actions and their results is known as “the 
correct vie w of all Buddhists ” and is praised as the foundation of all wholesome qualities  (Page 17) .  
 
Gaining this ascertainment of actions and their effects , i.e., the workings 
of karma , become s the foundation for all good qualities to arise in our 
mind. This is like the root . Without it, it is very difficult to practi se the 
Dharma.  Whether we succeed in our practice and spiritual transformation 
depends on whether we have this whole -hearted conviction in the 
workings of karma .  
 
When we talk about the eightfold noble path1, the first is right view . That 
refers to this conviction , i.e., the right view about action s and their effect s, 
the root of spiritual transformation. Therefore  from the very beginning , it 
is import ant to learn and to reflect on the natural principl es of causality , 
cause and its effect , keeping in mind that c ause and effect is not karma.  
 
Based on the natural principles of causality , one tries to understand 
action s or karma and their results. It is very important to develop this 
root at the outset.  It is very important to gain an understanding of and 
conviction  with regard t o the infallibility of karma , actions and their 
effects. This becomes the right (or correct ) view. By keeping this 
conviction in mind , then our whole life change s and in the future , no 
matter how we look at the world  or how we think, everything will be 
coloured by this conviction.  
 
On the basis of the right view , this conviction in the workings of karma, 
whatever perspective one may have of thing s will be the right perspective . 
When  one has the right perspective of thing s, right thought , then one’s 
speech will also be right speech .   
 
There are also right  action s. This refers to one’s physical actions  or 
behaviour . Whatever  physical actions one undertakes will also be right.  
When one accumulates  karma , one does so through the actions of body, 
speech , and mind . On the basis of right view, one accumulate s virtuous 
karma with one’s  mind . One accum ulates virtuous karma with one’s  
speech . One accumulates virtuous karma  with one’s right physical 
actions. In other words, the right physical action s can also be virtuous 
                                                           
1 The eight branches of a superior’s path are: (1) correct view , (2) correct thought, (3) 
correct speech, (4) correct aims of actions (5) correct livelihood, (6) correct effort, (7) 
correct mindfulness and (8) correct m editati ve stabil isation ( Page 64, Basic Program 
Study Manual for Maitreya’s  Ornament for Clear Realisations, Chapter 4)     
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                               Second Basic Program – Module 2  
                                                                    The Study of Mind and Its Functions  
 
Lesson 19  
Page 8 of 12 karma.  Whether one accumulate s virtue or non -virtue  with one’s  body, 
speech , and mind  therefore depends on whether one has the right view of 
the Buddhist s, i.e., whether one has the conviction  in and ascertainment  
of actions and their effects.  When one has  such conviction , it is then 
possible to accumulate virtuous actions . Without this conviction, one may  
accumulate only non-virtuous actions.   
 
 On the basis of right view, it is possible to ha ve right livelihood  in one’s  
life.  
 With conviction in the workings of karma, one will also make right 
effort . Whatever one engage s in will be right endeavo urs.  
 Then there is right mindfulness . Whatever effo rt one is making, one 
works at one’s goal with right mindfulness .  
 When right effort is accompanied  by right mindfulness, one is then able 
to have the condition s for develop ing the single -pointed mind. When one 
is able to develop a very strong  and stable concentration  and achieve 
calm-abiding, then one has right concentration .  
 
From this , you can see how it is extremely important to have an 
ascertainment of and the conviction in karma and its effect s for this is the 
foundation of all wholesome qualities. Using the eightfold noble p ath as 
an example, this is how the eightfold noble p ath is based on the right 
view.  
 
Without this conviction in the workings of karma in our minds, it is very 
difficult to engage in virtue , the foundation of all wholesome qualities. 
When you are unable to generate wholesome qualities, liberation and 
enlightenment will never happen. Therefore without conviction in the 
workings of karma , there is no way to achieve liberation and 
enlightenment.   
 
Developing such conviction in karma and its effects is extremely 
important , particular ly in relation to all our unhappy experiences, 
suffering , and problems . We have to understand and ascertain how all 
our unhappiness  and suffering  are our  own doing . They are the result s of 
our own karma and afflictions .  
 
This is where the four noble truths  come  in. Generally we talk about true 
suffering  first. The purpose  of looking at true s uffering is to understand  
what suffering is . It is not looking at some one else’s suffering . First w e 
look at our own suffering .  
 
Where do our suffering  and pain  come from ? We need to understand how 
we are tormented by suffering  and pain . While we don’t like them , they 
still come  our way. The reason for this is because  we have already 
accumulated the cause  for them to occur, i.e., non-virtue. Since the cause 
has been accumulated, whether we like it or not, they will come  our way . 
Therefore we need to develop an understanding  of and conviction in how 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                               Second Basic Program – Module 2  
                                                                    The Study of Mind and Its Functions  
 
Lesson 19  
Page 9 of 12 this is so .  
 
When we are convinced of this  in relation to ourselves , we then shift this 
understanding  to look at how others are suffering as a result of their own 
actions. Without  a thorough understanding  of how we are tormented by 
the various kinds of suffering  and the ir causes , it is not possible for us to 
have a thorough understanding of why and how others suffer .  
 
Without  that thorough  and decisive understanding of why and how others 
suffer , it is impossible to develop  love and compassion when we focus on 
the suffering  of other sentient beings.  The realisation s of love and 
compassion can only arise in one’s  mind in dependen ce on first knowing 
how one self is suffering . This is an extremely impor tant point . This is why 
the Buddha said , “This is the truth of suffering ,” when he first taught the 
the four noble truths. It is very important to first acknowledge our own  
suffering by looking within  ourselves , not lo oking outside .  
 
On the basis of having a thorough understanding of how and why our 
own suffering  arises, then when we see other sentient beings, we know 
how and why they are tormented by suffering . When we see sentient 
beings  suffer, we will then have the right understanding rather than a 
perverse or wrong understanding  of their situation .  
 
On the basis of understanding how our own suffering  and problems arise 
from our karma and afflictions, we will be able to understand how this is 
also the case for others . With the right view , the conviction in the 
workings of karma , we will be able to develop love and compassion for 
others . This is right thought. Once we have right thought, right speech 
will arise  and right livelihood and so forth will naturally follow . What we 
have to do is to gain an understand ing of how the conviction in the 
infallibility of actions and the ir effects is the root of every good quality.  
 
When feelings are divided, there are three:  
(1) pleasant feelings  
(2) suffering feelings  
(3) neutr al feelings  
 
Furthermore, it is just as it has been said in A Discussion of the Five Aggregates : 
 
QUESTION: What is feeling?  
RESPONSE: It is the three types of experience – pleasant, suffering, and that  which is neither 
suffering nor pleasant.  
 Pleasant [fe eling] is that which, when it ceases, you wish to meet with  again.  
 Suffering is that which, when it arises, you wish to be separated from.  
 That which is neither pleasant nor suffering is that which, when it arises,  neither of the two wishes 
occurs.  
 
When t hese three types of feeling are differentiated in terms of the supports of body  and mind, there are six 
types – three bodily feelings and three mental feelings.  
 
First, the three bodily feelings are:  
(1) bodily pleasant feelings  
(2) bodily suffering feelin gs 
(3) bodily neutral feelings  
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                               Second Basic Program – Module 2  
                                                                    The Study of Mind and Its Functions  
 
Lesson 19  
Page 10 of 12 Second, the three mental feelings are:  
(1) mentally pleasant feelings  
(2) mentally suffering feelings  
(3) mentally neutral feelings  
 
What is the difference between bodily and mental feelings?  
 Feelings that arise in the retin ue of the five sense consciousness are called "bodily  feelings";  
 Feelings that arise in the retinue of the mental consciousness are called "mental  feelings ." (Pages 17 – 18) 
 
Feeling  is essentially an experience .  
 When feelings are divided, there are th ree: (1) pleasant feelings, (2) 
suffering feelings, and (3) neutral feelings.  
 Feelings can also be divided into : (1) bodily feelings and (2) mental 
feelings  that in turn can be divided into three bodily feelings  and three 
mental feelings.   
o Bodily feelings  refer to the mental factor of feeling  accompanying a 
sense primary c onsciousness . 
o Mental feeling s accompany a mental primary consciousness . 
 
Also, when these six feelings are differentiated into the two – the materialistic  and the non -materialistic – 
[feelings] are of twelve types.  
 
QUALM: What do materialistic and non -materialistic mean?  
RESPONSE: Feelings that are concomitant with the craving for the contaminated  appropriated aggregates 
are called "materialistic feelings." Feelings that are concomi tant with the exalted wisdom directly realizing 
selflessness are called "non -materialistic  feelings."  (Page 19)  
 
After stating what a non -materialistic feeling is, there is a qualm .  
 
QUALM: Well then, if one were to explain the above -mentioned "non -materialistic suffering feeling," how can 
a suffering feeling be present in those who possess the exalted wisdom directly realizing selflessness?"  
RESPONSE: There are many such cases. For example, the Scripture on Disciplin e (Vinayagama ) says that 
even foe -destroyers who have abandoned the conception of self experience suffering feelings such as 
headaches due to the fruition of past actions  (Page 21) . 
 
Moreover, when feelings are divided by way of objec t of abandonment and antidote, there are two:  
1) feelings that support adherence and  
2) feelings that support deliverance.  
 
1) Feelings that support adherence  are feelings that are concomitant with the craving for the attributes of 
the desire realm.  
2) Feelings that  support deliverance  are, for example, feelings that are concomitant with the mental 
consciousness that, having turned away from the attachment to the attributes of the desire realm, is 
included within the actual first concentration  (Page 19 - 20). 
 
Feeling is an experience. A main mind is necessarily accompanied by 
feeling. For ex ample: in the retinue of an eye primary consciousness 
apprehending blue , there is a mental factor of feeling . Since feeling is an 
experience, what does the mental factor of feeling in the retinue of this eye 
primary consciousness apprehending blue experience? It experience s 
blue.  
 
(2) Discrimination  
 
Regarding the entity of discrimination, the Compendium of Knowledge  says:  
 
QUESTION: What is the defining characteristic of discrimination [Tibetan: 'du shes , literally, 
aggregation -knowing]?  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                               Second Basic Program – Module 2  
                                                                    The Study of Mind and Its Functions  
 
Lesson 19  
Page 11 of 12 RESPONSE: It has th e characteristic of knowing upon aggregation. It has the entity of apprehending 
the sign and apprehending the mark, through which one designates an expression to objects of 
perceptions, hearing, differentiation and knowledge.  
 
Just as it has been said abov e, discrimination is a knower that, upon the aggregation of the three – object, 
sense power, and primary consciousness – apprehends the uncommon sign of an object  (Page 20) .  
 
Discrimination  apprehends the uncommon sign of an object. If this is so,  
we must be able to posit the uncommon sign of any object . So what is the 
uncommon sign  of an object ? Think about  this.  W e will continue in the 
next lesson.  
 
Question:  Are sense consciousnesses necessarily non -conceptual? The 
qualm I have is  this: assuming that all the 51 mental factors can be 
concomitant with the sense primary consciousness, the mental factor of 
doubt that is concomitant with a sense perceiver would end up being a 
sense consciousness that is conceptual.  
 
Answer:  Is there such a thing in the first place? I wonder whether there is 
such a thing as doubt accompanying a sense consciousnes s. 
 
Question:  So we cannot assume that all the 51 mental factors can be 
concomitant with a sense consciousness?  Are s ense consciousnesses  
necessarily non -conceptual?  
 
Answer:  Yes. 
 
Student:  The definition for a sense consciousness d oes not mention that it 
is free of conceptuality . It only says that it is a knower that is generated in 
dependen ce on a physical sense pow er … 
 
Questions for Sunday discussion session:  
 
1. The definition of a doubting consciousness is a knower that has 
qualms two -pointedly by its own power. What is the reason for including, 
“by its own power” in the definition?  
 
2. If it is a mental factor that has qualms two -pointedly, is it necessarily 
doubt?  
 
3. Is a doubting consciousness and a wrong consciousness mutually 
exclusive or is there a common locus between them?  
 
4. Can a sense consciousness become a conceptual consciousness? Can 
a direct perceiver beco me a conceptual consciousness?  
 
5. Is the subsequent consciousness induced by the eye consciousness 
apprehending blue necessarily a sense consciousness?  
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                               Second Basic Program – Module 2  
                                                                    The Study of Mind and Its Functions  
 
Lesson 19  
Page 12 of 12 6. What is the Sutra School’s reason for positing self -knowers? Why are 
self-knowers not main minds and ment al factors?  
 
As I mentioned before , the entire text of the mind and mental factor s has 
been translated in English . You should read it before class.  
 
Question:  For the five omnipresent mental factors that are present in all 
minds, does that mean  that these five mental factors will always be with 
the main mind at any one time?  
 
Answer:  Yes. 
 
Five similarities according to  
Asanga’s Compendium of Knowledge  
 (Abhidharmasamuchchaya)  
1. Similar 
substance  In the retinue of a single m ain mind, there can arise 
only one mental factor ; for instance, feeling, of a 
similar type. Two [mental factors] of a similar type 
but of different substances cannot occur.  
2-3  Similar object 
of observation and 
[subjective] aspect 
and same entity    [A mind and the mental factors in its retinue] are 
similar in observing one object – the object of 
observation – and they are similar in being 
afflicted or non -afflicted in terms of the object of 
observation and the [subjective] aspect.  
 If a main mind has beco me afflicted, then the 
mental factors in its retinue also become afflicted , 
whereas if a main mind has become 
uncontaminated, the mental factors in its retinue 
also become uncontaminated.  
 
4. Similar time  A mind and the mental factor s in its retinue are 
simultaneous with re gard to the three - produc tion, 
abiding , and cessation.  
5. Similar realm 
and level    If a main mind is a mind of the desire realm, then 
it is impossible for a mental factor of the form or 
formless realms to arise in its retinue.  
 It is impossible for a mental factor of the desire 
realm to arise in the retinue of a mind of the form 
realm.  
 That realm in which the main mind is included is 
also necessarily the realm in which mental factor 
in its retinue is included  
 
Translated by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme  
Transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek, Vivien Ng, and Patricia Lee  
Edited  by Cecilia Tsong  