Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Lorig/Edited/BP2 M2 L21 (final2) .pdf
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:53:46.705850
================================================================================

Amitabha Buddhist Centre                               Second Basic Program – Module 2  
                                                                    The Study of Mind and Its Function s 
 
Lesson 21  
Page 1 of 10 Transcript of teachings by Khen Rinpoche Geshe 
Chonyi  on the Modes of Mind and Mental Factors  
 
Lesson No: 21      Date: 4th September 2012  
 
Root text:   A Necklace for Those of Clear Awareness Clearly Revealing the 
Modes of Minds and Mental Factors by Ye -she Gyeltsen , translated by Toh 
Sze Gee; January 2006 edition. Copyright: Toh Sze Gee & FPMT, Inc. 
September 2003.   
 
All page references refer to the root text, unless otherwise stated.  
 
Five Omnipresent  
Mental Factors  Function  
(1) Feeling  To enable the mind to experience the object.  
(2) Discrimination  To enable the mind to distinguish the un common sign 
of the object.  
(3) Intention  To move the mind towards the object.  
(4) Attention  To direct the mind towards the object. 
(5) Contact  To enable the mind to meet with the object.  
 
As long as it is a main mind, it is necessar ily accompanied by these five 
omnipresent mental factors . From your side, you need to have a rough 
idea of what these five omnipresent mental factors are and the  function s 
they perform.  
 
Five object -ascertaining mental factors  
 
The five object -ascertaining mental factors are:  
(1) aspiration  
(2) belief  
(3) mindfulness  
(4) meditative stabilization  
(5) wisdom  (Page 26)  
 
(1) Aspiration  
 
Aspiration  is a knower that focuses on a desired object and wishes to be 
endowed with it . 
  
(2) Belief   
 
Belief “is a knower which holds an object that has been ascertained by its 
valid cognition , thinking , ‘It is just like this and not otherwise. ’” Belief  is 
an ascertainment of an object.  
 
Belief is very important especially the belief in karma and its effect s. This  
is the root of all wholesome qualities. It is important to gain an 
ascertainment of this through the process of learning and reflecting on 
the workings of karma . Throug h the process of hearing , learning , and 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                               Second Basic Program – Module 2  
                                                                    The Study of Mind and Its Function s 
 
Lesson 21  
Page 2 of 10 reflecting on karma and its effect s, it is possible that qualms about karma  
may arise .  
 
You may have doubts but they can be doubt s tending toward s the fact ual. 
Further learning and reflection  can result in a correct  assum ption with 
regard to karma and its effect s, i.e., you gain the correct assumption that 
is akin to a real isation. Having such correct belief in karma and its effect s 
can help us to practise and live a life that is based on th is belief .   
 
It would be ideal if one c ould gain a valid cognition of karma and its 
effect s. If one can generate an inferential cognition of karma and its 
effect s in dependence upon the application of correct logic  and reasonin g,  
that faith in the workings of karma  will be very stable and irreversible.  
With such irreversible faith in karma and its effect s, one’s practice will be 
greatly enhanced and one will  achieve one’s goal.  
  
In the context of this discussi on on belief, the belief in karma and its 
effect s refers specifically to “a knower  that holds the object that has been 
ascertained by its valid cognition .” That mean s the object of the mental 
factor  of belief  has been ascertained by valid cognition . Belief holds on to 
this object as ascertained by its valid cognition to be as it is , not as  
something else. So it is not the same  as the term, “belief ,” that appears in 
ordinary usage.  
 
Belief is a mind that possesses these three features:  
1. Its object is something that has already been ascertained .   
2. Its subjective aspect  holds on to th e object , think ing, “It is just like th is 
and not something else.”  
3. Its function  is non -captivation.  
 
Belief is a mind that hold s on to an object that has already been 
determined and ascertained by valid cognition . Therefore  it is impossible 
for you to change your mind about th e object  that you have reali sed. No 
matter what other people  may say or what conditions you  may encounter,   
your belief will not be sway ed, i.e., you will not be captivated by those 
counter -arguments or view s. This is the function of non -captivation.  
 
Therefore belief is very important for spiritual development , for training 
the mind , and practi sing t he Dharma . Once you have ascertained 
something through valid cognition , you hold on to that reali sation . Then 
whatever practice you do , you will achieve your goal. Generally speaking, 
belief is also important  in whatever we do in life . We need this kind of 
belief.  
 
Is there a difference between belief  and a subsequent cogni ser? A 
subsequent cogni ser is a knower that reali ses what has already been 
realised. Belief  and subsequent cogni tion are not th e same .  
 A subsequent cogni ser can be a main mind  or it can be a mental factor  
but if it is belief , it is necessar ily a mental factor.  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                               Second Basic Program – Module 2  
                                                                    The Study of Mind and Its Function s 
 
Lesson 21  
Page 3 of 10  Belief is not a knower that reali ses what has already been r ealised. It 
simply holds on to the object , believing it is that and not something else.  
These are the difference s between belief and a subsequent cogni ser.  
 
(3) Mindfulness  
 
Regardi ng the entity of mindfulness, the Compendium of Knowledge  says:  
 
QUESTION: What is mindfulness?  
RESPONSE: It is a non -forgetfulness of the mind with respect to a familiar object. It has the function 
of non -distraction.  
 
Just as it has been said above, it i s a knower that possesses three features. These three features are:  
(1) objective feature – a familiar object  
(2) [subjective] aspect feature – a non -forgetfulness upon having observed that object; and  
(3) functional feature – non-distraction  (Pages 28 – 29) 
 
The object of mindfulness is a familiar object. Why is this so?  
 
(1) Since mindfulness is not produced with respect to that which has not been  previously familiarized with, 
the objective feature is stated as "a familiar object  (Page 29). ” 
 
Mindfulness is  not forgetting th e object. So you cannot have mindfulness 
with respect to an object that you are unfamiliar with.  
 
(2) Even though the mind might have previously familiarized itself with an object, if  it does not presently dawn 
as an object of the mind, mindfulness will not occur.  Thus, [the subjective aspect feature] is specified as "non -
forgetfulness of the  mind."  
(3) Since the stability of the mind is enhanced in dependence on special  mindfulness, its functional feature is 
specified as that of "n on-distraction  (Page 29) ." 
 
What f ollow s are quotations from Arya Nagarjuna  and Shantideva stating 
the importance of mindfulness.  
 
And Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds  (stanza 5.26 -30) says:  
 
Even though learned,  
Faithful and di ligent in effort,  
Many become tainted by downfalls  
Due to committing the fault of lacking introspection  (Page 29) . 
 
Although this verse refers manifestly to introspection , it is also 
highlighting the importance of mindfulne ss. Mindfulness and  
introspection ( or vigilance) are very important . It says that even though 
one may  be hardworking, learned , and has a lot of faith , but if one does 
not know the essential point s of how t o practi se, then one can be tainted 
by various downfalls and faults due to the lack of mindfulness.  
 
Though they have amassed merit,  
It is pilfered by the thief of non -introspection  
Who follows upon degeneration of mindfulness;  
They pro ceed to a bad migration  (Page 29) . 
 
When one loses mindfulness or forgets the virtuous object of observation , 
and one’s mindfulness degener ates, all the merit  one has amassed may 
decline. As a result, one may go t o the lower realms.  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                               Second Basic Program – Module 2  
                                                                    The Study of Mind and Its Function s 
 
Lesson 21  
Page 4 of 10 This band of thieves, the afflictions,  
Looks for an opportunity;  
Upon finding an opportunity, it pilfers my virtue and  
Even destroys the life of a  good migration  (Page 29) . 
 
The moment you forget to place  your mind on and lose your mindfulness 
of a virtuous object , the afflictions will come rea dily to take its place . Due 
to that, you r virtues will decline. When your virtues are stolen by the 
afflictions , you will not be able to obtain a good rebirth.  
 
Therefore, mindfulness should never be displaced  
From the door of the mind;  
If it does go, recalling the anguish of bad migrations,  
Place it back  (Page 30) . 
 
These verses  talk about the great importance of mindf ulness . You are 
reminded not to forget  to focus the mind on a virtuous object.  When you 
find that your mindfulness is indeed degenerating , you must recall the 
sufferings of the lower realms and think, “If I forget to place my mind on 
virtue , then th ese sufferings will happen to me .” Remembering that, you 
place the mind back on the virtuous object.   
 
Due to association w ith spiritual teachers,  
The teachings of the abbot, and fear,  
Fortunate ones who act respectfully  
Easily generate mindfulness  (Page 30) . 
 
This verse highlights the external conditions for generating mindfulness , 
i.e., association with a guru.  
 
Mindfulness and introspection are extremely important  and are said to be 
indispensable for developing good qualit ies. 
  
In this vein, Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds  says (stanza 5.22 -23): 
 
Let my gain and honor,  
My body and livelihood vanish;  
Let even my other virtues degenerate,  
But may my mind never degenerate.  
 
I urge you,   
Those who wish to guard their minds,  
Guard your mindfulness and introspection  
Even at the cost of your lives!  (Page 30)  
 
Shantideva is advising us to always protect our mind by relying on 
mindfulness and introspection . Just as we would protect  our possessions, 
body, and so forth, likewise, we must protect  our mind with mindfulness 
and introspection. Between protecting our body and  our mind, it is said 
that protecting  our mind is more important.  
 
When you think about this from various perspectives, you will underst and 
how important it is to protect the mind with mindfulness and 
introspection . When you c ompare physical suffering and mental suffering , 
mental suffering is far more unbearable . Which is more important, 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                               Second Basic Program – Module 2  
                                                                    The Study of Mind and Its Function s 
 
Lesson 21  
Page 5 of 10 physica l bliss or mental bliss? I think mental bliss is more important.  
 
The body does not go on to the next life . It is the mind that goes on to and 
that determines  the kind of rebirth you will get in your nex t life. Since it is 
the mind that moves from life to life, you should understand how 
important  it is to protect the mind.  
 
How do we differentiate between a good person and a ba d person?  The 
differen tiation is not made based on their physical differences such as the 
size of the ir bodies and so forth. Rather we distinguish a bad person from 
a good person by the virtuous state of their mind s. A good person is 
different from a bad person because h is mind is of a better quality . He  is 
possibly more good -hearted.  
 
When we say we l ike or l ove some one, our affection for that person has 
more to do with th e mind of that person . Of course the mind is there 
within the body . The person is alive because the consciousness is sti ll in 
the body . When the person is dead and the consciousness is no  longer in 
the body, we will not have the same affection or love  when we see the 
dead body . In fact we may feel scared when we look at the body .  
 
The essential point is that the state of the mind is very important. 
Therefore it is extremely important to protect the mind. We put in a lot of 
effort in protectin g our body . Shantideva urges and pleas with us to put in 
even more effort to guard our mind. In Tibetan , this part of the text reads,  
“I put my palms together and I request you  to guard your mind .” 
 
The discussion of mindfulness here is in the context of the mental factor 
of mindfulness in the retinue  of a virtuous mind. It is so important to 
protect the mind and place  it on a virtuous object . It is the mental factor 
of mindfulness that enables us to do this. Therefore  we must understand 
what mindfulness is and its importance . With strong  mindfulness and 
introspection, one can achieve meditative stabili sation  (or concentration) . 
 
(4) Meditative stabili sation  
 
Regarding the entity of meditative stabilization, the Compendium of Knowledge  says:  
 
QUESTION: What is meditative stabilization?  
RESPONSE: It is a one -point edness of the mind with respect to an imputed thing. It has the function 
of acting as a support for knowledge.  
 
Just as it has been said above, it is a one -pointedness of mind that, within observing an imputed thing, is 
continuously set upon it.  
 
The objective feature of meditative stabilization is specified to be "an imputed thing," because, when 
cultivating meditative stabilization, one holds the mind to an object of observatio n that is imputed by the mind  
(Page 30) .  
 
Meditative stabili sation  is a knower that also possesses the three features.  
1. Its object  is specified to be an imputed thing.  
2. Its subjective aspect  is its one -point edness.  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                               Second Basic Program – Module 2  
                                                                    The Study of Mind and Its Function s 
 
Lesson 21  
Page 6 of 10 3. Its function  is to develop wisd om. 
 
Why is the object of meditative stabili sation “specified to be an imputed 
thing ”? This is because, when one is cultivating meditative stabili sation, 
one holds the mind onto an object of observation that is imputed by the 
mind.   
 
There are four types of object s of observation  that are used for developing 
meditative stabili sation.  
 
Furthermore, although there appear to be many enumerations of objects of  observation for meditative 
stabilization, whe n condensed, it is taught that there are  four [categories]:  
(1) objects of observation for purifying behavior  
(2) objects of observation for purifying afflictions  
(3) pervasive objects of observation  
(4) objects of observation for [developing] skill  (Pages  30 – 31) 
 
(1) Object s of observation for purifying behavio ur 
What is purifying behavio ur? We look into our own mind , at our own 
afflictions and observe which  one is predominant , whether it be anger, 
attachmen t, pride , and so forth. By observing the predominant affliction , 
we then apply the antidote to it.  
 
When the afflictions are too strong, it will be difficult for you even to try to 
develop one-pointedness of  the mind.  Therefore  first, we have to purify 
our behavio ur, i.e., to identify the predominant affliction  and apply the 
respective antidote. E.g., when the predominant affliction  is: 
 desire or attachment , one can meditate on ugliness . 
 anger , one can meditate on love . 
 ignorance , one can meditate on dependent -arising . 
 pride , one can think of the countless things in th e world that one does 
not know.  
 discursive though t, one can meditate on the breath .  
 
(2) Object s of observation  for purifying afflictions  
Purifying affliction s means purifying the manifest afflictions by observing 
the good qualities of the next higher realm , thinking, “How nice if I can 
achieve that state. ”  This is the  meditation whereby you look at your 
current realm as coarse  and not as inviting as the realm above  it.   
 
The meditation on the  sixteen aspects of the four noble truths  can be 
used in the same way . 
 
(3) Pervasive object s of observation   
This refers to al l existents or phenomena.  
 
(4) Object s of observation for [developing] skill   
This has to do with  the meditation on the selflessness of person s and the 
selflessness of phenomen a, e.g., meditating on whether the self exists on 
the body or the aggregates .  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                               Second Basic Program – Module 2  
                                                                    The Study of Mind and Its Function s 
 
Lesson 21  
Page 7 of 10 Any object can be posited to be an object of observation for the cultivation 
of meditative stabili sation.  
 
An important point that is m entioned here is that medita tive stabili sation 
is produced in relation to a mental consciousness  and not a  sense 
consciousness . You do  not generate concentration through the eye 
consciousness. Therefore  the visible form that appears to an eye 
consciousness  is not posited  to be the object for developing meditative 
stabili sation.  You do not develop  concentration by staring at something 
without closing the eye s or simply focusing the mind on, say, a  cup. That 
is not how one develops meditative stabili sation.  
 
Moreover, its object of observation is not form appe aring to a sense consciousness ; rather it is  only a mental 
object imputed by the mind  (Page 31) . 
 
When we are trying to develop meditative stabilisation by focusing on a 
particular object, we first look at it and get a clear ide a of what it looks 
like. We then try to reproduce and focus  on a mental image of the object 
in our min d. That mental image is  what we focus  on when we are trying to 
develop meditative stabili sation.   
 
Question : Since the object of observation is said to be an imp uted thing, 
can the object of observation of a non -conceptual meditative stabili sation 
be a non -imputed thing? Can there be imputation by a non-conceptual 
mind?  
 
Answer : In general , when something is imputed by the mind, th at mind 
may not necessarily be a conceptual consciousness.  
 
Student : I thought all along that there can  be imputation  by a non-
conceptual sen se consciousness  because during the classes on special 
insight, we learnt that even a sense consciousness can impute  object. But 
during the discussion of the mental factor of discrimination,  Khen 
Rinpoche explained that the imputation is done  only by a conceptual 
consciousness only. 
 
Answer:  If you remember , for the mental factor of discrimination:  
 The discrimination that is in the retinue of the sense consciousness  is 
an apprehension of a sign. 
 The discrimination that is in the retinue of the mental consciousness  is 
an apprehension of a mark . 
The mental consciousness is primarily a conceptual consciousness.  
 
The questio n now is : does the sense consciousness , say, an eye 
consciousness, impute  or designate , “This is form ”?  How does a mental 
consciousness designate something?  
 
Perhaps it is no t really necessary for imputation to be done by a 
conceptual consciousness. With regard  to this impute d thing, when you 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                               Second Basic Program – Module 2  
                                                                    The Study of Mind and Its Function s 
 
Lesson 21  
Page 8 of 10 are trying to meditate, the object of observation  for developing meditative 
stabili sation  is essentially an appearance to the mind. From the 
perspective of this appearance appearing to th e mental consciousness , we 
say it is imputed , i.e., it is appearing to the mind.  
 
I think this is what the text is trying to say when it states that the object 
of observation is  an imputed thing . It is referring to that appearance 
appearing to the mental consciousness.  
 
     Nowadays, it seems that there are some instructions at odds with the wording of the Conqueror's 
scriptures that clearly teach the method of performing star ing meditation within observation of a form 
appearing to the eye consciousness. However, Arya Asanga clearly stated that meditative stabilization is not 
produced in sense consciousnesses; rather, it is only produced in a mental consciousness. Moreover, its  
object of observation is not form appearing to a sense consciousness; rather, it is only a mental object 
imputed by the mind  (Page 31) . 
 
When you stare at a cup without being distracted, you won’t see the cup 
very clearly.  
 
When you are trying to develop meditative sta bilisation , you focus on a 
chosen object . There is the factor of stability  and the factor of clarity . Your 
aim is to achieve both these factors . 
 
When you are focussing on an object with your eye consci ousness, you 
may be able to stay on the object  but there may be a lack of clarity . This 
is like the laxity that is experienced by those who are trying to develop 
concentration. When you try  to place your min d on the object  for a while,  
you are focussed but the object i s unclear. This is what we call laxity.  
 
To reiterate, me ditative stabili sation is generated in a mental 
consciousness , not in a sense consciousness. The object of observation is 
not the form that appear s to the sense consciousness . Rather by looking 
at an object, we make an image of the object in our mind and we then 
focus on that mental image.  
 
Can one achieve meditative stabili sation by focus sing on the breath? The 
object is moving . And your breathing in and out, is that an imputed 
thing?  Does an object of observation of  meditative stabili sation 
necessarily have to be an imputed thing?  
 
The text then brings up a qualm.  
 
QUALM: Well then, does the object of meditative stabilization definitely have to be a real object?  
RESPONSE: No. Whether the object be real o r erroneous, if one attentively familiarizes oneself with it 
internally over and over again, clear appearance and non -conceptuality with respect to that object will arise. It 
is just as it has been said in [Dharmakirti's] Commentary on (Dignaga's) 'Compend ium of Valid 
Cognition'(Pramanvarttikakarika):  
 
Therefore, utmost familiarization with whatever – whether real or unreal  
– Results in a clear non -conceptual mind  
When that familiarization is thoroughly completed  (Page 31) . 
 
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                               Second Basic Program – Module 2  
                                                                    The Study of Mind and Its Function s 
 
Lesson 21  
Page 9 of 10 Khen Rinpoche : How do you differentiate between what is real and what is 
unreal?  
 
Do you think the real and  the unreal is differentiated  in dependence on 
whether the object in question is an existent or a non -existent ? 
 
Khen Rinpoche : You can imagine the rabbit has horn s. Can you not then 
meditate on that image ? 
 
The horns of a rabbit are non-existent . It is not possible for such a thing 
to exist, i.e., its existen ce is impossible.  I am not sure whether “real” here 
refers to an existent and “unreal ” refers to a non -existent .  
 
When you choose to meditate on the  horns of a rabbit , that object does 
not appear  to a sense consciousness  as it is a non -existent, but it is 
possible to have a mental image of the horns of a rabbit . If you decide to 
meditate on  the horns of a rabbit , what is your object of observation? It is 
the mental image , is it not ? 
 
The functional feature of meditative stabilization is specified to be "acting as a support for knowledge," 
because, through the force of analysis with the wisdom of individual i nvestigation in dependence on calm -
abiding in which the mind is internally set in equipoise, one achieves the special insight observing modes and 
varieties1 (Page 31) . 
 
The function  of meditative stabili sation is to act as a support for 
generating special insight. The root of cyclic existence  and the afflictions  
is ignora nce. In order to destroy ignorance, one first ha s to develop calm -
abiding . In dependence upon calm -abiding, one achieves special insight. 
When one has the special insight focus sing on emptiness, one will have 
the dir ect antidote to the afflictions .  
 
Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds  says (stanza 8.4):  
 
Having understood that afflictions are destroyed  
By special insight that is fully endowed with calm -abiding,  
First seek calm -abiding;  
That is achieved through taking joy in non -attachment to the world.  
 
Also, the Scripture on Discipline  repeatedly teaches the ways in which the training in meditative stabilization 
depends on the training in ethics, and the training in wisdom  depends on the training in meditative 
stabilization. In this manner, those who wish for liberation from their hearts should regard these great texts as 
supreme quintessential instructions  (Pages 31 – 32). 
 
This paragraph  reinforces the importance of learning the teachings, even 
in the context of someone who is seeking  to develop a one-pointedness of 
the mind. Before you can achieve that: 
 you must know exactly  what meditative  stabilisation  is  
 what the appropriate objects of med itation  are 
                                                           
1 "Modes and varieties" is an expression referring to ultimate trut hs and conventional 
truths, that is, all phenomena.  
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                               Second Basic Program – Module 2  
                                                                    The Study of Mind and Its Function s 
 
Lesson 21  
Page 10 of 10  meditative stabili sation is achieved in a mental  and not sense  
consciousness  
Without learning  and studying  how to achieve meditative stabili sation, 
even though you may wish to achieve calm -abiding , you can spend your 
whole life thinking that you are practi sing correctly but you will never 
achieve your goal . In that way, you waste your life thinking that you have  
achiev ed something. Therefore it is very important to study.  
 
Lama Tsongkhapa  points out how important it is to study the great 
treaties, in particular , looking at the texts of the great Indian m asters . In 
the context of develop ing meditative stabili sation, the primary source that 
is often cited is the text s of Arya Asanga. All the compositions and the 
explanation s of the teachings of the Bu ddha  by these great Indian 
masters can  be traced back to the Buddha himself . The purity of the 
source  is very important . It is important to rely on unmistaken 
explanation s. 
 
It is very difficult to achieve meditative stabili sation . But by gaining a 
complete  and correct understand ing o f exactly what meditative 
stabili sation  is and how to go about achieving it , at the very least, we 
place special imprints in our mind . There is then hope that we can attain 
this in the future. The extensive explanation on cultivating meditative 
stabili sation can be found in the Lamrim  Chenmo . In the  context of the 
51 mental factors, we are focussing on the entity of meditative 
stabili sation.  
 
We will look at the last object -ascertaining men tal factor, wisdom , in the 
next lesson. We will t hen go through the eleven virtuous mental factors. It 
would be good i f you can read these on your own.  It is not difficult . It is 
quite straight forward. It is very important that you read.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Translated by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme ;  
 
Transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek, Vivien Ng, and Patricia Lee ;  
 
Edited by Cecilia Tsong  