Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Lorig/Edited/BP2 M2 L10 (final).pdf
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:53:49.274029
================================================================================

Amitabha Buddhist Centre                               Second Basic Program – Module 2  
                                 The Study of Mind and Its F unctions  
 
Lesson 10  
Page 1 of 11 Transcript of teachings by Khen Rinpoche Geshe 
Chonyi  
 
Lesson No: 10        Date: 19th July 2012  
 
There are four divisions of the d irect perceiver : 
1. sense direct perceiver  
2. mental direct perceiver  
3. self-knowing direct perceiver  
4. yogic direct perceiver  
 
According to the Sutra School  (SS), a  direct perceiver is necessarily  (1) 
free of conceptuality and (2) non -mistaken.  
 
You must understand the importance of knowing this subject well  
because, a s I have mentioned before, the different modules in the Basic 
Program , especially the philosophica l subjects, are closely interconnect ed. 
When you do  not have a reasonably good understanding of Lorig, it is not 
possible to learn tenets well. That is not going to happen . Since the se 
subjects are connected in this way, from now on, you must try your best 
to understand as much as you can.  
 
You must understand  in accordance with the assertions of the S S:  
o Why direct perceivers  are necessarily  non-mistaken ? 
o Why conceptual consciousnesses  are necessarily  mistaken ? 
This has to depend  on an understanding of what a mistaken 
consciousness is  and knowing the definition of a mistaken consciousness .  
Once you know the definition of a mistaken consciousness, you will be 
able to understand why , according to  the SS, direct perceivers are 
necessarily non-mistaken.  
 
The proponents of the Mind-Only School  (MOS ) can be divided into:  
1. proponents of the True A spectarian M ind-Only School  
2. proponents of the False A spectarian M ind-Only School   
 
Khen Rinpoche : Listen to this to place some imprints in your mind.  
 
The F alse A spectarian s also posit direct perceivers such as the sense 
direct perceiver s and the mental direct  perceiver s but according to the m, 
these direct perceivers  are mistaken . This  position  is different from that of 
the SS which assert s that the self-knowing direct perceiver s and the yogic 
direct perceiver s are non -mistaken . 
 
In the same way, the True Aspectarian s assert that the sense direct 
perceivers  in the continu a of ordinary being s are necessarily mistaken.  
 
This is j ust to give you an idea . As we move up the t enets , there w ill be 
slightly different assertions. For t he highest tenet , the Consequence 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                               Second Basic Program – Module 2  
                                 The Study of Mind and Its F unctions  
 
Lesson 10  
Page 2 of 11 Middle Way School  (CMWS) , with the exception of the wisdom directly 
perceiving emptiness, all other minds  in the continu a of sentient beings 
are necessarily mistaken . For the CMWS , not only are the sense direct 
perceiver s in the continuum of a sentient being mista ken, every  mind in 
the con tinuum of a sentient being, with the exception of the wisdom of 
directly reali sing emptiness , is necessarily mistaken.  From this, you can  
see that there is so much  more to learn and to know . There is a lot more 
coming.  
 
We are approaching th is topic from the perspective of the S S. You have to 
at least understand why, from the perspective of the SS , direct perceivers  
are necessarily non -mistaken .  When we study the t enets , we will  then 
look at why the MOS asserts that  not all direct perceivers  are necessarily 
non-mistaken . As we go up to the CMWS, we will look at  why the CMWS  
assert s that, with the exception of the wisdom direct ly perceiving 
emptiness, all other minds in the continu a of sentient beings are 
necessarily mistaken . You have to understand all the se assertions .  
 
All this will become clearer  when we study tenets. I brought  this up to   
highlight to you that there  is a lot more coming.  
 
Khen Rinpoche : A lot  of interesting things are coming , ok? Not boring things 
but interesting things ! 
 
Earlier w e had looked at the sense  direct perceiver s and mental direct 
perceiver s. Going back to the example of a sense direct perceiver 
apprehending form : 
1. First, the sense direct perceiver apprehending form is generated.  
2. Following that , the mental direct perceiver apprehend ing form  arises  
but, in the continu a of ordinary beings, this mental direct perceiver 
apprehending form lasts only for the shortest moment of time . 
3. The conceptual consciousness apprehending form then arises.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Due to the prior realisation of form by the sense direct perceiver 
apprehending form , the conceptual consciousness apprehending form is 
able to induc e the ascertainment of form.  
 Because t he mental direct perceiver  apprehending form in the continu a 
of ordinary being s lasts for only the  shortest moment of time , that 
mental direct perceiver apprehen ding form does not realise form , i.e., it 
is unable to induce  an ascertainment of form.   
 
In order to be a mental d irect perceiver, four characteristic s must be 
present:  Sense direct 
perceiver 
apprehending form  Mental direct perceiver 
apprehending form that 
lasts for the shortest 
moment of time  
 
  
 
 
being  Conceptual 
consciousness 
apprehending form 
arise s 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                               Second Basic Program – Module 2  
                                 The Study of Mind and Its F unctions  
 
Lesson 10  
Page 3 of 11 1. It is generated in dependence upon a mental sense power  that is its 
uncommon empowering condition . 
2. It must be non-mistaken . 
3. It must be f ree from conceptuality .  
4. It is a conscio usness that is an other -knower  
 
There are consciousness es that are other -knower s and there are 
consciousnesses that are self-knower s. 
 
Other -knower s 
An other -knower reali ses something other than itself.   Consciousnesses 
that are o ther-knowers are:  
1. In the division of direct perceivers : 
a. sense direct perceiver s 
b. mental direct perceiver s 
c. yogic direct perceiver s 
2. All conceptual consciousnesses  
 
Therefore  any consciousness that is a sense direct perceiver, a mental 
direct perceiver, a yogic direct perceiver , or a conceptual consciousness  is 
necessarily  an other -knower.  
 
Question : Why is the word , “other -knower ,” not in the definition of a sense 
direct perc eiver? 
 
Answer : There is no need to specifically mention “other -knower” f or 
conceptual consciousness es.  
 
The definition of a sense direct perceiver is:  
1) that which is produced in dependence on its own uncommon 
empowering condition, a physical sense power, and  
2) is a knower that is free from conceptuality and non -mistaken.  
 
The definition of a sense direct perceiver does not say , “it is an other -
knower that is free from conceptuality and non -mistaken .” However in the 
definition s of the mental direct perceiver  and yogic dir ect perceiver , the 
words, “is an other -knower ” and “is an other -knowing exalted knower” are 
included in their definition s. 
 
Related to th is discussion , if you were asked , “Is the self -knower that 
experiences the sense direct perceiver, an eye consciousness 
apprehending form , a sense direct perceiver? ” what will be your answer?  
 
Khen Rinpoche : Yes or no?   
 
(Students answer no.)  
 
No? Are you sure? Why are you saying no? 
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                               Second Basic Program – Module 2  
                                 The Study of Mind and Its F unctions  
 
Lesson 10  
Page 4 of 11 In debate  language, it follows that the self -knower experiencing a sense 
direct perceiver is a sense direct perceiver becau se it is produce d in 
dependence upon the uncommon empowering condition, a physical sense 
power.  
 
So the next question is  this: Is the uncommon empowering condition of a 
self-knower experiencing a sense direct perceiver a physical sense power?  
 
What do you think is the uncommon empowering condition of the self -
knower experiencing an eye consciousness?  
 
The eye consciousness and the self -knower experienc ing it are established 
simultaneously . That being the case , then the uncommon empowering 
condition for this self -knower that is experiencing the eye consciousness  
has to be posited to be the physical sense power as well.  
 
The self -knower experiencing an eye consciousness  is a direct perceiver  
that is non-mistaken and free from conceptuality . Is it generated in 
dependence upon the uncommon empowering condition of the eye 
consciousness , i.e., the physi cal sense power? That is what you have to 
analy se.  
 
In the definition of a mental direct perceiver, why then is “an other -
knower ” specif ied? What does this eliminate? A mental direct perceiver  is 
a non-mistaken knower  that is free from conceptuality  and generated in  
dependence upon its uncommon empowering condition, a mental sense 
power.  But that is not enough . For a consciousness to be a mental direct 
perceiver , it must be an other -knower .   
 
If you think along th ese lines, perhaps t his is the reason why “other -
knowe r” is included in the definition of a mental direct perceiver. The 
point here is that we have to understand  why the te rm “other -knower ” is 
in the definition of a mental direct perceiver  and why it is insufficient for 
the definition to s tate that its uncommon empowering condition is a 
mental sense power  and that it is non -mistaken and free from 
conceptuality . When we do  not mention “other -knower ,” what happen s to 
the self -knower experiencing the mental consciousness? That make s the 
self-knower the me ntal consciousness . 
 
Therefore in order to show that the self-knower experiencing a mental 
consciousness  is a self-knower  and not th e mental consciousness , “other -
knower ” is included in the definition of a mental direct perceiver.  It should 
be like that.  
 
If you say this is acceptable, then is it all right to apply the same line of 
reasoning to the definition of  a sense direct perceiver  or not?  
 
Question : Is the uncommon empowerin g condition of a self -knower 
experienc ing the  eye consciousness apprehending form the mental sense 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                               Second Basic Program – Module 2  
                                 The Study of Mind and Its F unctions  
 
Lesson 10  
Page 5 of 11 power ? 
 
Khen Rinpoche:  Why do you have to posit that the uncommon empowering 
condition of this self -knower experiencing an eye consciousness is a 
mental sense power?  
 
Student : Because the self -knower is experiencing an eye consciousness 
apprehending form , so its uncommon empowering condition has to be a 
mental sense power  and n ot a physical sense power.  
 
Khen Rinpoche : That is a good point.  
 
Question:  For someone who remember ed, “I saw blue ,” the reason posited 
was that this is due to the self -knowing direct perceiver perceiv ing the 
consciousness apprehending blue in the pa st. Does this self -knowing 
direct perceiver apprehend the thought consciousness that discriminate s 
blue or does it apprehend the eye consciousness that apprehends blue at 
that point in time?  
 
Answer:  Memory is a conceptual thought . When the eye consciousness 
apprehended blue earlier , there  was a self -knower experiencing it. Of 
course at the time of apprehending blue , you also ha ve the thought 
conceptually designating , “This is blue ” and “This is not blue .” There is 
also a self -knower experiencing that thought.  
 
Self-knower s  
Self-knowers are asserted by the SS, the MOS and the Autonomy Middle 
Way School (AMWS) . What is the main reason for the m to assert  the 
existence of self-knower s? For them, t he correct sign  that establishes the 
existence of self -knowers is memory .  
 
According to the abovementioned tenets , the reason why , after having 
seen blue , subsequently you remember  the experie nce of having seen blue  
at a later date  is because , at the earlier time when the eye consciousness 
was apprehending blue, there was a consciousness experiencing this eye 
consciousness. This consciousness that experience s the eye 
consciousness appr ehending blue is called the self-knower .  
 The self-knower  experiencing the eye consciousness apprehending blue 
is of one collection  with the eye consciousness apprehending blue.  
 The self -knower that experiences the eye consciousness apprehending 
blue has the factor of clarity and knowing .  
 
There are two factors to the eye consciousness apprehending blue : 
1. The factor that experiences itself , i.e., experiencing the eye 
consciousness apprehending blue.  
2. The factor  that experiences something other than itself , i.e., blue.  
 
It is similar to the two parts that pertain to the illumination of a flame :  
1. The flame i lluminating itself is like the factor that experiences itself , 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                               Second Basic Program – Module 2  
                                 The Study of Mind and Its F unctions  
 
Lesson 10  
Page 6 of 11 the self-knower . 
2. The flame i lluminat ing something other than itself is like the factor 
that experiences something other than itself , the other -knower .   
 
These two  factors  are included in  one collection . 
 
You must have a rough idea of what a self -knower is. If you do not, then 
when we come to the highest school, the CMWS , that does not assert self -
knower s, you cannot make any comparison with those schools that do 
assert self -knower s. In reality , there are no self -knower s.  
 
Here we are trying to find out what is a self -knower in accordance with 
those who assert it. When you think about the main reason why the 
proponent s of self -knower s assert the existence of self -knower s, i.e.,  
memory, it does make sense . Otherwise how would we remember things? 
Only after you think, “Maybe self-knower s do exist ,” and then you hear 
the explanation s of the CMWS refuting those assertions, only then will 
you appreciate the  difference .  
 
So you should try to have a rough idea of  why a self-knower is posited by 
those who believe in it . The main reason they put forth is the memory of 
the subject and the object.  
 
When a self -knower experiences the consciousness that is of one 
collection  with it, it does not experience the consciousness with any sens e 
of duality  such as the experiencer is here and the experience is there. The 
way a self -knower experienc es the consciousness that is of the same  
collection with itself is as if it has becom e one with the consciousness that 
it is experiencing . So there is no duality.  This is what constitutes a self-
knowing direct perceiver  that: 
 has an aspect of the apprehender , 
 is free from conceptuality  and 
 is non -mistaken  
 
Question:  Is a self-knower of a conceptual consciousness conceptual or 
non-conceptual?  
 
Answer : It was mentioned earlier that a conceptual c onsciousness is 
necessarily an other -knower.  
 
Question : But it is non-dual with a conceptual consciousness because the 
self-knower has the characteristics of being non -dual with the 
consciousness that it is exp eriencing. In that sense, is it not conceptual?  
 
Khen Rinpoche : You accept that sense direct perceiver s, mental direct 
perceiver s, yogic direct perceiver s, and conceptual consciousnesses are 
other -knower s? 
 
Student : Yes.  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                               Second Basic Program – Module 2  
                                 The Study of Mind and Its F unctions  
 
Lesson 10  
Page 7 of 11  
Khen Rinpoche : If that is the  case then there is no reason why this 
question should be asked. The answer is No.  
 
Student : The self -knower is non-conceptual but it is non -dual with the 
conceptual consciousness ?  
 
Khen Rinpoche: Yes. What is the probl em with that ? 
 
Student : It is one entity but one  part is conceptual and the other is non -
conceptual ? 
 
Khen Rinpoche : That does not matter . There is no problem with that.  
 
Question : Can we say that a self-knower and the consciousness that it is 
experiencing are one entity with two isolates?  
 
Answer : Yes, you can say that.  
 
Question : I would like to clarify an example of a self-knowing direct 
perceiver that is an AAA. The e xample is of a smoker who knows smoking 
is bad yet still  continues to smoke  even after having seen all the 
advertisement s on the effects of lung cancer and so forth . Is that a n AAA 
that is a self-knower?  
 
(Khen Rinpoche answers this question towards the end of the lesson).  
 
Question:  When we meditate, there is the mindfulness of the object and 
there is another part of the mind  that makes sure that the mind does not 
go shoppin g. Is such vigilance of the mind a self-knower?  
 
Answer : No, that is a mental factor. I t is a different mind. Within one 
consciousness, there are two parts:  
1. One part is experiencing itself  
2. Another part is reali sing something other than itself.  
These two are pre sent and exist in any one consciousness. In the 
collection of consciousness, there are two parts existing in the 
consciousness . There is the part that illuminates objects other than itself , 
i.e., the other -knower . When you expand the presentation from this, then 
you have the sense direct perceiver s, the mental direct perce ivers, the 
yogic direct perceiver s, and the conceptual consciousnesses.  
 
Question:  Can I say that t he self -knower experiencing the eye 
consciousness, that eye consciousness is not aspected?  
 
Answer:  Remember the discussion on the aspect of an appre hender  and 
the aspect of the apprehended ? 
 
Student : So it is in the definition.  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                               Second Basic Program – Module 2  
                                 The Study of Mind and Its F unctions  
 
Lesson 10  
Page 8 of 11  
Question:  Can I say that the self-knower and the eye consciousness share 
the three  conditions: the observed object cond ition, the uncommon 
empowering condition , and the immediate preceding condition ?  
 
Answer:  What we are trying to analy se here is the self -knower 
experiencing an eye consciousness appr ehending blue. The question  is: is 
the self -knower experiencing the eye consciousness a pprehending blue 
generated by the same three  conditions that produce the eye 
consciousness apprehend ing blue ? 
 
Perhaps one can say that the self -knower experiencing eye consciousness 
apprehending blue  is generated in dependence on : 
 blue 
 the eye sense power  
 the consciousness that existed just prior to the generation of the eye 
consciousness apprehending blue  
 
But we need to analyse whether blue is the observed object condition of 
the self -knower experiencing the eye consciousness apprehending blue .  
 
The eye consciousness apprehending blue and the self -knower 
experiencing that eye consciousness arise simultaneously , i.e., they are 
generated , abide, and disintegrate at the same time . Therefore  the causes 
that are responsible for the generation of the eye consciousness 
apprehending blue can be said to be the causes of the self -knower 
experiencing the eye consciousness apprehending blue . We can p robably 
say that.  The causes for the production of an eye consciousness 
apprehending blue ca n be posited to be the causes for  the production of 
the self -knower experiencing the eye consciousness apprehending b lue.  
 
Question:  Do all sense direct perceiver s have the aspect of an 
apprehender? Page 4 of Handout  No. 5 dated 10 July  2012 states, “The 
eye consciousness itself is the apprehender .” May I take that to mean all 
sense direct perceiver s have the aspect of an apprehender ?  
 
Answer: What is the apprehended object  of the eye consciousness 
apprehending bl ue? The apprehended object  of that consciousness is 
mutually inclusive with its appearing object .  
 
What is the appearing object of an eye consciousnes s apprehending blue? 
It is blue. So blue is the apprehended object of the eye consciousness 
apprehending blue.  The eye consciousness apprehending blue is the 
aspect of the apprehended  because it is a consciousness that is generated 
into the aspect of b lue.  
 
Question:  There is an apprehender that is the subject and the 
apprehended that is the object. The self -knower is apprehending the eye 
consciousness apprehending blue  so the self -knower is the apprehender . 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                               Second Basic Program – Module 2  
                                 The Study of Mind and Its F unctions  
 
Lesson 10  
Page 9 of 11 What is being apprehended by this apprehender , the self -knower , is the 
eye consciousness apprehending blue. In turn the eye consciousness 
apprehending the object blue  is the apprehender of blue . Is this all right ? 
 
Answer:  That is correct.  
 
Question : The self -knower take s on the aspect of the  apprehender, the eye 
consciousness apprehending blue . If that is the case , is there a cause and 
effect  relations hip between the self -knower and the eye consciousness?  
 
Answer:  There is no cause and effect relationship between a self -knower 
and the consciousness that it is experiencing because they are 
established simultaneously , i.e., they are produced at the same time. If 
you talk about there being a sequence, then it is necessarily a cause and 
effect relationship but because they are produced simultaneously, you 
cannot talk about cause and effect.  
 
Question : If they occur  simultaneously, how then does a self -knower take 
on the aspect  of an apprehender  that is the eye consciousness itself ? 
 
Answer:  This aspect of the study of L orig is the most difficult aspect.  All 
minds have a self-knower. Whether it is a main mind or a mental factor , 
there is a self -knower experiencing it.  
 
Question:  What would be the problem if we were to use the terms , 
obser ved object condition, uncommon empowering condition , and 
immediately preceding condition  with regard to the production of the self-
knower ? It seems Khen Rinpoche  was very careful  when he was giving the 
expla nation  earlier  to show that the self -knower arises in dependence on 
these conditions but they are not quite the same  thing .  
 
Answer:  Blue is the appearing object of eye consciousness apprehending 
blue. I f we were to say that blue is the  appearing object of the self -knower 
experiencing the eye consciousness apprehending blue, then what would 
be the consequence ?  
 
What appears  to this self-knower experiencing the eye consciousness 
apprehending blue ? It is o nly the eye consciousness apprehending blue . 
Blue does not appear.  
 
In the next lesson, w e will look at the facsimile of a direct perceiver. O nce 
we complete that, we will move on to the inferential valid cogn iser. 
 
I don’t fully understand the earlier question about smoking but let us 
assume that t his is the answer !  
 
A smoker may know that if one smoke s, it is bad for one’s health . Such a 
thought however can be a doubt  as one could be wondering , “Maybe it is 
bad for me or maybe it is not. " For such a person who is still  entertaining 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                               Second Basic Program – Module 2  
                                 The Study of Mind and Its F unctions  
 
Lesson 10  
Page 10 of 11 doubt s about whether  smoking is really harmful or not, obviously  he does 
not realise that smoking is bad and he will continue  to smoke.  
 
After hearing more about the harmful effect s of smokin g and now 
believing  that smoking is really bad , that is an assumption that  accord s 
with the fact . It is still just a thought  but it is better than doubt. When 
one has arrived at a correct assumption , there is greater hope that the 
chances of smoking less will be higher .  
 
The person who has this correct assumption  is now on the side of the 
truth that smoking is bad, but he has not ascertained or realised this yet. 
He still smok es. Even  when one has a very strong belief  in the harmful 
effect s of smoking , nevertheless it is still just an assumption . There is still 
a long way to go before one is able to induce an ascertainment.  
 
When one is able to induce ascertain ment , this is valid cogni tion. During 
the gap between the development  of this ascertainment  that is a 
realisation  and the correction assumption, one s till smoke s. Once a 
person is able to i nduce  the ascertainment  or the valid cognition  of the 
harmful effect s of smoking, definitely the chances of him smoking less is 
much higher than the chance s he had when he simply had the correct 
belief . 
 
So do people who have the valid cogni tion realising the harmful effect s of 
smoking still smoke? Yes or no?   
 
(Student ’s response is inaudible ) 
 
Due to seeing an advertisement on the harmful effects of smoking , it is 
possible to generate a va lid thought thinking smoking is bad. But this 
thought can be a valid cogni ser, a correctly assuming consciousness , or 
even doubt . The adults did not give the lighter to the child in the 
advertisement you described because  they realise  the harm of smoking 
with respect to others . But they still have doubts with respect to 
themselves being harmed  by smoking . There are people who know that 
they are harmed by certain habit s like smoking , yet they knowingly 
engage in the  very habit s that harm them.  
 
Questions for discussion on Sunday, 22nd July 2012  
1. If it is an established base, is it necessarily all three of the following:  
 appearing object  
 determined object, and  
 object of engagement?  
 
2. Object possessors are divided into: (1) persons (2) awarenesses, and 
(3) expressive sounds.  
 Why are they object possessors?  
 If it is a sound, is it necessarily an object possessor?  
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                               Second Basic Program – Module 2  
                                 The Study of Mind and Its F unctions  
 
Lesson 10  
Page 11 of 11 3. (a) If an object appears to a direct perceiver, is it necessarily its   
appearing object?  
      (b) If an object appears to a conceptual consciousness, is it  
necessarily not its appearing object?  
4. Among the seven -fold division s of consciousness, how many are 
mistaken consciousnesses and how many are non -mista ken 
consciousnesses?  
5. (a) What is the uncommon empowering condition, the mental sense  
power?  
      (b) If it is a consciousness that is generated in dependence on a 
mental sense power, is it necessarily a mental direct perceiver?  
 
 
Translated by Ven. Tenz in Gyurme  
 
Transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek, Vivien Ng and Patricia Lee  
 
Edited by Cecilia Tsong  
 