Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Lorig/Edited/BP2 M2 L09 (final).pdf
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:53:50.583871
================================================================================

Amitabha Buddhist Centre                               Second Basic Program – Module 2  
                                 The Study  of Mind and Its Functions  
 
Lesson 9  
Page 1 of 9 Transcript of teachings by Khen Rinpoche Geshe 
Chonyi  
 
Lesson No: 9        Date: 17th July 2012  
 
All page references in this lesson refer to Handout No. 5 dated 10th July 
2012 : The Study of Mind and its Functions  (Direct perceiver and its 
divisions) unless  otherwise stated.  
 
Sense Direct Perceiver  
A sense direct perceiver possesses the following three characteristics:  
1. It is produced in dependence on its uncommon empowering condition, 
a physical sense power . 
2. It is free from conceptuality, i.e., it is non-conceptual . 
3. It is non-mistaken .  
 
If someone were to ask  you: “Is a direct perceiver necessarily a valid 
cogni ser?” you should be able to say , “It is no t necessar ily so.” You have 
to understand why it is not necessar ily so.  
 
The handout  (page 2) clearly stat es that a sense direct perceiver has three 
divisions:  
1. valid cogni sers that are sense direct perceivers  
2. subsequent cogni sers that are sense direct perceivers  
3. awareness es to which an object appears and is not ascertained (AAA)  
that are sense direct perceive rs 
From th is you should know instantly that if it is a sense direct perceiver , 
it is not necessarily a valid cogniser.  
 
The chart on the seven -fold consciousness es (Page 4, Handout No. 3 
dated 3rd July 2012)  shows very clearly how many consciousnesses are  
valid cogni sers, how many are non -valid awareness es, and so forth . You 
should be able to give the answer immediately .  
 
(Students answered that two are valid cogni sers and five are non -valid 
cogni sers). 
 
Khen Rinpoche: Are you sure? I thought it was three and four? Isn’t a 
subsequent cogniser a valid cogniser? You must confirm this. You cannot 
have doubts anymore. A subsequent cogniser doesn’t realise its object?  
 
(Students confirm the above answer ). 
 
Khen Rinpoche: Ok! Good.  
 
Mental Direct Perceiver  
What d etermines a mental direct perceiver? A mental direct perceiver 
possesses the following three characteristics:  
1. It is produced in dependence on its own uncommon empowering 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                               Second Basic Program – Module 2  
                                 The Study  of Mind and Its Functions  
 
Lesson 9  
Page 2 of 9 condition, a mental sense power . 
2. It is free from conceptuality , i.e., it is non -concep tual. 
3. It is non-mistaken . 
However, these three characteristics  are insufficient . In addition, a mental 
direct perceiver is an other -knower .  
 
Page 4  
Definition of a mental direct perceiver is: 
 
1) that which is generated in dependence on a mental sense pow er which is its own  
uncommon  empowering condition and  
 
2) is a consciousness that is an other -knower which is free from conceptuality and 
non-mistaken.  
 
We can only understand what a mental direct perceiver is on the basis of 
its definition. That is why o ne has to memori se the definition. On the 
basis of the definition , we are  then able to extract the essential features 
that make up a mental direct perceiver. From the definition of the mental 
direct perceiver, we see that there must be four characteristics :  
1. It has to be generated in dependence on a mental sense power , i.e., its 
own uncommon empowering condition . 
2. It is free from conceptuality . 
3. It is non-mistaken . 
4. It is an other -knower . 
When a ll these four features are present, that mind  is a mental direct 
perceiver.  
 
Just like the s ense direct perceiver, the mental direct perceiver has three 
divisions:  
1. valid cogni sers that are mental direct perceivers  
2. subsequent cogni sers that are mental direct perceivers  
3. AAAs  that are mental direct perceivers  
 
It is clear from this that there are no mental direct perceivers that are: 
 inferential valid cogni sers 
 correctly assuming consciousness es 
 doubting consciousness es  
 wrong consciousness es 
 
Self-knowing direct perceiver  
 
Page 5  
 
The definition of a self-knowing direct pe rceiver is: that which has the aspect of an 
apprehender, is free from conceptuality, and is non -mistaken.  
 
Among the four Buddhist tenets, most of them assert self -knowers : 
 The Sutra School (SS), the Mind -Only School (MOS) , and the Autonomy 
Middle Way Scho ol (AMWS) assert self -knowers , and they each have 
their own reasons for doing so .  
 The Great Exposition School (GES) and the Consequence Middle Way 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                               Second Basic Program – Module 2  
                                 The Study  of Mind and Its Functions  
 
Lesson 9  
Page 3 of 9 School (CMWS) do not assert self -knowers.  
 
Self-knower and other -knower  
A self-knower  is: 
 that which has  the aspect of an apprehender  
 is an experiencer of a consciousness  
 is of one collection with the consciousness that it experiences   
 is a consciousness that is directed inwards and not directed outwards  
 
How does a self-knower experience the consciousness tha t comes along 
with it? It experiences th at consciousness non -dualistically , i.e., through 
the subsidence of duality .  
 
An analogy to understand  a self-knower and an other -knower is the 
illumination of a flame. The nature of a flame is that it is bright and  
illuminating. The  flame can also illuminate other objects. Likewise the 
other -knower is like the flame that illuminates another object other than 
itself.  
 
A consciousness also has these two factors:  
1. By nature it is clear and knowing and is related to having the aspect of 
an apprehender.  
2. It is also able to illuminate  or clarify other objects and is related to 
having the aspect of the apprehended.  
These two factors are established in any consciousness.  
 
Related to memory  
Why do some tenets assert self -knowers? It is related to memory . Memory 
explains why we can remember things. For example, you see the object 
blue. Later you remember , “I saw blue at that time.” The reason why you 
are able to remember having seen blue in the past is because in the past, 
there was a valid cogni ser that reali sed blue.  
 
You have a memor y of that experience. That memory consists of the 
memor y of remembering  (1) the object , blue, and (2) the subject , the 
consciousness that saw blue . When you think , “I remember see ing blue,” 
you remember both the object and the subject.  
 
All the tenets assert a memory , even the highest school, the CMWS. We 
remember both the object and the mind that experienc ed the object.   
 Why do we remember blue? This is because at an earlier time , there was 
a valid cogni ser reali sing blue.   
 Likewise, the reason why we remember an eye consciousness 
apprehending blue is because, at that time, there was a valid cogniser, 
an experiencer  of that eye consciousness apprehending blue.  That is 
why at a later moment  we ca n remember the eye consciousness that 
apprehended blue.  
 
 
This is the reason why the proponent s of self -knower s assert that there 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                               Second Basic Program – Module 2  
                                 The Study  of Mind and Its Functions  
 
Lesson 9  
Page 4 of 9 must be a self-knower , an experience r of the eye consciousness 
apprehending blue at the time when the eye consciousness was 
apprehending blue.  Without this self -knower that experience d the eye 
consciousness apprehending blue at that time, later on you will not be 
able to remember that eye consciousness that saw blue.  
 
For this reason , therefore the proponents of the SS, MOS , and the AMWS 
assert self -knower s. For them if you d idn’t assert self -knower s, you w ould 
not be able to remember the eye consciousness that saw blue earlier.  This 
is the most important reason for those who assert self -knower s: to 
account for memory. It is imp ortant to understand why  self-knower s are  
asserted .  
 
 Just like the analogy of the flame that is illuminating by nature, the 
consciousness that is able to experience itself is a self -knower .  
 The consciousness that is also able to illuminate objects other than 
itself is the other -knower . 
 
Aspect of an apprehender & aspect of the apprehended  
It is also important to understand what is an aspect of the apprehender 
and an aspect of the apprehended.  
 The factor of a consciousness that is just mere experience  of itself is 
having the aspect of an apprehender.  
 The factor of a consciousness that experiences something other than 
consciousness itself is the aspect of the apprehended.  
 
Main mind and mental factor  
A self -knowing direct perceiver is neither a main mind n or a mental 
factor. It is said that the presentation of the main mind and the mental 
factor is from the perspective of the aspect of the apprehended.  The self -
knower has the aspect of an apprehender. Therefore  it is neither a main 
mind nor a mental factor.  
 
Divisions  
A self-knowing direct perceiver has three divisions:  
1. valid cogni sers that are self-knowing direct perceiver s 
2. subsequent cogni sers that are self-knowing direct perceiver s  
3. AAAs that are  self-knowing direct perceiver s 
 
The illustration s of a self -knowing direct perceiver that is an AAA  are: 
 a self -knowing direct perceiver in the continuum of a Samkhya that 
experiences bliss as being a consciousness  
 a self -knowing direct perceiver in the continuum of a Vaisheshika that 
experiences bliss as being a consciousness  
 a self -knower in the continuum of a Nihilist that experiences an 
inferential cogni ser as being a prime cogni ser 
 
The proponents of non-Buddhist Indian philosophical systems , such as 
the Samkhya s and Vaisheshika s, assert that bliss is matter a nd not 
consciousness, whereas for Buddhist s, bliss is necessarily a 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                               Second Basic Program – Module 2  
                                 The Study  of Mind and Its Functions  
 
Lesson 9  
Page 5 of 9 consciousness. In the continuum of a Samkhya who experiences bliss, 
bliss appears but he doesn’t reali se bliss is a consciousness.  According to 
proponent s of self -knower s, since bliss is a  consciousness, there is a self -
knower that is the experiencer of th is bliss. The Samkhya who 
experiences bliss does not realise that bliss is a consciousness. Therefore 
the self -knower that experiences the bliss but does not realise the bliss is 
a self -knower that is an AAA.  
 
The Nihilist s only assert direct valid cogni ser. They do  not assert 
inferential valid cogni sers. In the continuum of the Nihilist who does  not 
believe in  an inferential valid cogni ser, nevertheless in his mind there is 
an inferential valid cogni ser whether he believe s it or not. So there must 
be a self -knower experiencing this inferential valid cogni ser. So we have to 
say that the self -knower experiencing the inferential valid cogni ser in the 
continuum of a Nihilist , that self -knower  does not reali se the inferential 
valid cogni ser but is  nevertheless experiencing it , is a self-knower that is 
an AAA.  
 
Question:  Can any self -knower that experiences  an AAA be cited as an 
example of a self -knower that is an AAA?  
 
Answer : An ear consciousne ss to which sound appears when one is fully 
engrossed in looking at something is an AAA. There is a self -knower that 
is experiencing th is AAA. Your questions pertains to whether this self -
knower that is experiencing this AAA is itself a self -knower that is an 
AAA. 
 
The answer is n ot necessarily so. It is possible to have a self -knower 
experiencing an AAA to reali se the AAA.  
 
The ear consciousness to which sound appears in the continuum of 
someone whose mind is very engrossed with a form is an AAA. The self -
knower experiencing this ear consciousness can reali se that mind  that is 
an AAA.  
 
Why? Because later on you remember , “Did I hear that sound or not?”  
Later on don’t you remember that AAA? So why can’t we say that the self -
knower that experiences the AAA  can reali se the AAA?  
 
Question : It was mentioned earlier  that the study of mind and mental 
factors is with respect to the aspect of the apprehended. So far there has 
been no mention  of the aspect of the apprehender except for the self -
knower. How is somet hing apprehended without  an apprehender?  
 
In the previous lesson, it was pos ited that the immediately preceding 
condition for the eye consciousness apprehending blue is in the aspect of 
the apprehended. It was  not stated whether the eye consciousness 
apprehending blue that is generated immediately after that is in the 
aspect of an apprehender  though that seems to be the natural inference .  
Ven Gyurme : (Paraphrasing the question) : In the last lesson, Khen 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                               Second Basic Program – Module 2  
                                 The Study  of Mind and Its Functions  
 
Lesson 9  
Page 6 of 9 Rinpoche spoke of three things that c ame together . Consciousness is one 
of them. It was mentioned that consciousness is generated into the aspect 
of vase. In the next moment, that consciousness transforms into the 
entity of  an eye consciousness apprehending vase.  
 
At the time when the three things c ame tog ether, there is no eye 
consciousness apprehending vase because cause has to precede effect. 
But at that time there is a consciousness that is generated into the aspect 
of vase. In the next moment, that consciousness transform s into the eye 
consciousness ap prehending vase.  
 
He (the student) is saying that this eye consciousness apprehending vase 
has an aspect of the apprehender. Why? Because it is a continuation of 
the consciousness that existed prior to it at the time when the three 
things meet.  
 
Question:  Where does the aspect of the apprehender come in the study of 
mind and mental factor s or is there no such thing?  
 
Answer:  There is no such thing.  
 
Question:  What t hen is apprehending the aspect of the apprehended ?  
 
Answer : An aspect of an apprehender doe s not merely refer to any mind 
that realises another mind.  
 
The study of the aspected consciousness is one of the most difficult 
aspects of th is topic. The presentation of main mind and the mental 
factor s is from the perspective of the aspect of the appreh ended.  Why? 
How do you distinguish a main mind from a mental factor?  
 A main mind reali ses the entity of the object.  
 A mental factor reali ses the characteristics of the object.  
Therefore the main mind and the mental factors are explained from the 
perspec tive of the aspect of the apprehended. T hrough the sense direct 
perceiver, mental direct perceiver , and yogic direct perceiver, one explains 
the mind and mental factors.  
 
The presentation of main mind and mental factor is not done from the 
perspective of a self -knowing direct perceiver because a self -knower is just 
a mere experiencer of the entity of the consciousness . Self -knower is that 
has which has the aspect of an apprehender.  
 
The factor of a consciousness that is just mere experience of itself  is an 
inherent part of consciousness. From the moment consciousness exist s, 
that consciousness has th e factor of experiencing itself.  
 
Question:  The main mind reali ses the entity of the object . Why can’t that 
object be consciousness itself ? Why must it be othe r objects?  
 
Answer : We are trying to find out about the entity of an object. The object 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                               Second Basic Program – Module 2  
                                 The Study  of Mind and Its Functions  
 
Lesson 9  
Page 7 of 9 can be a consciousness but it has to be a consciousness other than itself.  
 
Student:  In this case since consciousness can be divided into the main 
mind and mental facto rs, the main mind and mental factors are not all - 
encompassing as there is a category of self -knowers, that are 
consciousnesses, that are excluded.   
 
Khen Rinpoche : Yes, you can say that.  
 
Question:  Would this self -knowing direct perceiver be a non-associa ted 
compositional factor ? Is it a consciousness?  
 
Answer:  The s elf-knowing direct perceiver is a division of direct 
perceiver s; therefore it has to be a consciousness. A direct perceiver is 
necessarily a knower ; so self -knowing direct perceiver s will neces sarily be 
consciousness es.  
 
The aspect of an apprehender and aspect of the apprehended are  
necessarily consciousness es:  
 A self -knower has the aspect of an apprehender.  
 The s ense direct perceiver, mental direct perceiver , and yogic direct 
perceiver are o ther-knowers and they have the aspect s of the 
apprehended.  
 
Question:  The first moment of the eye consciousness apprehending  blue is 
a sense direct valid cogni ser apprehending blue . The impermanence of 
blue also appears to such a consciousness but it doesn ’t reali se the 
impermanen ce of blue. Is such a mind a sense direct valid cogni ser with 
respect to apprehending blue but an AAA with respect to apprehending 
the impermanen ce of blue?  
 
Answer : The eye consciousness apprehending blue is a valid cogni ser. If i t 
is a valid cogni ser then it cannot be an AAA.  To this eye consciousness, 
the impermanen ce of blue also appears but is not ascertained. Does that 
make the eye consciousness apprehending blue an AAA?  
 
This eye consciousness apprehending blue is an AAA with respect to the 
impermanen ce of blue  but this eye consciousness apprehending blue is 
not an AAA. Why? Because whether a mind is an AAA or not depend s on 
its object of engagement. The object of engagement of the eye 
consciousness apprehending blue is blue and is not impermanen ce of 
blue.  
 
The c onclusion therefore is:  
 the eye consciousness apprehending blue is a valid cogniser  and is not 
an AAA,  
 but with respect to the impermanen ce of blue , the eye consciousness 
apprehending blue is an AAA.  
 That does not entail that the eye consciousness apprehending blue itself  
is an AAA.  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                               Second Basic Program – Module 2  
                                 The Study  of Mind and Its Functions  
 
Lesson 9  
Page 8 of 9  
Question:  A vase generality is the opposite from non -vase. The m eaning 
generality of vase is the appearance of opposite from non -vase mixed with 
the vase appearing. Are these two mutual ly exclusive?  
 
Answer:  Is opposite from non -vase a vase generality? Yes, opposite from 
non-vase is a vase generality .  
 
When we say vase generality, it is different from the meaning generality of 
vase.  The m eaning generality of vase  has to be an appearance  of opposite 
from non -vase. That is insufficient. It also has to be a imputed factor, i.e., 
a factor imputed by thought.  
 
Question:  Is vase generality permanent or impermanent?  
 
Answer : A vase generality is  permanent because  it is also an imputation 
by tho ught.  
 
In general, generalit ies and instance s are imputed by thought. But 
whatever is a vase generality is not necessarily permanent. For example, 
something that is a vase generality but is not permanent is “opposite from 
non-vase,” i.e., vase, which is impermanent. So whatever is a vase 
generality is not permanent, but a vase generality itself is permanent.  
 
Question:  Does “opposite from non -vase” also include permanent 
phenomenon such as  the absence of a horse in this gompa ? 
 
Answer: The absence of a hor se in this gompa i s not opposite from non -
vase. Opposite from non -vase is necessarily vase . Therefore it is 
necessar ily impermanent.  
 
Question : Is there something that is a vase generality that is a permanent  
phenomenon ? 
 
Answer:  Appearance of opposite fro m non -vase.  
 
*************  
(Benny Law share s his experience of studying the Basic Program ) 
 
Khen Rinpoche: Benny said he took nine years to understand a little bit  (of 
the teachings) . I took 30 years to understand a little bit  (of the teachings) . It 
took a bout 18 years of full -time studies but still I have a lot of questions. 
Having been here for 12 years, I taught the first Basic Program and now I 
am teaching the second Basic Program. I have more questions now than the 
first time round.  
 
This is the quali ty of the Buddha’s teachings. The more you study, the more 
questions you will have. That means you are getting more intelligent That 
means you are getting closer to enlightenment!  We say the Buddha knows 
everything. Each time you clear some doubt in your m ind, you understand 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                               Second Basic Program – Module 2  
                                 The Study  of Mind and Its Functions  
 
Lesson 9  
Page 9 of 9 something better. That means you are closer to knowing everything.  
 
There is no other way. It is not easy, but just put in the effort, make strong 
prayers and give your time to attend discussions. Try to put in the effort. 
Not everyone  can become the same but somehow you will get something out 
of this. This is the important part of studying.  
 
In the course of one’s studies, all sorts of obstacles and hindrances can 
occur. Therefore it is very important to make strong aspirational prayer s all 
the time to succeed in your studies.  
 
For that reason on this coming Friday, I will be giving a short introduction to 
the deity, the Most Secret Hayagriva , and some suggestions for a short 
practice based on this deity. Come if you can to this introd uction of the Most 
Secret Hayagriva and find out about the short practice that you can do.  
 
Relying on Most Secret Hayagriva through this short meditational practice 
with mantra recitation becomes the most supreme method of overcoming 
obstacles in one’s l earning process and one’s studies. It can also help to 
overcome both human and non -human interferences. Also this organisation 
and some of us as individuals have a very long karmic connection with this 
deity.  
 
In the previous Basic Program, we collected so me money from all the 
students and, collectively as a class, we sponsored the Most Secret 
Hayagriva extensive tsog offering and fulfilment puja several times at Sera 
Je Monastery.  
 
This time I did not say anything but recently this idea was brought up 
because at that time there were many students who did not understand the 
subject. So it was suggested that now is the best time to do the puja with 
the hope that everyone can understand this topic faster.  
 
It is important to have faith and make a single -pointed request to the deity. 
But the most important factor remains one’s own determination. On the 
basis of maintaining that firm determination, one then makes single - 
pointed request to and rely on this deity. Of course then something can be 
achieved.  
 
 
Translated by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme  
 
Transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek, Vivien Ng and Patricia Lee  
 
Edited by Cecilia Tsong  