Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Lorig/Edited/BP2 M2 L25 (upload).pdf
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:53:50.149284
================================================================================

Amitabha Buddhist Centre                               Second Basic Program – Module 2  
                                                                    The Study of Mind and Its Functions  
 
Lesson 25  
Page 1 of 12 Transcript of teachings by Khen Rinpoche Geshe 
Chonyi  on the Modes of Mind and Mental Factors  
 
Lesson No: 25          Date: 20th September 2012  
 
Root text:   A Necklace for Those of Clear Awareness Clearly Revealing the 
Modes of Minds and Mental Factors by Ye-she Gyeltsen , translated by Toh 
Sze Gee; January 2006 edition. Copyright: Toh Sze Gee & FPMT, Inc. 
September 2003.   
 
All page references refer to the root text, unless otherwise stated.  
 
The Eleven Virtuous Mental factors  
 
There are eleven virtuous m ental factors:  
(1) faith  
(2) shame  
(3) embarrassment  
(4) non -attachment  
(5) non -hatred  
(6) non -ignorance  
(7) effort  
(8) pliancy  
(9) conscientiousness  
(10) equanimity  
(11) non -harmfulness  (Page 33)  
 
We should have a rough idea of these eleven mental factors  by way of 
their three respective features : object, aspect , and function. We should try 
to develop these mental factors in our own mind. This is the essence. We 
have to see for ourselves the bene fits when these  eleven virtuous mental 
factors arise in us.  
 
It is mentioned in the text that these eleven mental factors are virtuous by 
entity , i.e., they are virtuous from their own side without depending on 
any kind of motivation.  It is mentioned that the imprints of these virtuous 
mental factors are also virtuous. The physical and verbal action s following 
from these mental factors also become virtuous.   
 
These eleven virtuous mental factors can only arise in our min d through 
the assertion of effort. Subsequent to the arising of these virtuous mental 
factors  in our mind , virtuous imprints are left in our mind. When imprints 
of virtue are left in our mind , we are more  likely to perform virtuous 
physical and verb al actions motivated by such mental factors . These 
positive effects do  not only occur in this life . They will remain with us 
from life to life . So from life to life , we have to familiari se ourselves with 
these mental factors over and over again.  
 
It is obvious  that, in order for any of our physical and verbal actions  to be 
virtuous, they have to arise from imprints of virtue. In order for there to 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                               Second Basic Program – Module 2  
                                                                    The Study of Mind and Its Functions  
 
Lesson 25  
Page 2 of 12 be imprints of virtue, first a virtuous mind must arise . Therefore we have 
to put in the effort to generate  such virtuous minds . These virtuous minds 
leave positive imprints that give rise to virtuous physical and verbal 
actions. Reflecting on this process , one should understand that it is 
extremely important to develop virtuous minds.  
 
The text mentions virtue by way of attain ment at birth . This does not 
happen  without reason. In order for th is virtue by way of attain ment  at 
birth to arise , in the first place , there has to  be the virtue by way of 
application . The v irtue by way of application  means  putting in  the effort  to 
develop virtuous minds. When we put  effort into developing a virtuous 
mind , when the virtuous mind arise s, definitely there is hope for the 
future . From the moment you are born, you  will have all these virtues.   
 
In essence, we have to know what these virtuous mental factors  and their 
respective entit ies are and we have to know what is  in it for us when we 
develop the m in our minds. Following from th is, as mentioned in  
Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds , we have to work on developing them . 
We have to depend on joyous perseverance , the enthusiasm for virtue . 
 
Question:  Can t he virtue  by way of application  that has these four 
conditions —relying on the virtuous spiritual guide, listening, reflecti on, 
and meditati on—be equated with the second type of joyous perseverance , 
the joyous perseverance of application  that has two types : (1) constant 
application and (2) respectful application?  
 
Can we relate  respectful application  to rel iance on the spiritual guide and  
constant application to listening, reflect ing, and meditating on the 
teachings?  
 
Answer : I am no t sure.  
 
I saw a commentary explaining these two  applications , but now I don’t 
remember . 
 
Question: Can I say  that non-harmfulness is no different from 
compassion?  
 
Answer : I can’ t say for sure but it would seem that w hen you look at the 
definition of non -harmfulness, it seems to be saying that  it is compassion . 
The definition of non -harmfulness is almost the same as the definition of 
compassion1. 
 
Question : Among the four immeasurable s, equanimity  and compassion 
are among the eleven virtuous mental factors . There seem s to be no  
                                                           
1 It is a mind of compassion and is involved with non -hatred (Page 48).  
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                               Second Basic Program – Module 2  
                                                                    The Study of Mind and Its Functions  
 
Lesson 25  
Page 3 of 12 mention  of joy and love ? 
 
Answer : The equanimity that is part of the eleven virtuous mental factors 
is no t immeasurable equanimity.  In general, ther e are three types of 
equanimity:  
(1) equanimity of application  (or compositional equanimity)  
(2) equanimity that is feeling  
(3) immeasurable equanimity  
 
The mental factor of equanimity  that is part of the eleven virtuous mental 
factors is the equanimity of appli cation . Not everything is listed there but 
we can check whether  immeasurable love and immeasurable joy  can come 
under non -hatred  or not. This is something you can think about.  
 
Question:  How does pliancy overcome obscuration s? 
 
Answer:  This has already  been explained. In this context, r emember  that 
there are five obscurations;  
1. aspiration for the desire object  
2. malice  
3. sleep and lethargy  
4. excitement and regret  
5. doubt  
 
Question:  Is wisdom  necessarily a conceptual mind ?  
 
In the definition s: wisdom  “strongly differentiates the qualities of things 
that are to be examined ” (Page 32) and non-ignorance  is the “ knowledge 
arisen  from fruition , scripture, contemplation or realization , and is a 
wisdom of individual investigation ” (Page 38) . So when one directly 
realises emptiness,  is the mental factor of wisdom in  the mental 
continuum?  
 
If wisdom is a conceptual mind  and non-ignorance is present in the 
continuum of a mind that d irectly reali ses emptiness , how about wisdom  
then? Can a direct reali sation of emptiness still perform analysis?  
 
Answer : You are saying that t he mental factor of wisdom is necessarily 
conceptual  by reason , that i t is an analy tical mind . The m ental factor of 
wisdom is not necessarily conceptual  because th ere is also non -
conceptual wisdom such as the direct perception of emptiness.  
 
Question:  Equanimity has the function  of not allowing an opportunity for 
the afflictions to arise . It gives the impression that we don’t have to reali se 
emptiness  then because merely achieving equanimity  means the 
affliction s do not arise.  
 
Answer:  The ans wer is there in the text:  
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                               Second Basic Program – Module 2  
                                                                    The Study of Mind and Its Functions  
 
Lesson 25  
Page 4 of 12 The function of equanimity is specified as "not allowing an opportunity for afflictions,"  because upon attaining 
the ninth mental abiding, the manifest afflictions of the desire realm are easily overcome, an d in particular, 
laxity and excitation do not arise during meditative equipoise ” (Page 48).  
 
The afflictions  here refer to the manifest afflictions of the desire realm. 
Without the wisdom reali sing emptiness, it is not possible to abandon the 
afflictions  of the three realms.  Therefore  in order to destroy the afflictions 
of the peak of cyclic existence , the highest possible existence in samsara ,  
one needs the wisdom reali sing emptiness  without which  there is no way 
to destroy the afflictions of t he peak of cyclic existence . 
 
The Six Root afflictions  
 
The six root afflictions are:  
(1) attachment  
(2) anger  
(3) pride  
(4) ignorance  
(5) doubt  
(6) afflicted views  
 
Regarding the general defining characteristic of afflictions, the Compendium of  Knowledge  says:  
 
The definition of an affliction is a phenomenon such that when it arises, the characteristic of bei ng 
very unpeaceful arises, and due to its arising, the mental continuum arises as being very unpeaceful.  
 
Just as it has been said above, it is an awareness that causes the mental continuum to be very unpeaceful 
when it arises  (Page 53) .  
 
When a  mind causes one to be very unpeaceful , that very mind is called 
an affliction . There are six root afflictions  and twenty secondary 
afflictions . 
 
(1) Attachment  
 
Regarding attachment , the Compendium of Knowledge  says:  
 
QUESTION: What is attachment?  
RESPONSE: It is clinging of the three realms. It has the function of producing suffering.  
 
Just as it has been said above, it is a mental factor that perceives a contaminated thing to be attractive by 
way of its own en tity and thereupon seeks it. Regarding this, the Foremost Omniscient [Tsong -kha-pa] says in 
[his Great Exposition of the Stages of the Path ]: 
 
Attachment observes an external or internal object that is beautiful and  attractive and then becomes 
attached to  it. For example, just as oil that has  soaked into a piece of cloth is difficult to remove, 
likewise [attachment]  spreads on and adheres to its object of observation, making it difficult to tear  
oneself away from it  (Page 54) . 
 
 What is the object of observ ation  of attachment? It is either an external 
or internal object that is beautiful and attractive.  
 What is the aspect  of attachment? Difficulty in separating from the  
object.  
 What is the function  of attachment?  It produces suffering . 
 
Attachment is of three types:  
(1) attachment of the desire realm  
(2) attachment of the form realm  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                               Second Basic Program – Module 2  
                                                                    The Study of Mind and Its Functions  
 
Lesson 25  
Page 5 of 12 (3) attachment of the formless realm  
 
The Treasury of Knowledge  divides it into two:  
(1) attachment of the desire realm  
(2) attachment for [cyclic] exi stence  
 
[The Treasury of Knowledge ] condenses the attachment of the two upper realms [i.e., form realm and 
formless realm] into one.  
 
(1)    Attachment of the desire realm is aspiration for and attachment to the five qualities of the desire realm – 
form, s ound, and so forth – within observation of them.  
(2)   The attachment of the two upper realms is condensed into one, known as the "attachment for [cyclic] 
existence," because the two upper realms are referred to as "[cyclic] existence" in order to overcome  
the mistake of taking the meditative absorptions of the form and formless realms as a path of liberation.  
 
The func tion of attachment is specified as "producing suffering" for the purpose of  making us understand that 
the root of all suffering within the three realms of cyclic existence is rebirth which connects us to cyclic 
existence, and the principal cause for rebirt h within cyclic existence is attachment, craving itself  (Page 54) . 
 
One may have accumulated the projecting karma for rebirth in cyclic 
existence , but having that karma alone does not necessarily mean  that 
you will experience the result , i.e., rebirth in cyclic existence. What 
nourishes th at projecting karma is attachment and craving. Attachment 
nourishes the projecting karma that has been accumulated and  gives  it 
the strength and power to actuali se rebirth in cyclic existence. It is said 
that attachment is the principal cause for rebirth in cyclic existence. Due 
to attachment , karma is  nourished , and we will be  reborn in cyclic 
existence . Rebirth in cyclic existence is suffering . 
 
(2) Anger  
 
Regarding anger , the Compendium of Knowledge  says:  
 
QUESTION: What is anger?  
RESPONSE: It is a malice t owards sentient beings, suffering, and phenomena that are sources of 
suffering. It has the function of acting as a support for not abiding in contact and for misconduct.  
 
Just as it has been said above, anger is a malice that, upon observing the three obje cts of observation of 
anger, cannot tolerate them and wishes to harm them.  The three objects of observation of anger are:  
(1) sentient beings,  
(2) one's own sufferings, and  
(3) the sources from which these sufferings arise  (Page 55).  
 
 
 In order for anger t o arise, there must be an object  towards which the 
anger is directed. These three objects  are: (1) sentient beings,  (2) one's 
own sufferings, and  (3) the sources from which these sufferings arise . 
 What is the aspect of this anger? It is malice  that is essentially a very 
gross , rough or hard mind  that wishes to harm.   
 The function  of anger  acts “as a support for not abiding in contact ,” i.e.,  
one will not com e into contact with happiness . 
 
Regarding the teachings on "the nine bases of malice", the Precious Garland  (stanza 5.31) says:  
 
Harmful intent arises from nine causes  
Of intending to harm others:  
Bearing senseless misgivings in the thre e times  
With regard to oneself, one's friends and one's enemies  (Page 55) . 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                               Second Basic Program – Module 2  
                                                                    The Study of Mind and Its Functions  
 
Lesson 25  
Page 6 of 12 With regard  to oneself , it applies to the three times: the past, the present , 
and the future:  
(1) I was harmed (in the past).  
(2) I am being harmed (now in the present ).   
(3) I will be harmed (in the future ).   
These are the three  bases .  
 
Anger arises because when you think:  
(1) “I was harmed ,” you get upset .   
(2) “I am being harmed, ” you get upset .  
(3) “I will be harmed  or he is going  to hurt me ,” you get upset . 
 
The same thing applies to one’s friend s, i.e., people we consider to be on 
our side :  
(1) They were harmed.  
(2) They are being harmed.  
(3) They will be harmed.  
Because of these three reasons, a gain one gets angry.  
 
With regard  to one’s enem ies, i.e., people who are not on our side , when 
we think : 
(1) “They had benefited from this ,” we get upset.  
(2) “Someone is helping them now  so they are benefiting fr om this,”  we 
get upset.  
(3) “In the future , they will  be helped  and they will benefit ,” we also get 
upset.  
 
These are the nine causes of malice  with regard  to oneself, one’s friend s, 
and one’s enem ies in term of the past, present , and future.  
 
This is just as it has been said in the Great Exposition of the Stages of the Path : 
 
Anger is malice, a harsh mind that observes sentient beings, suffering, and the sources of suffering 
such as weapons and thorns, and intends to harm those objects.  
 
It has the function of causing one not to abide in happiness in this lifetime, and produces immeasurable 
suffering in future lives  (Page 55) . 
 
When we are happy , we feel calm and peaceful . But the moment anger 
arises, that sense of peace fulness degenerates . When we get very angry , 
we forget every good thing  that the other person ha s done for us  and the 
benefit  we ha ve received from that person.  As a result o f anger, we make 
many enemies , even among our loved ones  who ha ve helped us. The 
function of a nger is to increase the number  of enemies that we have.   
 
Usually we are able to sleep well  but when we get very upset , we find it 
difficult t o fall asleep. Anger also hurt s our reputation.  Because of anger, 
we will not have a good and happy life. Obviously a nger will also affect our 
future lives  where we will have to experience much suffering . 
 
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                               Second Basic Program – Module 2  
                                                                    The Study of Mind and Its Functions  
 
Lesson 25  
Page 7 of 12 In this vein, Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds says  (stanza 6.3 -5): 
 
If one maintains a painful mind of hatred,  
mind does not experience peace,  
Nor obtain joy and happiness;  
Sleep does not come and there is no stability  (Page 55) . 
 
With anger, we cannot experience physical nor mental happiness.  
 
He saddens his friends.  
He gathers them with generosity but is not served.  
In brief, joy does not exist in one  
Where anger abides comfortably  (Page 55 – 56). 
 
With anger, we destroy our friendship s. In brief, “joy does not exist in 
one/ Where anger abides comfortably. ” 
 
The Garland of Birth Stories  (stanza 21.29 -33) also says:  
 
Due to the fire of anger, one colors unflatteringly,  
Even adorned with ornaments, one do es not look good.  
Even though one may lie on a comfortable bed,  
One's mind suffers due to the agony of anger.  
 
Forgetful of the benefits one has enjoyed,  
Tormented by anger, one proceeds on a bad path.  
One's reputation and achievements degenerate,  
Like the  waning moon, one's glory fades.  
 
Although supported by friends,  
Due to anger, one plummets senselessly into the abyss.  
One's contemplation of benefit and harm degenerates;  
One becomes erratic and confused.  
 
Due to anger, one becomes habituated to misdeeds , 
And will experience suffering for hundreds of years in the bad migrations.  
Even an enemy who goes to great lengths to inflict great harm cannot  manage more than this  (Page 
56). 
 
As said in the Jataka Tales , when you look at a person who is generally 
regarded as attractive and pleasant , when that person is very upset, even 
if that person wears a lot of makeup, jewel lery, and adornment s, I don’t 
think you will find that person attractive.  
 
By not controlling our a nger and getting upset over and over again , we 
will get use d to being angry. What anger  does is  to create  the cause s for 
us to be reborn in the lower realms and to remain there for a very long 
time. This is something that even an external enemy  cannot do . So the 
essential advice is to see anger as a fault  and to try to manage and reduce 
it. 
 
We have to see  this for ourselves  by looking at our own mind . When anger 
manifest s, do we feel happy ? Do we fee l peaceful ? We should analy se and 
think about the faults of anger . What is its function? What does it do to 
me? By thinking about this, when we start to feel upset or angry, we 
should remind ourselves of what we have reflected on  and try to manage 
our anger.  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                               Second Basic Program – Module 2  
                                                                    The Study of Mind and Its Functions  
 
Lesson 25  
Page 8 of 12 (3) Pride  
 
Regarding pride , the Compendium of Knowledge  says:  
 
QUESTION: What is pride?  
RESPONSE: It is a puffing up of the mind in dependence on the view of the transitory coll ection. It 
has the function of acting as a support for disrespect and suffering.  
 
Just as it has been said above, it is a mental factor that has the aspect of a puffing up of the mind upon 
observing the basis for puffing up – one's own wealth, qualities an d so forth  (Page 56) .  
 
 The object  of pride is  one’s own wealth, one’s possession s, and one’s 
qualities . 
 The aspect  is the puffing  up or inflating of the mind , i.e., the mind tak es 
on the aspect of feeling very superior.  
 The funct ion of prid e is acting as a support for disrespecting others and 
for suffering in future lives.  
 
The disrespect  we show to others basically come s from pride  and following 
from that  comes the different negative actions. Our mind becomes inflated  
and by focus sing on our wealth or qualities , we feel superior  in relation to 
others.  
  
Here the Great Exposition of the Stages of the Path  says:  
 
Pride is based on the view of the tran sitory collection and is a puffing up of the mind upon observing 
an external or internal phenomenon that is high or low, good or bad; it involves an aspect of 
loftiness.  
 
"In dependence on the view of the transitory collection" is specified because all pr ide is generated in  
dependence on the innate conception which thinks  "I". Pride is of seven types:  
(1) pride  
(2) exceeding pride  
(3) pride beyond pride  
(4) pride of thinking "I"  
(5) pride of vanity  
(6) pride of slight inferiority  
(7) wrongful pride  
 
(1) Pride is a puffing up of the mind, thinking that one is superior to lower persons.  
(2) Exceeding pride is a puffing up of the mind, thinking that one is superior to peers.  
(3) Pride beyond pride is a puffing up of the mind, thinking that one is greatly superior  even to other 
superior persons.  
(4) Pride of thinking "I" is a puffing up of the mind, thinking "I" within observing the appropriated 
aggregates.  
(5) Pride of vanity is a puffing up of the mind, thinking that one has attained what has not been attained.  
(6) Pride of slight inferiority is a puffing up of the mind, thinking that one is just slightly lower than others 
who are actually greatly superior.  
(7) Wrongful pride is a puffing up of the mind, thinking that one has attained excellent qualities when 
one has actually  gone astray  (Pages 56 – 57).  
 
An example  of wrongful pride will be feeling very proud because you  have 
beaten up someone or you have given someone a hard time , thinking , “I 
really did well .”  
 
However, the Precious Garland  explains them as follows (stanza 5.6cd -12): 
 
Pride is of seven types;  
I shall explain each of them  (Page 57) . 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                               Second Basic Program – Module 2  
                                                                    The Study of Mind and Its Functions  
 
Lesson 25  
Page 9 of 12 Seven types of pride are also mentioned i n the Precious Garland , but this  
text describe s the first two types of pride —pride and exceeding  pride—
differently.  
 
Regarding these, being conceited that one is lower than the lowly,  
Or equal with the equal,  
Or grea ter than or equal to the lowly  
Is calle d the {1} pride of selfhood  (Page 58) . 
 
In the Precious Garland , the first verse  is a description of the first type of 
pride , pride itself.  
 
The second verse describes “exceed ing pride .” 
 
Being conceited that one is equal to those  
Who by some quality are superior to oneself  
Is {2} exceeding pride . 
Being conceited that one is superior to the superior,  
 
Thinking that one is higher than the very high,  
Is {3} pride beyond pride ; 
Like sores on an abscess,  
It is exceedingly virulent.  
 
Conceiving through obscuration an "I"  
In the five empty [aggregates]  
Which are called "the appropriated"  
Is explained to be the {4} pride of thinking "I."  
 
Thinking that one has attained fruits not y et attained  
Is the {5} pride of vanity.  
Praising oneself for committing negative actions  
Is known by the wise as {6} wrongful pride.  
 
Deriding oneself, saying,  
"I am useless," is called  
The {7} pride of lowliness  
Such is a brief description of them  (Page  58). 
 
The pride of lowliness  refers to putting down oneself , thinking, “I am 
stupid . I am useless, ” and so forth.  This is considered to be a kind of 
pride. You have to think about this : how is this pride ? Pride has an aspect 
of the puffing up of the mind . If think ing, “I am useless ,” or “I am stupid ” 
is considered to be a pride of lowline ss, how does this pride have the 
aspect of the puffing  up of the mind?  
 
In the first verse , the first type of pride  refers to , “being conceited that one 
is lower than the lowly, / Or equal with the equal ,/ Or greater than or 
equal to the lowly .” How is this thought , “I am lower than the lowly ” 
pride?  
 
Khen Rinpoche : If that is pride , then it cannot be the  practice of the 
bodhisattva  where you have to think , “I am lower than the low ly.” When 
you feel y ou are lower than the low ly, you are more humble .  Isn’t that the 
practice of a bodhisattva ? How can it be pride ?  
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                               Second Basic Program – Module 2  
                                                                    The Study of Mind and Its Functions  
 
Lesson 25  
Page 10 of 12 Pride has the function of obscuring any new attainment of the Dharma of scriptures and realization due to its 
disrespect for those who possess excellent qualities, causes rebirth in bad migrations in future lives, and even 
when reborn as a human, acts as the cause for rebirth in a low caste, as a servant and the like. Therefore, it 
produces the undesirable in both this and future lives.  In this way, the Precious Garland  (stanza 1.17cd -18) 
says:  
 
Through being inflated comes a bad lineage,  
Through j ealousy little magnificence.  
 
Through anger comes a discolored face, and  
Through not questioning the wise, stupidity.  
These are the results for humans,  
But prior to all of them there is a bad migration.  
 
The Stages of the Path to Enlightenment  says:  
 
Since  pride is the greatest hindrance in developing the path in this life, and is the cause for 
becoming a servant and the like in future lives, abandon it  (Pages 58 – 59). 
 
You have to understand what the se seven  types of pride are as well as the 
function of pride. In brief, in this life , pride  obstructs the generation of 
qualities and , in future lives , it cause s a lowly rebirth.  By reflecting on the 
faults of pride , we try to reduce  it in this life.  
 
(4) Ignorance  
 
Regarding ignorance, the Compendium of Knowledge  says:  
 
QUESTION: What is ignorance?  
RESPONSE: It is unknowing of the three realms. It has the function of acting as a support for the 
arising of wrong ascertainment, doubt and afflictions with respect to phenomena.  
 
Just as it has been said above, it is the mental factor of unknowing that is obscured regarding the mode of 
abiding of all phenomena. It is of two types:  
(1) obscuration that is  the mental factor of unknowing  
(2) an awareness that apprehends erroneously  
 
From among these two, the explicit indication in the Compendium of Knowledge  explains [ignorance] to be 
the mental factor of unknowing. Since Acharya Vasubandhu also explained it in this way in his A Discussion 
of the Five Aggregates , the assertions of both Asanga and his brother agree. However, Acharya Dharmakirti 
asserts [ignorance] to be an awareness that apprehends erroneously. In this way, although there are two 
types of as sertions with regard to ignorance —(1) the assertion that it is a wrong conception and (2) the 
assertion that it is an awareness that does not realize —[both] are alike in asserting that the principal antidote 
to ignorance is the wisdom realizing sel flessness  (Page 59) . 
 
There are two types of i gnorance .  It either  refers to : (1) a mind that 
apprehends erroneously  or (2) a mind that simply does not  know .  
 
Both the lower and higher Abhidharma  agree  that ignorance refer s to the 
mind that does  not know . This unknowing mind is ignorance . Ignorance 
is the  opposite of knowledge . In this context, ignorance is posited to be 
not knowing.  
 
Ignorance is of two types:  
(1) ignorance that is obscuration with respect to actions and their results  
(2) ignorance that is obscuration with respect to the meaning of suchness  
 
(1) The ignorance that is obscuration with respect to actions and their results causes one to accumulate 
actio ns for rebirth in the lower realms.  
(2) The ignorance that is obscuration with respect to the meaning of suchness causes one to accumulate 
actions for circling in the good migrations.  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                               Second Basic Program – Module 2  
                                                                    The Study of Mind and Its Functions  
 
Lesson 25  
Page 11 of 12 Its function is specified as "acting as a support for the arising of w rong ascertainment, doubt and afflictions 
with respect to phenomena," because other afflictions arise in dependence on ignorance; in dependence on 
them [i.e., afflictions] actions arise; in dependence on actions all sufferings of cyclic existence arise. 
Therefore, all afflictions and faults arise in dependence on ignorance  (Pages 59 – 60). 
 
In brief, this ignorance is the root of circling in the three realms of cyclic existence. Since it is the basis for all 
actions and afflictions, ign orance is taught at the beginning of the twelve links of dependent -arising2 (Page 
61). 
 
(5) Doubt  
 
Regarding doubt , the Compendium of Knowledge says:  
 
QUESTION: What is doubt?  
RESPONSE: This is being two -minded with regard to the truths. It has the function  of acting as a 
support for not engaging in the class of virtue.  
 
Just as it has been said above, it is a mental factor that wavers between two points within observation of the 
four truths, cause and result, and so forth. This doubt hinders all virtuous ac tivities and especially hinders the 
seeing of the truth. Since it will be overcome when one sees the truth, it is said to be a thorough 
entanglement that is an object of abandonment of the path of seeing3 (Page 61) . 
 
Doubt here is the afflicted doubt  that is abandoned by the path of seeing .  
It is an object of abandonment  of the path of seeing , unlike anger, 
ignorance, the afflicted view s, and so forth, that are not abandoned by the 
path of seeing .   
 
When we have doubt s regarding karma and their results  or the four noble 
truths , we will not abandon what needs to be abandoned and cultivate 
what needs to be cultivated. Therefore it hinders virtue.  
 
We will look at the afflic ted view s in the next lesson.  
 
Question:  What are the objects  of observation for doubt and ignorance?  
 
Answer : The object s of observation  for afflicted doubt  can be posited to be  
the four noble truths  and the  presentation of karma a nd their effects. I 
guess the object s of observation  for ignorance  can be all phenomena.  
 
Student : With r egard  to the pride of lowliness  and the pride of selfhood ,  
the inflated mind relates to observing the “I” that is the view of the 
transitory collection  and cherish ing this “I.” When I think that I am lower 
than the lowly, I am  actually seeking attention for myself.  
 
In the case of the bodhisattva who cherishes others  thinking , “I am lower 
than the lowly ,” that thought comes from cherishing others  and  
observing others . So there is a big difference between the se two mind s.  
 
                                                           
2 The twelve links are: (1) ignorance, (2) action, (3) consciousness, (4) name and form, (5) 
sources, (6) contact, (7) feeling, (8) attachment, (9) grasping, (10) existence, (11) birth, 
and (12) aging and death.  
3 The three thorough entanglements ar e: (1) view of the transitory collection, (2) view 
holding [bad] morality and conduct as supreme, and (3) doubt.  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                               Second Basic Program – Module 2  
                                                                    The Study of Mind and Its Functions  
 
Lesson 25  
Page 12 of 12 Khen Rinpoche : That is a g ood suggestion.  
 
Question:  I refer to ignorance . I am not sure what “unknowing of the three 
realms ” means. If it means not knowing all phenomena, how would the 
wisdom reali sing selflessness make us know all the three realms?  
 
Answer:  There is always an answer to everything. The final ultimate 
antidote is the wisdom reali sing selflessness. The mind that does not 
know , ‘this is a microphone ,’ is basically  oppose d by the mind that learns 
and knows that this is a microphone. Of course there is  also a mind that 
does not know the final mod e of abiding of the microphone . The antidote 
to that  mind is the wisdom re alising selflessness.  
 
Discussion questions  for 23 September  2012 : 
 
1. (a) What is the difference between a main mind and a mental factor?  
    (b) Explain their concomitance by way of the five similarities.  
 
2. (a) What is the difference between disc rimination and attention?  
(b) Is discrimination necessarily conceptual?  
 
3. Is there a difference between aspiration and belief?  
 
4. What is the difference between wisdom and non -ignorance?  
 
5. Is there a common locus between faith and aspiration?  
 
Some of th e questions may be difficult . You may not be able to arrive at a 
conclusion but that is not the point of the discussion . The discussion is 
an opportunity for you to read and study the text  and to get a clearer idea 
of what is being discussed.  
 
 
Translated by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme   
 
Transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek, Vivien Ng, and Patricia Lee  
 
Edited by Cecilia Tsong  
 