Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Lorig/Edited/BP2 M2 L18 (upload).pdf
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:53:47.712132
================================================================================

Amitabh a Buddhist Centre                               Second Basic Program – Module 2  
                                                                    The Study of Mind and Its Functions  
 
 
Lesson 18  
Page 1 of 11 
 Transcript of teachings by Khen Rinpoche Geshe 
Chonyi  on the Modes of Mind and Mental Factors  
 
Lesson No: 18          Date: 21st August 2012  
 
Root text:   A Necklace for Those of Clear Awareness Clearly Revealing the 
Modes of Minds and Mental Factors by Ye -she Gyeltsen , translated by Toh 
Sze Gee; January 2006 edition. Copyright: Toh Sze Gee & FPMT, Inc. 
September 2003.   
 
All page references refer to the root text, unless otherwise stated.  
 
In the last lesson, we saw how it is mentioned in the text  that all the 
qualities of b uddhahood  and full enlightenment  are inconceivable and 
indesc ribable. These inconceivable and indescribable qualities of full 
enlightenment arise from the mind. Likewise, the environment , its 
inhabitants , and all the experiences of happiness and suffering  are also 
the creation s of the mind. They all arise from the mind . In the text , many 
scriptural qu otations by various great Indian masters were cited to 
highlight th is fact. 
 
From our earlier discussion s, we saw how everything arises from the 
mind. What determines  whether something is an existent or a non-
existent ? It has to be posited from the perspective of the mind. If it is 
observed or verified by a valid cogni ser, it is said to be a n existent.  If it is 
not observed or verified by a valid cogni ser, it is said to not ex ist. Whether 
something exists or not is dependent on the mind. Whether a partic ular 
phenomenon is something or is not something is also determined by the 
mind. So ultimately everything is the creation of  or determined by the 
mind . Whether something exists or not or whether something is or is not 
is decided by the mind.  
 
 This does not mean that whatever is conceived by the mind necessarily 
exists in the way it is conceived .  
 A phenomen on that is not conceived by a mind or is thought not to exist 
by a mind does not mean that it is non-existent.  
 
To highlight  this fact, there is the division of consciousness into valid 
consciousnesses and non-valid consciousnes ses. This is the reason why 
there is a presentation of valid mind s and non -valid mind s.  
 
We have to understand the import of what we have just discussed. The 
purpose is not to better understand phenomena that are external to us, 
that this is this and that is that. The main import is to apply this to our 
own experience of happiness and suffering , i.e., all our happiness and all 
our suffering  are the creation s of our own mind .  
Amitabh a Buddhist Centre                               Second Basic Program – Module 2  
                                                                    The Study of Mind and Its Functions  
 
 
Lesson 18  
Page 2 of 11 
 What causes suffering ? It is our afflictions that lead on to actions  or 
karma . So it is our afflictions and karma . The main thing  that we must 
understand is that our happiness and suffering  are the creation s of and 
arise from our own mind . In particular, we have to understand the role of 
our afflictions and actions. By gaining a good understanding  of and 
developing conviction in this, we apply mindfulness and vigilan ce to guard 
and protect our mind  in our daily life . 
 
I mentioned in the last lesson  that all our experiences of happiness and 
suffering  come from  believing that all  the things that appear to our mind 
are real . We apprehend  and believe that those appearance s exist in the 
way they appear  to us. We react to tho se appearances and f rom that, the 
feelings of pai n and pleasure arise.  These different mental appearances 
do not exist from the side of the objects.  They are the  projection s of our 
mind . We have to understand  and we should be able to explain how 
everything arises from the mind .  
 
Since all phenomena arise in dependence on the mind, therefore it is 
important to gain a good understanding of the mind itself and how it 
works . That is why there is this presentation of Lorig, the study of mind 
and its function s. 
 
When our mind is  not disciplined, everything – the world, the 
environment, the people  around us – appears problem atic, as suffering . 
But for those individuals who have trained their minds, whose mind s are 
subdued and disciplined, they perceive the environment as a pure land  or 
a celestial mansion  and sentient being s as deities. Such appearances 
depend on whether the mind is disciplined and subdued. That is why it is 
always  pointed out in the teachings that happiness comes from a 
subdued mind  and that s uffering comes from a  mind  that is not subdued.  
 
Whether the environment is ordinary, whether it is fraught with suffering , 
or whether it is a pure  land, this depends on  our mental pers pective , i.e., 
how it appears to our mind. When the mind is subdued  and disciplined, 
everything appears as if it is a pure land.  When the mind is not subdued, 
everything appear s to be filled with suffering. All these  appearances come  
from the mind.  Therefore it is all right to say that the pure  land is in the 
mind  and that the ordinary suffering world is also in the mind. The pure  
land is not that far away and is not something that is separate from our 
mind.  
********************  
 
Differentiating a main mind from a mental factor  
What is the difference between a main mind and a mental factor?  
 A main mind  engages the entity of the object  by its own po wer. 
 A mental factor  engages the features  or characteristics of the object by 
its own power.    
Amitabh a Buddhist Centre                               Second Basic Program – Module 2  
                                                                    The Study of Mind and Its Functions  
 
 
Lesson 18  
Page 3 of 11 
 For e xample , an eye consciousness apprehending blue :   
 The main mind, the eye primary consciousness , apprehends the mere 
entity  of blue. From the perspective of the mind apprehending  the mere 
entity  of blue, it is called a main mind  
 The mental factor of mindfulness  induces a memory holding on to this 
blue. Mindfulness is the mind that enabl es the consciousness to hold 
on to the object without forgetting  it. It engag es the object by way of its 
attributes and therefore is a mental factor . From the perspective of the 
mind that function s not to forget the object , blue, it is called  
mindfulness .  
 
One entity but two isolates  
Are the eye primary consciousness apprehending blue and the mental 
factor of mindfulness in its retinue one or different? These two  minds are 
different  but they are one entity , i.e., they are one entity with different 
isolates . 
 
Let’s look at the mea ning of “one entity. ” What does that mean ? For 
example, (1) a vase and (2) the impermanence of the vase: these two are 
one entity  but different isolates.  The impermanence of the vase is of one 
entity with  the vase, but this does  not mean that the impermanence of the 
vase is the vase.   
 
The impermanence of the v ase can only be found on the vase. It cannot be 
posited on a non -vase nor can you talk about an impermanence of the 
vase that is separate from or of a different ent ity from the entity of the 
vase.  
 
The self, the person , and the “I” are mutually inclusive. The self and the 
aggregates are said to be of one entity.  You will not b e able to posit a self 
or a person that is of a separate entity from the aggregates . 
  
QUALM: Are a mind and its mental factors one entity or different entities?  
RESPONSE: The Treasury of Knowledge  (stanza 2.23) says:  
 
A mind and its mental factors are definitely simultaneous  (Pages 11 – 12). 
 
 
The Abhidharmakos ha says, “A mind and its mental factor s are definitely 
simultaneous .” So the main mind and its mental factor s are one entity.  
One will not be able to posit  a mental factor that is of a sep arate entity 
from the main  mind  just as one cannot posit a main mind that is of a 
separate entity from its mental factor.  
 
This is a bit tricky but w hen we say that the main mind and its mental 
factor s are one entity, it seems that we are referring to one thing but 
calling them  different names.  In fact the re are some scholars who assert 
that the main mind and its mental factor are the same , that we are just 
calling one phenomenon by different na mes.  
Amitabh a Buddhist Centre                               Second Basic Program – Module 2  
                                                                    The Study of Mind and Its Functions  
 
 
Lesson 18  
Page 4 of 11 
 In our system  however, we posit  that the main mind and its mental 
factor s are one entity but different isolates . The main mind and the 
mental factor are posited  to be different  due to their  different functions. 
They are not the same.   
 
The text says that the mind and its mental factor s are one entity . They are 
not different entit ies. The m ind and the mental factor are not like a pillar 
and a vase.  A pillar and a  vase are different entit ies because  there is a 
vase that is separate from  the entity of a pillar  and vice versa. Therefore  a 
vase and a pillar are separate entit ies but a mind and its mental factor s 
are not like that.  
 
Five similarities  
 
These modes have been set forth in accordance with  how it has been taught in [Gyel -tsab's] Essence of the 
Ocean of Knowledge: An Ex planation  of the Compendium of Knowledge . [Ge -dun Drub's] Ornament of 
Reasoning, the Great  Treatise on Valid Cognition  explains that:  
 the definition of a main mind  is that which is concomitant by way of the five  similarities with the mental 
factors in its  retinue, and  
 the definition of a mental factor  is that which is concomitant by way of the five  similarities with its main 
mind  (Page 12) . 
 
In the Ornament of Reasoning, the Great Treatise on Valid Cognition  by Ge -
dun Drub, the first Dalai Lama, he states precisely the definition of a 
main mind and the definition of a mental factor  for the purpose of debate.  
 
For example, an eye consciousness apprehending blue and the mental 
factor of feeling in its retinue  are concomitant by way of t he five 
similarities.  
 
Regarding the modes of these five similarities, there are two explanations – one from the Treasury of 
Knowledge  and one from [Asanga's] Compendium of Knowledge (Abhidharmasamuchchaya)  (Page 12) . 
 
Depending o n the text you are referring to, there are slight ly different 
presentation s on the concomitan ce of the five similarities between the 
main mind and its mental factor s. 
 
We will look at these five similaritie s by using the illustration of an eye 
consciousness apprehending blue  and the mental factor of feeling  in its 
retinue.  
 
The five similarities according to the Treasury of Knowledge  (stanza 2.35a) are as follows:  
1) similar support (simila r basis)  
2) similar object of observation  
3) similar [subjective] aspect  
4) similar time  
5) similar substance  
 
Their individual meanings are as follows:  
1) Since a mental factor is also supported by that sense power upon which the mind is supported, their 
support s are similar.  
2) Since a mental factor also observes that object which the mind observes, their objects of observation  
are similar.  
Amitabh a Buddhist Centre                               Second Basic Program – Module 2  
                                                                    The Study of Mind and Its Functions  
 
 
Lesson 18  
Page 5 of 11 
 3) Since, when a mind is generated having an aspect, for instance, blue, its mental factor is also generated 
in that aspe ct, blue, their [ subjective] aspects  are similar.  
4) Since a mind and its mental factor are simultaneous in regard to the three –production, abiding and 
cessation – their times  are similar.  
5) Just as minds of a similar type are distinct substances, lik ewise, mental factors, such as feelings, of a 
similar type are also distinct substances, therefore their substances  are similar  (Page 12) . 
 
1. Similar support  
 
Why is a n eye primary consciousness apprehending blue and the mental 
factor of feeling in its retinue said to have a similar support ? Just as an 
eye primary consciousness apprehending blue  is generated in dependence  
upon  the eye sense power, similarly the mental factor of feeling  in the 
retinue of this eye primary consciousness apprehend ing blue is also 
generated in dependence upon the eye sense power . In that sense , these 
two minds share  a similar support.  
 
In the retinue of an eye primary consciousness apprehending blue , there 
are many other mental f actors . We are using the mental factor of feeling  
only as an illustration .  
 
2. Similar object of observation  
 
The object of observation  of an eye primary consciousness apprehending 
blue is blue. The eye consciousness apprehending blue  is generated in 
dependence on the object of observation , blue.  Similarly the object of 
observation of the mental factor of feeling  in the retinue of this eye 
primary consciousness apprehending blue is also blue.  
 
A similar object of observation  means that ju st as the eye primary 
consciousness apprehending blue  is observing blue ; similarly the mental 
factor of feeling  in the retinue of this eye primary consciousness 
apprehending blue is also observing blue.  
 
3. Similar Aspect  
 
An eye primary consciousness apprehending blue is in the aspect of blue . 
Similarly the mental factor of feeling in the retinue of this eye primary 
consciousness apprehending blue is also in the a spect of blue.  
 
4. Similar time  
 
A main mind and its mental factor s are also similar in terms of time, i.e., 
a  mind and its mental factor s are simultaneous with respect to their 
production, abiding , and cessation.  These two – the eye primary 
consciousness apprehending blue and the mental factor of feeling  in its 
retinue  – abides at the same time and when they disintegrate, they also 
disintegrate at the same time.  
 
Amitabh a Buddhist Centre                               Second Basic Program – Module 2  
                                                                    The Study of Mind and Its Functions  
 
 
Lesson 18  
Page 6 of 11 
 5. Similar substance  
 
These two – the eye primary consciousness apprehending blue  and the  
mental factor of feeling  in its retinue  – have similar object s of observation  
and are generated into the same  aspect. In the retinue of this main mind ,   
there can only be one mental fa ctor of feeling  that has a similar o bject of 
observation , and there can only be one mental factor of feeling  in the 
retinue of this main mind  having the same aspect. You cannot have two 
mental factor s of feeling accompanying th e eye pri mary consciousness 
apprehending blue.  
 
This is what is meant by similar substance . Just as there is only one 
substance, the main mind, there can only be one substance, the mental 
factor of feeling accompanying the main mind .  
 
There is only one eye primary consciousness apprehending blue  at any 
one time . In the retinue of this eye primary consciousness, there are 
many mental factors . Taking the mental factor of feeling  as an  example ,  
there cannot be two mental factor s of feeling accompanying that eye 
consciousness. Just as there is only one main mind, there can only be 
one mental factor of feeling. That is the meaning  of similar substance .  
 
In the retinue of this eye primary consciousnes s apprehending blue , there 
are the five omnipresen t mental factors of feeling, discrimination , 
intention, contact , and attention . There is only one of each of these 
omnipresent mental factors accompanying the main mind. As long as you 
understand this, that is enough.  
 
Question : On pa ge 13 of the root text, it says, “Just as minds of a similar 
type are distinct substances, likewise, mental factors, such as feelings, of 
a similar type are also distinct substances, therefore their substances are 
similar ,” what do “their substance s” refer to? 
 
Answer : The e ye primary consciousness is a substance . It is a composed 
phenomenon . It is a substantial phenomenon . Just as there is one 
substance that is the main mind, similarly there is on ly one mental factor 
of feeling accompanying it that is a substance. As long as you understand 
that point , it is sufficient.   
 
When we say they are “distinct substances ,” that mean s that they are 
one. The main mind is substantially estab lished as one . Similarly , the 
mental factor of feeling accompanying the main mind is also substantially 
established as one.  These two are similar in being distinct substance s, 
i.e., “distinct ” mean ing that there is one of  each.  
 
Questi on: On page 11, it reads, “That which sees an object is a primary 
consciousness. That which sees its attribute is a mental factor .” In the  
Amitabh a Buddhist Centre                               Second Basic Program – Module 2  
                                                                    The Study of Mind and Its Functions  
 
 
Lesson 18  
Page 7 of 11 
 footnote, it states that , "Consciousness" ( shes pa ) would encompass both 
main minds as well as men tal factors .” Should I understand “primary 
consciousness ” as a term that is mutually inclusive with mind, sentience , 
and so forth , or should I understand that to refer to a primary mind and 
mental factor s? 
 
Ven Gyurme : The quotation is referring to the primary consciousness,  a 
main mind. A primary consciousness and consciousness are different.  
 
Question : The m ain mind is also a perceiver . Is it a direct per ceiver ? 
 
Ven Gyurme : “Perceiver ” and “primary consciousness ” are translation s for 
nam par she s pa, the main mind.  
 
Question : The m ind and the mental factor seem  to be the  same  thing . 
Could the  term, “concomitant ,” be tran slated as complement ary or co -
existent? 
 
Answer:  The m ind and its mental factor s are different. E.g., a product and 
an impermanent phenomenon are mutually inclusive but they are 
different . Likewise the mind and its mental fact ors are different.  
 
Why is a product and an impermanent phenomenon different?  We have 
discussed earlier the concepts of one and different . It is important to 
understand th is. What does it mean when we say something is  one and 
when we say the two things are different ?  We first need to know what is 
one, what is different , and their definition s.  
 
In the case of  a product and  an impermanent phenomenon, they are 
mutually inclusive but, nevertheless , they are  different. These two have  
the same meaning, but from the perspective of it being opposite to a 
permanen t phenomenon , it is called an impermanent  phenomenon . From 
the perspective of it being the opposite of a non-produc t, it is a product. 
They are different isolates.  
 
The process by which the ir names are imputed  are different  based on the 
different reason s. From it being opposite of a permanent  phenomenon, it 
is called an impermane nt phenomenon . From the perspective of it being 
opposite of a non-product, it is called a product. These two are different  
because their names are different.  
 A product and an impermanent phenomenon have the same meaning 
but because they have diff erent names, they are different.  
 When t wo phenomena are being compared, even though they are 
different, it does  not necessarily mean  that they have different 
meaning s.  
 In the case of a product and an impermanent phenomenon , these two 
are mutually inclusive. B ecause they are mutually inclusive therefore 
Amitabh a Buddhist Centre                               Second Basic Program – Module 2  
                                                                    The Study of Mind and Its Functions  
 
 
Lesson 18  
Page 8 of 11 
 they have the same meaning but they have different names .  
 It is also not the case that when you compare two phenomena, as long 
as they have different names , it necessar ily means they have the same 
meaning .  
 In the case of the mind and mental factor, we are not saying that the 
mind is a mental  factor and that the mental factor is the mind . These 
two are not mutually inclusive but they are one entity. These two  – the 
mind and the mental factor  – are not one. They are different .  
 Do they have the same entity or are they different entit ies? We say these 
two are one entity.  
 
Question:  Can the main mind be understood to be like a collective engager  
while the mental factor is similar to a partial engager?  
 
Answer:  Using the object blue , when the eye primary consciousness 
apprehend s blue, blue is the entity . What are the feature s of blue? I can’t 
say exactly because it is not so straight forward.  
 
The m ain mind and its mental factors have similar objec ts of observation 
and similar aspect s. 
  
A main mind engages the mere entity of the object , whereas the mental 
factor in its retinue engages the different features of the object .  
 
Just as a n eye primary consciousness apprehending blue is generated in 
dependence upon observing blue , similarly, the mental factor in its 
retinue must also observe blue. What does th e eye primary consciousness 
apprehending blue know? It knows the mere entity of blue. Just as it 
knows the entity blue, the mental  factor in its retinue must also know the 
entity , blue. Whatever the main mind knows , the mental factor in its 
retinue also knows.   
 
For this reason , in some texts , it is mentioned that it is insufficient to 
posit a main mind to be a mind that knows the mere entity of an object 
and a mental factor  that knows the features of the objec t. Rather one has 
to add the words , “by its own power .” Therefore in some text s it is said 
that you ha ve to posit : 
 a main mind to be a knower that knows the mere entity of the object by 
its own power ; and  
 a mental factor knows the features of an object by its own power.  
 
The definition of a doubting consciousness is a knower that has qualms 
two-pointedly  by its own power. A doubting consciousness is a mental 
factor and is in the retinue of a main mind .  
 
Let us say that th e main mind is a mental consciousness.  This mental 
consciousness , the main mind  that has doubting consciousness in its  
Amitabh a Buddhist Centre                               Second Basic Program – Module 2  
                                                                    The Study of Mind and Its Functions  
 
 
Lesson 18  
Page 9 of 11 
 retinue , also has qualms two -pointedly about the object but it does  not 
have qualms two -pointedly by its own power. The main mind does  not 
have qualms two -pointedly by its own power.  
 
Therefore in some texts , it is mentioned that both the main mind and 
mental factor  know (1) the entity of the object and (2) the features of the 
object.  
 But the main mind knows the entity of the object  by its own power . The 
mental factor also knows the mere entity of the object but not by its own 
power.  
 The mental factor knows the features of the object  by its own power . 
The main mind also knows the features of the object but  not by its own 
power.  
 
For this reason, when you think about it,  the main mind and th e mental 
factor in its retinue are not the same . They are not one . They are different.  
 
Coming back to blue, blue is the mere entity of blue . Maybe we can posit 
the feature s of blue to be a bright blue or a dull blue.  
 
Question:  Khen Rinpoche said that t he definition of a main mind 
according to Ge -dun Drub ’s text is used for debate  purposes . If a question 
were to come  up in an exam asking for a definition of a main mind , is this 
the definition we must use? The reason I am asking  this is because this 
definition doesn’t tell me anything about what a main mind is.  
 
On page 11, we are told that, “A main mind is a knower distinguished by 
mere observation of the object itself and does not need to be posited in 
terms of the other attributes .” Can that also be seen as a definition of a 
main mind? Or must we stick to the earlier definition given by Ge-dun 
Drub?  
 
Answer : The earlier explanation of a main mind and a mental factor (on 
page 11) is given from the perspective of what they do . It is to help us to 
understand what exactly is a main mind and what exactl y is a mental 
factor .  
 
The definition in Ge -dun Drub’ s text  is for the purpose of establishing the 
boundary of pervasion , what is and what is not.  
 
Question:  Should the earlier presentation of the seven-fold di vision of 
consciousnesses and the presentation of the mind and mental factor s be 
kept separate?  Is there anything that we can carry over from what we 
have learn t from the seven  consciousnesses into this presentation of mind 
and mental factors?  
 
Answer:  Presenting the mind by means of the seven -fold division of 
Amitabh a Buddhist Centre                               Second Basic Program – Module 2  
                                                                    The Study of Mind and Its Functions  
 
 
Lesson 18  
Page 10 of 11 
 consciousness  is just to understand  the mind in general  whereas in the 
study of the main mind and its mental factors, the e mphasis is on the 
mental factor s and identifying their respective entities.  
 
We study the 51 mental fa ctors  such as the afflictions, virtuous mental 
factors , and so forth  by studying and knowing their individual entities. 
When we talk about anger or attachment, you can definitely connect it to 
the seven -fold division s of consciousness .   
 
Among the 51 mental factors, there are virtuous  mental factors and non-
virtuous  mental factors . Among them, some are subsequent cogni sers, 
some are valid cogni sers, and some are wrong consciousnesses.  
 
Question:  Referring to the footnote on page 11 on the term, “isolate ,” can I 
say that an isolate can also be understood as opposite of something as it 
is also translated as a “double negation ”? 
 
Answer:  To clearly explain this paragraph :  
 
Just as it has been said above, that which knows the mere entity of an object is called a mind. That which, 
taking the observation of that very object as its basis, engages the object by means of the isolates of other 
attributes, such as its function, is called a mental factor  (Page 11)   
 
Gyel-tsab Je’s text  says: 
 
To explain this clearly, when the mindfulness of an object, for instance, a form, is produced, the two – the 
mind and the mindfu lness in its retinue – are similar in observing the object, form; nevertheless, they are 
posited separately. The knower of the mere entity of the object, form, is called "mind," but from the point of 
view of the function of acting not to forget, "mindfulne ss" (Page 12) .  
 
That is the isolate.  
 
In the next lesson , we will look at the five similarities as described in the 
Compendium of Knowledge . We will go through that quickly . I hope to 
finish the five omnipresen t factors. It would be good if you can read up on 
these five omnipresen t factors.  
 
I think the best way to conduct class is through Q&A . You read 
beforehand . Then we discuss through Q&A in class.  I think this is t he 
best approach . As the text has already  been translated , you should read  
it. If there is anything that you don ’t understand , you can ask and I can 
clarify. I think th at is the best approach . It is difficult to read everything 
in class . 
 
Question : 
 
That which, taking the observation of that very object as its basis, engages the object by means of the 
isolates  of other attributes, such as its function, is called a mental factor (Page 11).   
Is it a collective engager?  
 
Amitabh a Buddhist Centre                               Second Basic Program – Module 2  
                                                                    The Study of Mind and Its Functions  
 
 
Lesson 18  
Page 11 of 11 
 Answer : It is not exactly like that. In terms of an eye consciousness, it is a 
non-conceptual consciousness  and a collective engager , but an eye 
consciousness can be a main mind and it can also be a mental factor. The 
mental factor s in the retinue of non -conceptual consciousness es, such as 
sense consciousnesses, are also sense consciousness es.  
 
Having said that , you cannot say that all mental f actors are eliminative 
engagers and all  main minds are collective engag ers.  Just as an eye 
primary consciousness apprehending blue is a collective engager , the 
mental factors in the retinue of this eye consciousness are also collective 
engagers.  
 You should not think that a main mind is necessar ily a collective  
engager just because the main mind is a knower that knows the mere 
entity of an object.  
 You should not  think that a mental factor is an eliminative engager just 
because it knows the features  of an object.  
 
 
 
 
Translated by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme  
 
Transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek, Vivien Ng, and Patricia Lee  
 
Edited by Cecilia Tsong  
 