Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Lorig/Edited/BP2 M2 L28 (upload).pdf
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:53:47.459164
================================================================================

Amitabha Buddhist Centre                               Second Basic Program – Module 2  
                                                                    The Study of Mind and Its Functions  
 
Lesson 28  
Page 1 of 11 Transcript of teachings by Khen Rinpoche Geshe 
Chonyi  on the Modes of Mind and Mental Factors  
 
Lesson No: 28                Date: 2nd October 2012  
 
Root text:   A Necklace for Those of Clear Awareness Clearly Revealing the 
Modes of Minds and Mental Factors by Ye -she Gyeltsen , translated by Toh 
Sze Gee; January 2006 edition. Copyright: Toh Sze Gee & FPMT, Inc. 
September 2003.   
 
All page references refer to the root text, unless otherwise stated.  
 
Question s: (1) What is the difference between the mental f actor of 
haughtiness and the mind of rejoicing? (2) What is the meaning of 
“contaminated success ”? 
 
Answers : (1) Haug htiness is similar to pride , which is a puffing up of the 
mind. It is an obstacle  to developing good qualities  whereas rejoicing is a 
mind of liking that arises when one focuses, for example , on the virtues in 
one’s own mental continuum.  
 Rejoicing is a basis for acquiring or increasing one’s qualit ies and it can 
act as a support for developing respect .  
 Pride and haughtiness do  not have that function because the mind is 
puffed up.  
 
Haughtiness is a derivative of attachment . While rejoicing is not  
necessarily  a derivative of attachment , it is possible tha t  rejoicing can 
lead to attachment. When one does not know how to rejoice, it can be 
mixed with attachment and  when that happens, there is the danger that 
it will become haughtiness.  
 
Rejoicing is a mind of liking that arises and focuses  on one’s virtues, 
whereas haughtiness is a puffed up mind that focuses on one ’s attributes .   
When we rejoice in our virtues and qualities and our mind become s 
puffed up, then that is not right . Would that not become  haughtines s?  
 
When our rejoicing is involved with attachment and it leads to  the puffing 
up of one’s mind,  it would no  longer act as  a support for the generation 
and the increase of one’s g ood qualities , which is its purpose. It may 
become haughtiness  instead . 
 
(2) “Contaminated success ” refers to samsaric perfections or enjoyments .   
It refers to those desirable objects that promote or cause the generation of 
the afflictions.  
 
(10) Harmfulness  
 
Regarding harmfulness, the Compendium of Knowledge says:  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                               Second Basic Program – Module 2  
                                                                    The Study of Mind and Its Functions  
 
Lesson 28  
Page 2 of 11 QUESTION: What is harmfulness?  
RESPONSE: It is involved with anger. It is non -benevolence, non -compassion and non -mercy. It has 
the function of harming others.  
 
Just as it has been said above, it is a wish, bereft of benevolence, to harm sentient beings  (Pages 75 - 76). 
 
Next is an explanation of the  three words in the definition of harmfulness .  
 
 since it is a wish to harm by oneself, it is non-benevolence ,  
 since it is a wish to engage others in harming, it is non-compassion , and  
 since it is a rejoicing upon seeing or hearing others acting [to harm], it is non-mercy  (Page 76) .  
 
(11) Non-shame  
 
Regarding non -shame, the Compendium of Knowledge  says:  
 
QUESTION: What is non -shame?  
RESPONSE: It is a non -avoidance of misdeeds on account of oneself and is involved with 
attachment, hatred and ignorance. It has the function of assisting all [root] afflictions and secondary 
afflictions.  
 
Just as it has been said above, it is an awareness that does not avoid misdeed on account of either oneself or 
the Dharma. For example, if a fully -ordained monk encounters an intoxicant and avoids a misdeed on account 
of himself, thinking, "Drinking this intoxicant is not something I should do," then this is shame. The opposite of 
this is non -shame  (Page 76) . 
 
Non-shame is essentially the opposite of shame, the vi rtuous mental 
factor we had discussed earlier. Shame is an avoidance of misdeeds on 
account of oneself;  it is a mind that restrain s oneself from committing 
misdeeds on account of oneself. Non-shame i s the opposite of that.  
 
(12) Non-embarrassment  
 
Regarding non -embarrassment, the Compendium of Knowledge  says:  
 
QUESTION: What is non -embarrassment?  
RESPONSE: It is a non -avoidance of misdeeds on account of others and is involved with 
attachment, hatred and ignorance. It has the function of assisting all [root] afflictions and secondary 
afflictions.  
 
Just as it has been said above, it is an awareness that does not avoid faults on account of others. If one, 
when about to engage in a misd eed, avoids the misdeed on account of  others, thinking, "If the Teacher and 
the clairvoyant gods were to become displeased and I were to be despised by others, this would be unfitting," 
then this is embarrassment. The opposite of this is non -embarrassment  (Page 76) . 
 
(13) Lethargy  
 
Regarding lethargy, the Compendium of Knowledge  says:  
 
QUESTION: What is lethargy?  
RESPONSE: It is an unserviceability of mind and is involved with ignorance. It has the function of 
assisting all [root] affliction s and secondary afflictions.  
 
Just as it has been said above, it is a heaviness and an unserviceability of the body and mind and is a factor 
of ignorance. Moreover, the Precious Garland  (stanza 5.32ab) says:  
 
Lethargy is a state of inactivity  
Due to heavi ness of body and mind.  
 
The Explanation of the 'Treasury of Knowledge'  says:  
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                               Second Basic Program – Module 2  
                                                                    The Study of Mind and Its Functions  
 
Lesson 28  
Page 3 of 11 What is lethargy? It is a heaviness of the body and a heaviness of the mind. It is an unserviceability 
of the body and unserviceability of the mind.  
 
The Great Exposition of the Stages of the Path  also explains it in this way. Its function is specified as 
"assisting all [root] afflictions and secondary afflictions," because all afflictions will increase in dependence 
upon lethargy. In this vein, the Exhortation to the  Exceptional Resolve (Adhyasayasamcodanasutra ) says:  
 
Phlegm, wind, and bile  
Occur to a great extent in the bodies  
Of those who take joy in sleep and lethargy;  
Their constituents are in disorder.  
 
For those who take joy in lethargy and sleep,  
Their stomachs are unclean  due to a bad diet,  
Their bodies are heavy and their complexions unhealthy,  
Even their speech is slurred.  
 
And, 
 
Those who take joy in lethargy and sleep  
Are confused and their aspirations for the Dharma degenerate.  
The childish completely degenerate from all excellent qualities,  
Their wholesomeness degenerates, and they proceed to darkness  (Pages 77 – 78). 
 
(14) Excitement  
 
Regarding excitement, the Compendium of Knowledge  says:  
 
QUESTION: What is excitement?  
RESPONSE: It is an unpeacefulness  of mind that subsequently engages an attractive cause. It has 
the function of hindering calm -abiding.  
 
Just as it has been said above, i t is an awareness that, upon observing the attributes of the desire realm 
previously experienced, mentally scatters ou twards to them and engages them with craving. Regarding this, 
the Precious Garland  (stanza 5.32cd) says:  
 
Excitement is an  
Unpeacefulness of the body and mind  (Page 7 8). 
 
These points are taught i n the Great Exposition of the Stages of the Path : 
 
Its obj ect of observation is a pleasant and attractive object. Its [subjective] aspect is an 
unpeacefulness of the mind that is scattered outward and it is involved with attachment. Thus it 
engages its object with the aspect of craving. It has the function of hin dering the mind from abiding 
on the object of observation.  
 
QUALM: Are all outward scatterings of the mind excitement?  (Pages 78 – 79).  
 
The author does not believe this to be so. He says : 
 
Excitement is involved with attachment, but the mind is freq uently distracted to objects by way of afflictions 
other than attachment; the mind even scatters to non -afflicted virtuous objects of observation. Hence, not all 
scatterings of the mind are excitement  (Page 79) . 
 
Excitement is a derivative of attachment  and it obstructs  and hinders the 
mind from remaining focus sed on an object . As it says here, it functions 
to hinder  the development of calm-abiding.  Excitement is a mind that  is 
distracted  and is an outward scattering of the mind, i.e., the attention of 
the mind  is focus sed outward s towards an object .  
 
Mental scattering , on the other hand, can be virtuous, non-virtuous , or  
neutral . One’s mind may be scatter ed outwards  but the object is not 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                               Second Basic Program – Module 2  
                                                                    The Study of Mind and Its Functions  
 
Lesson 28  
Page 4 of 11 necessarily always a non -virtuous object . One’s mind can also focus on a 
virtuous object.  
 
 Since e xcitement is classified as a secondary affliction , therefore it is 
either non -virtuous or neutral.  
 In the case of mental scattering, the mind is scatter ed but it can be a 
virtuous, non-virtuous , or neutral mind.   
 
So w hat is the difference between excitement and scattering? There can 
be virtuous mental scattering but you will not be able to find virtuous 
excitement. Excitement is a scattering of the mind due to attach ment, 
whereas mental scattering does  not occur due to attachment  neces sarily. 
That being the case, probably we can say that excitement is necessarily 
mental scattering, whereas mental scattering  is not necessarily 
excitement . Perhaps we can say this . What do you think?  
 
(15) Non-faith  
 
Regarding non -faith, the Compendium of Knowledge  says:  
 
QUESTION: What is non -faith?  
RESPONSE: It is a non -conviction, non -clarity29, and non -wishing of the mind with respec t to 
virtuous phenomena, and is involved with ignorance. It has the function of acting as a support for 
laziness.  
 
Just as it has been said above, it is the discordant class of faith and is involved with ignorance  (Page 79) .  
 
When we look ed earlier at the mental factor of faith, we saw that there 
were three types of faith : clarifying or clear faith, the faith of conviction , 
and wishing or aspiring faith. Here non -faith is the opposite of th ese 
three.  
 
 For example , when you have a min d that is the opposite of clear faith, 
that is a mind that does not have a liking  for nor does it see the 
qualities of , say, the Three Jewels .  
 Then there is a mind that i s not convinced  about or does not believe  in 
reincarnation, the workings of karma, or the Three Jewels .  
 There is also a mind that does  not wish or aspire for liberation.  
 
Non-faith “is involved with  ignorance . It has the function of acting as a 
support for laziness. ” Because faith functions as a support for joyous 
perseverance, when you do  not have faith, i.e., you have non-faith 
instead , then you are not going to generate any joyous perseverance. 
When we don’t have joyous perseverance , this means we are lazy. The 
antidote  to non -faith is faith. So we have to try our best to develop faith.  
 
(16) Laziness  
 
Regarding laziness, the Compendium of K nowledge  says:  
 
QUESTION: What is laziness?  
RESPONSE: It is a non -enthusiasm of the mind engendered by the comfort of lying down, reclining 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                               Second Basic Program – Module 2  
                                                                    The Study of Mind and Its Functions  
 
Lesson 28  
Page 5 of 11 on one's side, and slouching about, and is involved with ignorance. It has the function of hindering 
application to  the class of virtue.  
 
Just as it has been said above, it is a non -enthusiasm of the mind for virtue due to a habit of lying down and 
so forth. Laziness causes the entire class of virtue to degenerate. The Close Placement of Mindfulness  
(Saddharmasmrtyupas thana ) says:  
 
The one basis for afflictions  
Is laziness. Who has it?  
Wherever laziness is present,  
All Dharma is absent  (Pages 79 – 80). 
 
Laziness is the opposite of joyous perseverance. Joyous perseverance is 
the antidote to laziness. Laziness is a mind t hat is un enthusiastic  about 
virtue. Joyous perseverance is a mind that is enthusiastic about virtue.  
 
In order for joyous perseverance to arise in our mind, first we must be 
convinced of the benefit of engag ing in virtue .  Regardless of the virtuous 
activity, you should always reflect on the benefits of engaging in that 
virtuous activity  and think  about the ripening effects of that virtue. In 
particular , you should think about the benefits of achieving liberation and 
enlightenment. When we see the benefits, we become enthusiastic  and 
would want  to engage in that virtue. That is how joyous persev erance 
arises. 
 
The key to generating joyous perseverance is developing faith. When there 
is no  faith, there can be no joyous perseverance. That is wh at is 
mentioned in the lam-rim. A major outline of the lam -rim is developing 
the faith of conviction in karma , which is the root of all happiness. 
Therefore developing this conviction in  the workings of karma is extremely 
important for generating joyous perseverance. With this faith of conviction 
in the workings of karma, we will be able to cause our virtue to increase.  
 
It is like th is in our every day life as well. Although we do  not call the effort 
we put in to our daily life, joyous perseverance, essentially the process is 
the same. Before we are willing to work hard towards achiev ing 
some thing , we first have to be convinced  of how beneficial it will be for us .  
Only then will we aspire to achieve that goal. With that aspiration  comes 
effort. We put in  the effort to achieve that goal . 
 
So joyous perseverance is important  and we need faith to be able to 
generate it. Without joyous perseverance we cannot turn away laziness.  
 
(17) Non-conscientiousness  
 
Regarding non -conscientiousness, the Compendium of Knowledge  says:  
 
QUESTION: What is non -conscientiousness?  
RESPONSE: Abiding with attachment, hatred, ignorance as well as laziness, it is a non -cultivation of 
virtuous qualities and non -guarding of the mind against contaminated phenomena. It h as the 
function of acting as a support for the increase of non -virtue and the decrease of virtue.  
 
Just as it has been said above, it is an awareness that, not guarding the mind against the hosts of afflictions 
and misdeeds, gives in to relaxation  (Page 80 ).  
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                               Second Basic Program – Module 2  
                                                                    The Study of Mind and Its Functions  
 
Lesson 28  
Page 6 of 11 Non-conscientiousness is the opposite of conscientiousness. It is 
mentioned in the teachings that we have to rely on conscientiousness all 
the time in order to guard our mind. Without conscientiousness, we will 
allow the afflictions to arise.  
 
(18) Forgetfulness  
 
Regarding forgetfulness, the Compendium of Knowledge  says:  
 
QUESTION: What is forgetfulness?  
RESPONSE: It is a mindfulness that is concomitant with afflictions. It has the function of act ing as a 
support for distraction.  
 
Just as it has been said above, it is a knower that is an unclear mind and forgetful with respect to virtue on 
account of mindfulness of an object of observation of afflictions. Similarly, A Discussion of the Five 
Aggrega tes also explains forgetfulness to be an afflicted mindfulness, whereby an unclear, forgetful, virtuous 
mind should be called "forgetfulness." However, since the objects of observation of afflictions – pleasant and 
unpleasant characteristics and so forth – do not arise as objects of awareness  [of such a virtuous mind], 
perhaps it should not be posited as forgetfulness. Forgetfulness acts as a support for distraction, because, in 
dependence on afflicted mindfulness, the mind will be distracted to an object o f observation of the afflictions  
(Page 81) . 
 
Forgetfulness is listed as a secondary affliction . Therefore we have to posit 
it to be a mind that is unclear  about virtue and a mind that forgets the 
virtuous object of observation. In this context here forgetfulness is a mind 
that is focus sed on a non -virtuous object of observation . Through that , it 
becomes unclear with regard to a virtuous object  of observation and 
subsequently forgets it.  
 
The fun ction of forgetfulness is that it acts as a support for distraction. In 
dependence on afflicted mindfulness, i.e., the mindfulness that is 
focus sed on a non -virtuous object of observation, the mind is distracted 
by and focuses on th at object . This afflicted mindfulness  acts as a 
condition for the mind to forget the virtuous object of observation.  
 
(19) Non-introspection  
 
Regarding non -introspection, t he Compendium of Knowledge  says:  
 
QUESTION: What is non -introspection?  
RESPONSE: A wisdom that is concomitant with afflictions and engages unknowingly in activities of 
body, speech, and mind. It has the function of acting as a support for infractions  (Pag e 81) . 
 
Infraction s are also translat ed as downfall s. In some commentar ies, non -
introspection is also said to act as a support for negativities, so  non-
introspection supports both negativities and dow nfalls.  
 
Just as it has been said above, it is an afflicted wisdom that engages unknowingly in activities of the three 
doors; it is the discordant class of introspection.  That this non -introspection acts as a support for infractions 
accords with what i s said in Engaging in  the Bodhisattva Deeds (stanza 5.26):  
 
Even though learned,  
Faithful and diligent in effort,  
Many become tainted by downfalls  
Due to the fault of lacking introspection  (Page 81) . 
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                               Second Basic Program – Module 2  
                                                                    The Study of Mind and Its Functions  
 
Lesson 28  
Page 7 of 11 Therefore in the teachings, we are advised to be vig ilant all the time . We 
have to cultivate introspection continuously. Without introspection, we 
will not be able to guard our body, speech , and mind against negativities , 
and we will not be able t o protect ourselves from committing downfalls, 
infraction of our vows, and so forth.  
 
(20) Distraction  
 
Regarding distraction, the Compendium of Knowledge  says:  
 
QUESTION: What is distraction?  
RESPONSE: It is a scattering of t he mind and is involved with attachment, hatred, and ignorance. It 
has the function of hindering separation from attachment.  
 
Just as it has been said above, it causes the mind to be distracted from its object of observation through the 
force of affliction s. A Discussion of the Five Aggregates  explains it as a scattering of the mind to the five 
attributes of the desire realm.  
 
QUALM: Is there no difference between this [distraction] and the excitement that was explained above?  
RESPONSE: Excitement  is a sca ttering to attractive objects previously familiarized with and is involved with 
attachment, whereas distraction  can be distracted to any object and be involved with all three poisons. Thus 
they are different  (Pages 81 – 82). 
 
When one is asked whether there  is a difference between excitement and 
distraction, one will have to say that they are different : 
 Excitement is involved with attachment  and due to that, the mind 
scatters outward s towards an attractive object.  
 Distraction  is not necessarily focus sed on an attractive object . One can 
be distracted due to attachment, anger, or ignorance, so it is not 
necessarily involved with attachment.  
 
Distraction here is classifi ed as a secondary affliction. In this case, 
distraction can be a derivative of ignorance, attachment , or anger.  
 
When distraction is divided, there are six:  
(1) distraction by way of its very entity  
(2) external di straction   
(3) internal distraction   
(4) distraction by way of signs   
(5) distraction by way of unfavorable states   
(6) distraction  by way of attention   
 
(1) Distraction by way of its very entity  is explained to be the five sense consciousnesses. The reason is 
that, at the time of being set in equipoise on meditative stabilization, if any of the five sense 
consciousnesses are generated, then [the mind] arises from meditative stabilization. Thus, they are 
called "outward distraction of the mind away from meditative st abilization " (Page 82).  
 
You can understand fr om this that concentration is not cultivated by the 
sense consciousness  but it is achieved by the mental consciousness. 
When the five sense consc iousnesses are generated, you will be 
distraction . You can not concentrate  when you are distracted.  
 
(2) External distraction is, when one is engaged in virtues of the three – listening,  contemplation and 
meditation – the outward sca ttering of the mind to the attributes of the desire realm without abiding in 
them [i.e., the virtues]; since it causes scattering to an erroneous object of observation without abiding 
on the virtuous object of observation, it is called such.  
(3) Internal distraction is laxity, excitement, and craving for the taste of meditative  absorption at the time 
of being set in equipoise on meditative stabilization. What is the reason for calling these "internal 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                               Second Basic Program – Module 2  
                                                                    The Study of Mind and Its Functions  
 
Lesson 28  
Page 8 of 11 distraction"? They are so -called because they are the mai n obstacles for cultivating meditative 
stabilization internally.  
(4) Distraction by way of signs  is to put effort in virtuous training with the thought, "How wonderful it would 
be if another person were to develop conviction in me, thinking, 'He has attained  a concentration '" 
(Page 82).   
 
This is  essentially being involved with the eight worldly dharmas.  
 
(5) Distraction by way of unfavorable states  is a puffing up of the mind conceiving I and mine when the 
feeling that one is engaging in virtue arises in dependence on the unfavorable states of the view of the 
transitory collection and pride  (Page 82) .  
 
Distraction by way of unfavo urable states is a puffing up of the mind . It is 
essentially pride.  
 
(6) Distraction by way of attention  is, for instance,  
 giving up the meditative absorption of the fourth concentration for  the meditative absorption of the 
third concentration or below, or  
 thinking, "Giving up engaging in the great vehicle, I shall abide in the lesser vehicle ."  
 
These types of distractions explained are taught to be general enumeration s of distraction but it is not definite 
that they are actual secondary afflictions ; the first is unspecified  and the last one is included within virtue  
(Pages 82 – 83). 
 
In this context, distraction is classified as a secondary affliction  and  
therefore it is afflicted . Having said that, among the types of distractions 
mentioned here, not all are non -virtuous  and afflicted : 
 The first is unspecified, i.e.,  it is not specified as virtuous or non -
virtuous.  
 The last one , distraction by way of attention , “is included  within virtue. ” 
 The distraction that is an actual secondary affliction is  the external 
distraction and the internal distraction. The text goes on to say, “those 
of keen in tellect need to analyze this in detail. ” 
 
[Discusssion of the category of secondary afflictions]  
In this way , these twenty  - from belligerence  up to distraction  - are called “secondary afflictions ” [Tibetan: nye 
nyon , literally, near -afflictions]  because they are near to or involved with the root afflictions. Furthermore, you 
should understand them individually – belligerence and resentment being near to anger, and being involved 
with it [anger] and so forth. Most of them are clear from the Knowledge  passages that have been previously 
cited  (Page 83) . 
 
The reasons why these are called the secondary afflictions is because 
these minds are close to and are derivative s of the root afflictions.  
 Belligerence, resentment, jealousy , and spite  are derivatives of anger.  
 Miserliness , deceit, dissimulation, haughtiness , and excitement are 
derivative s of attachment.  
 Concealment, lethargy, non -faith, and laziness  are derivatives of 
ignorance.  
 There are many others that are derivative s of or are involved with all 
three mental poisons, such as non-introspection, non -
conscientiousness , and so forth.  
 
We will finish this module on Thursday . We will cover the four changeable 
mental factors and then that is it. Next week is a break and you come 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                               Second Basic Program – Module 2  
                                                                    The Study of Mind and Its Functions  
 
Lesson 28  
Page 9 of 11 back for the exam s on Sunday, 14 October  at 3pm.  
 
Question:  On page 83, under distraction by way of attention , the second 
point is, “thinking, ‘Giving up engaging in the great vehicle, I shall abide 
in the lesser vehicle. ’" Even though  abiding in the lesser vehicle is 
virtuous, h ow would giving up the pledge  of the mind of enlightenment be 
virtuous? Is  that not a downfall?  
 
Answer:  The mind that gives up bodhicitta is not virtuous. But the mind 
that enters the Hinayana path is virtuo us. 
 
Student:  Do both these aspects come under “distraction by way of 
attention ” or does it only cover abiding in the lesser vehicle?  
 
Answer : I guess the main poi nt here is entering the Hinayana path . You 
enter the Hinayana path upon giving up the Mahayana  path. The 
emphasis seems to be on entering  the Hinayana path.  
 
Question : Lethargy  is said to be an unserviceability of the body as well as 
the mind . Since it is a mental factor , how is it  an unserviceability of the 
body?  
 
Answer:  Lethargy refers to the mind that makes you r body and mind  feel 
heavy  just as pliancy is a mind that makes the body and mind extremely 
serviceable for engaging in virtue . 
 
Question : Can Khen Rinpoche please explain the object s of observation of 
these 20 secondary afflictions that have not been clearly indicated i n the 
text or mentioned before in class ? 
 
Answer:  
(1)  Belligerence:  the object of observation would be 
the same as those for  anger, i.e., 
sentient beings, sufferings and 
sources of sufferings. I mentioned 
before that anger is the basis for 
belligerence that is an inflamed and 
stronger form of anger .  
(2) Resentment:  same objects as anger  
(3)  Concealment:  one’s faults and the faults of others  
(4)  Spite:  same objects as anger  
(5)  Jealousy:  the good qualities of others  
(6)  Miserliness:  one’s possessions and wealth  
(7 & 8)   Deceit & dissimulation:   any good qualities because by 
focusing on them, you act as if you 
possess them although you do not.  
 Now the question is can the deceit 
be in  relation to someone other 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                               Second Basic Program – Module 2  
                                                                    The Study of Mind and Its Functions  
 
Lesson 28  
Page 10 of 11 than oneself? For example, you 
may like someone and, acting out 
of deceit, although that person does 
not have any good qualities, you 
pretend that the person has good 
qualities.  
 
Whether it is dissimulation or 
deceit, they refer  to either hiding 
one’s own faults or pretending to 
have qualities that one does not 
have. Based on their definitions, 
they seem to relate more to oneself.  
 Deceit is pretending to have 
qualities that one does not have.  
 Dissimulation is hiding one’s 
faults and pretending not to have 
those faults.  
(9) Haughtiness:  one’s good health, prosperity, and 
so forth  
(10) Harmfulness:  sentient beings  
(11 & 12)  Non-shame & non -
embarrassment:  misdeeds  
(13) Lethargy:  perhaps you can posit many 
different kind s of objects. I am n ot 
sure you can point to one object of 
observation.  
(14)  Excitement:  pleasant and attractive objects  
(15) Non-faith:  same objects as faith  
(16) Laziness:  virtues  
(17) Non-conscientiousness:  virtues  
(18) Forgetfulness:  basis for deve loping afflictions  
(19) Non-introspection:  activities of one’s body, speech, and 
mind  
(20) Distraction:  any object  
 
 
Question s (1) Can you please clarify why the object s of observation for 
concealment , apart from one’s own faults , includes  the faults of others.  
(2) W ith regard to distraction , on page 8 3, for distraction by way of signs 
and distraction by way of unfavo urable  states, it was  not explained as to 
what these two types of distraction were.  
 
Answer s: (2) That is why the text says we have to analy se this in detail!    
 
(1) The text that we are using refers only to one’s own faults  and  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                               Second Basic Program – Module 2  
                                                                    The Study of Mind and Its Functions  
 
Lesson 28  
Page 11 of 11 misdeeds, but in some commentar ies, the misdeeds of others are also 
posited as the object of observation . So when we conceal the misdeeds of 
others, is it a fault ? Does it become concealment? This is what we have to 
think about : is it al l right to conceal the misdeeds of  others?  
 
Student : When we do  not conceal the faults of others , does that mean that 
we are exposing their faults? Under the four qualities that makes one a 
trainee -in-virtue  (Page 49 of root text) , it is said that even when one’s own 
faults are exposed, one does not expose the faults  of others .  
 
Khen Rinpoche : The question  is this: is it al l right to conceal the mistakes 
of others?  
 
Student : We can say yes because we are taught to only look at the 
qualities of others  and not at their faults . 
 
Khen Rinpoche : The four training s you mentioned are in the context of 
overcoming anger. When you are derided, you do not respond with 
derision out of anger. If your faults are exposed, you should  not expose 
the faults of others out of anger.  
 
The definition refers to when you try to hide your faults when another 
person , such as a virtuous friend , benig nly points them out to you . This 
shows the motivation —that there is a need to point out  or expose the 
faults,  without which you cannot confess or purify  them . But it has to be 
done with a benevolen t intention, the wish to benefit.   
 
When we retaliate or we point out the faults  of others out of anger , that is 
wrong. But I wonder if it is a fault or mistake to point out or expose the 
faults  of others with an intention to help and benefit. Perhaps there isn’t 
any fault in pointing out the fault s of someone if that is done with the 
intention to benefit.  
 
 
Translated by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme  
 
Transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek, Vivien Ng, and Patricia Lee  
 
Edited by Cecilia Tsong  
 