Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Lorig/Edited/BP2 M2 L12 (final).doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:53:49.825632
================================================================================


Transcript of teachings by Khen Rinpoche Geshe Chonyi

Lesson No: 12                       Date: 26th July 2012

During the course of studying or learning  this  topic,  the  mind  and  its
functions,  -Mind and Awareness- there may be are  times  when  you  do  not
understand the terminologies or  know  and  the  way  you  are  supposed  to
approach and look at this subject. topic.  If your mind  gets  very  uptight
because of not understanding the terminologies or their  meanings,   then  I
would say that that it is not right. At such a times, you must know  how  to
relax make the mind, making it  a little bit more open  and  ,  a  bit  more
expansive.  and a bit more relax.

In the course of studying this topic, Iit seems that there  are  people  who
are getting  stressed, -out and  got  upset,  and  unhappy  .  You  may  get
uptight and stress during in the process of  studying  of  tthis  topic  and
then becoming unhappy and upset. Then Iit is possible  that  you  will  then
start to entertain doubts and asking yourself, : “Why am I doing this?”  Why
should I be doing this?”

In the process  of  learning  anything  whatever  in  life,  when  you  feel
uptight,  then you must loosen up a bit. On the  other  hand,  when  if  you
become are too relaxed, then you need to tighten up a  bit.  This  not  only
applies to studying of Lorig but to  anything  whatever  you  may  study  in
life. This should be your approach.  is  how  you  should  approach  it.  My
purpose of saying this is  so  that  you  will  not  become  crazy  from  by
studying Lorig. If you think  that  you  will  definitely  become  crazy  by
studying this subject, then I will be the first one to become crazy!.

Khen Rinpoche spoke in English: My point is that there is no need to  become
worry. Simply Puput t effort into your to studies.

y. They always give a very good example all the time for  whatever  you  do.
You may know of this famous example:  when  you  play  the  guitar,  if  the
strings are  is too tight,   thenthen  the  sound  would  not  be  good  and
pleasing. On the other hand,  there is no  good  sound.  Another  danger  is
that when the strings are too tight, they mthe string may snap. break  down.
If the string too loose the sound doesn’t come nice and not pleasing. It  is
exactly the same with your studies when you are too relaxed or too  uptight.
study this topic. When you are too loosed then it is the same and  when  you
too tight then it is the same.

If you think you are getting too stressedtight, then relax loosen a  little.
bit. But iIf you think you are too relaxed, then you need to put  in  a  bit
more effort. tighten  a  little  bit.  Remember  the  above  example,  which
.applies  I mean this work forto  whatever that you do,  even  in  business.
Whatever it is, the example is the same. You shouldn’t be too hard tight  on
yourself. When that happens, tight, you must loosen up.

                             ******************

Establishing the existence of existents
Remember we had looked at an Aestablished base that  is  mutually  inclusive
with an existent in the t the beginning of this module.  we  looked  at  the
established base.
Established base is mutually inclusive with existent.
WThen what then is an existent?  It is that which is  observed  by  a  valid
cogniszer.
So  an  established  base  is  that  which  isis   established  by  a  valid
cogniszer.


That was what we hadve looked at in  the  beginning.  How  many  weeks  have
already passed since then? It has been at least aA couple of weeks,  right?.
 Now when you hear the same words again, is there  any  difference  in  your
understanding? At least now you have  some  idea.  s  and  Tthere  are  some
meaning generalities appearing in your  mind.  This  is  a  sign  of  having
learnt something.

Khen Rinpoche spoke in English: There is no other realisation. That  is  the
rRealiszation! . No other realization. That is the realization.

The definition of an existent is  :  that  which  is  observed  by  a  valid
cogniszer.
Essentially wIf you think about it, hat does that  meanwhat  essentially  it
is saying? What is it that that distinguishes between an existent  from  and
a non-existent and determines whether a phenomenon is an  existent  or  not?
What is that determines whether that is an existent or not?
When a If that particular phenomenon is observed or comprehended by a  valid
cogniszer, then tthat phenomenon is said to exist. ; Ootherwise it does  not
exist.
  there is no such thing.

“The definition of existent: that is Oobserved by a valid  cogniszer”:  here
. “oObserved” here means realiszed, i.e. it is that is realiszed by a  valid
cogniszer. Therefore, in order for it to  be  an  existent,  it  has  to  be
realiszed by a valid cogniszer.

The definition It does not say,  “appearing to  a  valid  cogniszer,”  i.e.,
just because the phenomenon appears to a valid cogniser,  iit does  not  n’t
mean that you can definitely say that it definitely something exists.   just
because it appears to  a  valid  cognizer.   As  I  have  mentioned  before,
whatever appears to your mind does not  mean  it  exists.  This  is  because
there can be all sorts of both  valid  and  invalid  appearances.   such  as
valid and invalid appearances.

The criterion for a phenomenon something to exist  is  that  that  there  is
being a valid cogniszer  realiszing  it.  If  there  is  a  valid  cogniszer
realiszing it, thate phenomenon is then that phenomenon is  said  to  exist.
It ; it is an existent. Otherwise, it is a non-existent. So  This  was  that
is established right from the very beginning.  and Yyou  have  to  be  clear
about with that.

When If the phenomenon is realiszed or comprehended by  a  valid  cogniszer,
that phenomenon exists. So Ffrom this you can see  that  a  valid  cogniszer
definitely has to exist.

Establishing the existence of valid cognisers
The next logical question is:  hHow do we know  whether  a  valid  cogniszer
exists or not?
Just as an existent is verified by a valid  cogniszer,  what  then  verifies
the existence of a valid cogniszer?

The sSelf-knower is posited to verify the existence of a valid cogniszer.  A
sSelf-knower is the mind that exists in one  collection  together  with  the
valid cogniszer that it is experiencing. The verifier of a  valid  cogniszer
cannot be verified by something that is of a different collection  from  the
valid cogniszer that is being it is verified. ying.

• What is it that verifiesd an  existent?  A  valid  cogniszer  verifies  an
  existent, so a valid cogniszer has to exist.
• What then verifies the existence of a How do we  know  a  valid  cogniszer
  exist? What is it that verified the existence of a valid cognizer?  It  is
  the self-knower, . Self-knower is the mind that exists in  one  collection
  together with the valid cogniszer that it is experiencing.

The verifier of a vself-knower  that  verifies  the  existence  of  a  valid
cognizser, which is the self-knower, cannot be another valid cognizser  that
is of a different collection from the valid cogniszer that it is  verifying.
 It is problematic iIf you  were  to  posit  say  it  is  a  separate  valid
cogniszer that verifying  the existence of another valid cogniszer. This  is
b, then it would be a problem because then you would then need another  mind
to verify this valid cogniszer.  and Tthere would be nis no end to this  and
it. This willyou will  incur the fallacy of infinite regressions.

This is one of the reasons why those who assert self-knowers arrive  at  the
conclusion that self-knowers exist. conclude the existence  of  self-knower.
Although the assertion of a self-knowers is not the final views nor do  they
exist in reality, or is not a reality  but  nevertheless  those  who  assert
self-knowers do so because of the abovesuch a reason.

Question: Student: Since For the Sutra  Schoolis  system,  it  asserts  that
external phenomenaon exist from their its own side, would that  not  mean  .
As it already existing there, would that entails  that  you  do  not  really
need a valid cogniszer to establish their  its  existence  validity  because
they are it is already inherently existing ent  exist  from  their  its  own
side?

Ven Gyurme: The qualm is: If something exists from its own side,  you  don’t
need a valid cognizer positing it.
AnswerKhen Rinpoche: This school does asserts external objects  but  whether
it is an external object or not, it  is  ultimately  dependent  on  a  valid
cogniszer to that posit the  external object.

QuestionStudent: If there are no valid cogniszers, will there  still   there
are stillbe existents?

Answer: Khen Rinpoche: No.

Question: Student: Setting aside the definition, how then  should  does  one
understand the meaning of tbeing hat it is already  establisestablished  hed
by itself, that it is self-established?………..

Answer: Khen Rinpoche: It is established because it is realiszed by a  valid
cogniszer. It is established to exist by way of its own characters.

Question: An eStudent: The external phenomenon on is established by itself?

Answer: Khen Rinpoche: In this system, every phenomenon  exists  by  way  of
its own characters. When If you think about long the definition,  then  that
is what it means is that but its existence has to  be  posited  by  a  valid
cogniszer.

Question:  Student:  With  regard  to  On  the   relationship   between   an
apprehender and  the  apprehended  and  the  aspect  of  the   &  aspect  of
apprehender and  the  aspect  of  the  apprehended,  f.  For  a  self-knower
experiencing the eye consciousness apprehending blue, :
bBlue is the apprehended and both the self-knower and the
Both self-knower  and  the  eye  consciousness  apprehending  blue  are  the
apprehenders because they are both since they are apprehending something.
May Can I say the following:?

1. The self-knower experiencing theis eye consciousness is  the  apprehender
   having the aspect of the apprehender.
2. The eye consciousness apprehending blue is  the  apprehender  having  the
   aspect of the apprehended?

Answer: Khen Rinpoche: If you  are  referring  to  the  apprehended  object,
then it is blue.

Question:  Student:  TThe  self-knower  experiences  an  eye   consciousness
apprehending blue. , Tthese two parts are of one  collection.  Within  these
two parts there are two apprehenders: (1) t:
   1. The self-knower self-knower and (2) t
   2. The eye consciousness apprehending blue.
   3.
The eye consciousness apprehending blue itself is an apprehender having  the
aspect of blue. T; therefore it is  an  apprehender  having  the  aspect  of
being generated into the aspect of the apprehended, the object  blue.   (the
object blue).
Can I say that it is the apprehender having the aspect of the apprehended?

Answer: Khen Rinpoche: If you are referring to just talking about  tthe  eye
consciousness apprehending blue, the eye consciousness is  the  apprehender.

This eye consciousness is generated into the aspect  of  blue.  It  has  the
aspect of the apprehended. Blue is the apprehended.

Question: Student: Can I just summarisze this into one  sentence:?   iIt  is
an apprehender generated into the aspect of the apprehended?.

Answer: Khen Rinpoche:  The  eye  consciousness  apprehending  blue  is  the
apprehender. In this context, the apprehended is the object blue. Then  Yyou
can say:
-the eye consciousness apprehending blue is generated  into  the  aspect  of
the apprehended.

Question: Student: Is it all right okay to say:  it  It  is  an  apprehender
generated into the aspect of the apprehended?

Answer: Khen Rinpoche: The meaning is fine but whether we can  say  it  like
that,  thenthat it is another question. I don’t think it is taught  in  such
a way.

Student: If that is the case, then there is no need to talk about the  self-
knower. There is also no need to say: itIt is an apprehender generated  into
the aspect of the apprehender.

Khen Rinpoche: Isf there such a need? The self-knower has the is  an  aspect
of the apprehender.

Question: Student 1: Is it not in itsItself is also an apprehender?

Answer: KR: In general,  when  we  talked  about  the  apprehended  and  the
apprehender, :the
aApprehended refers to the object and .
the aApprehender refers to the subject.
If it is an established base, it is necessarily an  object.  Therefore,  the
apprehended refers to the object.
Then Tthe apprehender, the consciousness or the subject,   it  is  also  the
the apprehended.  because the apprehended is the object.

In general, wWhen we talk about  the  apprehender  and  the  apprehended  in
general, we are referring to the talking about  the  two-fold  divisions  of
object and object possessor. rocessor.
The aApprehended refers to  the  object.  The  aApprehender  refers  to  the
subject, - consciousness.
When the subject,  – consciousness, - is divided, there is  the  self-knower
and the other-knower. it has:
Self-knower
Other-knower
This is a division of consciousness, ; not a division of the object.
• An eye consciousness apprehending blue would have  the  aspect  of  be  an
  aspect of the an apprehended.
• The self-knower experiencing an eye consciousness apprehending blue  would
  have the  be an aspect of the an apprehender.

Question: Student: If a tree fell there is falling tree in athe  forest  and
no one body hears the sound of thate tree  falling  tree,  does  that  sound
exists?

Answer: Khen Rinpoche: If there is no valid cogniszer realiszing  the  sound
of the tree falling, tree then you have to say that  the sound of  the  tree
falling tree does not exist.

What Who decides and how do we know whether a  phenomenon  something  exists
or not? How do we know something exists or not? Do you accept that for a  if
phenomenon to something exists,  it is dependsent on whether it is  verified
by there is a valid cogniszer verifying that phenomenon??

Khen Rinpoche spoke in English: You must either accept or  does  not  accept
this position. If you don’t accept it, you have to give a other  reason.  If
you accept that,  then is no problemquestion. The answer is  already  given.
done. If you don’t accept then………

Khen Rinpoche: Just because a tree fell all in  an  uninhabited  area  (i.e.
uninhabited by human being), it does not necessarily means that there  isn’t
any valid cogniszer not  realiszing  that  sound  because  there  are  ants,
worms, spirits, gods, and nagas around.  and I guess some  of  them  do  get
crushSome of them may even be crushed  by the tree!. VValid cogniszerss  are
not necessarily only present only  in the continuaum of human beings.

Khen Rinpoche spoke in English: Some of them may  be  are  valid  cogniszers
hearing ing the sound of the tree falling. You do not need human  beings  to
be there.  tree; doesn’t have to be human being there.

Student:  When If we do not tune in to  n’t  tune  in  the  radio  frequency
where we can hear a song,  that does not means the song  is  not  there.  In
fact the song is there all the while but i there. It is only when  until  we
have tuned in that then we can hear the song.

Khen Rinpoche: This sBtudent asically she is saying that  the  songund  does
exists regardless of whether there is a valid cogniszer  or  not.   I  would
have to  disagree.  The fact that you can talk about  frequency  means  that
there is a mind. The scientists have found out that there is frequency.

The first thing you have to get is this: the existence  of  an  existent  is
completely dependent on a valid  cogniszer  verifying  certifying  it.  Just
because there is an object out  thing  there,  does  it  mean  that  it  can
exists? How does it exist? If no one there is no one says  it  they  exists,
how does it  they exist?

In the first place, when  if there is no valid cognition, zer, how  can  you
even say that whether there is sound or there is no sound? Even to say  that
there is no sound, you also need a valid cogniszer.

Khen Rinpoche:  spoke in English: So, There  are  that  is  different  views
here. (This student) She says it is id not necessary ily  for  there  to  be
isa  valid cogniszer. I am saying there :  must be  a  valid  cogniszer.  So
You need to think about this.

Question: Student: A human being apprehends a glass of  water  as  water,  a
hungry ghost hell being apprehends it as pus and or  blood,   and  athe  god
apprehends it as nectar. Whose view  is  the  most  correct?  Are  they  all
mistaken?

Answer: Khen Rinpoche: We would  have  to  say  that  all  three  are  valid
cogniszers w. hen If we look at this e issue of  a  human  being,  a  hungry
ghost, and a god seeing a glass of  water  as  water,  pus  and  blood,  and
nectar respectively. :
 -a human being seeing a glass of fluid as water
 -a god seeing a glass of fluid as nectar
 -a hungry seeing a glass of fluid as pus

When If we look at this  it from  the  perspective  of  the  higher  tenets,
then it is easier to understand the reason and to accept . From  there,  you
can accept that all three are valid in their own way.

When you talk  about  this  it  from  the  perspective  of  the  MOS,  their
assertion is that everything is  in  the  nature  of  the  mind.  From  that
perspective, If you think about that, I think there is something to  it  can
be said say that these three are being valid cognisers.   because  they  are
in the nature of the mind.

When If you go to the highest school, the CMWS, where  they  assert  that  ,
everything is merely imputed by  the  mind,  then  (the  validity  of  these
three) at  is quite clear.

But when If yyou talk about the lower tenets, you need  to  analyse  whether
they assert that  all three are valid or not,  then  it  is  something  that
need to be analyzed.

These three different appearances are not said to exist just  because  there
are is such an appearances. Simply  i.e. just because something  appears  as
pus, that does not necessarily mean it is pus. The reason why the beings  of
these three different realms have these three different experiences  is  due
to the  because  of  their  respective  karma  that  they  have  accumulated
respectively, causing es them to have thoseat particular appearances.

Let’s say Ffoor r human beings, the fluid appears as water.   and  you  have
to say that It there is water there  because  it  is  established  by  their
karma, resulting in  this   and  the  karmic  appearance.   is  the  result.
Therefore that experience of water for human beings is valid.  If  you  were
to  say that it is innot valid,   then  the  entire  whole  presentation  of
cause and effect will falls apart.

It is the same as thinking of whether the sufferings of  the  hungry  ghosts
realm  and the hell realms do exist or not. These sufferings are said to  be
exist because there is the karma that is accumulated for such sufferings  to
occur. When If you do not consider n’t talk about the cause,  -the karma,  -
then how then are you going to posit the existence of such sufferings?

Anyway Iit is a complicated issue.  and Wwe have to think about it. When  If
we look at it from the view of the MOS view where  it  is  asserted  that  ,
everything is in the nature of the mind,  then tit is here is  something  to
think about.  because Ddue to the mind of a  specific  individual,  ’s  mind
there is a particular appearance arises. But when if we relate this  to  the
assertion of an external object that exists from its  own  side,   then  the
issue becomes it is a little bit difficult.

                               **************
Facsimiles of a Direct Perceiver
In the last class, session, we looked at a facsimile of a direct  perceiver,
basically a counterfeit direct perceiver. For a non-conceptual facsimile  of
a direct perceiver, there are causes of errors that which are  external  and
internal.
The four causes of errors are used to explain how non-conceptual  facsimiles
of a direct perceivers which which are sense consciousnesses are produced.

There are also non-conceptual facsimiles of a direct  perceiver  that  which
are mental consciousnesses. An illustration of  this  is  a  dream  elephant
appearing s asas  an elephant.

Our  appropriated  contaminated   physical   and   mental   aggregates,   in
particularly the contaminated physical body,  is   by  nature  uncleandirty,
but we instinctively apprehend it instinctively to be clean.  This  kind  of
mind is a mistaken mind.

Is the mind that apprehends the contaminated physical body  to  be  clean  a
valid cogniszer or a wrong consciousness?

In this world, Cconventionally speaking we say that  the  e  body  is  clean
once we have washed it. Due to that we apprehend the body to  be  is  clean.
Because of this such conventional designation that the body is  clean  after
one has taken a bath, is such a this mind a valid mind or a  mistaken  mind?

If you say that this is a mistakenwrong  consciousness,  how  does  it  come
about and what is its cause?

Similarly, in this world of ours, it is conventionally  accepted  that  when
if one is able to get a pleasant and desirable object,  one  will  be  bliss
out and happy. Is this mind that experiences happiness  the  bliss  a  valid
consciousness  or  a   mistaken  consciousness?   You   need   to   analyze.
Conventionally, it is accepted that when one get the desirable  object,  one
will be happy and regards this happiness as the perfect real  happiness.  Is
such mind a valid mind or a wrong consciousness?

When we saw someone yesterday and then we see the same person  again  today,
what we feel is that it is the same person. Based on  what  appears  to  us,
i.e., the shape and the colourr have that do  not  changed,  then  we  think
theat person of yesterday and the  person  of  today  is  exactly  the  same
person. Is this mind a valid mind or a wrong consciousness? This is  another
point for you thing to analyzse.

How do you feel when you see the same person on the  two  consecutive  days?
Do you feel that there are two different persons?  You will never ever  feel
that there are two different persons.

When we accept reincarnation, we accept that a person  movesing   from  life
to life. So Wwe have to posit that definitely there is  a  person  who  that
comesame  from athe previous life into  move on to  this  life  and  who  is
then going to move on to the next life. It is the same one person who  moves
from life to life.  and  Iit  cannot  be  a  different  person.  So  Iit  is
possible for us to conceive and believe that this person is permanent. ;  It
is the same unchanging person. It  and is not athe different person.

If you were to say that thesere are two different persons,  then   then  the
person who created the cause and the person who is experiencing  the  result
would be different. For us, it is definitely the same unchanging person  who
goes on from life to life. So  Wwe  have  to  analysze  on  whether  such  a
conception is correct or not.

Just as the non-conceptual facsimiles of a  direct  perceivers  that   which
are sense consciousnesses that are produced  in  dependence  upon  the  four
causes of errors, in the same way, to the four examples  that  which  I  had
brought up can be  related  to  ,  we  have  to  relate  them  to  the  four
attributes of the first nNoble tTruth,  - tTrue sSuffering: (1) i. The  four
attributes of True Suffering are:
   1. Impermanentce, (2) s
   2. Suffering orf misery, (3) e
   3. Empty,  and (4) s
   4. Selfless.

These four attributes of tTrue sSuffering  definitely  do  exist.  What  are
their opposites? Therey  are the conceptions holding on to the opposites  of
to these four attributes.  You need to understand how,   on  the  one  hand,
therey are mistaken  conceptions  and,   on  the  other  hand,   therey  are
conceptions that realisze reality as it is.

From this you can see that what all we have covered is  related  these  have
to do wwith our own practice. Therefore, it is  very  important  for  us  to
understand the difference between a valid  mind  and  a  mistaken  mindwrong
consciousness. It is through giving in to these  wrong  consciousnesses  and
believing  in  them  that  ,  we  encounter  are  led  into  problems,   and
sufferings,  and all the things that we don’t want in life.  It  is  through
following after the valid minds that we get happiness  as  its  the  result.
So it is extremely important to distinguish  between  a  valid  mind  and  a
wrong consciousness.

Subsequent Cognisers
We also talked about subsequent cognizer. The  definition  of  a  subsequent
cogniszer is a knower that which realiszes what has already been  realiszed.

It is not as simply knowing e as saying that it is the second moment  of  an
the eye consciousness apprehending a vase, or that the  first  moment  is  a
valid cogniszer and the subsequent moment is the subsequent cogniszer.  That
is not the main point.

The main point is that you have to familiarisze yourselfves  over  and  over
again with what you  have  already  understood  and  realiszed.   and  Tthat
process  of  familiariszation  has  to  be  continued  until  the  mind   is
transformed into a mind that has a very clear appearance of the object  that
it has already realiszed. In some cases, the mind is  transformed  into  the
entity of direct perception. This is what you have to  understand  from  the
definition of a subsequent cogniszer.
Correctly assuming consciousness
Then you have the A correctly assuming consciousness is  a  .   A  correctly
assuming consciousness is a factually concordant determinative  knower  that
which is convertible with regard to determining its object.
Is it sufficient just to have a correct belief or a correct assumption?  No,
, because whatever imprints that areis planted in the mind  due  to  from  a
correct  belief,  until  you  have  ascertained  the  object  by  completely
removing all doubts and superimpositions pertaining to it,  which you  think
and believe in it, although it may be true, the imprints  will  be  unit  is
not stable. It  and that is not a  realiszation.  You  cannot  be  satisfied
with that.

In order to be able to place very strong and stable imprints in  your  mind,
you have to work towards a valid cognition  of  the  object.  ascertain  the
object completely by having removed  all  the  doubts  and  superimpositions
pertaining to that object. When If you are able to do  that,  so  then  then
the imprints in your mind will be very stable.

So you cannot be satisfied with just that. You have to work towards a  valid
cognition of the object in question. Is this This  isnot   related  to  your
practice, isn’t it? WSo whatever practice you are  doing,  it  will  make  a
huge difference when if you  have  gained  complete  a  full  certainty  and
ascertainment after having removed  all  doubts  and  superimpositions.  The
practice will then come  naturally  without  the  need  for  someone  to  of
someone pushing you to  do  it.  This  is  because  of  you  haveing  gained
conviction and with certainty with regard to your practice.

Doubting consciousness
Next is doubting consciousness. A dDoubting consciousness is a  knower  that
which has qualms two-pointedly by its own power.  Can you imagine  that  you
are trying to do your practice with doubts in your mind? Nothing will  work.
It is an obstacle to your practice. When there are doubts, y and  you  won’t
don’t even get started on your practice. They are with doubt. It is  a  huge
obstacles to you entering the path.

A  dDoubting  consciousness  has  two  divisions:  :(1)  doubts   that   are
beneficial and (2) doubts that are not beneficial.
   1. Doubts that are beneficial
   2. Doubts that are not beneficial

Here we are talking about the doubting consciousness that is an obstacle  to
our practice and in generating the path. When  It  is  an  obstacle  to  our
practice. If we have doubtss right  from  the  very  beginning,   it  is  an
obstacle that prevents us from engaging in the path.  and  The  majority  of
us people are practiscing at this level. Our practice will go  nowhere  with
just  mmere  belief.  By   n   Noot   eliminating   all   our   doubts   and
superimpositions, there will be no ascertainment.  and Tthis will  not  lead
us to any realiszations.

So Hahaving a correctly assuming  consciousness  ption  alone  is  also  not
enough even though it is better than doubt. You have to transform your  mind
into a valid cognizser.  But  just  transforming  your  mind  into  a  valid
cogniszer is also not enough. You have to transform it into a  direct  valid
cogniszer so  that  you  can  directly  perceive  the  whatever  objects  in
question. With that kind of valid cognition, whatever practice you  do  will
becomes easy.  and Tthe quality will becomes very good.

Read up on the inferential valid cogniser in your  On  the  Hhandout  No.  7
dated 24 July 2012, read up on inferential valid  cognizer  particularly  on
tthe presentation of a correct reason and what constitutes a correct sign.

Student:  The impermanence of bBlue impermanence is not form. Therefore,  it
cannot be the appearing object of the eye consciousness apprehending form.

Ven Gyurme: The reason is not established.
Khen Rinpoche: If it appears to a direct perceiver,  it is  necessarily  the
appearing object.  It is in the Sunday discussion  questions.  No  one  body
ever said that if it appears to a sense direct  perceiver,   it  necessarily
has  to  be  a  visible  form.  Basically  Wwhatever  appears  to   an   eye
consciousness, it is not necessarily visible form but ;  all  the  qualities
that are in one collection  with  the  object.  Think  about  this:  iIf  it
appears to an eye consciousness, it is not necessarily visible form.


Translated by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme

Transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek, Vivien Ng and Patricia Lee

Edited by Cecilia Tsong

____________________________________________________________________________
_________
For reference:
Example: Eye consciousness apprehending blue.
Eye consciousness itself is an other-knower.
The consciousness which  experiences  that  eye  consciousness  is  a  self-
knower.
The blue which is the object of the eye consciousness apprehending  blue  is
the apprehended.
The eye consciousness itself is the apprehender.
The eye consciousness apprehending blue sees the aspect of  blue  is  called
that which has the aspect of the apprehended.
The consciousness, self-knower, which  experiences  that  eye  consciousness
sees the apprehender itself is called  that  which  has  the  aspect  of  an
apprehender.
