Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Lorig/Edited/BP2 M2 L16 (final).pdf
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:53:47.162326
================================================================================

Amitabha Buddhist Centre                               Second Basic Program – Module 2  
                                 The Study of Mind and Its Functions  
 
 
Lesson 16  
Page 1 of 8 Transcript of teachings by Khen Rinpoche Geshe 
Chonyi  
 
Lesson No: 16      Date:14th August 2012  
 
Question : You mentioned  that a mental direct perceiver for an ordinary 
being is an awareness to which an object appears but is not ascertaine d 
(AAA). Can there be mental direct perceivers that are valid cogni sers? 
 
Answer:  Not all mental direct perceivers in the continu a of ordinary 
beings are AAA s. The mental direct perceiver apprehending form in the 
continuum of an ordinary being , that is an AAA.  Are there mental direct 
valid cogni sers in the continuum of an ordinary being? Yes, it is possible.  
 
When menta l direct perceivers  are divided, there are:  
1. valid cogni sers that are mental direct perceiver s 
2. subsequent cogni sers  that are mental direct perceiver s 
3. AAAs that  are mental direct perceiver s 
 
The first moment of a clairvoyance in the mind of an ordinary being that 
knows another person ’s mind can be posited as a mental direct valid 
cogni ser. 
 
Question : When the consciousness apprehends an object, at which stage 
is it known as an appear ing object and at which stage is it known as an 
object of engagement?  
 
Answer:   For an eye consciousness apprehend ing blue: 
 when blue appear s to the eye consciousness apprehending it,  it 
become s the appearing object .  
 when the eye consciousness apprehending blue realises blue, blue 
become s the object of the mode of apprehension . 
 
Question:  According to the perspective of Sera Je College , there is no 
object of engagement for  a wrong consciousness.  Why  is this so ? What is 
the appearing object of this consciousness?  
 
Khen Rinpoche : I have already explained the reason for not p ositing an 
object of engagement for a wrong consciousness.  
 
Awareness to which an object appears but is not 
ascertained  
 
Question : In Handout No.  8 dated 7th August 2012, there is this passage  
following the definition of an AAA :  
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                               Second Basic Program – Module 2  
                                 The Study of Mind and Its Functions  
 
 
Lesson 16  
Page 2 of 8 However, one should know the manner in which not to posit as the definition of “something’s being  an 
awareness to which the object appears without being ascertained,” “that which is a common locus  of (1) 
having clear appearance of the  specifically characterized phenomenon which is its object and (2)  being 
unable to induce ascertainment with respect to the specifically characterized phenomenon  which is its object”  
(Page 3)  
 
Can you p lease explain this? 
 
Answer: According to the author, you should posit the definition of an 
AAA as a knower that is a common locus of:  
(1) having clear appearance of the specifically characteri sed phenomenon 
that i s its object of engagement and  
(2) being unable to induce ascertainment with respect to the specifically 
characteri sed phenomenon that i s its object of operation .1 
 
 
 
 The author is saying that you should not posit the definition  of an AAA  as 
a knower that is a common locus of  
(1) having clear appearance of the specifically chara cterised phenomenon 
that is its object  and  
(2) being unable to induce ascertainment with respect to the specifically 
characteri sed phenomenon that is its object . 
 
In other words, you have to say, “object of engagement ,” instead of simply  
“object ” in defining an AAA. In the definition of an AAA, if you only say, 
“having clear appearance of the specifically characteri sed phenomenon 
that is its object ,” that would incur the fallacy that an eye consciousness 
apprehending a blue snow mountain would be an AAA. That eye 
consciousness apprehending a blue snow mountain would fulfil  the 
definition of “having a clear appearance of the specifically characteri sed 
phenomenon that is its object ,” i.e., the definition that does not mention 
an obj ect of engagement.  
 
However since the definition of an AAA is , “a knower that is a common 
locus of (1) havin g clear appearance of the specifically characteri sed 
phenomenon that is its object of engagement  …,” this eliminate s the eye  
consciousness apprehending a blue snow mountain to be an AAA  as it is 
not an AAA.  
 
Having said this, you must figure out  how simply eliminating “object ”  
from the definition  and having “object of engagement ” in the  definition 
solve s the problem that we have just brought up.  
 
Based on the correct  definition of an AAA, is  an AAA a factually 
concordant or a factually discordant knower ? Is an AAA necessar ily a 
                                                           
1 Ven Gyurme: In the definition of an AAA,  jug.yul  in Tibetan appl ies to both an object of 
engagement and an object of operation but the author translate s it as “object of 
operation” in the second part of the defini tion. I believed the author is trying to bring 
something across.  
 
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                               Second Basic Program – Module 2  
                                 The Study of Mind and Its Functions  
 
 
Lesson 16  
Page 3 of 8 factually concordant knower?  
 
For example, when you are engrossed in an activity but you have a sense 
of something flying pas t you but you ar e unable to identify what it is , that 
is an AAA. Is that a factually concordant knower?  
 
In the handout , the illustration  of an AAA is a sense direct perceiver 
apprehending blue that induces the doubt  that wonders, “Did I see blue 
or not?” This is something for you to think about.  
 
Doubting consciousness  
 
The definition of a doubting consciousness  is: a knower that has qualms two -pointedy by its own 
power  (Page 4).   
 
In the definition, why  are the words,  “by its own power ,” included? This is  
because there is a main  mind  that is concomitant with doubt . In the 
retinue of this main mind  there are also other mental factors such as 
feeling, discrimination, and so forth.   
 
 The main mind that is concomitant with doubt is not doubt. There is a 
difference between a main mind and a mental factor . Doubt is a mental 
factor. It is concomitant with th e main mind  but t his main mind that is 
concomitant with doubt is not doubt. Why? Because i f it is doubt, it is 
necessarily a mental factor.  The main mind that is concomitant with the 
mental factor doubt has qualms two -pointedly but it does not have 
qualms two-pointedly by its own power. Therefore the main mind is not 
doubt.  
 
 How about those mental factors that are in the retinue of the main mind 
that is concomitant with doubt? Are they knowers that have qualms 
two-pointedly? Yes, but these mental factors al so do not have qualms 
two-pointedly by their own power.  
 
When doubting consciousnesses are divided there are three:  
 
 doubt tending toward the factual  
 
e.g. doubt which thinks that sound is probably impermanent  
 
 doubt tending toward the non -factual  
 
e.g. doubt  which thinks that sound is probably permanent  
 
 equal doubt  
 
e.g. doubt which wonders whether sound is permanent or impermanent  (Page 4) . 
 
The illustration for doubt tending toward the factual  is the doubt that 
thinks that sound is probably impermanent. In reality, sound is 
impermanent. Although there is doubt , that doubt is tending toward the 
factual in accordance with how sound exists.  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                               Second Basic Program – Module 2  
                                 The Study of Mind and Its Functions  
 
 
Lesson 16  
Page 4 of 8  
The illustration for doubt tending toward the non -factual  is the doubt 
that thinks that sound is probably permanent but , in reality , sound  is not 
permanent.  
 
Question:  It seems that doubt and doubting conscio usness are referring to 
the same entity. I remember Khen Rinpoche mention ing that the seven -
fold divisions of consciousness  refer to main mind s. If doubting 
consciousness is not a main mind but a mental factor , how do we 
reconcile  this? 
 
Khen Rinpoche : If that was said, it should not be the case.  
 
Question:  Among the seven consciousnesses, doubting consciousness is a 
mental factor and the other six co nsciousnesses are main mind s? 
 
Khen Rinpoche : We have to think about this. I s a direct perceiver  
necessarily a main mind? Is an inferential valid cogni ser a main mind? 
Going by its definition of being a new incontrovertible knower, free from 
conceptuality, which arises in d ependence upon a physical sense power 
that is its uncommon empowering condition , is a sense direct valid 
cogniser a main mind?  
 
In the retinue of this sense direct valid cogni ser, there is the mental factor 
of discrimination. Is this mental factor  of discr imination  necessarily a 
valid cogni ser? Is the mental factor of discrimination that is concomitant 
with the sense consciousness a sense consciousness  or not ? 
 
 
 In the seven -fold division s of consciousness , is doubt the only mental 
factor ? Are the remaining consciousnesses necessarily main minds?  
 
In general, “mind ” refer to a main mind ( tso sem). Mind ( sem), sentien ce 
(yid), and primary consciousness ( nam she)  are mutually inclusive.  They 
are all talking about a main mind.  Sometime s, primary consciousness is 
also translated as “perceiver. ” 
 
Having said that, there is definitely a difference between sentien ce and 
mental consciousness . In term s of possibilit ies, there are four possibilities 
between sentien ce and a mental consciousness : 
 
1. An eye perceiver (or eye primary consciousness) is a sentien ce because 
it is a main mind. It is not a mental consciousn ess because it is a 
sense consciousness.  
2. There is s omething that is a mental consciousness but is not 
sentien ce. For example, the mental factor of feeling  that is concomitant 
with a mental primary consciousness is a mental consciousness but is  
not sentien ce because it is a mental factor. Sentien ce is a main mind.  
3. Something that is both sentien ce and a mental consciousness is a 
mental primary consciousness. A mental primary consciousness is a 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                               Second Basic Program – Module 2  
                                 The Study of Mind and Its Functions  
 
 
Lesson 16  
Page 5 of 8 sentien ce, i.e., a main mind  and a mental consciousness.  
4. Something that is neither sentien ce nor a mental consciousness is the 
mental factor of feeling  that is concomitant with an eye primary 
consciousness. That mental factor of feeling is not sentien ce because it 
is a mental factor. It is not a mental consciousness because it is a 
sense consciousness.  
 
 In Tibetan, yid is usually translated as mental .  
 In this text , when yid appears on its own , it refers to a main mind  and  
is translated as sentien ce.  
 When i t is yid nam par she  pa, that refers to a mental primary 
consciousness . 
 
We do th is exercise of the four possibilities to show the ir difference s. 
 
Question:  Awareness, consciousness , and knower are mutually inclusive . 
Why is “mind” not included there?  
 
Answer:  When we say mind ( sem) it means the main mind . Therefore it is 
not mutually inclusive with awareness, consciousness , and knower.  
 
Question:  Does a scertain and reali se mean the same thing?   
 
Answer:  Yes. 
 
Question:  In the sequence of the eye consciousness apprehending blue  
follow ed by the mental direct perceiver and the conceptual consciousness 
apprehending blue , that conceptual consciousness is a subsequent 
cogni ser. But for an ordinary being, that mental direct perceiver is an 
AAA. It seems that this mental direct perceiver cannot reali se its object 
yet it can induce a subsequent cogni ser that realises somethi ng that has 
already been realised. 
 
Answer : A subsequent cogni ser is a knower that reali ses what has already 
been reali sed. It has to be induced by a valid cogni ser. The valid cogniser  
that induces the subsequent cogni ser is not the mental direct perceiver 
apprehending blue. It is the eye consciousness apprehending blue.  
 
Question : Is it necessary for the mental direct perceiver to be in the 
middle ? Why can’t the conceptual consciousness be induced by the eye 
consciousness directly without going through the mental direct perceiver?  
 
Answer:  This is what is said in the t ext. It is difficult for us to experience 
the mental direct perceiver because it last s for only the shortest moment  
of time . 
 
This mental direct perceiver apprehending form in the continuum of 
ordinary being is posited to be an AAA . Therefore  it cannot induce  the 
subsequent cogni ser. The s ubsequent cogni ser has to be induced by a 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                               Second Basic Program – Module 2  
                                 The Study of Mind and Its Functions  
 
 
Lesson 16  
Page 6 of 8 valid cogni ser. In this case, one has to posit the eye consciousness 
apprehending blue to be the valid cogni ser that induces the subsequent 
cogni ser. 
 
Question:  I refer to page 3 of Handout No. 8 dated 7th August. It reads:  
 
This is because a sense consciousness that sees snow mountains as blue sees as blue the white color of the 
snow mountains, which is its object of operation, and theref ore does not see clearly the specifically 
characterized phenomenon which is its object of operation. Still, since its appearing object, the white color of 
snow mountains, appears clearly as blue whereas it does not exist [as blue], there is clear appearanc e of the 
specifically characterized phenomenon which is its object. Also it is unable to induce ascertainment with 
respect to that because it engages that [object] perversely  . 
 
Can you p lease explain: “Still, since its appearing object, the white colo ur 
of snow mountains, appears clearly as blue whereas it does not exist [as 
blue], there is clear appearance of the specifically characteri sed 
phenomenon which is its object. Also it is unable to induce as certainment 
with respect to that because it engages that [object] perversely. ” 
 
Answer:  The definition of an AAA is having “clear appearance of the 
specifically characteri sed phenomenon that is its object of engagement  …” 
so you cannot posit a blue snow mountain. Is there a specifically 
characterised phenomenon such as a blue snow mountain ? It is al l right 
if you posit that to be a snow mountain or  a white  snow mountain.  
 
This is a bit complicated. When you posit a snow mountain or  a white 
snow mountain to be the appearing object, does the snow mountain 
appear as white?   
 
To the eye consciousness to which a blue snow mountain appear s, how 
does th at white snow mountain appear to the eye consciousness? Does 
the white snow mountain appear? We have to say that a white snow 
mountain  appears but the white snow mountain does not appear as 
white.  
 
There is a text that mention s that whatever appear s to a non-conceptual 
consciousness is posited to be its appearing object. If that is the case, 
there is nothing wrong in saying that the blue snow mountain  is the 
appearing object  of the consciousness to which the blue snow mountain 
appear s. The b lue snow mountain is the appearing object of the non-
conceptual consciousness to which a blue snow mountain appear s but , in 
general, the blue snow mountain is not an appearing object.  
 
Question:  During our lessons on special insight, it was said that in the 
first moment of reali sing the selflessness of perso ns directly , for such a 
person, nothing appears except emptiness . According to the Sutra School,  
in the first moment, what exactly appear s to the consciousness?  
 
Answer:  The yogic direct perceiver explicitly  realises the composed 
phenomen a, the aggregates , that are the base s of the selflessness of 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                               Second Basic Program – Module 2  
                                 The Study of Mind and Its Functions  
 
 
Lesson 16  
Page 7 of 8 persons . He implicitly  realises the selflessness of persons.  
 
Student:  So the composed phenomenon is its appea ring object and it does 
appear to such  a consciousness ? So such  a consciousness is realising two 
truths simultaneously ? 
 
Khen Rinpoche : I am not sure . I need to think  about this . 
 
Student:  So the appearing object is not the selflessness of pe rsons 
although the object of engagement  is the selflessness of persons . It seem s 
to me that this consciousness is like a mistaken consciousness in that it 
is mistaken with respect to its appe aring object  ...  
 
Khen Rinpoche:  What is wrong with having a composed phenomenon as 
the appearing object for this mind?  Whatever a mind reali ses, does the 
object necessar ily appear to it?  
 
When we talk about reali sation here, we are talking about explicit ly 
realising an d implicitly reali sing something. When the mind reali ses 
something, that something that is being realised need not be appearing to 
it. Following from this, you have to say that the selflessness of persons 
does not appear to the yogic direct perceiver apprehending it.  
 
Is the selflessness of persons realised by a yogic direct perceiver? Yes.  
 
Does the selflessness of persons appear  to the yogic direct perceiver 
apprehending it? No.  
 
Question:  When the forward pervasion is established , isn’t the counter 
pervasion necessarily established as well?  It seems to me that two modes 
are sufficien t for a correct sign to be established.  
 
Answer:  In general, i f the sign is present in the similar class , then it is 
definitely universally absent from the dissim ilar class. But we are talking 
about the three modes in relation to the person to whom we are trying to 
establish something. For th at person to whom we are positing the sign , it 
is not sufficient for  him to rea lise that the sign exist s only in the similar 
class. He may have reali sed that but he may still ha ve doubt s as to 
whether the sign is universally absent from the dissimilar class. He is not 
sure about that yet. For that reason, the correct sig n is that which  is the 
three modes.   
 
When we talk about the three modes and the correct sign, we are not 
talking so much about the sign itself. If the sign exist s in the similar 
class, the sign is definitely universally absent from the dissimilar class. 
Although that is the case, we are stating the reason in order to establish 
something. To the mind of the person to whom we are proving this , that 
person must have established the three modes.  
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                               Second Basic Program – Module 2  
                                 The Study of Mind and Its Functions  
 
 
Lesson 16  
Page 8 of 8 According to the position of Sera Je , there is a common locus  between a 
doubting consciousness and a wrong consciousness . An illustration  
would be a mind that thinks reincarnation most likely does not exist. That 
is a dou bt tending to ward the non-factual and is a wrong consciousness  
as it is a knower that engages its object erroneously.  What is being 
posited to be the object of th e mind  here? The object is reincarnation. This 
mind engages its object errone ously.  
 
However there are also those who assert that there isn’t a common locus 
between a  doubting consciousness and  a wrong consciousness , that  
they are contradictory  and are mutually exclusive  without any common 
locus between the m. Why? This is because a wrong consciousness is very 
decisive about what it believes , e.g., that reincarnation does not  exist 
whatsoever .  A doubting consciousness on the other hand is two -pointed; 
maybe it exists and maybe  it does not exist . 
 
So that is about it for the seven -fold divisions of consciousness. We will 
start mental factor s in the next class. It is easier to ha ndle mental factor s 
so please start reading the text.  
 
Question:  I refer to page 4 of Handout No. 2  dated 26 June. Can you 
please explain , “Whatever is an established base is necessarily the object  
of the mode of apprehension of both a conceptual and a non -conceptual 
consciousness. ” My example  is this : uncompounded space is a permanent 
phenomenon. How can a permanent phenomenon be an object of 
engagement of a non -conceptual consciousness?   
 
(Khen Rinpoche asks the student s to answer the question)  
 
Student ’s answer to question : For a yogic direct perceiver reali sing the 
selflessness of persons , the selflessness of persons is a permanent 
phenomenon but it is not the appearing object .  
 
Khen Rinpoche : Is there a valid cogni ser that directly reali ses uncomposed 
space?  
 
Student:  Yes.  
 
Khen Rinpoche : Then there is no problem. Uncomposed space is the object 
of the mode of apprehension of a non -conceptua l consciousness.  
 
Question : How are existent s and non -existent s regarded as selfless?  
 
Answer:   Non-existent s are not established as self.  
 
Translated by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme   
Transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek, Vivien Ng and Patricia Lee  
Edited by Cecilia Tsong  