Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Lorig/Edited/BP2 M2 L15 (final).pdf
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:53:50.412637
================================================================================

Amitabha Buddhist Centre                               Second Basic Program – Module 2  
                                 The Study of Mind and Its Functions  
 
 
Lesson 15  
Page 1 of 12 Transcript of teachings by Khen Rinpoche Geshe 
Chonyi  
 
Lesson No: 15      Date: 7th August 2012  
 
Question : To understand the forward pervasion, it is said that the sign 
and similar class must be equal in extent or the sign must be lesser in 
extent th an the similar class  (Page 5, Handout No. 7 dated 24 July 2012) .  
Therefore in the syllogism, the subject , sound , is an impermanent 
phenomenon because of being a product , product and impermanent 
phenomenon are equal in extent.  
 
If I look at phenomena that are mutually inclusive  with product , can I 
state the syllogism in this way: the subject, sound, is a functioning thing 
because of being an impermanent phenomenon ? Can I swop them a round  
because they are mutually inclusive and are equal in extent?  
 
Answer:  Yes you ca n. 
 
With regard to t he sign that is stated in the above syllogism, the extent of 
the pervasion between the sign and its similar class may be the same. 
Having said  that, it is not necessarily so. With regard to t he sign that is 
posited:  
 if the extent of its pervasion is (1) equal to or (2) lesser than the 
predicate to be proven, that is all right.  
 if the extent of its pervasion is greater  than the predicate to be proven , 
then that is incorrect. When the extent of the pervasion of the sign is 
greater  than the predicate to be proven , you cannot establish the 
forward pervasion.   
 
 
 For exampl e, the syllogism  is this : the subject , the sound of the conch , is 
impermanent  because it arises through human effort.  
 
If it is a result of human effort , it is necessarily impermanent, but 
whatever is impermanent is not necessar ily a result of human eff ort.  
 
In the syllogism that we have been  using, the subject, sound , is 
impermanent because of being a  product , the sign is an instance of 
product .  
 
Question : Is human effort referring  to the thought consciousness?  
 
Answer : You need effort to blow the conch shell to make the sound.  
 
Non-Valid Awarenesses  (Handout No. 8 dated 7th August 2012)  
 
Among the seven -fold division s of consciousness es, these five  – the 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                               Second Basic Program – Module 2  
                                 The Study of Mind and Its Functions  
 
 
Lesson 15  
Page 2 of 12 
subsequent cogni ser, correct ly assuming consciousness, awareness to 
which an object appears and is not ascertained, doubting consciousness, 
and wrong consciousness  - are  non-valid consciousnesses.  
 
Subsequent cogniser  
 
The definition of  a  subsequent cognizer  is: a knower that realises what has already been reali sed (Page 
1).  
 
The main thing to understand about this definition is not just that it is a 
mind that knows something that has alrea dy been reali sed. Rather the 
import of this definition is that whatever the subsequent cogni ser reali ses, 
it realises it through the force of the reali sation of a valid cogni ser in the 
first place . That is the  meaning . This is how yo u should understand th is 
definition. A subsequent cogni ser is a knower that realises what has 
already been reali sed by a valid cogni ser. Whatever a subsequent cogni ser 
knows, that knowledge is induced by the prior rea lisation of the object by 
a valid cogni ser 
 
There are three divisions of subsequent cogni sers:  
1. directly perceiving subsequent cogni ser 
2. conceptual subsequent cogni ser 
3. subsequent cogni ser that is neither of those two 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                               Second Basic Program – Module 2  
                                 The Study of Mind and Its Functions  
 
 
Lesson 15  
Page 3 of 12 A directly perceiving subsequent cogni ser has five divisions:  
 
- directly perceiving subsequent cogni ser that is a sense direct perceiver  
e.g. second moment of a sense direct perceiver apprehending blue  
- directly perceiving subsequent  cogni ser that is  a mental direct perceiver  
e.g. the second moment of a clairvoyance knowing another’s mind  
- directly perceiving subsequent cogni ser that is  a self-knowing direct perceiver  
e.g. the second moment of a self -knowing direct perceiver exper iencing an eye consciousness  
- directly perceiving subsequent cogni ser that is a yogic direct perceiver  
e.g. the second moment of an uninterrupted path of a path of seeing  
- directly perceiving subsequent cogni ser that is none of those four  
e.g. t he second  moment of a direct perceiver  (Page 1)  
Question:  Why is there a division of a “directly perceiving subsequent 
cogni ser that is none of th ose four ”? 
 
Answer:  If you were asked, “If it is a directly  perceiving subsequent 
cogni ser, is it necessarily one of those four? ” what will your answer be?  
 
Khen Rinpoche : Whether you r answer is “Yes” or “No,” you must  have 
confiden ce in your answer.  
  
You have to be confident and know why you are taking that position.   
There is something that is other than these four .  The illustration  given is 
the second moment of a direct perceiver .  
 
So if you were asked , “Is a second moment  of a direct perceiver  a directly 
perceiving subsequent cogniser that is a mental direct perceiver? ” what is 
your answer?   
 
Khen Rinpoche : Your mind must be active when I am asking  you.  
Otherwise there is no point in debat ing this because you won’t get anything  
out of it . You must have confidence in w hat you are saying .  
 
Question from Khen Rinpoche : Is a person a human being?  
 
(Students  answer: “No.”) 
 
Khen Rinpoche : Why “No”? If some one were to ask you , “Is a person a 
donkey?” remembering that person  refers not to a human being  but to all 
living beings , what will b e your answer? It will be, “N o,” right? If you were 
to say a person is a donkey, what is the problem  with that ?  
 
Student:  We will all be donkey s? 
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                               Second Basic Program – Module 2  
                                 The Study of Mind and Its Functions  
 
 
Lesson 15  
Page 4 of 12 Khen Rinpoche:  No, you cannot say that . That is not the logic. If a person  is 
a donkey , it does  not mean that you become a donkey . It is not like that . 
The logic doesn’t work that way.  
  
When you say, “A person is donkey ,” then you would have to say , “A 
person is a horse . A person is an elephan t.” That means that t here is 
something that is a common locus between an elephant and the donkey. It 
is not about you becom ing donkey .  You must get the idea .  
 
What is the problem when you say , “A person is  a donkey .” When y ou sa y 
“Yes,” immediately someone  will ask, “Is a person a horse ?” W hat are you 
to say then ? You cannot say , “No,” because you have already said , “Yes” 
earlier . Then some one asks “Is a person an elephant ?”  What can you say? 
A person  would then become everything.  
 
Question from Khen Rinpoche : Is the second moment of a direct perceiver 
a mental direct perceiver?  
 
Khen Rinpoche : No.  
 
If it is not  a ment al direct perceiver, it is also not a yogic direct perceiver . 
It is also not a self -knowing direct perceiver . It is also not a sense direct 
perceiver . But  it is a direct perceiver.  
 
The thing here is to use your brain s because when som eone debate s with 
you, you have  to be able to say something . You can’t say , for example, 
that it is a mental direct perceiver  because you will run into problem s. 
 
When you think about direct perceiver s, the second moment of a direct 
perceiver  has t o be one of th ese four: a directly perceiving subsequent 
cogniser that is  a sense direct perceiver, a mental direct perceiver, a self -
knowing direct perceiver , or a yogic direct perceiver . But during debate 
when some one states , “The subject, the second moment of a direct 
perceiver  …” what are you going to say?  
 
Khen Rinpoche : You can bring th e same  logic there . How are you going to 
answer  in debate?  
 
Earlier on we look ed at direct perceiver s that are divided into four 
divisions : sense direct perceiver s, mental direct perceiver s, self -knowing 
direct perceiver s, and yogic direct perceiver . Only four divisions are 
posited. Those are the four divisions of direct perceivers. If some one were 
to ask you , “Is there a direct perceiver that is none of these four? ” what 
would you say?  
 
Khen Rinpoche : Do you understand my question? If you don’t get  it, then I 
would have to explain every thing regarding direct perceiver s again. You all 
know these four  divisions .  
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                               Second Basic Program – Module 2  
                                 The Study of Mind and Its Functions  
 
 
Lesson 15  
Page 5 of 12 Now the question is: “If it is a direct perceiver, is it necessarily  one of 
these four  divisions ?” 
 
Student:  This category is just a generic term  describin g the class of direct 
perceiver s. A direct perceiver necessar ily has to be one of the four  
divisions , but at the same time , this generic class is none of the four  
divisions  because it cannot be any one of them.  
 
Khen Rinpoche : Yes. 
 
If a directly perceiving subsequent cogni ser is not necessarily one of the 
four direct perceivers, then what about the category of direct perceiver s 
itself? If it is a direct perceiver , is it necessar ily one of these four  
divisions ? That is a question to which you have to answer , “Yes” or “N o.” 
When there is n o answer , then there is no discussion and  no debate. It is 
only through debate that it becomes clearer, but you have to give an 
answer.   
 
A concept ual subsequent cogni ser has two divisions:  
 
- conceptual subsequent cogni ser that is induced by a direct perceiver   
 
e.g. a factually concordant ascertaining consciousness ascertaining blue that is induced by a sense 
direct perceiver apprehending blue  (Page 1).  
 
First you have a sense direct perceiver  ascertaining  blue and , 
subsequently , you have a remembering consciousness thinking of blue.  
  
- conceptual subsequent cogni ser that are induced by inferential cogni sers 
 
e.g. the second moment of an infe rential cogni ser realizing sound to be impermanent  (Page 1) . 
 
By depending on the sign , product, one generate s an inferential cogni ser 
realising sound to be impermanent . The first moment is a valid cogni ser. 
The second moment would be a conceptual subsequent cogni ser that, in 
this illustration, is induced by an inferential cogni ser. 
 
Is there a subsequent cogni ser that is neither a direct perceiver nor a 
conceptual consciousness? There is the third division: a s ubsequent 
cogni ser that is neither of those two.  Can you posit an illustration for a 
subsequent cogni ser that is neither a direct perceiver nor a conce ptual 
consciousness? An illustration would be  a subsequent cogni ser. 
 
If it is a conceptual subsequent cogni ser, is it necessar ily one of these 
two:  
1. something that is induced by a direct perceiver or  
2. something that is induced by an inferential cogn iser?  
If you think about it, the answer would probably be “No,” e.g., the 
subsequent cogni ser that is induced by a conceptual  subsequent 
cogni ser. In debate, you can say,  “A conceptual subsequent cogni ser 
itself”.  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                               Second Basic Program – Module 2  
                                 The Study of Mind and Its Functions  
 
 
Lesson 15  
Page 6 of 12 What we have brought  up here is a subsequent cogni ser that  is induced 
by a subsequent cogni ser and that is none of the two , i.e., induced by a 
direct perceiver or inferential cogniser . 
 
Question:  I refer to the sequence of the sense direct p erceiver 
apprehending an object followed by a mental direct perceiver  that lasts for 
the shortest moment of time , and then the conceptual consciousness 
realising the object . Can that conceptual consciousness reali sing the 
object be understood to be this conceptual subsequent cogni ser that is 
induced by a direct perceiver?  
 
Answer:  Yes. 
 
Question:  What do we mean by the term , “induced ,” in the  definition of 
the conceptual subsequent cogni ser that is induced by a direct  perceiver?  
 
Answer:  Why do we generate a remembering consciousness remembering 
blue? Because of having reali sed blue sometime in the past. Blue was 
realised by a valid cogni ser, so the valid cogn iser reali sing blue is the 
condition  that induce s one to remember blue.  
 
In order to remember something, does that something need to be reali sed 
by a valid cogni ser earlier? In the first place, without reali sing something 
by a valid cogni ser, is it possible to remember  it later o n? Is it possible to 
remember something that you did not reali se? 
 
Student:  Remembering the experience of the eye con sciousness 
apprehending two moons  which is a wrong consciousness .  
 
Khen Rinpoche : Would you remember two moons  or not in your life?  
 
Student : No, because there is no such thing as two moons.  
 
Khen Rinpoche : So you won’t  remember two moons in your life. It is n ot 
possible to remember two moon s. 
 
Student:  But I will remember the experience  of the appearance of two 
moons  although there is no such thing as two moons  in the sky.  
 
Khen Rinpoche : So you won’t remember  two moons , right? 
 
Student:  Yes. I cannot say that I will remember two moons , but I can 
remember the experience of seeing two moons . 
 
Khen Rinpoche : So you accept that you cannot remember the two moon s? 
 
Student : Yes, I probably would have to accept that . 
 
Khen Rinpoche : So what do you remember?  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                               Second Basic Program – Module 2  
                                 The Study of Mind and Its Functions  
 
 
Lesson 15  
Page 7 of 12 Student:  I can remember the appearance of seeing two moons. That would 
become a remembrance of an app earance of a non-existent. So this is an 
example of remembering something that is not reali sed by a direct 
perceiver, because there is no such thing as two moons.  
 
Khen Rinpoche : All right.  
 
I think i t is difficult to be able to remember something  if you have not 
realised it earlier with valid cognition . The Sutra S chool  asserts sel f-
knowers.  Why do they assert  self-knowers ? It is to account for memory , 
especially being able to remember the experience of having seen 
something .  
 
Why do we remember that earlier there was an eye consciousness  
apprehending blue ? Because  at that time  there was a self -knower 
experienc ing that eye consciousness apprehending blue. If you have not 
realised blue and you don’t know what blue is, it is not possible to 
remember blue. This is the assertion of most of the tenets up to the 
Autonomy Midd le Way School  (AMWS) . Without a prior reali sation of blue 
by a valid cogni ser, there is no way that you can remember blue later on.   
 
Why do we remember the experience of having seeing blue ? Why do we 
remember that earlier there was an eye consciousness apprehend ing 
blue? Because at that time , when the eye consciousness was 
apprehending blue, there was a self -know er experiencing that eye 
consciousness. That self-knower is a v alid cogni ser. Therefore , 
subsequently, it is possible for us to remember the experience of having 
seen blue , i.e., remember that the eye consciousness apprehend ed blue.  
 
But i t is p ossible to remember the app earance of two moons if you had 
had the experience of seeing two moons for whatever reason . Later on you 
can remember  that.  
 
Similarly  we do remember our dream s. For example, when you dream  of 
an elephant , later on you will remember you dream t of an elephant . You 
will remember th e appearance  of the elephant  in your dream .  A dream 
consci ousness is not a valid cogni ser. H owever  it is pos sible to remembe r 
what we dream t.  
 
It follows th en in order for a remembering consciousness to arise , it need 
not be preceded by a valid cogni ser. That being the case, there is no need 
for a self-knower.  
 
Khen Rinpoche : I think you may be more confused now ! 
 
Although there are many tenets assert ing self-knower s, they are not the 
ultimate tenet s. It is not reality. They have a reason for positing self-
knower s, but when you analy se their logic, you will find fault s with it.  
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                               Second Basic Program – Module 2  
                                 The Study of Mind and Its Functions  
 
 
Lesson 15  
Page 8 of 12 When we talk about reality , what exactly is it and what is it not. In 
general , how can  one remember something that one has not realised? 
That does not  happen . You cannot remember somethin g that you did not 
see or reali sed. Is it possible for someone who has never seen blue in his 
life to remember blue? From this you can see that it is very difficult to say 
that you can remember something without having realised it in the first 
place.  
 
According to the C onsequence Middle Way School  (CMWS) , if it is a 
dualistic mind, it is necessarily valid with respect to what appears to it.  
We are not saying that it is a valid cogni ser, but it is valid with respect to 
what appears to it.  
 
For this reason,  say, in a dream where there is an appearance of a dream 
elephant, although the dream consciousness is a wrong consciousness , 
because it is valid with respect to the appearance of a dream elephant , in 
that sense , it reali ses the dream elephant . Therefore , subsequently , it is 
possible to remember th e appearance of a dream elep hant. This is the 
position of the CMWS, the highest tenet.   
 
Do the AMWS , the Mind -only School, and the Sutra School assert the 
same  thing? That is something to be analy sed. 
 
Correctly assuming consciousness   
A correctly assuming conscio usness is either generated upon a reason or 
no reason  at all and it ha s five divisions :  
 
1. Correctly  assuming conscious ness that does not have a reason  
For e xample: someone say s, “Sound is impe rmanent”  without stating any 
reason. You hear this and think , “Yes, sound is impermanent ,” with out 
any reason whatsoever. This is a correctly assuming consciousness  that 
does not have a reason .   
 
2. Correctly assuming consc iousness that has a contradictory 
reason  
For e xample : you think that sound is impermanent  because it is not able 
to perform a function. This is a contradictory reason  but you do think ,  
“Sound is impermanent .” The reason is contradic tory because whatever is 
empty of being able to perform a function is necessar ily permanent , not 
impermanent.  
 
3. Correctly assuming consciousness for which the reason is 
indefinite [or lacks pervasion ] 
For e xample : you conclude that sound is impermanen t because sound is 
an object of comprehension. This is an indefinite reason because whatever 
is an object of comprehension is not necessarily impermanent.   
 
4. Correctly assuming consciousness for which the reason is not 
established.  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                               Second Basic Program – Module 2  
                                 The Study of Mind and Its Functions  
 
 
Lesson 15  
Page 9 of 12 For e xample : you genera te a thought thinking that sound is impermanent 
by depending on the sign of it being an object of apprehension by an eye 
consciousness. The reason is not established because you cannot 
establish th e sign on the subject.  
 
5. Correctly assuming consciousness for which a reason exists but 
is not settled  
Although product is the correct sign for establishing that sound is an 
impermanent phenomenon, in order  for product to be a correct sign for 
someone, he must have established the three modes . The sign must exist 
on the subject . The sign is necessarily the predicate to be proven . When 
all these conditions come together, only then he is ready to generate an 
inferential valid cogni ser. Although product is a correct sign in the proof 
that sound is  an impermanent phenomenon , if you state the correct sign 
to someone who has not yet ascertain ed that (1) sound is a product  and 
(2) that product is necessarily impermanent, then for him it has not 
become a correct sign.  
 
The r eason proving that sound is impermanent exists  but, until that 
person has reali sed the three modes in his mind , he has yet to generate 
an inferential cogni ser. Although in general it is a correct sign, for that 
person to whom yo u are trying to pro ve that sound is impermanent, it has  
not become a correct sign yet. Therefore  although it is a reason , it is a 
reason that has not been settled.  
 
Question:  In the Sutra School, can an ordinary being directly reali se 
imper manence?  
 
Answer : In the Sutra School , probably not, because to them the mind  that 
directly reali ses impermanence would be a yogic direct perceiver  that 
exists only in the continu a of Superiors.  
 
Question : The person to w hom t he syllogism  is directed : the subject , 
sound , is an impermanent phenom enon because of being a product , must 
realise that product is an impermanent phenomenon . Product  is an 
impermanent phenomenon because of something else. That would be an 
inferential valid cogni tion for an ordinary being , not a direct valid 
cognition, right?  
 
To the person  to whom you are trying to pro ve that sound is 
impermanent, that person must necessarily have the inferential cogni tion 
realising that product is necessarily impermanent . Can an ordinary 
person directly rea lise that product is impermanent?  
 
Answer:  In the context of talking about reali sing impermanence here, it is 
referring to subtle impermanence.  An ordinary being cannot realise subtle 
impermanence directly. Only a Superior can do t hat.  
 
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                               Second Basic Program – Module 2  
                                 The Study of Mind and Its Functions  
 
 
Lesson 15  
Page 10 of 12 Also a mental direct perceiver apprehending form in the continuum of an 
ordinary being is an AAA because it exists only for the shortest moment of 
time. If you say that a mental direct perceiver apprehending form realises 
its object, that would incur  the fallacy that an ordinary being  can realise 
subtle imperman ence. That would incur the fallacy that that ordinary 
being becomes a Superior. According to the Sutra School , only Superior s 
can directly reali se subtle impermanence.  
 
Question:  So in that syllogism even the sign is  also ascertained by 
inferential valid cogni tion? 
 
Answer : It is the same. An o rdinary being cannot directly  realise that 
product is impermanent . 
 
Question:  A functioning thing, manif est phenomenon , and so forth is 
explicitly reali sed by a direct valid cogni ser. In other word s, a permanent 
phenomenon is not explicitly reali sed by a direct perceiver . How then does 
a yogic direct perceiver realise emptiness which is a  permanent 
phenomenon?  
 
Answer : The yogic direct perceiver reali ses the selflessness of person s by 
explicitly realising the compositional factors that are devoid of a self of 
persons.  In dependence on that, it then implicitly re alises the selflessness 
of persons.  
 
We mentioned  before that whatever is a functioning thing is necessar ily 
the appearing object of a direct perceiver. Based on this, is the 
selflessness of person s the appearing object of a direct perceiver?  
 
The s elflessness of person s is a permanent  phenomenon . Does the 
selflessness of person s then appear  to a yogic direct perceiver? Because i t 
does not appear to a yogic direct perceiver ap prehending the selflessness 
of person s, therefore the selflessness of persons is not directly realised by 
a yogic direct perceiver .   
 
But i f you were asked, “ Does a yogic direct perceiver realise the 
selflessness of person s?” you probably have to say, “Yes.”   
 
A yogic direct perceiver reali ses the selflessness of person s.  
The yogic direct perceiver reali ses the selflessness of person s directly.  
The selflessness of persons is not directly realised by a yogic direct 
perceiver.   
 
The appearing object of a direct perceiver is necessarily a functioning 
thing. That being the c ase, i s the selflessness of person s the appearing 
object of a direct perce iver? We have to say , “No.”  
 
If some one were then to say, “The s elflessness of person s is the appearing 
object of a direct perceiver because the selflessness of person s is reali sed 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                               Second Basic Program – Module 2  
                                 The Study of Mind and Its Functions  
 
 
Lesson 15  
Page 11 of 12 directly by a yogic direct perceiver ” …  
 
Khen  Rinpoche : What are you going to say?  
 
The selflessness of person s is not the appearing object of a direct 
perceiver. But you accepted that the selflessness of person s is the 
appearing object of a direct perceiver because the se lflessness of a person 
is reali sed directly by a yogic direct perceiver . 
 
The s elflessness of person s is not the appearing object of a direct 
perceiver because there is  no direct perceiver that directly reali ses the 
selflessness of person s. 
 
Question:  What is the object of engagement of this yogic direct perceiver 
that reali ses the selflessness of person s?  
 
Answer:  The s elflessness of person s. 
 
With regard to the remaining consciousnesses  – the AAA, doubt, and 
wrong consciousness  – you can read up on them on you r own . I am not 
going through them. You can ask i f you have any questions . Otherwise I 
am no t going through them.  
 
We will start on the mental factors.  The 51 mental factors are easier  to 
deal with because they are straight forward .  
 
Khen Rinpoche : We will be introducing what are the 51 mental factor s, 
what is anger, what is attachment , and so forth . What we have covered so 
far is more complicated. The n ext one or two months  should be easier. I 
hope so.  
  
This subject has been challenging . Nevertheless you have  all tried. You 
are listening . You are thinking about it . You are studying . That is very 
good. From my side, it is quite difficult to teach this  but, because of your 
effort  of continuing to listen  and to learn , that gives me some 
encouragement .  
 
Those of you who had studied this  topic in the previous B asic Program,  
you are now studying this  for the  second time . I guess most of you are 
finding it relatively easier . The reason why it is e asier for the se students is 
because they have heard it before. For those of you who are hearing this 
for the second time, when I say this , I don’t have to say anything else . It is 
very obvious because it is your own experience .  
 
Perhaps for those of you who are hearing this for the first time , you may 
not understand what I am trying to say. It is a fact . It is the nature  of 
things that when you do something again and again, it become s easier.  
 
Khen Rinpoche : So, the new ones, make  sure this becomes  your subsequent 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                               Second Basic Program – Module 2  
                                 The Study of Mind and Its Functions  
 
 
Lesson 15  
Page 12 of 12 cogni tion next time ! 
 
Question : Can I say that the appearing object of a wrong consciousness is 
not necessarily an existent?  
 
Answer : Perhap s it may be al l right to say  something like th at.  
 
You remember when we were looking at the facsimile of a direct perceiver . 
The non -conceptual facsimiles of a direct perceiver that are sense 
consciousness es, those minds have a clear app earance of a non -existent.    
 
Non-conceptual wrong consciousness , non-conceptual facsimile of a 
direct perceiver  and consciousness that has a clear appearance of a non -
existence are mutually inclusive. So a non -conceptual wrong 
consciousness can have a c lear appearance of a non -existen t. 
 
Question:  The eye consciousness seeing one moon as two moons : is the  
appearing object of that eye consciousness (1) two mo ons or (2) the clear 
appearance of two moons?  
 
Answer:  If you accept that a wrong consciousness can have a clear 
appearance of a non-existent, you don’t have to say “appearance ” of two 
moons  because two moon s are non-existent.  
 
Is it all right then to posit two moons as the appearing object?  
 
Student:  Yes. 
 
Khen Rinpoche : Could be.  Whether you say two moons or appearance of 
two moons , it should be all right.  
 
You h ave to analy se whether you should posit one moon or not? To the 
consciousness where one moon appears as two moon s, does one moon 
appear ? Is one moon its appearing object?  
 
 
Translated by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme  
 
Transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek, Vivien Ng and Pa tricia Lee  
 
Edited by Cecilia Tsong  
 