Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Lorig/Edited/BP2 M2 L06 (final).pdf
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:53:47.865842
================================================================================

Amitabha Buddhist Centre                               Second Basic Program – Module 2  
                                The Study of Mind and Its Functions  
 
Lesson 6  
Page 1 of 9 Transcript of teachings by Khen Rinpoche Geshe 
Chonyi  
 
Lesson No: 6          Date: 5th July 2012  
 
In the section on calm -abiding (or meditative serenity ) in the Lam-Rim 
Chenmo , it says:  
 
When you seek your object of meditation, the basis upon which you 
first keep your attention, look for an excellent painting or sculpture 
of the Teacher’s body and view it again and again. Remembering its 
features, firmly familiarize yourself with the mental appearance of 
the object. Or, seek your object of meditation by re flecting upon the 
meaning of the eloquent descriptions of the Buddha’s form which 
you have heard from your guru and make this image appear in your 
mind. Furthermore, do not let the object of meditation have the 
aspect of a painting or sculpture; rather, le arn to have it appear in 
your mind with the aspect of an actual buddha  (Page 44, Volume 3) . 
 
“When you seek your object of meditation, the basis upon which you first 
keep your attention, look for an excellent painting or sculpture of the 
Teacher’s body and  view it again and again. ” When you are trying to focus 
on the Buddha either by looking at a painting or a sculpture  of him , you 
have to look at it repeatedly over and over again. By remembering his 
features, you have to firmly familiari se yourself with th e mental 
appearance of the object, i.e., you try to create an appearance of that 
object that you have chosen to focus on. This mental appearance is an 
appearance to the conceptual consciousness.  
 
When you are trying to meditate  on, say, an image of the Bud dha, what 
are you focusing on? It is the image that is appearing as the B uddha. You 
are holding on  to that image and meditat ing on it. You have to 
understand that when we say , “meditate ,” meditation is an activity of the 
mental consciousness . It is done wi th the mental consciousness and not 
the sense consciousness.  
 
In the beginning, we have to meditate on an image , an appearance of the 
object that we are focus sing on. One starts with a conceptual 
understanding by meditating with the conceptual consciousne ss, focusing 
on the appearance of the object that one has chosen. Then slowly there 
will come a time when one will be able to directly perceive the object.  
 
Therefore the conceptual consciousness (or conceptual thought) is very 
important. Meditation is do ne with the mental consciousness and initially 
with the conceptual consciousness.  In order to be able to do this, you first 
have to understand fully what is the appearing object  of a conceptual 
consciousness . 
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                               Second Basic Program – Module 2  
                                The Study of Mind and Its Functions  
 
Lesson 6  
Page 2 of 9 The text mentions, “remembering its features .” Having chosen a 
representation of the Buddha , you look at it  and you have to remember 
his features. From remembering  his features, you firmly familiari se 
yourself with the mental appearance of th at object. We are talking here 
about the way to meditate  that is done first with the conceptual 
consciousness. Without understanding how the conceptual consciousness 
works , what its appearing object  is, and so forth, it is not possible to 
understand thoroughly the lam -rim, the stages of the path to 
enlightenment.  
 
In order to have a full, complete , and correct understanding of the lam-
rim, one has to study various teachings just as we are doing here right 
now. Sometimes people think that the lam-rim is so much easier than 
what we are studying here. But when you start to look at  the lam -rim, the 
individual words and their meanings , one begins to reali se one actually 
doesn’t know anything  at all . 
 
Question : A subsequent cogniser can be either a conceptual  or a non-
conceptual consciousness. If it is a conceptual consci ousness, when you 
try to remember blue, there is a mental image of blue. Is that mental 
image of blue a permanent phenomenon?  
 
Answer:  Your main question  seems to be, “Is th at mental image a 
permanent or impermanent phenomenon ?” 
 
The appearance of blue to  the conceptual consciousness apprehending 
blue has two parts:  
1. the s pecifically characteri sed phenomenon  
2. the g enerally characteri sed phenomenon  
 
One Entity  but Different Isolates  
We ha d been looking at phenomena that are mutually inclusive with 
functioni ng thing s. A functioning thing is mutually inclusive with cause, 
effect, impermanent phenomena, composed phenomenon, ultimate truth, 
specifically characteri sed phenomenon , and so forth.  
 
All those phenomena that are mutually inclusive with a functioning t hing 
are one entity but different isolates.  Now may be the time to talk a little 
about the meaning of one entity but different isolates.  
 
How does a conceptual consciousness  (or conceptual thought) and term 
(or expressive sound) engage their object s? A conceptual consciousness 
and term engage  their objects through the process of elimination  whereas 
a direct perceiver engages its object in a collective manner .   
 
When object possessors are divided, there are  three : 
1. Person  
2. Awareness  
3. Expressive sound  (or term ) 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                               Second Basic Program – Module 2  
                                The Study of Mind and Its Functions  
 
Lesson 6  
Page 3 of 9 A product and an impermanent phenomenon are one entity but different 
isolates.  
 
There is a term expressing “product ”:   
 How does the term “product ” engage its object ?  The term “product ” 
eliminates everything that is  a non-product.  
 What is the opposite  of a non-product? The opposite of a non-
product is a product.  
 The conceptual thought apprehending product that is induced by 
the term “product ” engages product by eliminating non -product.  
 The conceptual thought reali ses product.  
 
To the conceptual thoug ht apprehending product that is induced by the 
term “product ,” a product appears as a product . Therefore the opposite 
from non-product also appear s.   
 
A conceptual thought  or a term engages its object in the same  way. The 
term or the expressive sound expr essing product expresses  (1) “product” 
and (2) that which is opposite from non -product. But  the term “product” 
does not express opposite from non-impermanent phenomenon.  
 
A product and an impermanent phenomenon are mutually inclusive. 
However, the term “product ” can only express product and it does not 
express impermanent phenomenon.  Because the term “product ” does not 
express impermanent phenomenon, therefore it also cannot express 
opposite from non-impermanent phenomenon.  
 
Many isolates on one basis  
Let us take a product as the basis. On that one basis  product, there can 
be many isolates : opposite from non-impermanent phenomenon, opposite 
from non-ultimate truth, opposite from non-composed phenomenon , and 
so forth. All these isolates exist on one basis, product.   
 
Because the term “opposite of non-product ” cannot express  the opposite 
from non-impermanent phenomenon, therefore these two isolates that 
exist on the one basis are different.  
 
A product is mutually inclusive with  an impermanent phenomen on, a 
composed phenomenon, an ultimate truth, a specifically characteri sed 
phenomenon , and so forth.  On the basis , product, there exist the isolates 
that are  opposite from non-impermanent phenomenon, opposite from 
non-composed phenomenon, opposite from n on-ultimat e truth, opposite  
from non-specifically characteri sed phenomenon , and so forth.  
 
 On the basis of a product, there exists the isolate the opposite from 
a non -impermanent phenomenon. Because of this isolate, it is also 
an impermanent phenomenon.  
 On the basis  of a product, there exists the isolate the opposite from 
a non -composed phenomenon. Because of this isolate, it is also a 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                               Second Basic Program – Module 2  
                                The Study of Mind and Its Functions  
 
Lesson 6  
Page 4 of 9 composed phenomenon.   
 
Term “ vase” and non -vase 
The term “vase” expresses vase  through:  
 eliminating that which is non -vase 
 also expr essing the opposite from non -vase 
 
The two appearances : (1) the appearance as a vase and (2) the appearance 
as opposite from non-vase are the reason s why the term “v ase” is used.  
 
The appearance of opposite from non-vase to the conceptual 
consciousness app rehending a vase has two parts:  
1. One part is the specifically characteri sed vase  
2. One part is the meaning generality of the vase that is a permanent 
phenomenon  
 
The basis of imputation  of a vase is  a flat-based bulbous thing . The term 
“vase” is imputed upon  such an object . What is the process of imputing 
the term “vase” to the flat-based bulbous thing ? It is through the 
appearance of the opposite from non-vase.  
 
To the conceptual consciousness apprehending a vase, th is appearance of 
opposite from non-vase is  the generality, vase.  
 
The difficulty we are facing now is because w e do not have the t ime to go 
through a subject called Collected Topics  that is the foundation for what 
we are covering here. Under Collected Topics , you study subjects such as 
the e stabli shed bases, cause s and effect s, the meaning of isolates and 
entities, one and different, generalities and instances , and so forth . Due to 
not having studied this, we are trying to gather information here and 
there and to summarise it. I t become s a little d ifficult.  
 
Generalities and Instances  
When we say , “A vase, ” a vase is a generality . 
 
When we say , “A golden vase, ” a golden vase is an instance of a vase. It 
refers to a specific vase.  
 
Just as a vase is a generality, the opposite from non-vase is also a  
generality. When it is the opposite from non-vase, it is necessarily  a vase 
and it is necessarily a functioning thing .  
 
The term “vase” expresses opposite from non -vase.  Opposite from non -
vase is a generality . That makes vase a generality. Oppo site from non-vase 
pervades a golden vase, a copper vase, and so forth. Likewise the 
appearance of opposite from non -vase engages all these as well.  
 
On every single instance of vase, i.e., on every specific vase, the vase 
generality that is the opposite from non -vase exists and the appearance of 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                               Second Basic Program – Module 2  
                                The Study of Mind and Its Functions  
 
Lesson 6  
Page 5 of 9 a vase that is opposite from non -vase exists and pervades the vase.  
 
When you first see a golden flat -based bulbous thing , you may not have 
any idea what it is. Then someone tell s you, “This is a vase.” At th at 
moment when  you hear the term “ vase,” it induces in you the thought 
apprehending that golden flat-based bulbous thing  as a vase.  
 
How d id that imputation of a vase arise in relation to that golden flat - 
based bulbous thing? It is through the appearance of that which  is 
opposite from a non-vase. With that vase generality as the object, you 
then impute a vase on that golden flat -based bulbous thing.  
 
Later on when you see a copper flat -based bulbous thing, immediately 
upon seeing th at object, the thought thinking , “This is a vase ” arises 
automatically. At this time no  one needs to tell you that the object is a 
vase. It cannot be that some one has to tell you , “This is a vase ,” every 
time you see a flat -based bulbous thing. You have to think about this: 
why is it that af ter you have been introduced to the golden flat -based 
bulbous thing as a vase , subsequently when you see a copper flat -based 
bulbous thing, you know i nnately that it is a vase?  
 
The term “vase” expresses vase. It also expresses opposite from non-vase. 
The opposite from non -vase is a vase generality. This vase generality 
exists on the copper flat -based bulbous thing , the copper vase. Therefore 
when you see the copper flat -based bulbous thing, you will be able to 
immediately conceive of it as a vase.  
 
The ter m “vase”:  
 eliminates everything that is non -vase 
 expresses the opposite from non -vase.  
 
The term “vase” expresses a vase generality . A vase generality is opposite 
from non -vase. This opposite from non -vase pervades all instances of 
vase.  
 
When we give the  term “vase” to a copper  flat-based bulbous thing, that 
term “vase” is eliminating everything that is non -vase and is expressing 
the opposite from non -vase.  
 
The o pposite from non -vase that is t he vase generality exists on the 
copper vase . The copper vase  is an instance of vase. W hen you see this 
copper flat -based bulbous thing, without thinking, immediately you can 
recogni se it and say that it is a vase , i.e., you conceive of it as vase.  
 
This is a complicated topic  and is also an area where non -Buddhist 
philosophers disagree with the Buddhist presentation. For us, term (or 
expressive sound) and conceptual consciousness are eliminative engagers, 
whereas some non -Buddhist philosophical traditions assert  that they are 
collective engagers.  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                               Second Basic Program – Module 2  
                                The Study of Mind and Its Functions  
 
Lesson 6  
Page 6 of 9  
Accordingly to Bu ddhist epistemology  and the text s on valid cognition, 
what allows you to understand something that is similar to what you have 
seen or known earlier, e.g., a vase, is due to the generality e xisting on all 
instances of th at object.  
 
When the factor of oppos ite from non -vase on a golden  vase and the factor 
of opposite from non -vase on a copper  vase appear to the conceptual 
consciousness, these two appear as if they were the same  thing, i.e., you 
see them as vase s. 
 
How does the appearance of opposite from non -vase appear to a 
conceptual consciousness apprehending a vase?  
 To a conceptual consciousness apprehending a vase, there is the 
appearance of opposite from non -vase.  
 To a conceptual consciousness apprehending a vase, this 
appearance of opposite from non -vase appears as if it is the actual 
vase. It is not a functioning thing .  
 The appearance as opposite from non -vase to the conceptual 
consciousness apprehending a vase is a permanent phenomenon  
because it is an imputed factor.  
 
However, to a conceptual cons ciousness apprehending a vase, whatever is 
an appearance as opposite from non -vase is not necessarily permanent.  
 
As mentioned earlier, to a conceptual consciousness apprehending a vase, 
there is the appearance of opposite from non -vase. This  appearance of 
opposite from non -vase has two  parts:  
(1) one is a generally characteri sed phenomenon  
(2) one is a specifically characteri sed phenomenon  
 
What is both (1) an appearance that is opposite from non -vase and (2) a 
specifically characteri sed phenomenon?  It is the opposite from non -vase, 
i.e., a vase.  
 
What is both (1) an appearance that is opposite from non -vase and (2) a 
generally characteri sed phenomenon? It is the meaning generality of a 
vase.  
 
How does a vase appear  to a conceptual consciousness apprehe nding  a 
vase? The meaning generality  of a vase appears to be one  mixed with the 
vase.  To a conceptual consciousness apprehending a vase, the 
appearance as opposite from non -vase appears as the actual vase. This is 
one of the reasons why we say a conceptual  consciousness is a mistaken 
consciousness.  
 
Why is a conceptual consciousness apprehending  a vase a mistaken 
consciousness? Because to a conceptual consciousness apprehending a 
vase, there is the appearance as opposite from non -vase.  This appearance 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                               Second Basic Program – Module 2  
                                The Study of Mind and Its Functions  
 
Lesson 6  
Page 7 of 9 as opposite from non -vase is  not the actual vase but it appears as the 
actual vase.  For this reason, we say that conceptual consciousnesses are 
mistaken  consciousnesses .   
 
To a conceptual consciousness apprehending a vase, the appearance of 
opposite from non -vase appears as if it is the actual vase, but the 
conceptual consciousness apprehending a vase does not believe that the 
appearance of opposite from non -vase to be the actual vase. It knows that 
this is not the actual vase.  
 
There are two things to note :  
 To a conceptual consciousness apprehending  a vase, there is the 
appearance of opposite from non -vase.  
 This appearance as opposite from non -vase appears as if it was the 
actual vase.  For this reason, we say that the conceptual 
consciousness apprehending a v ase is mistaken.  
 
Does the conceptual consciousness apprehending a vase believe  that this 
appearance of opposite from non -vase is the actual vase? No , it does not . 
 
What does the conceptual consciousness apprehending a vase 
apprehends? It apprehends a v ase. A conceptual consciousness 
apprehending vase does not apprehend a vase generality.  
 
What is posited to be the appearing object  of a conceptual 
consciousness apprehending a vase? It is t he meaning generality (or 
mental image) of a vase, i.e., the appear ance of opposite from non -vase.  
 
What is posited to be the object of engagement , the object of mode of 
apprehension,  and the determined object  for the conceptual 
consciousness apprehending a vase?  It is just  the vase.   
 
 How does a conceptual consciousne ss apprehending a vase 
apprehend the vase?  It can only apprehend a vase by way of the 
appearance of opposite from non -vase.  
 To a conceptual consciousness apprehending a vase, the vase 
appears as mixed with the appearance of opposite from non -vase.  
 But to  that conceptual consciousness apprehending a vase, the 
appearance of opposite from non -vase appears as well. How does it 
appear? The appearance as opposite from non -vase appears as if it 
was the actual vase.  
 To a conceptual consciousness apprehending vas e, there is the 
appearance of opposite from non -vase.  A conceptual consciousness 
apprehending a vase is a mistaken consciousness because to this 
conceptual  consciousness apprehending a vase, the appearance of 
opposite from non -vase appears  to be the actual  vase. Therefore it is  
a mistaken  consciousness .  
 
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                               Second Basic Program – Module 2  
                                The Study of Mind and Its Functions  
 
Lesson 6  
Page 8 of 9 Similarly the eye consciousness looking at your reflection in a mirror, the 
reflection of your face appears as if it was your face , but it is not your 
face. 
 
When your eye consciousness see s a reflection of your face in the mirror, 
what appears to the eye consciousness? It is your reflection. It looks as if 
you are in the mirror but you don’t believe that that is you. Although the 
reflection appears to be you, you would not normally apprehend and 
believe t hat it is you.  
 
Question:  (A student tries to clarify his understanding of a direct perceiver 
and a conceptual consciousness with reference to three examples: a 
shadow, a star , and a 3 -D picture ).  
 
Answer:  The examples you g ave are basically direct perce ption with the 
sense consciousness.  
 
One has to understand that there are different kind s of sense 
consciousnesses . Some are mistaken and some are non -mistaken sense 
consciousnesses.  
 
The way an object appears to a sense consciousness can vary:  
 sometimes  the difference comes from the side of the object  
 sometimes the difference comes from your vantage point , i.e., where 
you are viewing the object  from 
 sometimes the difference comes from problem s with one’s sensory 
powers  
 
Many things can appear to a sense consciousness but it doesn’t mean 
that whatever appears to a sense consciousness is necessar ily valid.  
 
An example given in the text is that when one is very upset, whatever one  
looks at with one’s eyes will a ppear as unpleasant. But it is not 
necessaril y like that. The unpleasant appearance  is not coming from the 
side of the object . Rather it is due to the mind being disturbed  that is 
affecting how you view things.  
 
Let us say something happens to your eye s or you apply pressure to your 
eyeball s for a s hort time. You may see two moons but th at appearance is 
invalid as there is only one moon.  
 
Question : When you see two moons, is that considered to be a direct 
perceiver or a conceptual consciousness?  
 
Answer:  It is a wrong consciousness and not a valid m ind. When you 
posit that the eye consciousness seeing two moons is valid, then you 
must find two moons outside because this is established by a valid 
cogni ser. 
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                               Second Basic Program – Module 2  
                                The Study of Mind and Its Functions  
 
Lesson 6  
Page 9 of 9 Question:  The conceptual consciousness apprehending a vase is a 
mistaken consciousness. Is it also a wrong consciousness?  
 
Answer : The conceptual consciousness apprehending a vase is a 
mistaken consciousness. That is correct, but that should not be confused 
with a wrong consciousness.   
 
If it is a mistaken consciousness, it is not necessar ily a wr ong 
consciousness , e.g., the inferential cogni ser apprehending a vase.  That is 
a mistaken consciousness but it is not a wrong consciousness. Why is it 
not a wrong consciousness? This is because it is a valid cogni ser.  
 
There are consciousness es that are mistaken with respect to their 
appearing object s but which can still realise its object s. 
 
Do you remember the definition of the facsimile of a direct perceiver  that 
is mutually inclusive with a mistaken consciousness ? A mistaken 
consciousness is so -called  because it is mistaken with regard to its 
appearing object .  
 
In preparation for class next Tuesday, please try to memorise  the seven -
fold division of consciousness es, what they are , and their definition s. I will 
try to clarify these seven consciousnesses  again with the help of some 
illustrations.  
 
 
 
 
Translated by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme  
 
Transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek, Vivien Ng and Patricia Lee  
 
Edited by Cecilia Tsong  