Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Lorig/Reference material/CollectedTopicsSummary_ILTK2005.pdf
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:53:40.348401
================================================================================

 
 
FPMT  BASIC PROGRAM  
Summary of   
 
Collected Topics 
(bsdus grva ) 
 
Adapted from  
Debate in Tibetan Buddhism  
by  
Daniel E Perdue 
 
Supplementary course material for  
Mind and Cognition   
from the Basic Program 
at  Istituto Lama Tzong Khapa, 2005 
   
 
Initially produced by Jampa Gedun for the Masters Program debate sessions 
Lightly edited for use in the Ba sic Program by BP Teaching Assi stants Ven. Olivier Rossi and 
Ven. Birgit Schweiberer 
 
© ILTK and Jampa Gendun, 1998 
 
FPMT Basic Program                       Mind and Cognition 
Istituto Lama Tzong Khapa, 2005                  Summary of Collected Topics 
 
  
1 COLLECTED TOPICS1 
DÜ DRA  
(bsdus grva )2 
 
HOMAGE TO THE LAMAS AND TO THE PROTECTOR MANJUSHRI  
 
 
COLORS AND SO FORTH3 
 
Form4 (gzugs ) - that which is suitable as form 
External Form  (phyi’i gzugs ) - that which is suitable as fo rm and not included within the 
continuum of a person  
Form Source  (gzugs kyi skye mched ) (visible form) - an object apprehended by an eye 
consciousness( mig shes kyi gzung bya ) 
 A. shape ( dbyibs ) - that which is suitable to be shown as a shape 
  1 long ( ring ba )    5 square ( lham pa ) 
  2 short ( thung ba )   6 round ( zlum po ) 
  3 high ( mtho ba )     7 level ( phya le ba ) 
  4 low ( dma’ ba )     8 non-level ( phya le ba ma yin pa ) 
 B. color ( kha dog ) - that which is suitable to be shown as a hue 
  1 primary color ( rtsa ba’i kha dog ) - that which is suitable to be shown as a 
     primary hue 
   a. blue ( sngon po ) 
   b. yellow ( ser po ) 
   c. white ( skar po ) 
   d. red ( dmar po ) 
  2 secondary color    a. cloud      e. illumination    b. smoke     f. darkness    c. dust      g. shadow    d. mist      h. sunlight  
Sound source  (sgrai skye mched ) (sound) - an object of heari ng of an ear consciousness ( rna 
shes kyi nyan bya ) 
 A. sound caused by elements conjoined with consciousness 
  1 articulate    a. pleasant, e.g., words teaching the doctrine 
                                                
 
1 Material from the Masters Program 1998-2004 
2 Most of the material presented here has been adapted from Daniel E Perdue’s Debate in Tibetan Buddhism  (Ithaca, 
N.Y.:, Snow Lion Pub., 1992) which takes as its main source Collected Topics: The Introductory Path of Reasoning  
by Purbujok Jampa Gyatso (1825-1901. The special sources of Collected Topics  are Dignaga’s Compendium of Valid 
Cognition , Dharmakirti’s Commentary on (Dinaga’s) ‘Com pendium of Valid Cognition’ , and Vashbandhu’s Treasury 
of Knowledge . 
3 The Collected Topics  is linked primarily to the Buddhist tenet system of the Proponents of Sutra Following Reasoning 
(rigs pa’i rjes su ‘brangs pa’i mdo sde par smra ba ). 
4 A third type of form in addition to the two listed here is material phenomena which are both internal and external, for 
instance, “the loci of the senses: the ey es, ears, and so forth. For example, the fleshy eye, not the sense power, is an 
internal form because of being a mate rial phenomenon which is included within the continuum of a person, and it is 
an external form because of being matter which is an object of others’ sense consci ousnesses.” Daniel E Perdue, 
Debate in Tibetan Buddhism  (Ithaca, N.Y.:, Snow Lion Pub., 1992) p. 191. 
FPMT Basic Program                       Mind and Cognition 
Istituto Lama Tzong Khapa, 2005                  Summary of Collected Topics 
 
  
2    b. unpleasant, e.g., the sound of harsh words 
  2 inarticulate    a. pleasant, e.g., the sound of snapping fingers    b. unpleasant, e.g., the sound of a fist on impact  B. sound caused by elements not conjoined with consciousness   1 articulate    a. pleasant, e.g., the words of doctrine taught by trees rustled by a Buddha’s        extraordinary powers    b. unpleasant, e.g., the words of scolding conveyed by trees rustled by a        Buddha’s extraordinary powers   2 inarticulate    a. pleasant, e.g., the sound of a gong    b. unpleasant, e.g., the sound of crashing stones  
Odor Source  (drii skye mched ) (sound) - an object experienced by a nose consciousness ( sna 
shes kyi myong bya ) 
 A. natural 
  1 fragrant, e.g., the odor of sandlewood   2 unfragrant, e.g., the odor of decaying flesh  B. Manufactured   1 fragrant, e.g., the odor of bread   2 unfragrant, e.g., the odor of formaldehyde  
Taste Source  (roi skye mched ) (taste) - an object experienced by the tongue consciousness 
(lce shs kyi myong bya ) 
 1 sweet ( mngar ba ), e.g., taste of honey 
 2 sour ( skyur ba ), e.g., taste of lemons 
 3 bitter ( kha ba ), e.g., taste of coffee 
 4 astringent ( bska ba ), e.g., taste of persimmons 
 5 pungent ( tsha ba ), e.g., taste of chilli peppers 
 6 salty ( lan tshva ba ), e.g., taste of sea water 
 
Tangible Object Source  (reg byai skye mched ) (tangible object) - an object experienced by a 
body consciousness ( lus shes kyi reg bya ) 
 A. tangible objects which are elements ( ‘byung bar gyur pa’i reg bya ) 
  1 earth ( sa) - that which is hard and obstructive ( rlan zhing gsher ba ) 
  2 water ( chu) - that which is wet and moistening ( rlan zhing gsher ba ) 
  3 fire ( me) - that which is hot and burning ( tsha zhing sreg pa ) 
  4 air or wind-energy ( rlung ) - that which is light and moving ( yang zhing g.yo  
     ba ) 
 B. tangible objects arisen from the elements ( ‘byung bar ‘gyur reg bya ) 
  1 smoothness ( ‘jam pa ) 
  2 roughness ( rtsub pa ) 
  3 heaviness ( lci ba ) 
  4 lightness ( yang ba ) 
  5 cold ( grang ba ) 
  6 hunger ( bkres pa ) 
  7 thirst ( skom pa ) 
 
Internal Form  (nang gi gzugs ) - that which is suitable as form and is included within the 
continuum of a person 
1 eye sense power ( mig gi dbang po ) - a clear internal form which is the uncommon 
FPMT Basic Program                       Mind and Cognition 
Istituto Lama Tzong Khapa, 2005                  Summary of Collected Topics 
 
  
3    empowering condition for its own effect, an eye consciousness 
2 ear sense power ( rna ba’i dbang po ) 
3 nose sense power ( sna’i dbang po ) 
4 tongue sense power ( lce’i dbang po ) 
5 body sense power ( lus kyi dbang po )5 
  
ESTABLISHED BASES 
The Division s of Selfless ( bdag med ) 
 1 non-existent  (med pa ): favorite examples are the horns of  a rabbit, child of a barren woman, 
sky flower, etc. An important example is the independent self of persons. 
 2 existent  (yod pa ) 
Existent and the Phenomena Mutually Inclusive With It 
Definienda  Definitions  
1 established base ( gshi grub ) that established by a valid cognizer ( tshad mas    
 grub pa ) 
2 object of knowledge ( shes bya ) that suitable to be an object of an awareness   
 ( blo’ yul du bya rung ba ) 
3 existent ( yod pa ) that observed by a valid cognizer (tshad mas  
 dmigs pa) 
4 phenomenon (chos) that which holds it own entity ( rang gi ngo bo’  
 dzin pa ) 
5 object of comprehension ( gzhal bya ) object realized by a valid cognizer ( tshad mas   
 rtogs par bya ba ) 
6 object ( yul) object realized by an awareness ( blos rig par bya ba ) 
7 object of comprehension of an  object realized by an omniscient consciousness 
omnisicient consciousness  8 hidden phenomenon ( lkog gyur ) object realized in a hidden manner by a thought 
 consciousness apprehending it 
The Divisions of Existent 
1 Permanent Phenomenon  (rtag pa ), e.g., uncomposed space - a mere absence of 
   obtructive contact, selflessness, generic image, true cessation, non-pillar, etc.  
2 Functioning Thing (dngos po ), e.g. pot - a bulbous flat-based phenomenon able to 
   perform the function of holding water, compassion, cat, etc. 
Permanent Phenomenon and the Phenomena Mutually Inclusive With It 
1 permanent phenomenon ( rtag pa ) common locus of a phenomenon and the non-
 momentary ( chos dang skad cig ma ma yin    
 pa’i gzhi mthun pa ) 
2 non-produced phenomenon ( ma bya   non-created phenomenon ( ma skyes pa’i chos ) 
   pa’i chos ) 
                                                 
5 In addition to the five external and five internal forms listed there is an eleventh, though not fully qualified, type of 
form, non-revelatory form ( rnam par rig byed ma yin pa’i gzus ), or form for the mental consciousness - that which is 
suitable as a form which appears only to a me ntal consciousness, and are phenomenon-sources ( chos kyi skye mched ), 
e.g., a single atom. 
FPMT Basic Program                       Mind and Cognition 
Istituto Lama Tzong Khapa, 2005                  Summary of Collected Topics 
 
  
4 3 uncomposed phenomenon ( ‘dus ma   non-disintegrating phenomenon ( mi ‘jig  
   byas kyi chos ) pa’i chos ) 
4 conventional truth ( kun rdzob bden ba ) phenomenon which is ultimately unable to   
 perform a function ( don dam par don byed mi   
 nus pa’i chos ) 
5 generally characterized phenomenon  phenomenon which is merely imputed by a term  
 ( spyi mtshan ) or thought consciousness and is not 
 established as a specifically characterized phenomenon 
Functioning Thing and the Phenomena Mutually Inclusive With It 
1 functioning thing ( dngos po ) that which is able to perform a function ( don   
 byed nus pa ) 
2 impermanent phenomenon ( mi tag pa ) momentary phenomenon ( skad cig ma ) 
3 product ( byas pa ) created phenomenon ( skyes pa ) 
4 composed phenomenon ( ‘dus byas ) disintegrating phenomenon ( ‘jig pa ) 
5 cause ( rgyu) producer ( skyed byed ) 
6 effect ( ‘bras bu ) object produced ( bskyed bya ) 
7 ultimate truth ( don dam bden pa ) phenomenon which is ultimately able to  perform   
 a function ( don dam par don byed nus pa’i chos ) 
8 specifically characterized phenomenon  a phenomenon which established by way of its     (rang mtshan ) own character without being merely imputed    
 by a term or thought consciousness 9 manifest phenomenon ( mngon gyur ) object explicitly realized by a direct valid 
 cognizer ( mngon sum gyi tshad mas ngos su  
 rtogs par bya ba ) 
The Divisions of Functioning Thing  
I  matter  - that which is atomically established ( bem po ), mutually inclusive with form   
   (gzugs ) - that which is suitable as form 
 A. external matter ( phyi’i bempo ) - that which is atomically established and not included  
  within the continuum of a person   1 form source   2 sound source   3 odor source   4 taste source   5 tangible object  B. internal matter ( nang gi bem po ) 
  1 eye sense power   2 ear sense power   3 nose sense power   4 tongue sense power   5 body sense power  
II  consciousness  (shes pa ) - that which is clear and knowing ( gsal zhing rig pa ),  mutually 
 inclusive with awareness ( blo) and knower ( rig pa ) 
 A. sense consciousness ( bdang shes ) - a knower that is produced in dependence on its  
  own uncommon empowering condition, a physical sense power 
FPMT Basic Program                       Mind and Cognition 
Istituto Lama Tzong Khapa, 2005                  Summary of Collected Topics 
 
  
5   1 eye consciousness ( mig shes ) - a knower that is produced in dependence on its  
     own uncommon empowering condition, the sense power, and an observed-object- 
     condition, a visible form   2 ear consciousness ( rna shes ) 
  3 nose consciousness ( sna shes ) 
  4 tongue consciousness ( lce shes ) 
  5 body consciousness ( lus shes )  
 B. mental consciousness ( yid shes ) - a knower that is produced in dependence on its  
  own uncommon empowering condition, a mental sense power 
-or divided another way- 
 A. mind ( sems ) 
 B. mental factor ( sems byung ) 
 
III  non-associated compositional factor  (ldan min ‘du byed ) - a composed phenomenon  
  which is neither matter nor consciousness 
 A. non-associated compositional factors which are persons (or, more exactly, any living   being)  B. non-associated compositional factors which are not persons, e.g., time, number,    order, collection, birth, aging, duration, impermanent phenomenon, and so forth 
Various other ways of dividing object of knowledge 
 1 object of knowledge of which being [them] is possible  (yin pa srid pa’i shes bya ) -  
    those observed as a common locus which is (1) an object of which being it exists and     (2) also is suitable as an object of awareness, e.g., pot, product and impermanent, etc. 
 2 object of knowledge of which being [them] is not possible (yin pa mi srid pa’i shes 
     bya ) - those observed as a common locus which is (1) an object of which being it does 
     not exist and (2) also is suitable as an object of awareness, e.g., form and  
     consciousness, pot and pillar, etc.  
 1 singular phenomenon  - a phenomenon which is not diverse ( so so ba ma yin pa’i  
    chos ), e.g., existent, person, etc. 
  one-with-pot  - a phenomenon which is not diverse from pot 
 2 different phenomena - phenomena which are diverse( so so ba’i chos ),  
    e.g., existent and object of knowledge, pot and pillar, etc.   different-from-pot  - a phenomenon which is diverse from pot 
  1 generally characterized phenomenon  (spyi mtshan ) - a phenomenon which is merely  
    imputed by a term or thought consciousness and is not established as a specifically 
    characterized phenomenon 
 2 specifically characterized phenomenon  (rang mtshan )- a phenomenon which  
    established by way of its own character without being merely imputed by a term or  
    thought consciousness  
 1 conventional truth  (kun rdzob bden ba ) - a phenomenon which is ultimately unable to 
    perform a function, mutually inclusive with permament phenomenon   2 ultimate truth  (don dam bden pa ) - a phenomenon which is ultimately able to perform  
    a function, mutually inclusive with functioning thing 
  
FPMT Basic Program                       Mind and Cognition 
Istituto Lama Tzong Khapa, 2005                  Summary of Collected Topics 
 
  
6 IDENTIFYING ISOLATES 
The meaning of pot’s isolate  (bum pa’i ldog pa ) - that which is reversed from not being one with 
pot (bum pa dang gcig ma yin pa las ldog pa) = non-non pot, ie., pot.  
 
Types of isolates (using functioing thing as a basis of illustration): 
 1 self-isolate ( rang ldog ), e.g., functioning thing 
 2 general-isolate ( spyi ldog ), mutually inclusive with self-isolate and isolate in gneral as 
    above, e.g.,funtioning thing 
 3 illustration-isolate ( zshi-dog ), e.g, pot, pillar, person, etc. 
 4 meaning-isolate ( don ldog ), e.g., that which is able to perform a function  
 
The phenomena coextensive (yin khyab mnyam ) with the isolate of functioning thing 
 1 one-with-functioning-thing ( dngos po dang gicg ) 
 2 functioning-thing-which-is-one-with-function-thing ( dngos po dang gcig tu gyur pa’i 
   dngos po ) 
 3 the definiendum of that which is able to perform a function ( don byed nus pa’i mtshon  
    bya ) 
 4 the triply qualified imputed existent of that which is able to perform a function ( don 
    byed nus pa’i btags yod chos gsum tshang ba ) 
 
The phenomena coextensive with the isolate of able-to-perform-a-function  
 1 one-with-able-to-perform-a-function( don byed nus pa dang gicg ) 
 2 able-to-perform-a-function which is one-with-able-to-perform-a-function ( don byed 
    nus pa dang gcig tu gyur pa’i don byed nus pa ) 
 3 the definition of functioning thing ( dngos po’i mtshan nyid ) 
 4 the triply qualified substantial existent of functioning thing ( dngos po’i rdzas yod chos 
    gsum tshang ba ) 
 The definition of definition : that which is a triply qualified s ubstantial existent. A definition is 
called a “substantial existent” ( rdzas yod ) because it is the actual object, the meaning or referent of 
its definiendum. The three qualities of a definition : 1) in general, it is a definition, 2) it is 
established with it illustrations, and 3) it does not de fine anything other than that which is its own 
definiendum. 
 
The definition of definiendum : that which is a triply qualified imputed existent. A definiendum is 
called an “imputed existent” ( btags yod ) because it is the name imputed to its definition. The three 
qualities of a definiendum : 1) in general, it is a definiendum, 2) it is established with it 
illustrations, and 3) it does not the definiendum of  anything other than just its own definition. 
FPMT Basic Program                       Mind and Cognition 
Istituto Lama Tzong Khapa, 2005                  Summary of Collected Topics 
 
  
7 OPPOSITE-FROM-BEING SOMETHING ( yin log ) 
and 
OPPOSITE-FROM-NOT-BEING-SOMETHING  (min log ) 
By way of example, whatever is opposite-from-being-functional-thing  is pervaded by not being  
functional thing , for example permanent phenomenon, existe nt, and the horns on a rabbit’s head, 
are each not functional thing. 
Another example, whatever is opposite-from-being-pot  is pervaded by not being  pot, for example 
dog, functional thing, and permanent phenomena, are each not pot. 
 
By way of example, whatever is opposite-from-not-being-functional-thing  is pervaded by being  
functional thing , for example dog, consciousness, and functional thing, are each functional thing. 
Another example, whatever is opposite-from-not-being-pot  is pervaded by being  pot, for example 
pot, gold pot, and new pot, are each pot. 
 
By way of example, whatever is opposite-from-being-opposite-from-being-functional-thing  is 
pervaded by being  functional thing , for example, dog, consciousness, and functional thing, are 
each functional thing. Another example, whatever is opposite-from-being-opposite-from-being-pot  is pervaded by 
being  pot, for example pot, gold pot, and new pot, are each pot. 
 By way of example, whatever is opposite-from-being-opposite-fr om-not-being-functional-thing  
is pervaded by not being  functional thing , for example permanent phenomenon, existent, and the 
horns on a rabbit’s head, are each not functional thing. Another example, whatever is opposite-from-being-opposite-from-not-being-pot  is pervaded by 
not being  pot, for example dog, functional thing, and permanent phenomena, are each not pot. 
 
THE INTRODUCTORY PRESENTATION OF CAUSES AND EFFECTS 
Causes and effects  
 The definition of cause  (rgyu): producer ( skyed byed ). 
 The definition of effect  (‘bras bu ): produced ( ksyed bya ). 
 Functional thing, cause, and effect are mutually inclusive. 
 
Direct and indirect causes 
 The definition of direct cause ( dngos rgyu ) of smoke : direct producer of smoke, e.g.,  fire. 
 The definition of indirect cause ( brgyud rgyu ) of smoke : indirect producer of smoke,  e.g., 
firewood. 
 
Direct and indirect effects  The definition of direct effect ( dngos ‘bras ) of firewood : that produced directly by  firewood, 
e.g., fire. 
 The definition of indirect effect ( brgyud ‘bras ) of firewood : that produced indirectly by 
 firewood, e.g., smoke. 
 
Substantial causes and cooperative conditions 
 The definition of substantial cause ( nyer len ) of clay pot : that which is a main producer  of 
clay pot as a continuation of its own substantial entity, e.g., the lump of clay that  produced the 
clay pot. 
 The definition of cooperative condition ( lhan cig byed rkyen ) of clay pot : that which is a  main 
producer of clay pot as a substantial entity which is not a continuation of its own  substantial 
entity, e.g., the potter who produced the clay pot. 
FPMT Basic Program                       Mind and Cognition 
Istituto Lama Tzong Khapa, 2005                  Summary of Collected Topics 
 
  
8 GENERALITIES AND INSTANCES 
 
Generalities and instances  
 The definition of generality ( spyi): a phenomenon that encompasses it manifestations,  e.g., 
object of knowledge is a generality of functional thing, pot is a generality of clay  pot, etc. 
 
 The definition of instance(bye brag) : a phenomenon which has a type engaging it as a  
pervader, e.g., functional thing is an instan ce of object of knowledge. Object of knowlege 
pervades funtional thing. An instance of an obj ect’s generality involves the establishment of 
three necessary qualities : 1) it is that phenomena, 2) it is related with that phenomenon as the 
same essence, and 3) many common locuses of not being it (that is, the instance) and also being 
that phenomenon are established. 
 
 When generality is divided terminologically : 
  1  Type-generality( rigs spyi ): a phenomenon which encompasses the many which have 
its type, e.g., object of knowledge is type-gen erality of pot, person, unconditioned space, etc. 
All phenomena, permanent and impermanent, are  included within the type  of objects which 
are object of knowledge  because they share the quality of be ing “that suitable to be an object 
of an awareness”. Generality and type-generality are mutually inclusive . 
 
    2 Meaning-generality ( don spyi ) of pot: that imputed factor which, although it is not a 
pot, appears to the thought apprehending a pot as  a pot. A meaning-generality of a pot is a 
mental construction of an image like a pot whic h mistakenly seems to be a pot to a thought 
consciousness, insofar as one understands a pot by the appearance of something which is not 
a pot. Not all meaning-generalities are generalities, for example, the two – the meaning-generality of pot that exists in one person’s continuum and the meaning-generality that 
exists in another person’s continuum (taken together), since there is no instance of them. 
Many common locuses between them and other phenomena are not established.  
     3 Collection-generality ( tshogs spyi ): a gross form which is a composite of its many 
parts, e.g., pot, pillar, etc. Not all collecti on-generalities are generalities, for example, the 
twopot and pillar (taken together) are not a genera lity since there is no instance of them. 
Many common locuses between them and other phenomena are not established.  
FPMT Basic Program                       Mind and Cognition 
Istituto Lama Tzong Khapa, 2005                  Summary of Collected Topics 
 
  
9 SUBSTANTIAL AND ISOLATE PHENOMENA 
1 substantial phenomenon that which is a common locus such that: 
 (rdzas chos ) 1 it is an established base 
  2 it is itself 
  3 non-it is not it   4 its isolate is not mutually exclusive with        substantial phenomenon  Illustrations: object of knowledge, functioning thing, consciousness, pot, pillar and so on  
2 isolate-phenomenon-which-is-itself  that which is a common locus such that: 
 (rang yin pa’i ldog chos ) 1 it is an established base 
  2 it is itself 
  3 non-it is it   4 its isolate is not mutually exclusive with        isolate-phenomenon-which-is-itself  Illustrations: definiendum, permanent phenomenon, one, generality, instance, that which    is without self, non-thing, different-from-pot and so on  
3 isolate-phenomenon-which-is-not-itself  that which is a common locus such that: 
 (rang ma yin pa’i ldog chos ) 1 it is an established base 
  2 it is not itself 
  3 not-it is not it   4 its isolate is not mutually exclusive with        isolate-phenomenon-which-is-not-itself  Illustrations: definition, different, the mutually exclusive, objects of knowledge of which    being them is not possible, one-with-pot, substantial phenomenon and so on  
4 isolate-phenomenon-of-the-third-type  that which is a common locus such that: 
 (ldog chos phung sum tsam po ba ) 1 it is an established base 
  2 it is not itself 
  3 non-it is it   4 its isolate is not mutually exclusive with        isolate-phenomenon-of-the-third-type  Illustrations: negative phenomenon, generality-of-functioning-thing, instance-of-   generality-of-pot, and so on  
5 similitude-of-substantial-phenomenon  that which is a common locus such that: 
 (rdzas chos kyi rjes mthun ) 1 it is an established base 
  2 it is itself 
  3 non-it is not it   4 its isolate is not mutually exclusive with        similitude-of-substantial-phenomenon  Illustrations: functioning-thing-which-is-an-isolate-phenomenon, that which is mutually  exclusive with substantial phenomenon, and so on  
6 similitude-of-isolate-phenomenon-  that which is a common locus such that: 
 which-is-itself  1 it is an established base 
 (rang yin pa’i ldog chos  2 it is itself 
 kyi rjes mthun ) 3 non-it is it 
FPMT Basic Program                       Mind and Cognition 
Istituto Lama Tzong Khapa, 2005                  Summary of Collected Topics 
 
  
10   4 its isolate is not mutually exclusive with     
   similitude-of-isolate-phenomenon-which-is-      itself  Illustrations: non-isolate-phenomenon-which-is-itself  
7 similitude-of-isolate-phenomenon-  that which is a common locus such that: 
 which-is-not-itself  1 it is an established base 
 (rang ma yin pa’i ldog chos  2 it is not itself 
 kyi rjes mthun ) 3 not-it is not it 
  4 its isolate is not mutually exclusive with     
   similitude-of-isolate-phenomenon-which-is-      not-itself  Illustrations: non-isolate-phenomenon-which-is-not-itself  
8 similitude-of-isolate-phenomenon-  that which is a common locus such that: 
 of-the-third type  1 it is an established base 
 (ldog chos phung sum tsam po  2 it is not itself 
 ba’i rjes mthun ) 3 non-it is it 
  4 its isolate is not mutually exclusive with     
   similitude-of-isolate-phenomenon-of-the-       third-type  Illustrations: isolate-phenomenon-of-the-third-type   
May Goodness and Virtue Increase 
 
 