Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Lorig/Handout/H1_An Introduction to Buddhist philosophy.pdf
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:53:56.157586
================================================================================

FPMT Basic Program Module 2 -The Study of Mind & its Functions
1AN INTRODUCTION TO CERTAIN BUDDHIST PHILOSOPHICAL CONCEPTS
There are four Buddhist tenet systems in ascending order :
-TheGreat Exposition School / Vaibhas hika
-TheSutra School / Sauntrantika (divided into those following scripture and those following
reasoning)
-TheMind-only school / Cittamatra
-TheMiddle Way school / Madhyamika (divided into the Autonomy Middle Way school and
the Consequen ceMiddle Way school)
Thefollowing presentation is from the viewpoint of the Proponents of Sutra Following Reas oning.
ESTABLISHED BASES
The broadest possible category, including all existents and non -existents as well, is that of the selfless.
All Buddhist tenet systems assert selflessness as the main principle of their philosophies. What is
selfless is empty of or lacks a certain type of self. A fundamental assertion in Buddhism is that only
through understanding selflessness, or emptiness, can one gain liberation and thereby be relieved of
powerless rebirth.
Existent
Selfless
Non-existent
Inorder to understand selflessness, it is necessary to understand the phenomena that are the bases
of selflessness. Therefore, in the beginning, students are taught what exists and how one can know
those existents.
Established base is mutually inclusive wit h:
-object of knowledge
-existent
-phenomenon
-object of comprehension
-object
-object of comprehension of an omniscient consciousness
-hidden phenomenon
FPMT Basic Program Module 2 -The Study of Mind & its Functions
2Also, established base is mutually inclusive with its own definition as well as with the definitions of
thephenomena mutually inclusive with it.
Table: Established Base and the phenomena mutually inclusive with it
Definienda Definitions
1.Established Base Established by a valid cognizer
2. Object of knowledge Suitable as an object of an awareness
3. Existent Observed by a valid cognizer
4. Phenomenon That which holds its own entity
5. Object of comprehension Object realized by a valid cognizer
6. Object Object known by an awareness
7. Object of comprehension of an
omniscient consciousnessObject real ized by omniscient consciousness
8. Hidden phenomenon Object realized in a hidden manner by a thought consciousness
apprehending it
There are many divisions of established bases and the phenomena mutually inclusive with it but the
chief of these is the exhaustive division of established bases intopermanent phenomena and
functioning things .
Functioning thingsor simply, things are impermanent phenomena which are produced, abide, and
disintegrate moment by moment. On the other hand, permanent phenomena i n this system, are not
necessarily eternal but are those existents which are not momentary in the sense that they do not
disintegrate moment by moment.
Functioning thing
A thing is defined as: that which is able to perform a function
The main function o r the main object produced by a functioning thing is an effect which is the
substantial continuum of that functioning thing itself in the next moment. Thus, functioning things
principally perform the function of producing effects. Only such things, imperma nent phenomena, are
produced by their causes and conditions, abide for a single moment, and disintegrate only to be re -
produced in the next moment. The main or substantial cause of the table of this moment is the table
of the former moment which has produc ed a type similar to but not the same as itself. Reflecting this
nature of functioning things, the phenomena mutually inclusive with it include:
-functioning thing
-impermanent phenomenon
-product
-composed phenomenon
-cause
-effect
-ultimate truth
FPMT Basic Program Module 2 -The Study of Mind & its Functions
3-specifically characterized phenomenon
-manifest phenomenon
Table: Functioning thing and the phenomena mutually inclusive with it
Definienda Definitions
1. Functioning thing That which is able to perform a function
2.Impermanent phenomenon Momentary phenomenon
3.Product Created phenomenon
4.Composed p henomenon Disintegrating phenomenon
5.Cause Producer
6.Effect Object produced
7.Ultimate truth Phenomenon which is ultimately able to perform a function
8. Specifically characterized
phenomenonA phenomena whi ch is established by way of its own character
without being merely imputed by a term or thought
consciousness
9. Manifest phenomenon Object explicitly realized by a direct valid cognizer
FPMT Basic Program Module 2 -The Study of Mind & its Functions
4The Divisions of Functioning Thing
Matter Consciousness Non-associated compositional factor
Definition :That which is atomically
established
-mutually inclusive with form
A.External matter :that which is
atomically established and not included
within the continuum of a pe rson
1.Form source
2.Sound source
3.Odor source
4.Taste source
5.Tangible source
B.Internal matter
1.Eye sense power
2.Ear sense power
3.Nose sense power
4.Tongue sense power
5.Body sense powerDefinition: That which is clear and
knowing.
-mutually inclusive with awareness and
knower
A.Senseconsciousness :a knower that is
produced in dependence on its own
uncommon empowering condition, a
physical sense power.
1.Eye consciousness
2.Ear consciousness
3.Nose consciousness
4.Tongueconsciousness
5.Bodyconsciousness
B.Mental consciousness :a knower that
is produced in dependence on its own
uncommon empowering condition, a
mental sense power.
OR DIVIDED IN ANOTHER WAY
A.Mind
B.Mental factorDefinition: A composed phenomenon
which is neither matter nor consciousness
A.Non-associated compositional factors
which are persons (or more exactly, all
living beings)
B.Non-associated compositional factors
which are not persons (e.g. time)
FPMT Basic Program Module 2 -The Study of Mind & its Functions
5Permanent phenomena
Other than functioning t hings, all remaining established bases are permanent phenomena. A
permanent phenomenon is defined as:
A common locus of a phenomenon and the non momentary
That is, permanent phenomena are both phenomena and non -momentary. An example of a
permanent phenom enon is uncomposed space, which is a mere absence of obstructive contact. Space
is all pervading because there is an absence of obstructive contact everywhere, even where solid
objects exist, for without an absence of obstructive contact an obstructive obj ect could not be there
in the first place. Such space is not produced from causes and conditions. Uncomposed space is to be
distinguished from composed space which results from removing objects to allow passage and so
forth.
In all of the Buddhist systems except Proponents of the Great Exposition School, permanent is not
taken to mean lasting eternally. Rather, “permanent” refers to phenomena that are not momentary.
Permanent phenomena are of two types: those that are stable in time andthose which are occ asional.
Some permanent phenomena are not eternal, but are occasional. For instance, the uncomposed
space inside a pot is a permanent phenomenon but is not eternal. When the pot is destroyed, the
space inside is no longer suitable to be designated. Also, the space inside a pot does not change
moment by moment and thus cannot be called impermanent. It is an occasional permanence.
Table: Permanent phenomenon and the phenomena mutually inclusive with it
Definienda Definitions
1. Permanent phenomenon A common locus of a phenomenon and the non momentary
2. Non-produced phenomenon Non-createdphenomenon
3. Uncomposed phenomenon Non-disintegrating phenomenon
4. Conventional truth Phenomenon which is ultimately unable to perform a function
5. Phenomenon whic h is a non -
thingPhenomenon which is empty of the ability to perform a
function
6. Generally characterized
phenomenonA phenomena which ismerely imputed by a term or thought
consciousness and is not established as a specifically
characterized phenomenon
FPMT Basic Program Module 2 -The Study of Mind & its Functions
6Another way of dividing Object of Knowledge
Singular phenomenon –a phenomenon which is not diverse e.g. existent, person, etc.
One with pot –a phenomenon which is not diverse with pot, i.e. pot
Different phenomenon –phenomena which are diverse e.g. existent and object of knowledge, pot
and pillar, etc.
Different from pot –a phenomenon which is diverse from pot
THE COMPARISON OF PHENOMENA
The boundaries of pervasion or extension of a phenomenon is its range –what it pervades, what it
includes, and what it excludes. By understanding clearly a phenomenon’s boundaries of pervasion one
is able to ascertain the scope of that phenomenon. The essential tool in this investigation is the
analytical comparison of phenomenon. By comparing two phenomena and establishing their relative
boundaries of pervasion, the limits of each phenomenon in relation to the other, one comes to
understand the points of similarity and dissimilarity between them.
The comparison of phenomena presupposes that those phenomena aredifferent in the sense that
they are not exactlythe same from the point of view of nameandmeaning. Phenomena which are
not different are one.  A pot is the only thing which is one with pot, for it is exactly the same as a pot
in name and meaning. T he investigation of differences does not address the cases of phenomena
which are exactly the same. There is no difference between a pot and a pot. Any two phenomena
must compare in one of the following ways:
1.Mutually inclusive phenomena
Things which are mutually inclusive are different phenomena which have all eight approaches of
pervasion.  The Tibetan term for “mutually inclusive” literally means “the same meaning”. Mutually
inclusive phenomena are different only in the sense of not having the same name, for their meanings
–the objects which are included within the extension of each –are exactly the same.  Also, any two
mutually inclusive phenomena have all eight approaches of pervasion . That is, whatever is a pis
necessarily a q(and vice versa), if apexists, then a qexists (and vice versa).
That mutually inclusive phenomena have all eight approaches of pervasion entails that there is a
common locus ; that is, there is something which is those two mutually inclusive phenomena. A
common locus is not something that exists halfway between the two and is neither. Rather, it is
something which is both of them.
FPMT Basic Program Module 2 -The Study of Mind & its Functions
72.Three possibilities
If there are three possibilities between two phenomena, there must be a common locus of the two
and there are two p oints of difference, at least one of which is something which is one of the two
phenomena but not the other. The three possibilities are such that:
1.There is something which is both a pand aq.
2.There is something which is a pbut not a q
3.Thereis something which is a qbut not a p.
3.Four possibilities
If there are four possibilities between two phenomena, all the points of similarity and difference are
exemplified. The four possibilities are such that:
1.There is something which is both a pand aq.
2.There is something which is a pbut not a q.
3.There is something which is a qbut not a p.
4.There is something which is neither a pnor aq.
4.Mutually exclusive phenomena
Mutually exclusive phenomena are those which are different a nd a common locus of them is not
possible. There is nothing that is both a pand aq.