Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Lorig/Handout/H4_The way in which  Direct Perceiver & Conceptual Thought apprehend their object.pdf
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:53:50.744735
================================================================================

FPMT Basic Program, Amitabha Buddhist Centre, 5 July 2012
1THE STUDY OF MIND AND ITS FUNCTIONS
The way in which Direct Perceiver apprehends its object
A direct perceiver is a collective engager , it engages its object in a collective manner because its object appears
to it together with all of its uncommon characteristics. For instance, a direct perceiver apprehending a pot is a
complete engager. Hence it comprehends a pot not from the viewpoint of merely eliminating non-pot, but by
way of a pot's aspect being cast just as it is. A direct perceiver realizing pot does not comprehend its object by
explicitly eliminating non-pot or anything else in order to understand pot. Rather, it realizes its object nakedly
and directly. Beyond that, it is capable of realizing its object just as it is - that is to say, together with all of its
uncommon characteristics. The "uncommon characteristics" of an impermanent phenomenon are those
impermanent characteristics that are the same substantial entity in terms of being established, abiding and
disintegrating simultaneously with that thing. These are phenomena such as the individual particles that
compose a material phenomenon, the impermanence of the object, its productness, and so forth that are
produced together with the object, and disintegrate simultaneously with the object.
It is explained that because the sense consciousness apprehending a pot is a complete engager ,when the pot
appears everything that is one substantial entity of establishment and abiding with the pot must appear.
Futhermore, although the individual minute particles of a pot do not appear (as isolated particles) to that sense
consciousness, it is not contradictory for numerous particles, which are many particles collected in a cohesive
unit, to appear. For example, in order for a fist to appear it is necessary for a collection of five fingers to appear.
That the two, a pot and impermanence of a pot, are one substantial entity in the sense of undifferentiability of
establishment and abiding means the following. The impermanence of the pot is produced, abides, and ceases
simultaneously with pot; further, that which is pot's substantiality is also the substantiality of pot's
impermanence, and that which is the substantiality of pot's impermanence is pot's substantiality. From that
point of view, it cannot happen that one appears to a direct perceiver and the other does not. For this reason,
pot also appear as impermanent to the sense consciousness apprehending it.
The table and the impermanence of table are not different substantial factors, they are indivisible. Similarly, the
legs of the table are one substantiality with the table. You cannot separate out the parts of a table or the
impermanence of table from table. When you see one you see the other. Subtle impermanence appears to the
eye consciousness, although it is not ascertained. Nevertheless when you look at the coarse table you see its
subtle impermanence. Pot and golden pot are one substantiality of establishment of establishment and abiding,
but are not one substantiality of establishment and abiding in terms of place, time and nature. If they were, then
there would have to be an appearance of golden pot whenever a pot appeared. But this does not occur because
a silver or clay pot can appear without a golden pot appearing.
Specifically characterized phenomena have the character of appearing as they are, specifically, without
depending on the appearance of a meaning generality. In the Sutra school, these are phenomena that are
established by way of their own characters without depending on imputation by thought. Moreover, they
appear together with all their own characteristics of impermanence and so forth without being generally
characterized in a rough way by association with phenomena of other places, times, and natures.
Essentially, the meaning of that specifically characterized phenomena, impermanent phenomena, functioning
things, and so forth are phenomena with respect to which place, time and nature are not mixed is that these
FPMT Basic Program, Amitabha Buddhist Centre, 5 July 2012
2phenomena appear to direct perceivers nakedly, just as they are, without being at all mixed or confused with
phenomena of other places, times or natures.
Product and impermanent thing do not appear differently to direct perception. For example, both product and
impermanent thing appear to the ear consciousness that hears a sound. Direct perceivers are complete
engagers that operate with respect to all the factors which are one substantiality of production and abiding with
their appearing object. However direct perceivers are also involved in exclusion; for example, the direct
perceiver realizing product also eliminates non-product. However, it is not sufficient merely to exclude "non-
product" for a consciousness to be a partial engager. A consciousness which is a partial engager excludes all that
is one substantiality of establishment and abiding with its appearing object except for the factor realized.
The way in which Conceptual Thought apprehends its object
Thought consciousnesses are not collective engagers but eliminative engagers . Thought does not comprehend
its object together with all of its uncommon characteristics, but understands its object in a general way by a
negative process of eliminating all that is not that object.
The thought consciousness apprehending a pot does not comprehend a pot as it is, for it comprehends a mere
mental imputation which is an elimination of non-pot. Such a thought consciousness explicitly ascertains a pot,
but a pot is not its appearing object. The meaning-generality of pot is the appearing object, but it is not what
the thought consciousness ascertains.
How is it that, if a child learns to identify a blue Toyota Altis as a car, he or she will be able to recognize a black
Mercedes Benz as a car? What enables a person to generalize from one to the other? This is possible because
the generic image of a car that was formed in the child's mind during the original identification applies equally
to all cars. This generic image will be mixed with a mental image of a specific car - perhaps the blue Toyota Altis
that was originally identified. Although the image is mixed with that of a specific car, because it also represents
a factor which all cars possess, it serves as a means of identifying all instances of car.
Moreover, when one originally learned the name, the term "car" was affixed not to the specific Toyota of the
moment, but to the mental image of a car which then allowed one to distinguish car from non-car. The generic
image itself is an appearance as opposite from non-car, whereby it can serve to represent everything that is not
a non-car - in other words, everything that is a car. Every car is an instance of opposite from non-car, and just as
there are individual instances of cars, so there are individual instances of opposite-from-non-car. It is not that
there is a single entity of opposite-from-non-car which pervades all individual cars.
It is important to know how conceptual thought operates. For example, a person who does not know the
convention "pot" would, on seeing a golden bulbous thing to the east, asks, "What is this?", whereupon
someone tells him, "This is a pot." At this time, there develops in the continuum of the one who hears this a
thought consciousness which thinks, "This golden bulbous thing is a pot." This thought is induced by the
expression "pot."
Because the golden bulbous thing appears as a pot in the perspective, or way of apprehension of this
conceptual consciousness, it also appears as opposite from non-pot. This very appearance as opposite from
non-pot is the meaning of the term pot. However, because that thought consciousness perceives it within
mistaking the meaning-of-the-term to be a specifically characterized pot, it is said that for this thought
consciousness the appearance (i.e. the actual pot) and the imputation (the appearance as opposite from non-
pot) appear to be mixed as one.
FPMT Basic Program, Amitabha Buddhist Centre, 5 July 2012
3Here, "appearance" refers to the specifically characterized object (the actual pot), and "imputation" refers to
the meaning of the term pot (the image of the pot - an appearance as opposite from non-pot). The thought
consciousness thus perceives the meaning-of-the-term itself which is an appearance of a golden pot as opposite
from non-pot, and for this reason a specifically characterized pot does not actually appear - only a meaning-of-
the-term, which is the appearing object.
Therefore when this person sees a copper bulbous thing in the west, a thought consciousness thinking, "This is a
pot" develops without any further need for relying on an appellation supplied by an informant. In terms of the
appearance to this thought consciousness, all factors of being a pot which were earlier perceived in the golden
pot in the east also appear to exist in the copper pot in the west. This is the way in which place appears mixed
to thought.
It is not that for thought all the factors of a particular pot are mixed with all the factors of another pot. If this
were so it would absurdly follow that the golden appeared red like the copper one. Thus, the "mixture of place"
is that the pots in the east and west are mixed together in that they both appear as pot. This single appearance
as pot seems to exist equally in the east and west.
Similarly, when one who has seen a golden pot in the morning sees a copper pot in the afternoon, all the factors
of being a pot associated with the golden pot seen in the morning appear to a thought consciousness
apprehending pot also to exist in the copper pot seen in the afternoon. This is how time appears to be mixed to
thought.
For example, the innate apprehension of permanence is the misconception of earlier and later appearing to be
mixed. Thus, it seems that the person you saw yesterday is the same as the one that appears today. In this way
one conceives of phenomena as permanent or non-disintegrating.
Moreover, these two - the golden pot's factor of being a pot and the copper pot's factor of being a pot - appear
to be one to a thought consciousness pot. This is how nature appear to be mixed to thought. Thought cannot
distinguish between the factor of copper pot appearing as pot and the factor of golden pot appearing as a pot.
These are in fact different, however, and they appear so to direct perception.
This thought consciousness apprehending a pot in which place, time and nature appear as mixed also perceives
as unitary all the factors of being a pot in all manifestations of pot. "Manifestations of pot" is to be understood
as "instances of pot."
Although both copper and golden pots are one entity with pot, golden and copper pots themselves are different
substantial entities. Therefore, thought is mistaken in seeing these as one, for the pot which is a copper pot and
the pot which is a golden pot are different substantial entities.
The factors which are the minute particles and moments of a pot do not actually appear to the thought
consciousness apprehending pot. Rather, the meaning-of-the-term (which is the mental image) of the gross
objectоĂĐŽůůĞĐƟŽŶŽĨƚŚĞƉĂƌƟĐůĞƐŽĨƉŽƚĂŶĚŽĨƚŚĞĐŽŶƟŶƵƵŵŽĨĨŽƌŵĞƌĂŶĚůĂƚĞƌŵŽŵĞŶƚƐŽĨƉŽƚ- appear as
pot. For example, when crossing a river, a man's shoe is carried away by water. Then, even though a long time
has passed that man points a finger at the river and says, "This is the water that carried away my shoe." In fact,
the continuum of water that carried away the shoe has passed, but such is said due to thought's adhering to the
appearance of the meaning-of-the-term or generic image of the former and later parts of the water's continuum
as one.
FPMT Basic Program, Amitabha Buddhist Centre, 5 July 2012
4The thought consciousness apprehending pot is a eliminative engager because it eliminates some qualities or
factors related with the pot and engages with others. It does not realize all the factors - being a product,
impermanence, and so forth - which are one substantiality of establishment and abiding with the pot.
A thought consciousness is a partial engager because it separates out, or isolates, factors contained within the
same substantial entity and focuses on only one of them. Impermanence is not realized by a thought
consciousness realizing product, and product is not realized by a thought consciousness realizing
impermanence. Product and impermanent thing appear differently to thought.
The appearing object of a thought consciousness is necessarily a generally characterized phenomenon, a
permanent phenomenon. Generally characterized phenomenon are so called because their characters are
realized not by way of their own entities but by way of a generality. They are realized in a general way. For
instance, the thought consciousness apprehending pot understands pot through the elimination of non-pot by
way of its appearance of a mental image of something which is the opposite of non-pot. By this process pot is
not understood together with all its specific qualities but merely in a general way, as the elimination of non-pot.
Thus, a conceptual consciousness can know something in only a general way rather than appreciating its
object's freshness and fullness.
The appearance which appears to the thought consciousness apprehending golden pot is the meaning-
generality of golden pot, not the actual golden pot. If it were the actual gold pot, then even if that gold pot were
smashed with a hammer and then changed into another form, it would have to appear to thought just as it is
i.e., in its new broken form and not as a gold pot; however, it does not appear so.
To put this another way, if that appearance to thought were the actual pot, the appearance would be able to
perform functions such as holding water. If this were the case, then since wherever a thought consciousness
apprehending pot exists a pot would also have to exist, no one would be bereft of a pot. Therefore, this thought
consciousness is mistaken with respect to its appearing object because this appearance of gold pot as pot
appears to it as a pot whereas it is not a pot.
The meaning-generality which is an appearance as opposite from non-pot to the thought consciousness
apprehending pot is both a generality and a generally characterized phenomenon. All generalities are not
necessarily generally characterized phenomena; for example, pot is a generality that is concomitant with all
instances of pot, but pot is a specifically characterized phenomenon. The appearance as opposite from non-pot,
however is a generally characterized phenomenon because it is permanent, and it is a generality because it has
the nature of the external pot and the nature of the internal consciousness - the thought apprehending that
meaning-generality or generic image.
However, a correct conceptual thought is not mistaken with regards to its determined object/conceived
object because in the mode of apprehension of that thought consciousness there exist a conception thinking, "A
golden pot is a pot," but there does not exist a conception wrongly thinking, "That appearance is a pot." For
example, when one looks in the mirror wanting to discover whether or not there is grime on one's face, just that
image in the mirror appears as the face and in dependence on this fact the condition of the face is understood,
but there is usually no conception wrongly thinking, "That image itself is my face." In just the same way, the
thought consciousness apprehending pot conceives pot by way of the appearance of an image of pot, but does
not conceive the image of pot to be a pot.