Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Lorig/Transcript/lesson02_Rev.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:53:23.944748
================================================================================


Handout (An Introduction to Certain Buddhist Philosophical Concepts) Page
2:













Most of the information in this handout was covered on the previous class.
The table on page 2 of the handout (see above) shows the phenomena that are
mutually inclusive with established base. We did most of them but there is
the hidden phenomenon which I did not talk about it on previous class.
Nevertheless hidden phenomenon is also mutually inclusive with established
base; which means it has the same meaning as established base.
What is a hidden phenomenon? An inferential valid cognizer realizes this
hidden phenomenon through the medium of a generic image or a mental image.
It cannot realize the hidden phenomenon directly.  Because the hidden
phenomenon cannot be realized by an inferential valid cognizer without
depending on the medium of a mental image, therefore it is hidden.
When we say hidden phenomenon, we are also talking about existent. So
hidden phenomenon and existent are mutually inclusive; i.e. it is the same
meaning as an existent.
Handout Page 3:
















On page 3 of the handout (see above), there is manifest phenomenon which is
mutually inclusive with functioning thing or impermanent phenomenon.
What is a manifest phenomenon? A manifest phenomenon is an object that is
directly realized by a direct valid cognizer. When a direct valid cognizer
realizes a manifest phenomenon, it does not have to do so in dependence on
a mental image; but rather it perceives it directly. Therefore such an
object is called manifest phenomenon.
The table on page 3 shows the phenomena that are mutually inclusive with
functioning thing. There are impermanent phenomenon, product, composed
phenomenon, cause, effect, ultimate truth, specifically characterized
phenomenon and manifest phenomenon and they are all mutually inclusive;
i.e. they are referring to the same thing.
On page 4 of the handout (see below), when functioning thing or impermanent
phenomenon is divided then there are three divisions:
   1. Matter
   2. Consciousness
   3. Non-associated compositional factor
If it is a functioning thing, it is necessarily one of these three.
If the phenomenon in question is a functioning thing or impermanent
phenomenon, it is necessarily matter or consciousness or non-associated
compositional factor. These divisions are exhaustive. You will not find an
impermanent phenomenon or a functioning thing that is not one of these
three.
These three divisions of the functioning thing - matter, consciousness and
non-associated compositional factor - are mutually exclusive. So there
isn’t a common locus between them or between any two of these.
When we say there isn’t a common locus between these three -matter,
consciousness and non-associated compositional factor- what we are saying
is that you will not be able to point to any object that is all three. If
you are able to point to a phenomenon that is all three, then these three
things would not be mutually exclusive.
Handout Page 4:
[pic]
What is matter? The definition is that which is atomically established.
Matter refers to the phenomenon that its existent is established by atom.
In this system, matter is mutually inclusive with form.
Matter has two divisions:
   1. External matter
   2. Internal matter
The difference between the external matter and internal matter depends on
whether that matter is included within the continuum of the person or not.
An external matter is matter that which is atomically established and not
included within the continuum of a person.
Illustration of external matter: earth, water, fire, wind
An internal matter is matter but is included within the continuum of a
person.
Illustration of internal matter: an individual contaminated physical
aggregate
The external objects -form, sound, smell, taste and touch- are external
matter.
The internal matter is the five sense powers: eye sense power, ear sense
power, nose sense power, tongue sense power and body sense power. These are
called the uncommon empowering condition. This will come later.
These five are internal matter because they are form and are included
within the continuum of a person.
As mentioned on the previous class, consciousness, awareness and knower are
mutually inclusive.
Consciousness has two divisions:
   1. Sense consciousnesses
   2. Mental consciousness
For the sense consciousness, there are the five sense consciousnesses:
1. Eye consciousness
2. Ear consciousness
3. Nose consciousness
4. Tongue consciousness
5. Body consciousness
Together with mental consciousness, there are six consciousnesses.
In general, in order for a consciousness to be generated, three conditions
must be present:
   1. Observed object condition
   2. Uncommon empowering condition
   3. Immediately preceding condition
For example, in order for an eye consciousness apprehending form to be
generated, it needs the observed object condition which is form. Likewise:
In order for an ear consciousness to be generated, the observed object
condition is sound.
In order for a nose consciousness to be generated, the observed object
condition is smell.
In order for the tongue consciousness to be generated, the observed object
condition is taste.
In order for the body consciousness to be generated, the observed object
condition is tangible object.
So in order for the five sense consciousnesses to be generated, first there
must be the observed object condition.
The objects of these five sense consciousnesses are the external matters.
But by just having the observed object condition is not sufficient. In
order for these sense consciousnesses to be generated, the uncommon
empowering condition must be present as well. The uncommon empowering
conditions are essentially the five internal matters:
1. Eye sense power
2. Ear sense power
3. Nose sense power
4. Tongue sense power
5. Body sense power

|The sense        |Observed object   |Uncommon empowering    |
|consciousness    |condition         |condition              |
|Eye consciousness|Form              |Eye sense power        |
|Ear consciousness|Sound             |Ear sense power        |
|Nose             |Odor              |Nose sense power       |
|consciousness    |                  |                       |
|Tongue           |Taste             |Tongue sense power     |
|consciousness    |                  |                       |
|Body             |Touch             |Body sense power       |
|consciousness    |                  |                       |


The production of an eye consciousness is dependent on the existence of the
uncommon empowering condition; which is the eye sense power. Without the
eye sense power, there is no way that the eye consciousness can be
generated.
The eye sense power is also called a clear form.
In dependence of its uncommon empowering condition, which is the eye sense
power, an eye consciousness apprehending form can apprehend form.
An eye sense consciousness can only apprehend form. Why? It can only
apprehend form because it is dependent on its uncommon empowering condition
and in this case, it is an eye sense power.
The eye consciousness cannot apprehend smell. The reason why an eye
consciousness cannot apprehend smell is because of its uncommon empowering
condition.
Therefore the eye consciousness apprehending form is generated in the
aspect of form due to its observed object condition - form.
An eye consciousness apprehending form is also generated in the aspect of
that which is clear and knowing.
An eye consciousness apprehending form is in the nature of clear and
knowing, not because of its uncommon empowering condition but due of the
third condition -the immediately preceding condition- which refers to the
consciousness that immediately precedes the generation of such
consciousness.
The consciousness that immediately precedes the generation of this
consciousness is in the nature of clear and knowing. Due to that, when an
eye consciousness arise, it is generated in the aspect of that which is
clear and knowing.
From this, you can see that for any particular sense consciousness to be
generated, a couple of conditions must come together; without which you are
not going to have any sense consciousness.
The three conditions that must be present for any sense consciousness to
arise are:
   1. Observed object condition
   2. Uncommon empowering condition
   3. Immediately preceding condition
Functioning thing basically is also impermanent phenomenon. For any
functioning thing to come into existence, it must be preceded by its own
cause. So, in order for any impermanent phenomenon or functioning thing to
be created or come into existence, it has to depend on its own cause. In
that sense, we say functioning things are dependently originated/
dependently arisen on the level of cause and effect. Dependent arising is
in the sense of having to depend on causes and conditions. This is the
coarsest level of understanding of dependent arising.
Impermanent phenomenon or functioning thing can be created or come into
existence in dependence on their cause. In fact, it can only arise in
dependence on the concordant cause.
As mentioned on previous class, when you look at form and consciousness,
right from the moment they come into existence, they are established as
having different entities i.e. completely different and distinct entities.
Unlike matter or form which is atomically established, consciousness has
the nature of clarity and knowing in the aspect of non-obstructiveness;
likened to vacuity or voidness.
If you were to ask: Why matter is atomically established? Why consciousness
has the nature of clarity and knowing? There is no special reason and they
are just like that by nature. They are established by having that
particular nature or entity.
Form and consciousness arise in dependence of their concordant causes. If
you understand the implication, only then you will be able to start to
understand how there can be past and future life (reincarnation). Then one
can think more deeply on happiness, suffering and reincarnation. Happiness
can only arise in dependence on its own concordant cause; whereas suffering
can only arise in dependence on its own cause as well. If you understand
the concept of causality then there is something for you to think about.
All the sufferings and problems that we do not want arise from their own
causes. It has to be the concordant cause of suffering. If we do analyze
deeply, then at the end of the day, the main culprit behind all these
sufferings are our karma and afflictions. We have seen these in the
previous module on Lamrim –The stages of the path to enlightenment.
Karma and afflictions are the principal cause of suffering. If you analyze
deeply, the very root of all the problems is the ignorance apprehending a
self. The ignorance here, which is an apprehension of a self, is not just a
mere not knowing something; but rather, this ignorance apprehending a self
is a fundamental misapprehension of the self and reality. The thing to
establish here is that this ignorance is incorrect and is fundamentally
wrong. Whether ignorance can be removed or not depends on whether we can
find an antidote for it. This antidote has to be completely direct opposite
to ignorance. In this case, the antidote is a wisdom consciousness. If
there is a wisdom consciousness that can harm ignorance, then we can
increase the strength or the power of this wisdom consciousness.
Commensurate with the strength of this wisdom consciousness, the more we
increase it, the stronger it is able to harm the ignorance; the root of
suffering.
The whole point here is to realize the status of reality by valid
cognition. First, we have to realize what exactly exist and its reality. By
realizing reality as it is through a valid cognizer, we can remove all
misapprehensions of reality, ignorance and so forth. On this basis then we
can talk about becoming enlighten.
When we talk about the object of knowledge or object of comprehension,
which is mutually inclusive with established base, the phenomenon that can
be known and realized i.e. the basis can be divided into the two truths, or
further divided into the four truths.
The object to be realized based on the two truths. How can the two truths
be realized as it is? The two truths are realized by their respective valid
cognizers. Once they are realized, one continually familiarizes with that
realization through the valid cognizers and this is how one can posit the
possibility of achieving liberation from cyclic existence and full
enlightenment. These are said to be the fruits of valid cognizers. Why?
Because such states are the results of having accustomed oneself
continuously with the reality through valid cognitions.
We usually talk about the six consciousnesses: the five sense
consciousnesses and the mental consciousness.
A mental consciousness is generated in dependence on its own uncommon
empowering condition which is the mental sense power.  That is what
distinguishes the mental consciousness from the sense consciousnesses.
One can divide consciousness into:
   1. Sense consciousnesses
   2. Mental consciousness
Or you can look at consciousness in terms of:
   1. Mind
   2. Mental factors
If you look at the definition of consciousness, it is that which is clear
and knowing.
There are different ways of explaining the mind has the entity of clarity
or is clear. It is clear in the sense that it is not atomically
established; i.e. it is freed from been atomically established (made up of
particles).
I guess another way of explaining clear is related to the fact that when
any object is bring to the attention of the mind, it can appear to the
mind.
Some of you may have heard the statement: “the nature of the mind is clear
light”.
One way of explaining is that the afflictions, which are adventitious, have
not entered into the deepest recesses of the mind. That means the mind by
nature is not afflicted.
It is not easy to really pinpoint exactly and to be able to say the mind is
this or like that.
We can say the mind is in the entity of clear and knowing; it has clarity
and it knows.
Perhaps we could say knowing here refers to realizing an object. Or is it
referring to the fact that objects can appear to the mind?
Anyway, just relax. We will talk more about all these again when we start
with the actual topic. We have not start with the subject yet as we are
just doing the preliminary. So that will come later. This is just a mere
introduction.
Khen Rinpoche (spoke in English): Haven’t starts the class.
Handout Page 4:  Non-associated compositional factors
Definition: A composed phenomenon which is neither matter nor consciousness
   A. Non-associated compositional factors which are persons (or more
   exactly, all living beings)
   B. Non-associated compositional factors which are not persons (e.g.
   time)
On the division of the non-associated compositional factor, impermanent
phenomena or functioning thing which are neither matter nor consciousness
are included among non-associated compositional factor.
Illustration of non-associated compositional factor which are persons: cow,
horse, hamster.
(Note: Person here (gang zag in Tibetan) does not restrict to only human
beings; it includes all living beings)
There is an implication here when we say a horse or a cow is a non-
associated compositional factor; which means it is neither form nor
consciousness. When we look at the horse and point to the horse,
instinctively we think the form, the horse’s body, is the horse; but that
is the horse’s aggregate and it is not a horse. What our eye consciousness
sees is the horse’s body, which is form. That is the basis of designation
in dependence upon which we label or impute horse.  So the horse’s body is
not horse; it is form.
When we say ‘I’, ‘I’ is not the body or mind. The body and mind are the
basis of designation in dependence upon which we impute ‘I’ or self.
We will talk more about the nature of the ‘I” - what exactly it is and how
it exist- in the next module on Tenets. Depending on the different
philosophical systems of the Buddhist’s tenets, there are many debates and
disagreements as to who we are; the nature of the ‘I’. Most of the tenets
meet with the fundamental difficulty because they are unable to posit an
‘I’ that is not one with the basis of designation. Most of them feel that
the ‘I’ is something that can be pointed to and there must be one thing
that is the ‘I’. At the end, majority of the tenets assert the mental
consciousness is the ‘I’. However, according to the Consequent Middle Way
School, which is the final view, the ‘I’ is that which is merely imputed in
dependence upon the aggregates, which is the basis of designation. The ‘I’
does not exist from the side of the basis of designation; so that is the
fundamental difference.
There are non-associated compositional factors which are not persons, for
example, time.
As a generality, product or composed phenomenon is non-associated
compositional factors which are not persons.
Question: Why product or impermanent phenomenon as a generality an
illustration of non-associated compositional factor?
If we talk about impermanent phenomenon as a generality, it encompasses
everything that is an impermanent phenomenon. Having said that, then; “Is
impermanent phenomenon a consciousness?
Khen Rinpoche(spoke in English): The question is whether necessary or not?
Ven Gyurme: The question is: Yes or no? It is not necessarily. Is
impermanent phenomenon a consciousness? Is it form?
Khen Rinpoche (spoke in English): Therefore, only left one thing to say.
If you want to learn, you really have to memorize these things. You have to
have a rough idea such as when functioning thing or impermanent phenomena
is divided, there are three divisions: matter, consciousness and non-
associated compositional factor. You have to keep this in mind. You really
have to memorize. You also have to memorize the phenomenon that is mutually
inclusive with functioning thing, impermanent phenomenon, product, composed
phenomenon and so forth.
Likewise with permanent phenomenon, there are also phenomena that are
mutually inclusive with it such as non-produced phenomenon, uncomposed
phenomenon, conventional truth, phenomenon which is a non-thing and
generally characterized phenomenon.
Handout Page 5:











Mutually inclusive means  there  are  different  ways  of  saying  the  same
things. Some of these words here are new. You have no choice but you  really
have to memorize them.
Handout Page 5: Another way of dividing Object of Knowledge
Singular phenomenon – a phenomenon which is not diverse e.g. existent,
person, etc.
      One with pot – a phenomenon which is not diverse with pot, i.e. pot
Different phenomenon – phenomena which are diverse e.g. existent and object
of knowledge, pot and pillar, etc.
      Different from pot – a phenomenon which is diverse from pot
Phenomenon that exists when divided, it is either:
   1. Singular phenomenon (One)
   2. Different phenomenon (Many)
If it exists, it is either single or different. It is either one of these
two.
Phenomenon that exists when divided, it is either:
For example, when we say object of knowledge, it is single. It is one; not
many because it is one with itself.
When we say object of knowledge and established base, these two are
different. They are not the same. They are not one. They are different.
Are object of knowledge and established base one? No, they are different.
Are they different in meaning? No, they are the same meaning.
So, you must make a difference between different and different meaning.
If a phenomenon in question has the same name and the same meaning then
that mean it is the same thing. It is one with itself. It is singular
phenomenon. It is one.
If the phenomenon in question has a different name and different meaning
then they are diverse. They are different. They are not the same. They are
not one.
You must memorize what I have said.
A singular phenomenon, it is same, it is one with itself because it has the
same name and same meaning.
When you compare two objects, if they have a different name or a different
meaning, they are different.
But it doesn’t mean that if the two objects are different, it doesn’t
necessarily mean that they have the different meaning.
Handout Page 6:  THE COMPARISON OF PHENOMENA
The boundaries of pervasion or extension of a phenomenon is its range –
what it pervades, what it includes, and what it excludes. By understanding
clearly a phenomenon’s boundaries of pervasion one is able to ascertain the
scope of that phenomenon. The essential tool in this investigation is the
analytical comparison of phenomenon. By comparing two phenomena and
establishing their relative boundaries of pervasion, the limits of each
phenomenon in relation to the other, one comes to understand the points of
similarity and dissimilarity between them.
The comparison of phenomena presupposes that those phenomena are different
in the sense that they are not exactly the same from the point of view of
name and meaning. Phenomena which are not different are one. A pot is the
only thing which is one with pot, for it is exactly the same as a pot in
name and meaning. The investigation of differences does not address the
cases of phenomena which are exactly the same. There is no difference
between a pot and a pot. Any two phenomena must compare in one of the
following ways:
1. Mutually inclusive phenomena
Things which are mutually inclusive are different phenomena which have all
eight approaches of pervasion. The Tibetan term for “mutually inclusive”
literally means “the same meaning”. Mutually inclusive phenomena are
different only in the sense of not having the same name, for their meanings
– the objects which are included within the extension of each – are exactly
the same. Also, any two mutually inclusive phenomena have all eight
approaches of pervasion. That is, whatever is a p is necessarily a q (and
vice versa), if a p exists, then a q exists (and vice versa).
That mutually inclusive phenomena have all eight approaches of pervasion
entails that there is a common locus; that is, there is something which is
those two mutually inclusive phenomena. A common locus is not something
that exists halfway between the two and is neither. Rather, it is something
which is both of them.
There are such terms such as mutually inclusive and mutually exclusive.
“Mutually inclusive” literally means “the same meaning”.
For example, impermanent phenomenon and product; although they have
different name but essentially they have the same meaning. Impermanent
phenomenon is mutually inclusive with product; they have different name but
they have the same meaning and this mean that:
   1. If it an impermanent phenomenon, it is necessarily a product.
   2. If it a product, it is necessarily an impermanent phenomenon.
The relationship exists in the form of “if being is” or as an existential
form: existing or not existing -if this exist that also exist, if that
exist, that also exist, if this does not exist that also does not exist. So
that is the meaning of mutually inclusive.
Handout Page 7:  Mutually exclusive phenomena
Mutually exclusive phenomena are those which are different and a common
locus of them is not possible. There is nothing that is both a p and a q.
In order for it to be a mutually exclusive phenomenon, the basis of
comparison is that they must be of two different objects and there cannot
be a common locus between the two, that is you cannot point to something
that is both.
For example, comparing impermanent phenomenon and permanent phenomenon,
these two are different. Not only are they different, you will not be able
to find something that is both. In that sense, they are mutually exclusive.
One thing to take note is that this doesn’t mean that if two objects in
comparison are different then they are necessarily mutually exclusive.
For example, if you compare object of knowledge and impermanent phenomenon.
They are different.
Are they mutually exclusive?
Object of knowledge and impermanent phenomenon, these two are different,
but are they NOT mutually exclusive because there is a common locus between
these two. That means there is something that is both an object of
knowledge and an impermanent phenomenon.
Handout Page 7:  Three possibilities
If there are three possibilities between two phenomena, there must be a
common locus of the two and there are two points of difference, at least
one of which is something which is one of the two phenomena but not the
other. The three possibilities are such that:
   1. There is something which is both a p and a q.
   2. There is something which is a p but not a q
   3. There is something which is a q but not a p.
Handout Page 7:   Four possibilities
If there are four possibilities between two phenomena, all the points of
similarity and difference are exemplified. The four possibilities are such
that:
   1. There is something which is both a p and a q.
   2. There is something which is a p but not a q.
   3. There is something which is a q but not a p.
   4. There is something which is neither a p nor a q.
If any two phenomena in comparison are mutually inclusive, there is no need
to talk about three possibilities and four possibilities because that
possibility does not exist.
If any two phenomena in comparison are mutually exclusive, then the
possibility of them being four possibilities is eliminated. There may be an
occasion where they can be three possibilities.
The point of looking into whether the two objects in comparison are of
three possibilities or four possibilities is a way of analyzing reality so
that we can gain a deeper or clearer understanding of what exactly how
things are.
Question: Compare the object of knowledge and impermanent phenomenon, what
is their relationship? Are they mutually exclusive, mutually inclusive,
three or four possibilities?
Are object of knowledge and impermanent phenomenon different? Yes
Are they mutually exclusive?  No
When I ask you: “Are object of knowledge and impermanent phenomenon
different?” immediately in your mind you must have the reason why you say
yes. What is the reason that they are different?  Yes, they have different
name and they have different meaning. Are they contradictory? Are they
mutually exclusive? Why are they not mutually exclusive?
Khen Rinpoche (spoke in English): Something can be both, that is why not
mutually exclusive.
You say they are not mutually exclusive because you can point to an
illustration that is both an object of knowledge and impermanent
phenomenon. Give an illustration of something that is both.
How many permutations are there between object of knowledge and impermanent
phenomenon?  Three or four?
1. There is something which is both object of knowledge and impermanent
   phenomenon    - Yes
2. There is something which is object of knowledge but not impermanent
   phenomenon          - Yes
3. There is something which is impermanent phenomenon but not object of
   knowledge           -  No
4. There is something which is neither object of knowledge nor impermanent
   phenomenon    - Yes
There is something that is not an object of knowledge and not an
impermanent phenomenon.
Khen Rinpoche (spoke in English): Sky flower. Okay.
This is a process or tool for us to be much clearer about the things that
we are going to find out; especially when comparing different objects and
phenomena. It is a method for us to have a clearer idea of what exactly we
are talking about. It really makes a difference by analyzing in this way.
For example: Compare matter and consciousness, how many possibilities are
there? How many permutations are there between matter and consciousness?
   1. There is something which is both matter and consciousness     -  No
   2. There is something which is matter but not consciousness -  Yes (e.g.
      microphone)
   3. There is something which is consciousness but not matter -. Yes
   4. There is something which is neither matter nor consciousness  -  Yes
There isn’t anything that is both matter and consciousness which I have
already mentioned very clearly just now when we were talking about the
division of functioning thing: matter, consciousness and non-associated
compositional factor are mutually exclusive.
You have to look at the handouts well. As for the terms, you really have no
choice but to memorize them. On that basis you then try to look at the
relationship between two objects and compare whether they are mutually
exclusive and if so, how many possibilities between them. It is not
difficult. It is just a matter of getting used to it. So if you want to
continue (with the studies), you have to memorize the terms. There is no
choice. It is difficult in the beginning but if you don’t do it now, you
will never learn anything as we move on because as you will always get
stuck and you cannot even get pass the terms; forget even the meaning. You
have to memorize all these terms right from the beginning so you will not
be stuck if we talk about them in the future.
Handout Page 1:  There are four Buddhist tenet systems in ascending order:
        a. The Great Exposition School / Vaibhashika
        b. The Sutra School / Sauntrantika (divided into those following
           scripture and those following reasoning)
        c. The Mind-only school / Cittamatra
        d. The Middle Way school / Madhyamika (divided into the Autonomy
           Middle Way school and the Consequence Middle Way school)
The following presentation is from the viewpoint of the Proponents of Sutra
Following Reasoning.
You also have to memorize the names of the four Buddhist tenets in both
English and Sanskrit. We will look at them in details as we move along.
Whatever inside this handout, you really have to put in effort to memorize
them.  You will see the benefit when we start with the subject; otherwise
you will have difficulty later on.
Student 1: The three possibilities are such that:
      1. There is something which is both a p and a q.
      2. There is something which is a p but not a q
      3. There is something which is a q but not a p.
The example that was brought up about comparing the matter and
consciousness, you cannot have something that is both p and q. In this
case, we can only say: There is something which is both a p and a q OR
there is something which is neither a p nor a q.
Khen Rinpoche: Yes.
Student 2: What is mental sense power?
Answer: We will cover this later.
Student 2: Hidden phenomenon which is mutually inclusive with established
base seems to be subset for established base.
Answer: First thing to remember is that hidden phenomenon here is mutually
inclusive with established base. So whatever illustrations of an
established base that you can point out, it has to be a hidden phenomenon.
For example, a horse is an illustration of established base. Therefore the
horse has to be a hidden phenomenon. By using the horse as the
illustration, why is the horse a hidden phenomenon? That is the thing that
you have to figure out. You can see horse directly.
Is a horse a manifest phenomenon? Yes. A horse is both a hidden phenomenon
and a manifest phenomenon. A horse is a hidden phenomenon because when it
is realized by a thought consciousness realizing it, the thought
consciousness cannot realize it directly but through a medium of mental
image. Therefore horse is a hidden phenomenon.
A horse is also a manifest phenomenon because it can be realized directly
by a valid cognizer. Therefore the horse is also a manifest phenomenon. So
a horse is a manifest phenomenon and is also a hidden phenomenon.
Student 2: Does all objects has to realize by thought consciousness?
Answer: There isn’t any phenomenon that is not realized by thought
consciousness. If it is a phenomenon, it is necessarily realized by a
thought consciousness.
It will all become clear as we move along. Please look at your handout.
____________________________________________________________________________
_______________
Extract from BP1 Lorig Handout
Definition of generality: a phenomenon that encompasses its manifestations.
A generality must be an existent, and it may be either a permanent or an
impermanent phenomenon, e.g. object of knowledge is a generality of a
functional thing. A pot is a generality of clay pot.
Definition of specific/ instance: a phenomenon which has a type engaging it
as a pervader, e.g. functioning thing is an instance of object of
knowledge. Object of knowledge pervades functioning thing.
Summarized from Debate in Tibetan Buddhism
The boundaries of pervasion or extension of a phenomenon is its range –
what it pervades, what it includes, and what it excludes. By understanding
clearly a phenomenon’s boundaries of pervasion one is able to ascertain the
scope of that phenomenon. The essential tool in this investigation is the
analytical comparison of phenomenon. By comparing two phenomena and
establishing their relative boundaries of pervasion, the limits of each
phenomenon in relation to the other, one comes to understand the points of
similarity and dissimilarity between them. The comparison of phenomenon
presupposes that those phenomena are different in the sense that they are
not exactly the same from the point of view of name and meaning.
Phenomena which are not different are one. A pot is the only thing which is
ONE with the pot in name and meaning.
The investigation of differences does not address the cases of phenomena
which are exactly the same. There is no difference between a pot and a pot.
Every existent other than a pot is different from it, e.g. a person, a gold
pot.
Any two different phenomena must compare in one of the five ways; there is
no sixth possible way.


1st case (represented by two circles combined into one –one is superimposed
over the other)
The relative boundaries of pervasion or extensions of the two phenomena are
absolutely concomitant. They pervade exactly the same things.
Whatever is a p is necessarily a q.
Whatever is a q is necessarily a p.

2nd and 3rd cases (represented by a smaller circle wholly included within
the perimeter of a larger one)
There is something (inside the smaller circle) which is both a p and a q.
There is something (inside the larger circle but outside the smaller
circle) which is one but not the other. The larger circle includes at least
one phenomenon the smaller does not)
There is a uni-directional pervasion between these two:
Case 2: Whatever is a p is necessarily a q, but whatever is a q is not
necessarily a p
Case 3: Whatever is a q is necessarily a p, but whatever is a p is not
necessarily a q









4th case (represented by two overlapping circles)
There is an intersection of the relative extensions of the two phenomena,
but there is no pervasion between the two.
1. There is something which is both a p and a q (in the overlapping area).
2. There is something which is a p but not a q.
3. There is something which is a q but not a p.

5th case (represented by two separate circles)
The relative extensions of the two phenomena do not correlate at all. There
is neither any pervasion between the two nor is there any overlapping at
all.
There is nothing which is both a p and a q.
Whatever is a p is necessarily not a q.
Whatever is a q is necessarily not a p

Mutually Inclusive Phenomena
Mutually inclusive phenomena are represented by Case 1.
Things which are mutually inclusive are:
    - Being different phenomena and
    - Have all the 8 approaches of pervasion. (see note below)
Mutually inclusive phenomena are different only in the sense of not having
exactly the same name, for their meanings –the objects which are included
within the extension of each- are exactly the same.
E.g. Product and impermanent phenomenon are mutually inclusive, and there
is a common locus of these two. For example, a pot is such a common locus.
A pot is a product and it is also an impermanent phenomenon.

Three Possibilities
If there are three possibilities between two phenomena,
- There must be a common locus of the two and
- There are two points of difference, at least one of which is something
which is one of the two phenomena but not the other.

Phenomena having three possibilities compare in two ways:
The first way represents the three possibilities (Case 2 & case 3)
   1. something which is both,
   2. something which is one but not the other, and
   3. something which is neither
Example: Color and Red
|Something which is both color and red          |color of a ruby              |
|Something which is one but not the other       |white conch                  |
|(Whatever is red is necessarily color. Whatever|                             |
|is a color is not necessarily red)             |                             |
|There is something which is neither red nor    |a round form (round form is  |
|color                                          |not a color)                 |


The second way represents the three possibilities (Case 4)
   1. There is something which is both a p and a q.
   2. There is something which is a p but not a q
   3. There is something which is a q but not a p.
(Note: In this case, there is nothing one can posit which is neither a p
nor a q. Such comparisons necessarily involve two phenomena that together
include all existents and non-existents as well)
Example: Object of knowledge & Non-impermanent phenomena
|Something which is both object of   |Permanent phenomena                     |
|knowledge and a non-impermanent     |(Permanent phenomena is an object of    |
|phenomenon                          |knowledge [because of being an existent]|
|                                    |and a non-impermanent phenomenon        |
|                                    |[because not being produced from causes |
|                                    |and conditions])                        |
|Something which is object of        |A pot                                   |
|knowledge but not a non-impermanent |(Pot is an object of knowledge because  |
|phenomenon                          |being a impermanent phenomenon)         |
|Something which is a non-impermanent|Horn of a rabbit                        |
|phenomenon but not object of        |(Horn of rabbit is a non-impermanent    |
|knowledge                           |phenomenon because of being a           |
|                                    |non-existent. Horn of rabbit is not an  |
|                                    |object of knowledge because of not being|
|                                    |an existent)                            |


(Note: Something which is neither non-impermanent phenomenon nor object of
knowledge cannot be posited because something which is not an object of
knowledge but is an impermanent phenomenon cannot be posited)

Four Possibilities (Case 4)
If there are four possibilities between two phenomena, all the points of
similarity and difference are exemplified. The four possibilities are such
that:
   1. There is something which is both a p and a q.
   2. There is something which is a p but not a q.
   3. There is something which is a q but not a p.
   4. There is something which is neither a p nor a q
Example: Blue and color of cloth
|Something which is both blue and color |Color of blue cotton    |
|of cloth                               |cloth                   |
|Something which is blue but not color  |Color of blue sky       |
|of cloth                               |                        |
|Something which is color of cloth but  |Color of yellow cotton  |
|not blue .                             |cloth                   |
|Something which is neither blue nor    |Color of ruby (being red|
|color of cloth                         |in color)               |


Mutually Exclusive Phenomena (Case 5)
Mutually exclusive phenomena are those which are different and a common
locus of them is not possible.
There is nothing that is both a p and a q.
Example: Definition and definiendum
There is nothing that is both definition and definiendum.
Whatever is a definition is necessarily not a definiendum
Whatever is a definiendum is necessarily not a definition

The 8 Approaches of Pervasion that exist between P & Q are:
   1. Whatever is P is necessarily Q
   2. Whatever is Q is necessarily P
   3. Whatever is not P is necessarily not Q
   4. Whatever is not Q is necessarily not P
   5. If P exists, then Q necessarily exists
   6. If Q exists, then P necessarily exists
   7. If P does not exist, then Q necessarily does not exist
   8. If Q does not exist, then P necessarily does not exist.
