Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Lorig/Transcript/lesson14.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:53:23.994178
================================================================================


The concept of generality and instance
Illustration of a generality would be an object of knowledge. An object of
knowledge is the generality.
Why is it called the generality? Because an object of knowledge pervades
many types of phenomena.
Example: A horse is an instance of an object of knowledge.
A horse is pervaded by an object of knowledge. Object of knowledge pervades
horse.
What makes something an instance of a particular generality?
A horse is an instance of an object of knowledge not because of it being an
existent.
How do we then determine that horse is an instance of object of knowledge?
There are three criteria to determine something to be an instance of a
generality.
1. Horse has to be an object of knowledge
2. Horse has to be related to object of knowledge by reason of being one
  entity
3. It must be able to posit something that is non-horse but is an object of
  knowledge
If these three characteristics are present, then horse can be an instance
of object of knowledge.
For the time being, just keep this in mind and try to understand the
concept of generality and instance based on the example of a horse being an
instance of an object of knowledge due to the presence of these three
characteristics.
As explaining the relationship between generality and instance, there are
two kinds of relationships.
They are either:
   1. Causally related or
   2. Related of being one entity [Generality is not separate entity from
      its instance]
If there is interest, we will talk more about these two types of
relationships in the future; not now as it may complicate things.
There seems to be some confusion between a generality and a meaning
generality; they are not the same.
Is someone were to ask you, “Is horse a generality?” what would you say?
Earlier, we saw how horse is an instance of object of knowledge. Is horse a
generality?
Yes, horse is a generality.  If horse is a generality, what would be an
instance of horse?
You can say “White horse.”
[Horse is a generality and a white horse is an instance of this
generality.]
Some students were asking about generalities and instances, so this is
something for you to think about.

We were talking about inferential cognizer. How is an inferential cognizer
produced?
Inferential cognizer is produced in dependence upon a correct sign.
If an inferential cognizer is generated in dependence upon a correct sign,
then what is a correct sign?
A correct sign is that which is the three modes. If the three modes are
present then you have a correct sign/reason.
When we state a syllogism, there are three elements:
    • Subject
    • Predicate to be proven
    • The sign
When a syllogism is stated, you have a subject and a predicate to be
proven.
So, you are trying to prove that the subject is the predicate to be proven
in dependence upon stating a sign.
How do you determine whether it is a correct sign or not? You analyze
whether the three modes are fulfilled/present. The three modes have to be
established in order for the sign to be a correct sign.
Of the three modes, first mode is the property of the subject.
How is the property of the subject established?
To establish the property of the subject, there are three things to look
out for:
1. The subject in a particular syllogism and the sign that is stated in the
  same syllogism must be different.
2. The sign stated in the syllogism must exist with the subject. (The
  subject is the sign.)
3. The person to whom you are stating this syllogism has to be:
  - someone who has ascertained through a valid cognition that the subject
  is the sign and
  - someone who wishes to know whether the subject is the predicate to be
  proven.
If these three things are fulfilled then you can say the first mode -the
property of the subject- is established.
Syllogism: The subject, sound, is an impermanent phenomenon because of
being a product.
Subject - sound
Sign/ reason - product
Predicate to be proven - impermanent phenomenon.
This syllogism contains correct sign. Therefore the three modes are
established.
Let’s use this to see how the three modes are established.

From this you can see that if you don’t have some rough understanding of
what is an impermanent phenomenon, what is a product, what is sound, the
definition then really there is no way to analyze.
How is the property of the subject established in this syllogism?
In order for the property of the subject to be established, there are three
criteria to be fulfilled:
1. Are the subject and the sign stated different? Subject is sound. Sign is
  product. Sound and product are different.
2. Do the sign exist with the subject OR is the subject the sign?  Sound
  [subject] is the product [sign].
3. It is possible that there exist a person who has ascertained with valid
  cognition that sound is a product and who wishes to know whether sound is
  a impermanent phenomenon or not.
If these three are present then the property of the subject is established.
The second mode is forward pervasion
The easiest ways to see whether the forward pervasion is established or not
is to see whether the sign exist exclusively in the similar class or not.
Syllogism: The subject, sound, is an impermanent phenomenon because of
being a product.
Does product exist exclusively in the class of impermanent phenomenon?
When we say the similar class, we are talking about the predicate to be
proven.
The predicate to be proven is impermanent phenomenon.
So we have to establish whether the sign, product, accords with to
impermanent phenomenon or not.
The third mode is counter pervasion
In this syllogism, predicate to be proven is impermanent phenomenon.
The impermanent phenomenon is the similar class.
The opposite of impermanent phenomenon, non-impermanent phenomenon, is the
dissimilar class.
To check whether the counter pervasion is established or not, then you
check whether the sign is universally absence from the dissimilar class or
not.
Syllogism: The subject, sound, is an impermanent phenomenon because of
being a product.
Subject - sound
Sign/ reason - product
Predicate to be proven - impermanent phenomenon
The similar or dissimilar class is related to the predicate to be proven
The similar class is impermanent phenomenon. All impermanent phenomena are
the similar class.
The dissimilar class has to be something that is not accord with
impermanent phenomenon.
The dissimilar class is the opposite of impermanent phenomenon which is
permanent phenomenon.
If you know what the dissimilar class is, do the sign exist in the
dissimilar class or not?
One the easiest way to see whether the counter pervasion is established or
not is to see whether the sign is universally absence from the dissimilar
class or not.
Is product absence from the dissimilar class? [Sign - product. Dissimilar
class -permanent phenomenon]
Does product exist among permanent phenomenon?
To see whether it exists or not in the dissimilar class is to see whether
there is a common locus between product and permanent phenomenon. There is
nothing that is both a product and a permanent phenomenon.
• You have to stick to one example of the syllogism that we have been using
  here.
• Using that as the basis, you think about it over and over again until you
  are very clear about the three modes.
• Only then you can change the sign.
We try to prove something and whatever we try to prove we use different
reasons. First you have to understand the concept of the three modes before
you can practically apply and see whether that is a correct reason or
incorrect reason. It is complicated.
If somebody were to say: “The subject, sound, is permanent because of being
a product”.
He is trying to prove that sound is permanent by using the reason that
sound is a product.
Subject - sound
Sign/ reason - product
Predicate to be proven - permanent
Here the sign, product, is a contradictory reason because whatever is a
product, it is necessarily impermanent.
So how can he use this reason to establish that sound is permanent? The
reason is contradictory because product is necessarily impermanent.
In the syllogism: The subject sound is an impermanent phenomenon because of
being a product.
Subject - sound
Sign/ reason - product
Predicate to be proven - impermanent phenomenon
In this syllogism, the sign, product, is a valid/correct reason because
product is definitely impermanent.
Somebody also try to prove to you: “Sound is impermanent because it is an
existent”.
One can try to prove the same thing by using all sorts of reasons but not
all the reasons are fantastic.
Syllogism: The subject, sound, is impermanent because it is an existent.
Subject - sound
Sign/ reason - existent
Predicate to be proven - impermanent phenomenon
In this syllogism, the sign, existent, is an indefinite reason. You cannot
establish with full certainty that sound is an impermanent phenomenon just
by the fact that it is an existent. This is because whatever is an existent
is not necessarily impermanent; it could be impermanent but it is not
necessarily impermanent [as existent can be permanent and impermanent
phenomena].
Syllogism: The subject, sound, is an impermanent phenomenon because being a
product.
Subject - sound
Sign/ reason - product
Predicate to be proven - impermanent phenomenon
The sign, product, is a definite reason because the pervasion is definite
and necessarily so. The product as a reason is not a contradictory reason.
It is definite reason because whatever is the product is necessarily
impermanent.
The way to learn is hold onto one chosen correct syllogism, for example,
“The subject, sound, is an impermanent phenomenon because being a product”.

• Using this particular syllogism then you try to understand the three
  modes. By just understanding the three modes based on this syllogism
  doesn’t mean that you have understood everything. That is only starting.
• Once you know what the three modes are, then on the basis of this
  syllogism, you change the sign to a contradictory reason, for example,
  permanent.
• Then you try to understand why the three modes are not established.
• Then you change the sign to an indefinite reason such as an existent.
• Then you try to understand why the three modes are not established as
  well.
If you are someone who has memorized the sevenfold division of
consciousnesses and their respective definitions, then you can use this
information to state a syllogism, for example:
Syllogism: The subject, the sense consciousness to which one moon appears
as two moons, is a wrong consciousness because it is a knower that engages
in its object erroneously.
Subject - sense consciousness
Sign/ reason - a knower that engages in its object erroneously
If we state the sign [a knower that engages in its object erroneously] to
establish that the sense consciousness to which one moon appears as two
moons is a wrong consciousness, then this is a correct sign.
Someone then comes along and try to prove to you:
Syllogism: The sense consciousness to which one moon appears as two moons
is a direct perceiver because it is a sense consciousness.
Sign - a sense consciousness. In this case, it is incorrect.
If sense consciousness is posited to be the sign in proving that the sense
consciousness to which one moon appears as two moons is a direct perceiver,
then the sign [a sense consciousness] is an indefinite reason because
whatever is a sense consciousness is not necessarily a direct perceiver.
There is no pervasion.
When it comes to stating reason, one can state whatever kind of reasons but
it doesn’t necessarily mean a correct reason.
Syllogism: The sense consciousness to which one moon appears as two moons
is a direct valid cognizer because it is a wrong consciousness.
In this case, the sign is completely wrong because there is no way a wrong
consciousness can be a valid cognizer.
As long as you have a rough idea of what a correct sign is then it is
sufficient for the time being. You should be able to differentiate whether
something is a correct sign or an incorrect sign.
A correct sign has to be that which is the three modes. I think it is fine
as long as you have some understanding of what the three modes are. You
need to know this because an inferential valid cognizer is generated in
dependence upon a correct sign which is its basis. So in order to have some
ideas on how an inference is generated, it is important to have some ideas
on what constitute a correct reason.
Here we are trying to understand the concept and in order to understand the
concept, we have the example:
The subject sound is impermanent because it is a product.
At the end of day, is that really matters? Are you so interested to find
out whether sound is impermanent or not? It is good to so but the main
purpose is to understand the concept and then apply it to our own mind, to
our own existent, whether we are impermanent or whether we are product, but
first we have to understand the concept and the correct reason. Once we
know the concept, we then apply in the Lamrim meditation such as meditation
on death and impermanence. Then you change the subject to yourself: “I am
definitely going to die.”  You are going to prove to yourself that “I am
definitely going to die” because of the reasons in the nine-point on death
and impermanence in the Lamrim. Example: “I am definitely going to die
because there is nothing that can stop death”. Is the reason a correct
sign? You can change to another reason as there are three reasons that
prove that death is definite such as; “I am definitely going to die because
my lifespan is constantly depleting and there is nothing being added on”.
The main purpose is to apply it to meditation.
Or you can say: “There is no certainty when I will die, the time of my
death is uncertain, because the lifespan of the beings in this world is not
fixed.” Is this a definite reason?
In the course of the study and in order to understand the concept, there is
a lot of analysis and debates.  The classic example that is always being
used “Sound is impermanent because of this and this” and a lot of debate
going on to establish it. There is a saying’ “At end of the day, despite of
being able to establish that sound is impermanent because of the many
reasons but yet at the same time that person establishing it feels that he
will never die and thinking: “I am permanent.” If that happen, then that
becomes the most amazing thing.
Khen Rinpoche spoke in English: Most surprising thing and that mean no
good.
When we talk about past and future lives, reincarnation, and for most
people it is not something that is directly perceivable. So the only way,
the first step in realizing reincarnation is through inference i.e. you
have to realize it by an inferential cognizer. If that is the case, then
you have to posit a correct reason to establish in your own mind that
reincarnation definitely exists.
If we state a syllogism like this: The subject, mind of an infant at the
time of conception, was preceded by a mind of similar type because it is
mind.
This is posited to be a correct sign as this is what being mentioned in the
treatises. This is how one establishes past lives.
In order to prove future life: The subject, the last moment of the mind of
an ordinary person at the time of death, this mind will continue and lead
on to a mind in the future which is its effect because it is a continuum of
an awareness that is accompanied by attachment.
Subject: the last moment of the mind of an ordinary person at the time of
death
The predicate to be proven: there is an effect mind/consciousness. It is
the effect of the subject. The effect has to exist after the cause, i.e.,
in the future.
The sign/ reason: because is a continuum of an awareness that is
accompanied by attachment.
State it simply but not technically fully correct: The mind at the time of
death, which is the last moment of the mind of an ordinary person, will
continue because it is mind.
It is the same as in the previous proof of past lives, why don’t we simply
state it in such a way? Because the inclusion of certain words are there to
eliminate arguments.
Khen Rinpoche: Okay that is it. Syllogism is done. Anything you want to
know syllogism? Ask if you don’t understand about syllogism.
Student: Please explain the meaning of the illustrations of the inferential
cognizer through renown. Why inferential cognizer through renown is
necessarily an inferential cognizer by power of the fact?
Khen Rinpoche:  There are these different signs as well.
[Handout dated 24 July page 2: Inferential cognizer by power of the fact:
e.g. an inferential cognizer which realizes that sound is impermanent
through the sign of being a product.]
Power of the fact means that in reality it exists.
You are stating a fact as the reason therefore it is termed by power of
fact.
[Handout dated 24 July page 2: Inferential cognizer through renown: e.g. an
inferential cognizer which realizes that it is suitable to express the
rabbit-possessor by the term moon from the sign of its existing among
objects of thought.]
Syllogism: The subject, the rabbit-possessor, is suitable to be expressed
by the term moon because it exists among objects of thought.
[Note: In Tibetan tradition, rabbit-possessor is referring to a moon]
Here rabbit possessor is suitable to be expressed by the term moon because
it is widely known as that.
[Handout dated 24 July page 2: Inferential cognizer through belief: e.g an
inferential cognizer which realizes that the scripture, “From giving,
resources, from ethics, a happy migration,” is incontrovertible with
respect to the meaning indicated by it by the sign of its being a scripture
free from the three contradictions.]
For now we will just leave it as that; otherwise it is going to be
complicated. What we have been discussing so far is an instance of more to
do with the inferential cognizer by power of the fact. Try to understand
that well first, and in the future if there is an interest, perhaps we can
look at inferential cognizer through renown and through belief.
As to what is a scripture that is free from the three contradictions, that
can be complicated. We will just leave it for now.
That is about it for the sevenfold division of consciousnesses. We will
move on to the Mind and Mental Factors. We will attempt to give you the
textbook. Please register with the office if you are interested to have
one.
Khen Rinpoche spoke in English: If you need to know more about the seven
minds, then we can do some question and answer in the next class, only if
you have. Otherwise, we will start the 51 mental factors.
As we have only finished the first two divisions of the sevenfold
consciousnesses - direct valid cognizer and inferential valid cognizer- and
if you are interested with the remaining consciousnesses, starting from
subsequent cognizer and so forth which they do have their own divisions,
then we can look at them.
Khen Rinpoche spoke in English: Do you want to know the divisions or
enough?
Student:  Yes, because we want to be fully enlightened.
Ven Gyurme: It is enough to get fully enlightened by understanding a direct
valid cognizer and inferential valid cognizer because the rest are not
valid consciousnesses.
Khen Rinpoche spoke in English: Okay then we will have one or two classes
to look at the divisions, if you know the divisions, I think that make a
little clear about the minds, on the different minds. Okay maybe one or two
classes for that so you can be fully enlightened.
