Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Lorig/Transcript/lesson23.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:53:23.831331
================================================================================



[C] The Eleven Virtuous Mental factors (dge ba)
[Root text: page 33] There are eleven virtuous mental factors:
(1) faith
(2) shame
(3) embarrassment
(4) non-attachment
(5) non-hatred
(6) non-ignorance
(7) effort (or joyous perseverance)
(8) pliancy
(9) conscientiousness
(10) equanimity
(11) non-harmfulness

Of the eleven virtuous mental factors, we have finished with the first
three: faith, shame and embarrassment.
Faith is divided into three:
   1. Clarifying faith or clear faith
   2. Faith of conviction
   3. Wishing or aspirating faith
Clear or clarifying faith is a happy mind; the mind of faith that arises
from seeing the qualities of the Three Jewels. In order to generate this
clear faith or the liking for the Three Jewels, it is important to see the
qualities of the Three Jewels. To understand and to see the qualities of
the Three Jewels, one has to learn about the qualities of the Three Jewels;
without which it is very difficult to develop this clear faith. If we
managed to develop this clear faith in the Three Jewels, it will clear away
the murkiness of the afflictions and makes the mind suitable for developing
all the positive qualities. It is important to see how we can develop this
clear faith in the Three Jewels. For example, it has to come from seeing
the qualities of the Three Jewels. In order to see the qualities of the
Three Jewels, one has to engage in hearing and reflection. If you see the
point, then you will strive in hearing and reflection.
Faith of conviction, for example, is having conviction in reincarnation and
conviction in karma and its effects. In order to develop such conviction,
one has to hear and reflect on all these points in order to develop
conviction; without which conviction will not arise. If one lacks of
conviction in reincarnation and karma and its effects then the real
practice becomes very difficult.
Wishing faith or aspiring faith is explained in relation to the Four Noble
Truths. One has to see that true suffering and true origin are to be
abandoned. One also has to see that true path and true cessation is what
one has to actualize. One also has to see that true path and true cessation
can be generated in one’s own minds.
Three types of faith are mentioned here and no matter which type of faith
one talks about, it is clear that generating any of these faiths in one’s
mind is dependent on hearing and reflection; without learning/ studying and
reflection, it is not really possible for one to develop these three kinds
of faith. If we do not develop these three kinds of faith, then it is very
difficult for us to develop any further qualities because faith is the
foundation.
Then there is shame and embarrassment.
Shame is avoidance of misconduct or misdeeds on account of oneself.
Embarrassment is the avoidance of misdeeds on account of others.
[C4] Non-attachment (ma chags pa)
[Root text: page 37] Regarding non-attachment, the Compendium of Knowledge
says:
   QUESTION: What is non-attachment?
   RESPONSE: It is a lack of attachment to [cyclic] existence and the
   articles of [cyclic] existence. It has the function of acting as a
   support for non-engagement in misconduct.
Just as it has been said above, it is a knower which is disenchanted and
lacks attachment.
The objective feature of non-attachment is the object of desire i.e. the
object to which we have developed desire or attachment for.
The aspect of this knower is non-attachment; non-attachment when focused on
the object.
The function is a support for non-engagement in misconduct.
Non-attachment is antidote to attachment, miserliness, excitement,
distraction and haughtiness.
It is good to know how non-attachment works as an antidote to these various
afflictions. So it is important to develop faith, aspiration and belief in
non-attachment.
Basically non-attachment is an antidote to attachment. In order to develop
non-attachment one has to reduce attachment. One reduces attachment in
relation to those objects that one has desire or attachment for.
How do we develop non-attachment? How do we reduce attachment for those
various objects of desire? We have the desire for pleasurable feeling. We
have to see for ourselves that no matter how much we enjoy or partake of
it, it is never satisfying and fulfilling. When we think about the samsaric
happiness/ pleasure, they are never stable and they are in the nature of
suffering. So by analyzing and thinking about this, one will come to lower
one’s attachment for them.
There are so many techniques that have been taught for turning away
attachment or reducing attachment. For example, if one has the desire for
food, there is a reflection on the drawback on having attachment for food.
Another example is the antidote of ugliness. There are many such advices in
the teachings. For example, in the Vinaya, the code of conduct for the
ordained person, there is an advice for practicing contentment where you
just keep one set of robe and with regards to food and the place where one
live, basically to keep it simple. All these advices are to develop
contentment.
Non-attachment is a virtuous mind, but we have to identify what exactly is
non-attachment. We have to see for ourselves what is in there for us when
we have non-attachment. As I mentioned earlier, when we have non-attachment
then many of those afflictions are weakened. When there is non-attachment,
it acts as antidote for various afflictions such as miserliness,
attachment, haughtiness, distraction and excitement. The whole point of
understanding the benefits of having non-attachment is to put these advices
into practice and then reduces our attachment.
[C5] Non-hatred (zhe sdang med pa)
[Root text: page 37] Regarding non-hatred, the Compendium of Knowledge
says:
  QUESTION: What is non-hatred?
  RESPONSE: It is a lack of malice with regard to sentient beings,
  suffering and the sources of suffering. It has the function of acting as
  a support for non-engagement in misconduct.
Just as it has been said above, it is a knower that conquers the generation
of hatred within observation of any of the three objects that generate
hatred [i.e., sentient beings, suffering and the sources of suffering] and
is a lack of malice.
What is the benefit of developing non-hatred, which is a virtuous mind?
Non-hatred is an antidote for belligerence, resentment, spite, jealousy and
harmfulness.
The way to develop non-hatred in the mind is to try to put a stop to
belligerence, resentment, spite and so forth. There are many advices given
for developing non-hatred; basically for dealing with anger. When we
experience sufferings, one of the advices is to remind ourselves that we
ultimately are the one who is responsible for that experience, because it
is the ripening of our own non-virtuous karma. So by understanding that, we
voluntarily accept the suffering. If we manage to voluntarily accept it,
then it helps to overcome belligerence, spite, resentment and jealousy.
The Buddha has given a set of advice on how to deal with anger. The four
trainings are:
[Root text: page 49]
   Even when derided, do not deride in return.
   Even when someone gets angry at one, do not get angry in return.
   Even when hit, do not hit back.
   Even when one's faults are exposed, do not expose others' faults.
It is important to know how to develop non-hatred. Non-hatred can only
arise by us working in reducing belligerence, resentment, spite, and
harmfulness. It is by reducing them that we are able to develop non-hatred.
When non-hatred arises in the mind, then all these different minds
-belligerence, resentment and so forth- will naturally subside.
[C6] Non-ignorance (gti mug med pa)
[Root text: page 38] Regarding non-ignorance, the Compendium of Knowledge
says:
  QUESTION: What is non-ignorance?
  RESPONSE: It is knowledge [arisen] from fruition, scripture,
  contemplation or realization, and is a wisdom of individual
  investigation. It has the function of acting as a support for the non-
  engagement in misconduct.
Just as it has been said above, it is a wisdom of individual investigation
that is able to serve as the antidote to ignorance [arising] from its cause
– being either acquired through birth or arisen through application
Non-ignorance is the opposite of ignorance. What exactly is ignorance? We
have dealt this in Lamrim. According to Vasubandhu and Arya Asanga, there
is one way you can look at ignorance as separate/different from the view of
the transitory collection. From that perspective, if you look at ignorance,
ignorance is mere not knowing something, for example, not knowing what
karma is.  This ignorance is an afflicted mind and it is posited to be a
mind of not knowing.
Non-ignorance is a derivative of wisdom.
The aspect of non-ignorance is not confused.
Its function is a support for non-engagement in misconduct.
Perhaps we need to compare non-ignorance and the mental factor of wisdom
(which is one of the five object ascertaining mental factors). It is quite
challenging but it is something that we have to look at. Are the same or
not?
|       |Mental factor of wisdom      |Mental factor of non-ignorance |
|Aspect |Distinguishing what is to be |Non-confusion                  |
|       |abandoned and what is to be  |                               |
|       |adopted                      |                               |
|Functio|Overcoming doubt             |Acting as a support for        |
|n      |                             |non-engagement in misconduct   |


According to the higher Abhidharma, ignorance is posited to be confusion;
not knowing. If that is posited to be ignorance, then non-ignorance would
be non-confusion. Perhaps this is one of the things to see if there is any
difference between the two. It is not easy because it seem to be talking
about the same thing.
Non-ignorance is posited to be two types:
   1. Non-ignorance that is acquired through birth
   2. Non-ignorance arisen through application
Perhaps we can posit an illustration for the non-ignorance that is acquired
through birth - someone born with clear intellect. Something like that does
not happen without reason. That is why it is called fruition; it is
fruition from past endeavors which arise from the past actions of the past
lives.
An illustration for non-ignorance through application: If in this life,
through hearing, reflection and meditation one generates the wisdom arisen
from hearing, reflection and meditation. That would be a case of non-
ignorance that arises in this life and it is non-ignorance that arisen
through application.
[Root text: page 40] Therefore, seek much hearing on the three baskets as
well as their commentaries – the basis upon which one engages in hearing,
analyze again and again the meaning of what has been heard with the four
types of reasoning, and generate an ascertaining consciousness. Put the
entire path into practice by way of analytical and stabilizing meditation
upon that very meaning which the wisdom arisen from contemplation has
gained ascertainment of.
      These are the assertions of the Great Trailblazers.
Hence, those who are intelligent should engage in such a mode of path that
pleases the Conquerors. If you discard much hearing, the excellent cause of
wisdom of individual investigation, follow fools stupidly like a sheep,
dwell in a relaxed and idle manner without contemplating anything
whatsoever, and yet wallow in the conceit of being good-hearted, practicing
Dharma, engaging in practice, and so forth, then you will waste your
excellent support with its leisures, ruin others who are equal in fortune,
and even become a serious condition contributing to the degeneration of the
teachings. Therefore, those of you who wish to do yourselves good should
generate belief from your hearts regarding the modes of the wisdom of
individual investigation as explained above.
The essence of this advice is again how extremely important hearing,
reflection and meditation is. These three are very important for developing
wisdom. In order to develop wisdom, one has to engage in hearing,
reflection and meditation; without which there is no wisdom. Without
wisdom, one would not be able to achieve anything significant. Through
hearing, reflecting and meditating on the teachings is also a condition for
the Buddha’s teachings to be upheld. So you have to see the point behind
hearing, reflecting and meditation.
[Root text: page 40] In this vein, the Verse Summary of the Perfection of
Wisdom in Eight Thousand Lines (Ratnagunasancayagatha) says:
    How can millions and millions of blind men, without a guide,
    Enter the city without even knowing the path?
    Without wisdom, the five perfections are without sight;
    Without a guide, they cannot contact enlightenment.
    At such a time that they are strongly conjoined with wisdom,
    Then eyes are acquired and this name is attained.
The Venerable Maitreya also says [in his Sublime Continuum of the Great
Vehicle (Uttaratantra)](stanza 5.14-15):
    Conceptualizing the three spheres [of agent, action, and object]
    Is asserted to be a knowledge obscuration.
    Conceptualizations such as miserliness
    Are asserted to be afflictive obscurations.
    Apart from wisdom,
    None other is a cause for abandoning these.
    Therefore, wisdom is supreme. Its foundation is hearing.
    Thus, hearing is supreme.
And Acharya Aryasura says [in his Compendium of the Perfections
(Paramitasamasa)]:
    The blind ones of little hearing do not know the modes of meditation.
    Lacking that, what are they to contemplate?
    Therefore, you should put effort in hearing. Due to that cause,
    Contemplate and meditate, whereby vast wisdom will arise.
The supreme scholar Vasubandhu also says [in his Treasury of Knowledge]
(stanza 6.5ab):
    By abiding in ethics, possessing hearing and contemplation,
    There is strong application in meditation.
So in order to develop non-ignorance we need wisdom. In order to develop
wisdom we need to engage in the threefold activity - the process of
hearing, reflection and meditation.  Again we have to compare non-ignorance
and wisdom. Sometimes it seems like we are talking about the same thing.
[C7] Effort (brtson 'grus)
[Root text: page 41] Regarding effort, the Compendium of Knowledge says:
  QUESTION: What is effort?
  RESPONSE: It is a mind that is enthusiastic in regard to armoring,
  application, non-inferiority, irreversibility, and non-complacency. It
  has the function of fulfilling and accomplishing the class of virtue.
Just as it has been said above, the mind that is enthusiastic about virtue
is effort. Thus the Acharya Vasubandhu says [in his A Discussion of the
Five Aggregates]:
  QUESTION: What is effort?
  RESPONSE: It is the antidote for laziness and a mind that is enthusiastic
  about virtue.
(Note: Venerable Gyurme translated brtson 'grus as joyous perseverance;
instead of effort.)
The object of joyous perseverance is virtuous activity.
The subjective aspect is enthusiasm.
Its function is to accomplish virtue.
[Root text: page 42] The Compendium of Knowledge teaches five types:
(1) effort of armoring
(2) effort of application
(3) effort of non-inferiority
(4) effort of irreversibility
(5) effort of non-complacency
According to The Compendium of Knowledge teaches five types:
   1) joyous perseverance of armoring
   2) joyous perseverance of application
   3) joyous perseverance of non-inferiority
   4) joyous perseverance of irreversibility
   5) joyous perseverance of non-complacency
[Root text: page 42] (1) The effort of armoring is the donning of the great
armor of preceding attitude, a mental enthusiasm prior to embarking on a
virtuous activity.
What is armor-like joyous perseverance?  Just prior to engaging in the
virtuous activity there is a strong enthusiasm for it. That is armor-like
joyous perseverance.
[Root text: page 43] (2) The effort of application is a mind that is
enthusiastic when engaging in practice through application. It is of two
types: constant application and respectful application.
As the name implies, joyous perseverance of application happens when one is
applying oneself to a virtuous activity. So joyous perseverance of
application is when one is applying oneself to that virtuous activity, the
mind that is enthusiastic about it.
There are two types of joyous perseverance of application:
   1. Constant application
   2. Respectful application.
Khen Rinpoche spoke in English: I think I did explain these two are
different long time ago. I forgot myself.  What is the difference between
these two? Anybody remembers? I did explained some time, but I don’t
remember how these two are different. I saw in one of the text before but I
couldn’t find it anymore.  I think it is one of the book footnotes, but I
don’t know which book. If I remember then I explain these two. I don’t
remember now.
[Root text: page 43]
(3) The effort of non-inferiority is a generation of enthusiasm when
engaging in virtue without the mind being discouraged, thinking, "How could
one such as I do this?"
(4) The effort of irreversibility is an accomplished mental enthusiasm such
that one cannot be diverted by other circumstances at the time of engaging
in virtuous activities.
The joyous perseverance of non-inferiority and joyous perseverance of
irreversibility happen during the actual practice i.e. when one is engaged
in the actual practice. It is a mind that is not discouraged when engaging
in an actual practice; therefore one will never turn away from the
practice.
[Root text: page 43] (5) The effort of non-complacency is exertion that
does not just rest complacent with some trifling virtue, but seeks higher
qualities.
Joyous perseverance of non-complacency happens after a virtuous activity.
It refers to a mind that is not complacent or not satisfied after having
achieved something and happy with, “I have done and that’s it”, but it is a
mind that looks to achieving more qualities.
Prior to engaging in virtuous activity we need joyous perseverance; an
enthusiastic mind. When we start with the chosen virtuous activity, again
we have to start it with a mind of enthusiasm. When engaging in the
virtuous activity it is important not to get discourage and then stop doing
that activity during that time. Even when once the activity is
accomplished, one should not be satisfied with it and thinking “That it is
enough”, but rather we should strive to do it better and gain more
qualities.
The main incompatible factor of joyous perseverance is laziness. Laziness
is the basis for the afflictions to arise. Laziness deprives us of virtues.
When we are deprived of virtues, then this life degenerates and the future
lives will also degenerate.  In one sutra, Buddha says that laziness is
like the basis for all the afflictions.  When having laziness in the mind,
there is nothing at all in the mind.
There are three kinds of laziness:
   1. the laziness of procrastination
   2. the laziness ignoble activity
   3. the laziness of discouragement
There are many techniques or advices given in the Lamrim to overcome the
laziness of procrastination.
We can overcome the laziness of procrastination by reflecting on the
following topics:
    • Reflection on the human life of freedom and endowments,
    • Reflection on death and impermanence and
    • Reflection on the sufferings of the lower realms.
Similarly the reflection that is mentioned in the section on the path that
is shared with the persons of medium capacity such as reflection on the
faults of cyclic existence can help us to overcome the laziness of
procrastination.  This topic can also help us overcome the laziness of
ignoble activities.
What about stopping the laziness of self-contempt or discouragement?
To understand the presentation of mind, for example, how it is the nature
of mind that when the mind is trained and accustomed, then change is
definitely possible.  As mentioned in the Engaging in the Bodhisattvas
Deeds: “There is nothing that cannot become easier if your mind is
accustomed to it”.
So by understanding the presentation of mind in particular how it is the
natures of the mind to change when your mind is familiarized with the
process, and through understanding this possibility we stop this
discouragement. It is said that joyous perseverance is very important
because with joyous perseverance we are able to develop quality that we
have not yet develop. Laziness is the one that stop us from developing any
new qualities. So it is important to apply ourselves to joyous
perseverance.
[C8] Pliancy (shin tu sbyangs pa)
[Root text: page 45] Regarding pliancy, the Compendium of Knowledge says:
  QUESTION: What is pliancy?
  RESPONSE: It is a serviceability of body and mind due to severing the
  continuum of unfavorable states of body and mind. It has the function of
  eliminating all obscurations.
Just as it has been said above, it is a knower that deposits an imprint so
that the mind can be applied, however one wishes, to a virtuous object of
observation, and that severs the continuum of unfavorable states of body
and mind.
When divided, pliancy is of two types:
(1) physical pliancy
(2) mental pliancy
Pliancy focuses on a virtuous object.
The subjective aspect of this mind is that you are able to put your body
and mind to use in whatever way you wish; serviceability.
Function is eliminating all obscurations.
Here there are five obscurations;
   1. aspiration for desire object,
   2. malice,
   3. sleep and lethargy,
   4. excitement and regret,
   5. doubt
When there is pliancy, these five obscurations can be removed.
There are two kinds of pliancy:
1. Physical pliancy
2. Mental pliancy
The pliancy here has to be consciousness; in this case primary mental
pliancy because physical pliancy is posited as a special form of tangible
object.
It is mentioned in the Lamrim that mental pliancy is achieved before
physical pliancy.
There is mental pliancy, then you achieve physical pliancy, then you
achieve the bliss of physical pliancy and then you achieve the bliss of
mental pliancy. That is the order.
      Mental pliancy ( Physical pliancy ( Bliss of physical pliancy ( Bliss
of mental pliancy
In order to achieve calm-abiding it is necessary for one to achieve the
bliss of pliancy; not just pliancy alone. On top of pliancy, you must have
achieved the bliss of pliancy before that realization is considered calm-
abiding.
On the way to develops calm-abiding, there are nine mental states and the
ninth state is said to be a single-pointedness of the mind of the desire
realm. But that is not calm-abiding yet. One must have developed the bliss
of pliancy before that mind is called the mind of calm-abiding. If you have
achieved the mind of calm-abiding, you have achieved the first mind of the
higher realm, i.e. higher than desire realm.
Student: Root text page 38, on non-ignorance, it stated that “It has the
function of acting as a support for the non-engagement in misconduct”. What
is the meaning of misconduct? Is it simply means avoiding negative karma or
having a mind that is separated from wisdom?
Khen Rinpoche: For example, not knowing karma and its effect, because of
not knowing what is karma and its effect then it is possible to generate a
wrong view about karma. There are many kinds of misconduct.
Student: Can the explanations between non-ignorance and wisdom be
understood in terms of possibility?
Ven Gyurme: Is there something to be both?
Student: Doesn’t seem to be the case because Khen Rinpoche said they are
different; but I am just wondering non-ignorance that which is wisdom is
necessarily non-ignorance? Non-ignorance seemed to be something at a lower
level than wisdom.
Khen Rinpoche: Something to think about.
Student: How do we relate non-attachment with renunciation? Are they the
same?
Khen Rinpoche: I don’t think they are the same. Renunciation is probably
stronger. Non-attachment is just a lack of attachment and that is the
subjective aspect. Renunciation is a mind that wishes to turn away from
cyclic existence. So renunciation is not just non-attachment, it is
something stronger than that.
Student: Root text page 35, it is mentioned that faith and respect are
separate mental factors. Respect is which mental factor as it is not one of
the 51 mental factors. Is it a derivative of one of the 51 mental factors?
Is it a derivative of faith?
Khen Rinpoche: They are not the same. As said in the Lamrim,
-developing faith through remembering the qualities,
-developing respect through remembering the kindness.
So respect is induced by faith.
Student: Is respect a derivative of one of the 51 mental factors?
Khen Rinpoche: In the first place, the 51 mental factors are not
exhaustive. I don’t think there are only 51 mental factors. Where do you
put respect? Can you include it under faith? You have to think about it. It
is not something that we can decisively say “this or that” because when you
look at all the available texts, nobody has ever said anything on whether
it is this or that.
Read the rest on your own. We will look at conscientiousness, equanimity,
noon-harmfulness and the six root afflictions. These are also the 20
secondary afflictions. At least now you have a rough idea of each of these
mental factors. So when we talk about them, you have a rough idea of  what
is non-attachment, non-hatred, non-ignorance  and so forth.







