Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Lorig/Transcript/lesson10.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:53:23.934519
================================================================================


Direct perceiver has four divisions:
   1. Sense direct perceiver
   2. Mental direct perceiver
   3. Self-knowing direct perceiver
   4. Yogic direct perceiver
According to the Sutra School, direct perceiver is necessarily:
1. Free of conceptuality
2. Non-mistaken
You must understand the importance of knowing this subject well because, as
I mentioned before, the different modules in the Basic Program especially
the philosophical studies are closely connected. If you don’t get this well
and have a good understanding as possible, without reasonable understanding
of Lorig it is not possible to say you want to learn Tenets well. This is
not going to happen. Since there are some connections, so from now you must
try to understand as much as you can.
According to the Sutra School, you must understand:
    - Why direct perceivers necessarily are non-mistaken?
    - Why conceptual consciousnesses are necessarily mistaken?
The way to understand the reasons why according to Sutra School (SS) the
direct perceivers are necessarily non-mistaken and conceptual
consciousnesses are necessarily mistaken has to depend on:
      -the understanding of what a mistaken consciousness is and
      -knowing the definition of a mistaken consciousness
Once you know the definition of a mistaken consciousness, then you will be
able to understand why, according to Sutra School, direct perceivers are
necessarily non-mistaken.
The proponents of the MOS, the third in the hierarchy of the four tenets,
can be divided into:
   1. True Aspectarian Mind-only
   2. False Aspectarian Mind-only
Whether you understand this or not, it doesn’t matter but you just listen.
Khen Rinpoche spoke in English: You just listen and put some imprints.
For the False Aspectarian Mind-only, they also posit direct perceivers such
as sense direct perceiver and mental direct perceiver. But according to
them, sense direct perceivers and mental direct perceivers are mistaken.
This position is different from Sutra School.
The False Aspectarian mind-only assert that:
   1. Sense direct perceiver and mental direct perceiver are mistaken
   2. Self-knowing direct perceiver and yogic direct perceiver are non-
      mistaken
Similarly, the True Aspectarian Mind-only assert that sense direct
perceivers in the continuum of ordinary being are necessarily mistaken.
Just to give an idea, as we move up the tenets, there will be slightly
different assertions. When we go all the ways up to the highest tenets, the
CMWS, then with the exception of the wisdom directly perceiving emptiness,
all other minds in the continuum of sentient beings are necessarily
mistaken. For the CMWS, not only sense direct perceivers in the continuum
of a sentient being are mistaken, basically every mind in the continuum of
a sentient being, with the exception of the wisdom of directly realizing
emptiness, is necessarily mistaken. So from here, you can see that there is
so much to know as there are a lot more to come.
Here we are approaching the topics from the perspective of the SS. At
least, from the perspective of the SS, you have to understand why direct
perceivers are necessarily non-mistaken.  Only after that, when we study
Tenets, we will look at why MOS asserts that not all direct perceivers are
necessarily non-mistaken. As we go up to the CMWS, we will look at why CMWS
asserts, with the exception of the wisdom directly perceiving emptiness,
all other minds in the continuum of sentient beings are necessarily
mistaken. Therefore, you have to understand all these assertions.
Anyway, all this will become clearer when we look at Tenets. The reason why
I brought this up is just to highlight to you that there are a lot more
coming.
Khen Rinpoche spoke in English: A lot more interesting things coming. Okay?
Not the boring things but interesting things coming.
Earlier we have looked at sense direct perceiver and mental direct
perceiver.
Example: Sense direct perceiver apprehending form.
   1. First, the sense direct perceiver apprehending form is generated.
   2. Following that the mental direct perceiver apprehending form, but in
      the continuum of ordinary beings, this mental direct perceiver
      apprehending form lasts for only the shortest moment of time.(When the
      duration of a finger snap is divided into 65 parts, 1/65 of a finger
      snap is the shortest moment of time)
   3. Then conceptual consciousness apprehending form arises.







The conceptual thought apprehending form is able to induce ascertainment
with respect to form due the realization of form earlier by the sense
direct perceiver apprehending form.
The mental direct perceiver apprehending form in the continuum of ordinary
beings last for only the shortest moment of time and because it only abides
for such a short moment of time, that mental direct perceiver apprehending
form does not realize form i.e. it is not able to induce ascertainment with
regards to form.
In order to be a mental direct perceiver, four characteristic must be
present:
1. It is generated in dependence upon a mental sense power, which is its
   own uncommon empowering condition
2. It must be non-mistaken
3. Free from conceptuality
4. It has to be a consciousness which is an other-knower
You can look at consciousness in terms of:
   1. Other-knower
   2. Self-knower
Other-knowers
An other-knower realizes something other than itself.
Other-knowers are:
   1. In the division of direct perceivers, other-knowers include:
        a. Sense direct perceiver
        b. Mental direct perceiver
        c. Yogic direct perceiver
   2. All conceptual consciousnesses.
Therefore, if a consciousness is any of these -sense direct perceiver,
mental direct perceiver, yogic direct perceiver or conceptual consciousness-
 then it is necessarily an other-knower.
Student: Why the word ‘other-knower’ is not in the definition of sense
direct perceiver?
Khen Rinpoche: This is something to think about.
For conceptual consciousness, there is no need to specifically mention as
an other-knower.
The definition of sense direct perceiver is:
1) that which is produced in dependence on its own uncommon empowering
condition, a physical sense power,
2) is a knower that is free from conceptuality and non-mistaken.
However, the definition of a sense direct perceiver here does not say “it
is an other-knower that is free from conceptuality and non-mistaken.”
Whereas in the definition of the mental direct perceiver and yogic direct
perceiver, the word “is an other-knower” is included in their definition.
Definition of a mental direct perceiver is:
1) that which is generated in dependence on a mental sense power which is
its own uncommon empowering condition and
2) is a consciousness that is an other-knower which is free from
conceptuality and non-mistaken.
Definition of a yogic direct perceiver is:
1) that which is generated in dependence on its own uncommon empowering
condition, a meditative stabilization which is a union of calm abiding and
special insight, and
2) is an other-knowing exalted knower in the continuum of a Superior which
is free from conceptuality and non-mistaken.

Related to the discussion that is brought up here, if you are asked:
Is the self-knower that experiences an eye consciousness apprehending form
is a sense direct perceiver?
Is the self-knower experience a sense direct perceiver a sense direct
perceiver?
Khen Rinpoche spoke in English: Yes or no?  No, are you sure? Why say no?
In the debate language, it follows that the self-knower experiencing a
sense direct perceiver is a sense direct perceiver because it produces in
dependence upon the uncommon empowering condition, a physical sense power.
So the question is: Is the uncommon empowering condition of a self-knower
experiencing a sense direct perceiver a physical sense power?
Ven Gyurme: They are one collection. Khen Rinpoche said the word “they are
one collection” in last lesson.
What do you think is the uncommon empowering condition of the self-knower
experiencing an eye consciousness?
These two -the eye consciousness and the self-knower experience it - are
established simultaneously. If that is the case, then the uncommon
empowering condition for this self-knower that is experiencing the eye
consciousness has to posit as the physical sense power as well.
The self-knower experiencing an eye consciousness:
-is a direct perceiver,
-is non-mistaken and
-is free from conceptuality
Is it generated in dependence upon the uncommon empowering condition of the
eye consciousness which is the physical sense power? That is the thing to
analyze.
In the definition of a mental direct perceiver, why is “an other-knower” is
specified? What does it eliminate? Why it is specifically put in the
definition of a mental direct perceiver?
A mental direct perceiver is non-mistaken knower, is free from
conceptuality and is generated in dependence upon its uncommon empowering
condition, a mental sense power.  But that is not enough to make something
a mental direct perceiver as there must be an other-knower in order to make
it a mental direct perceiver, otherwise, then everything will become a self-
knower experiencing a mental consciousness.
If you think along this way, perhaps this is the reason why other-knower is
included in the definition of the mental direct perceiver.  If we apply the
same line of reasoning to the sense direct perceiver, what do you have to
say?
The point here is that we have to understand:
- Why the term “other-knower” is in the definition of a mental direct
perceiver?
- Why is it not sufficient for the definition to say that its uncommon
empowering condition is a mental sense power, it is non-mistaken and it is
free from conceptuality?
 - Why do we have to put the word “other-knower” in the definition?
If we don’t mention the word “other-knower” then what happen to the self-
knower experiencing a mental consciousness? That make the self-knower
becomes the mental consciousness.
So, in order to show that the self-knower experiencing a mental
consciousness is a self-knower and not that mental consciousness, therefore
the word “other-knower” is included in the definition of a mental direct
perceiver.
It should be like that. If you say this is ok, then if you apply the same
line of reasoning to the definition of sense direct perceiver, is it ok or
not?
Student: (Audio 37:08 – 37:50) Is the uncommon empowering condition of a
self-knower experiencing the eye consciousness apprehending form should be
mental sense power?
Khen Rinpoche: Why do you have to posit the uncommon empowering condition
of this self-knower experiencing an eye consciousness to be a mental sense
power?
Student: Because the self-knower is experiencing an eye consciousness
apprehending form, so its uncommon empowering condition has to be a mental
sense power and not a physical sense power.
Khen Rinpoche spoke in English: Good point.
Student : (Audio 40:08 – 41:04) For someone who remembers “I saw blue” and
the reason posited was because the self-knowing direct perceiver that
perceives the consciousness apprehending blue in the past. Does this self-
knowing direct perceiver actually apprehending the thought consciousness
that discriminate blue or does it actually apprehend the eye consciousness
that apprehends blue at that point in time?
Khen Rinpoche: Memory is a conceptual thought. When the eye consciousness
apprehended blue earlier, there was a self-knower experiencing it. Of
course at the time of apprehending blue, you also has the thought
conceptually designating this is blue and this is not blue. There is also a
self-knower experiencing that thought.
Back to other-knower, other-knowers are included in:
   1.  In the division of  direct perceiver:
        a. Sense direct perceiver
        b. Mental direct perceiver
        c. Yogic direct perceiver
   2. Conceptual consciousness (conceptual thought)
Self-knower
Other than an other-knower, you have a self-knower.
The SS, MOS and AMWS assert self-knower. What is the main reason for them
asserting self-knower? The correct sign for them to establish the existent
of self-knower is memory.
The reason why we can remember blue is because, at the earlier time, blue
was realized by an eye consciousness apprehending it. Similarly, we also
remember the experience of having seen blue. The experience here refers to
the eye consciousness.
So the only reason why we can remember having seen blue is because at the
earlier time when the eye consciousness was apprehending blue, there was a
consciousness that was experiencing this eye consciousness.
According to SS, MOS and AMWS, the reason why after having seen blue and
then at later time you remember the experience of having seen blue is
because at the time when the eye consciousness was apprehending blue, there
was a consciousness experiencing this eye consciousness. This consciousness
which experience the eye consciousness apprehending blue is called the self-
knower
The self-knower experiencing the eye consciousness apprehending blue is one
collection with the eye consciousness apprehending blue.
The self-knower that experiences the eye consciousness apprehending blue
that which is a factor of clarity and knowing.
For the eye consciousness apprehending blue, there are two factors:
   1. The factor that which experiences itself (i.e. experiencing the eye
      consciousness apprehending blue.)
   2. The factor which experiences something other than itself (which is
      blue.)
Just like the illumination of a flame, there are the two parts:
   1. Illuminating itself (is like the factor of which it experiences itself
      – self-knower )
   2. Illuminating something other than itself (is like the factor of which
      it experiences something other than itself – other-knower )
These two factors are included into one collection.
You must try to have a rough idea of what is being discussed here. If you
do not have a rough idea of what a self-knower is, then we come to the
highest school, CMWS, which do not assert self-knower and in reality there
is no self-knower, we cannot make any comparison with those schools which
assert self-knower. Here we are trying to find out what is a self-knower in
accordance with those who believe in it. In fact, if you really think about
the main reason that the proponent of self-knower assert the existence of
self-knower is memory, it does make sense; otherwise how to remember
things? Only after you have the feeling; “Maybe there is a self-knower’ and
later on when you hear the explanation of the CMWS which  actually is not
like that, then you will appreciate their difference, or else it is of no
big deal to you.
So you try to have a rough idea of why self-knower is posited by those who
believe in it. The main reason they put forth is memory; the memory of
subject and object.
When a self-knower experiences the consciousness that is of one collection
with it, it does not experience the consciousness with any sense of duality
such as the experiencer is here and the experience is there.
The way a self-knower experiences the consciousness that is of the same
collection is as if it enters and become one with the consciousness that it
is experiencing; so there is no duality. So, this is what constitutes a
self-knowing direct perceiver that which:
    • has an aspect of the apprehender,
    • is free from conceptuality and
    • is non-mistaken
Student: Is a self-knower of a conceptual consciousness conceptual or non-
conceptual?
Khen Rinpoche: Earlier it was mentioned that a conceptual consciousness is
necessarily an other-knower.
Student : (audio 59:09 – 59:40) So it is non-dual with a conceptual
consciousness because any self-knower has the characteristics of being non-
dual with the consciousness it is experiencing. In that sense, is it
conceptual?
Khen Rinpoche: You accept that sense direct perceiver, mental direct
perceiver, yogic direct perceiver and conceptual consciousnesses are other-
knower?
Student: Ok.
Khen Rinpoche: If that is the case then there is no reason why this
question should be asked.
Khen Rinpoche: The answer is No.
Student: It is a non-conceptual but it is non-dual with the conceptual
consciousness.
Khen Rinpoche: (English) Yes, what is the problem?
Ven Gyurme: It experiences it non-dually.
Student: It is one entity but one is conceptual and the other is non-
conceptual.
Khen Rinpoche: It doesn’t matter, no problem with that.
Student : (Audio: 60:59 – 61:43) [Clarifying with the terminology being
used] Can we say that self-knower and the consciousness that is it
experiencing is one entity with two isolates?
Khen Rinpoche spoke in English: Yes, you can say that.
Student: (Audio: 62:10 – 63:44) Would like to clarify with the example of a
self-knowing direct perceiver which is a AAA. The example is a smoker who
knows smoking is bad but yet still smoke. Is that an AAA that is self-
knower?
Student: Does hearer does not accept inferential valid cognizer?
Khen Rinpoche: No. Cannot be a hearer, should be a non-Buddhist Nihilist.
Student: Sometimes when we meditate, there is a mindfulness of the object
and there is another part of the mind (which is called the guarding
alertness) that makes sure that the mind does not go shopping. Is this
vigilance of the mind the self-knower?
Khen Rinpoche: No, it is a mental factor. It is a different mind.
Within one consciousness, there is two parts:
   1. One part is experiencing itself
   2. Another part is realizing something other than itself.
These two are present in any one consciousness.
On any one consciousness these two parts/factors exist in the collection of
consciousness.
In the collection of consciousness, there are two parts existing in the
consciousness. There is the part that illuminates objects other than
itself; which is the other-knower. If you expand the presentation from
this, then you have sense direct perceiver, mental direct perceiver, yogic
direct perceiver and conceptual consciousnesses.
Student: (Audio 68:35 – 69:38): Can I say that the self-knower experiencing
the eye consciousness, the eye consciousness is not aspected?
Khen Rinpoche: Remember the discussion on the aspect of an apprehender and
the aspect of the apprehended?
Student: So it is in the definition.
Student: Audio 70:02 – 70:51): Can I say that the eye consciousness and the
self-knower they share the three conditions: the observed object condition,
uncommon empowering condition and immediate preceding condition? Just now
it was mentioned that there is an eye consciousness which has a collection
of self-knower and other-knower.
Khen Rinpoche: What we are trying to analyze is the self-knower
experiencing an eye consciousness apprehending blue. The question: Does the
self-knower experiencing the eye consciousness apprehending blue have the
same three conditions that produce the eye consciousness apprehending blue?
Perhaps one can say that the self-knower experiencing eye consciousness
apprehending blue:
    • is generated in dependence upon blue
    • is generated in dependence upon the eye sense power and
    • is also generated in dependence upon the consciousness that existed
      just prior to the generation of the eye consciousness apprehending
      blue.
But whether blue is the observed object condition of the self-knower
experiencing eye consciousness apprehending blue is something to think
about.
The eye consciousness apprehending blue and the self-knower experiencing
it, these two come into being at the same time (simultaneously) i.e. they
are generated at the same time, abide at the same time and disintegrate at
the same. Therefore, the causes that are responsible for the generation of
the eye consciousness apprehending blue can be said to be the causes of the
self-knower experiencing the eye consciousness apprehending blue. Probably
we can say that.
In short, the causes for the production of an eye consciousness
apprehending blue can be posited to be the causes for the production of the
self-knower experiencing the eye consciousness apprehending blue.
Student:  (Audio 75:55 – 77:00): Do all sense direct perceivers have the
aspect of an apprehender? Because in page 4 of the handout (dated 10 July),
the statement “The eye consciousness itself is the apprehender” and I take
it to mean all sense direct perceiver has the aspect of an apprehender.
Ven Gyurme: There is a difference between:
- apprehender and apprehended and
-the aspect of an apprehender and aspect of the apprehended
Khen Rinpoche: What is the apprehended object of the eye consciousness
apprehending blue?
The apprehended object of a consciousness is mutually inclusive with the
appearing object of the consciousness. What is the appearing object of an
eye consciousness apprehending blue? It is Blue.
So blue is the apprehended object of the eye consciousness apprehending
blue.
The eye consciousness apprehending blue is the aspect of the apprehended,
because it is a consciousness that is generated into the aspect of blue.
Student: (Audio: 80:36 - 81:40) There is an apprehender which is the
subject and the apprehended which is the object. The self-knower is
apprehending the eye consciousness apprehending blue so the self-knower is
the apprehender. What is being apprehended by this apprehender (the self-
knower) is the eye consciousness apprehending blue. In turn the eye
consciousness as the apprehender is apprehending the object blue. Is this
ok?
Khen Rinpoche spoke in English: That is correct.
Student: (Audio 81:50- 82:10): The self-knower take on the aspect of the
apprehender, the eye consciousness apprehending blue, if that is the case
is there a cause and effect between the self-knower and the eye
consciousness?
Khen Rinpoche: There is no cause and effect relationship between a self-
knower and the consciousness that it is experiencing because they are
established simultaneously i.e. it is produced at the same time. If you
talk about sequence, then it is necessarily to talk about cause and effect,
but because they are produced simultaneously, you cannot talk about cause
and effect.
Student: If it occurs simultaneously, then how does a self-knower take on
the aspect of an apprehender, which is the eye consciousness itself?
Ven Gyurme: This aspect of the study of Lorig is the most difficult aspect.
So what’s the problem? If there is no cause and effect how does it take on
the aspect of an apprehender is it? It is one entity.
Student: (Audio 84:03 – 84:15) If it is one entity, both are the main mind?
Probably the main mind would have these two components right?
Khen Rinpoche: All minds have self-knower. Whether it is a main mind or
mental factor there is a self-knower experiencing it.
Student: (Audio: 84:53 – 86:05)  What would be the problem if we were to
say and use the terms that the observed object condition, uncommon
empowering condition and immediately preceding condition that give rise to
the self-knower ? Seems like Khen Rinpoche was very carefully when he is
giving the explanation earlier to show that it arise in dependence on them
but it not quite the same.
Khen Rinpoche: Blue is the appearing object of eye consciousness
apprehending blue. If we say that blue is the appearing object of the self-
knower experiencing the eye consciousness apprehending blue, then how?
The self-knower experiencing the eye consciousness apprehending blue, what
appears to this consciousness? It is only the eye consciousness
apprehending blue and blue doesn’t appear.
In the next lesson, we will look at the facsimile of a direct perceiver.
Once we are done with that we will move on to the inferential valid
cognizer.
About the smoking, I don’t really understand. Let assume that this is the
answer to the earlier question about smoking. A smoker may know that if one
smoke, it is bad for one’s health but such a thought can be a doubt as one
can be wondering; “Maybe yes and maybe not". For the person who is still
entertaining doubt about whether smoking is really bad or not, obviously he
doesn’t realize that smoking is bad and continues to smoke. After hearing
more about the harmful effect of smoking and believing that smoking is
really bad, it is an assumption but nevertheless it is accords with the
fact. That is just a thought but is better than doubt. So when one have a
correct assumption, the chances of smoking less is higher and with greater
hope. The person who has the correct assumption takes side with the truth
that smoking is bad, but he has not induced ascertainment yet. There is no
realization yet but nevertheless has taken side with the truth but he still
smokes. Even one has a very strong belief in the harmful effect of smoking
but nevertheless it is just assumption. There is still a way to go before
one is able to induce an ascertainment. When one is able to induce
ascertainment and so sure about it, then that is what is called a valid
cognizer. So during the gap between the developments of this ascertainment,
which is a realization, and the correction assumption, one still you smoke.
 Once a person is able to induce the ascertainment, a valid cognition, of
the harmful effect of smoking, then definitely the chances of him smoking
less is higher than the chance that he had when he just has the correct
belief.
So those people who have a valid cognizer realizing the harmful effect of
smoking still smoke? Yes or no?
(Student feedback and share his view)
Due to seeing an advertisement on the harmful effects of smoking it is
possible to generate a valid thought thinking smoking is bad. But this
thought can be a valid cognizer or a correctly assuming consciousness or
even a doubt. The adults who don’t give the children the lighter because,
with respect to others being harmed by smoking, they realize that, but with
respect to themselves being harmed, they still have doubt. There are also
people who know that they are harmed by certain habit like smoking, they
knowingly engage in the habit that harms them.

Questions for discussion on Sunday, 22nd July 2012
1. If it is an established  base,  is  it  necessarily  all  three  of  the
   following:
   (1) Appearing object
   (2) Determined object, and
   (3) Object of engagement?

2. Object possessors are divided into: (1) Persons (2) Awarenesses, and (3)
   Expressive sounds.
     a) Why are they object possessors?
     b) If it is a sound, is it necessarily an object possessor?

3. (a) If an object appears to a direct perceiver, is  it  necessarily  its
   appearing object?
     (b)  If  an  object  appears  to  a  conceptual  consciousness,  is  it
      necessarily not its appearing object?

4. Among the seven-fold division of consciousness, how  many  are  mistaken
   consciousnesses and how many are non-mistaken consciousnesses?

5. (a) What is the uncommon empowering condition, the mental sense power?
   (b) If it is a consciousness that is generated in dependence on a mental
      sense power, is it necessarily a mental direct perceiver?





-----------------------
Conceptual consciousness apprehending form arise

Mental direct perceiver apprehending form (that lasts for the shortest
moment of time)




being

Sense direct perceiver apprehending form


