Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Lorig/Transcript/lesson08.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:53:23.796026
================================================================================


In the twelve-link of dependent arising, there are four projected results:
   1. Name and form
   2. Six sources
   3. Contact
   4. Feeling
These are the four links which are the four projected results. We did look
at these in the previous module when we were looking at the twelve-link of
dependent arising. We are able to say them but, if without the prior study
in the understanding of the presentation of mind, it would be difficult to
be able to really explain and understand what those four things are when we
talked about name and form, the six sources, contact and feeling.
The link of name and form
The first of the four projected result is the link of name and form. The
name and form refers to the five aggregates. It is not just the five
aggregates, but the five aggregates which are projected by karma and the
afflictions. So, the five contaminated appropriated aggregates are:
   1. The aggregates of form
   2. The aggregates of feeling
   3. The aggregates of discrimination
   4. The aggregates of compositional factor
   5. The aggregates of consciousness
The link of six sources
The link of the six sources is the six sense powers. It is referring to the
time when the sense powers are established and during which their
respective consciousnesses that depends on them for the generation has not
yet arise. So, in order to understand exactly what these six sense powers
are, then you have to study what these six sense powers are that were done
earlier in this module.
The link of contact
If you think about the link of contact, it is really complicated.
The link of contact refers to the moment when the following three things
meet together:
   1. The object
   2. The sense power
   3. The consciousness
If these three things are present simultaneously at that moment then how do
you posit the cause and effect relationship between them?
Only after the meeting of these three things then you have the link of
feeling. Feeling is the result arising from the contact and without
contact, you will not have feeling.
I am just positing a thesis now. I am not saying this is the case.
Khen Rinpoche spoke in English: I am in the learning process.
Just how the link of contact is posited to happen, then if we think about
an eye consciousness apprehending vase, the three things must come
together:
   1. The object       -vase
   2. The sense power  -eye sense power
   3. The consciousness      -eye consciousness
When these three things come together then you have eye consciousness
apprehending vase.
This is something to analyze. Do you agree that the eye consciousness
apprehending vase comes after these three things meet?
In the previous lesson, we did talk about the three conditions for the
production of a sense consciousness.
In the case of eye consciousness apprehending vase, the three conditions
are:
   1. The observed object condition:          the vase
   2. The uncommon empowering condition:      the eye sense power
   3. The immediately preceding condition:    consciousness
In dependence on these three conditions, an eye consciousness apprehending
vase is produced.
In this case, these three conditions are the causes which lead to its
effect - eye consciousness apprehending vase.
If you think about it in this way, these three conditions would be posited
to be the cause of the effect; which is the eye consciousness apprehending
vase. So, you can posit the cause and effect relationship.
In this case, then vase would be posited as a cause of the eye
consciousness apprehending vase because the eye consciousness apprehending
vase is produced in dependence on vase.
With the exception of Vaibhashika, the lowest school, the Sutra School and
above accept that cause and effect are sequential; not simultaneously. The
Vaibhashika has their own position but that is not what is accepted by the
rest of the Buddhist tenets.
Cause and effect are sequential i.e. cause has to precede effect. Can cause
and effect happen simultaneously?
Here we posit that there is a cause and effect relationship and the cause
and effect are not sequential although when we look at a vase, it is as if
the eye consciousness apprehending vase and the vase exist simultaneously.
But in reality, this is not the case. The Vaibhashika (Great Exposition
School [GES]), actually assert that the eye consciousness apprehending vase
function almost like a hand grabbing an object; it is like there and then.
For the GES, the physical sense power, for example, the eye sense power,
does know its object.
The lowest school, GES, assert that the eye sense power also see the
object. Of course the eye consciousness also sees the object, but this is
not the assertion of the Sutra School and above.
Based on our ordinary experience, when we see something we don’t feel that
there is sequence of events such as there is a vase then our eye
consciousness sees it. What we feel is that our eye consciousness
apprehending vase and vase seem to exist simultaneously, but this is not
what reality is. This is not what the Sutra School and above assert. Why?
This is because there has to be a sequence for cause and effect i.e. cause
necessarily precedes effect. If that is the case, then it cannot be
simultaneous. Then we have to posit:
    - the vase to be the cause of the eye consciousness apprehending vase
    - eye consciousness apprehending vase is the result of its observed
      object condition, vase.
In dependence on vase as the observed object condition, the eye
consciousness apprehending vase is generated into having the aspect of
vase.
Student 1: (Audio 21:30 – 22:21) For the cause to give rise to the effect,
cause and effect has to be the same category of phenomenon like
consciousness give rise to consciousness and form would give rise to
another form of moment….
Khen Rinpoche spoke in English: As explained, there are two different types
of cause; like the water is the cause for the plant but this doesn’t mean
that water becomes the plant.
Student 1: But water and plant are still form. Here it sounds like in
dependence on the observed object condition, vase, which is a form and act
as a cause giving rise to the effect which is consciousness - the eye
consciousness apprehending the vase.
Ven Gyurme: Which is generated in the aspect of the object it is
apprehending.
Khen Rinpoche spoke in English: It is very simple. Somebody plants the seed
in the garden. The person becomes the cause for the plant to grow.  The
person who plants the seed is the cause, isn’t it? This doesn’t mean the
person is not form.
Two divisions of causes:
 1. Substantial cause
 2. Cooperative condition
The potter who makes the pot is a cause of the pot.
But the potter is not form. The potter is a non-associated compositional
factor.
The pot is a form.
Likewise, it is not difficult to posit a vase as a cause of an eye
consciousness apprehending vase.
We have to understand that when we talk about cause, there are two types of
causes: substantial cause and cooperative condition.
The Sutra School and above assert that cause and effect are sequential.
Vase is the cause of eye consciousness apprehending vase.
Since they assert that cause and effect are sequential, therefore vase has
to precede the eye consciousness apprehending vase.
From the example of the generation of the eye consciousness apprehending
vase, we are trying to relate it to the link of contact. The link of
contact, which is part of the twelve-link of dependent arising, refers to
the moment the three things -the object, the sense power and the
consciousness- are coming together. Only in dependence of these three
things, you then have the link of feeling.
Likewise, it is alright to say that this is how the eye consciousness
apprehending vase is produced.
I am not sure but perhaps we can say like this. This is presenting a
thesis.
However there is some issue if we say that the eye consciousness
apprehending vase is produced in dependence on the three things coming
together. Only after the three things meet together, then there is a
production of eye consciousness apprehending vase. The next moment after
the eye consciousness apprehending vase is produced the vase which existed
at the time of meeting of the three things has already ceased to exist
because it is momentary. In this case how are you going to explain the
production of an eye consciousness apprehending vase? Of course there is a
way.
It is okay whether you understand something, nothing or everything. Just to
leave some imprints.
This is where GES differs from the Sutra School and above. The Sutra School
and above assert that consciousnesses are aspected, but GES asserts that
consciousnesses are non-aspected.
(Audio 32:20– 36.40) Discussion on because the star is very far away from
us, so by the time when we see the reflection of light from the star which
is billions of light years away from us, the star is no more in that
position but is somewhere else.
- At the moment when the three things -the vase, the eye sense power and
 the consciousness- meet, the consciousness (which is in the entity of
 clear and knowing) is generated in the aspect of vase.
- This consciousness has the aspect of the apprehended.
- Then this consciousness, which has the aspect of vase, is generated into
 the entity of the eye consciousness apprehending vase.
- Only then does the consciousness realize vase.
Anyway, this is a thesis which I think maybe the case.
It is like having a mirror and then putting an object in front of the
mirror; it is something like this but not exactly.
The mirror is likened to a consciousness.
For example, a vase that is put in front of the mirror is likened to the
object.
So, when you put the vase in front of the mirror, the vase is reflected in
the mirror.
Likewise, when you bring a vase to the attention of the mind, you could say
that the vase is reflected on the mind. Specifically, what it means is that
the consciousness is generated into the aspect of the vase.
- If we are apprehending vase, then at the time when the three things -the
 vase, the eye sense power and the consciousness-meet, the consciousness
 (which is one of the three things) is generated into the aspect of vase.
- This consciousness, which has the aspect of vase, transforms the entity
 into consciousness realizing vase.
- That consciousness which realizes vase, in this case, is the eye
 consciousness apprehending vase.
If we explain in this way, there is no problem in saying that when the eye
consciousness apprehending vase is generated, vase (which is its observed
object condition) has already ceased.  The vase has already ceased because
cause precedes effect.
If that is the case, then how do you explain the eye consciousness
apprehending vase is generated if the vase has already ceased. There is no
problem because at the time when the three things come together, the
consciousness is generated into the aspect of vase. This then transform
into the entity of the eye consciousness apprehending vase in the next
moment.
I am not saying that this is the answer, but this is what I think and
perhaps this is the case and is something to think about. Just as what the
link of contact is posited to be the moment of the gathering of the three
things -object, the sense power and the consciousness- and only after that,
come the link of feeling.
Likewise, if we explain the production of, for example, an eye
consciousness apprehending vase in such a way, maybe it is okay.
In order for the feeling to arise, there must be contact. In order for
there to be contact, you need the three things -1. An object, for example,
a pleasant object
2. Sense object and
3. Consciousness
All these three things must be present in order to have contact.
Before contact, you cannot have feeling. So feeling is dependent on
contact.
I am not saying this is the reality and this is the answer. This is what I
think and perhaps this is the case. I can’t definitely say this is the case
because I don’t have anyone to check with. But this is related to the issue
of asserting consciousnesses as being aspected. This is one of core issue
in the studying of mind. It is very important because GES asserts that the
consciousnesses are non-aspected whereas Sutra School and above do. The
reason for asserting the consciousnesses to be aspected is one critical
issue that is to be understood.
Let’s take the example of a vase and the eye consciousness apprehending
vase. It is asserted that between these two, there is something that
interrupts the two. That which interrupts the two is asserted to be the
aspect.
The reason why I brought up this example of the four projected effects of
the twelve-link of dependent arising is to highlight the importance of
studying the Buddhist philosophy in more detail. Although we did study the
twelve-link of dependent arising and be able to say all the names, explain
what the twelve-link are and so forth, but if somebody were to pursues this
topics further by asking what exactly is feeling, what exactly is contact,
how is it produce and so forth, then you may find it very difficult to
answer. In order to answer this, you have to understand the presentation of
the mind. Without understanding of what we are studying here and some other
future topics, it is really difficult to get a good understanding of
Lamrim.
So we have to always keep in mind that the Lamrim (The Stages of the Path
to Enlightenment) is a subject matter that gathers the subject matter of
all the five great topics; which are mainly the philosophical subjects. The
Lamrim is like the essence of these major philosophical subjects. In order
to able to know the Lamrim well, it is important to study the Buddhist
philosophies like what we are trying to do here. We need to know the Lamrim
well because the Lamrim is the exact roadmap to enlightenment. It tells us
how to achieve enlightenment. It is the principal means by which we subdue
and discipline our mind.
Anyway, definitely some imprints were left but I can’t say that is
necessarily good. Perhaps some people may have gotten angry and upset. I am
not sure what kind of imprints is left.

Direct perceiver
The definition of a direct perceiver is a knower which is free from
conceptuality and non-mistaken.
In order to know what a direct perceiver is, you have to understand its
definition.
Direct perceiver has to be a non-conceptual consciousness and is also non-
mistaken.
A direct perceiver is a consciousness and it has to be non-conceptual
consciousness and non-mistaken. If these characteristics are present then
that knower/consciousness is a direct perceiver.
Question: If you understand this definition and relate it to the definition
of a direct valid cognizer, is a direct valid cognizer a direct perceiver?
(Definition of a direct valid cognizer: a new incontrovertible knower that
is free of conceptuality)
You must be able to say ‘Yes’ immediately because we have already covered
the definition of a direct valid cognizer.  As we move along in our
studies, we should not forget whatever that came before. If we move on but
forgetting whatever that came before then nothing will ever happen because
they are connected. So if you know the definition of the direct valid
cognizer and if you are asked; “Is the direct valid cognizer a direct
perceiver?”, then immediately you will say “Yes”. The only difference
between them is “New and incontrovertible”.
Khen Rinpoche spoke in English: May be I give one example. When you play
the game chess, you know chess? How many people know how to play? Everybody
know? When you play the chess, you must know the rules. Also you must
recognize the individual things such as horse, queen, minister, bishop etc.
You have to remember and know all the names. Not only that, what are their
functions and how you are going to move, they have certain rules. Some goes
L-shape, some goes this side and some goes straight. Not every piece can do
the same thing and each of them has different functions. Once you know the
rules then of course you have to play. Once you play, again it depends on
whom you play with. Once you start and you play with a very good one, you
always lose and always get discouraged. One moves, they will kill you and
that’s all. In order to play the chess, you cannot see the only front of
how you move but you really need to have bigger idea. You have ten ideas of
how to move the chess then you will be able to win. A lots of ideas, first
moves, this moves, I moves this, you have to have ten different ideas but
again you don’t know how the other person moves. Accordingly, you have to
move and again you need to change. Of course not everybody can do that. For
me, I also can’t do that. When I play the chess, I only see the front. Some
people are very clever and they really trick you. They come from behind and
check you. Then you lose. Yet you don’t know how they came there. You think
you did very well but somehow you are caught. Here, I think, if you really
want to play chess, you must know the rule. Then you must play with people
of the same level so that sometimes you win and sometime you lose. While
you win you will have the interest to play the second time. Even when you
lose, you have interest to go back and challenge. So win or lose you will
go back and play. But that kind of interest is not easy as not everybody
will have and not easy to get, that’s the most difficult part. Once you
have the interest to play the chess then that’s it, no problem, you will
make it somewhere. You may not be the best but you can play.
It is the same logic here when you learn the Buddhist philosophies. It is
the same kind of game. You must know all the definitions, all the rules,
how the mind works, how many types, what kind of minds do what. You must
know all these things. After that you play the game with other people. Then
your mind can think faster and answer faster. This is something that I
think it is similar. Once you do that, t think you will get some interest
in the mind. Your mind will be sharper, faster, and maybe even happier. “I
thought I am so stupid but I am clever,” it becomes possible like that.
What I see is that the most difficult part is to get the interest. Once you
have interest, I think there are plenty of things you can do; you can read,
you can discuss, you can come to class. It is very difficult to get the
interest. Even in monastery, not every monk has the interest to study
philosophy. I mentioned before, in my class, there were about 35 classmates
but only 6 or 10 have real interest to study philosophy, not everybody can
understand. Sometime is challenging, sometime they know and sometime don’t
know and after that they get discouraged. A lot of things happen. Here, if
you want to play the game, you want to learn more and get the interest then
you must learn the rules and definitions. You try to play some games and
hopefully you have some interest there. Once you have interest, that the
final goal and then there is no problem. What I see most difficult is
getting the interest because sometime you don’t see the point or sometime
you don’t understand. This is the difficult time but if you really want to
study then I think that there is no other way. You must try and try.
Somebody say; “Not lorig but rlunrig”. After studying lorig they become
rlung. Rlung in Tibetan is stress.
As much as possible you have to see the purpose of learning such a subject.
Through the examples that I have given before, from that you can really see
there is the close connection between the study of mind and the learning
and the practice of Lamrim (The Stages of the Path to Enlightenment). When
you see the relationship, then you try to act on it as much as possible and
put in your best to learn the topic.

The definition of a direct perceiver: is a knower which is free of
conceptuality and non-mistaken.
Direct perceiver has four divisions:
   1. Sense direct perceiver
   2. Mental direct perceiver
   3. Self-knowing direct perceiver
   4. Yogic direct perceiver

Sense direct perceiver
What determines whether a mind is a sense direct perceiver or not?
One of the things to look out for is the uncommon empowering condition.
The uncommon empowering condition of the sense direct perceiver has to be a
physical sense power.
One of the determining factors that make a particular consciousness a sense
direct perceiver is its uncommon empowering condition which is the physical
sense power. Likewise, whether a consciousness is a mental direct perceiver
or not, one of the things that you have to look for is the uncommon
empowering condition. It is the same thing with yogic direct perceiver. The
uncommon empowering condition is one of the factors that determine what
kind of mind it is.
|Types of direct     |Uncommon empowering       |Definition                     |
|perceiver           |condition                 |                               |
|Sense direct        |Physical sense power      |is a knower that is free from  |
|perceiver           |                          |conceptuality and non-mistaken |
|Mental direct       |Mental sense power        |is a consciousness that is an  |
|perceiver           |                          |other-knower which is free from|
|                    |                          |conceptuality and non-mistaken |
|Yogic direct        |Meditative stabilization  |is an other-knowing exalted    |
|perceiver           |which is a union of calm  |knower in the continuum of a   |
|                    |abiding and special       |Superior which is free from    |
|                    |insight                   |conceptuality and non-mistaken.|


The respective definitions of these direct perceivers are in the handout
(dated 10 July 2012).  You should look at it on your own and memorize them.
What I am doing here is to highlight the points that bring them together.
One of the thing that determine whether a mind is a sense direct perceiver,
mental direct perceiver or yogic direct perceiver is the uncommon
empowering condition. By depending on the type of uncommon empowering
condition, that consciousness may be a mental direct perceiver, sense
direct perceiver or yogic direct perceiver. These three have an uncommon
empowering condition.
Sense direct perceiver can be divided in five types:
   1. Sense direct perceiver apprehending forms
   2. Sense direct perceiver apprehending sounds
   3. Sense direct perceiver apprehending odors
   4. Sense direct perceiver apprehending tastes
   5. Sense direct perceiver apprehending tangible objects
How these five sense direct perceiver are differentiated?
These five sense direct perceivers are not differentiated in having a
radically different sense powers as all of them have the physical sense
power as their uncommon empowering condition.
If it is a sense direct perceiver, then they must have a similar uncommon
empowering condition. It cannot be different because it is the uncommon
empowering condition, a physical sense power, which makes it a sense direct
perceiver.
All five are produced in dependence upon a physical sense power which is
their uncommon empowering condition but the physical sense powers for these
five types of direct perceivers are different.
For example: A sense direct perceiver apprehending form is a sense direct
perceiver.
It has an uncommon empowering condition which is necessarily a physical
sense power.
In this case, the physical sense power has to be an eye sense power.
The uncommon empowering condition for the production of a sense direct
perceiver apprehending form has to be eye sense power.
Then you also need an observed object condition which is visible form.
On top of that, it has to be a knower that is free from conceptuality and
non-mistaken.
If a consciousness has all these characteristics, then it is called a sense
direct perceiver apprehending form.
Why there are five sense direct perceivers?
This is because they have different observed object conditions. The
observed object condition can be form, sound, smell, taste and tangible
object. Depending on which it is, then you have the respective sense direct
perceiver.
However you also have the different uncommon empowering conditions.
Although all their uncommon empowering condition are physical sense powers
but they are not the same physical sense power as there are eye sense
power, ear sense power, nose sense power, tongue sense power and body sense
power. That is the reason why you have the five sense direct perceivers.
It is important for you to read this handout on your own and memorize the
definitions, the divisions and the illustrations. Then on this basis, you
can bring it up for discussion if there are any words or concepts that you
don’t understand. Then this will become clearer. As for the other direct
perceivers, we will talk about it later on, especially the self-knowing
direct perceiver.
Homework:
1. How many possibilities are there between inferential valid cognizer and
   mistaken consciousness?
Student 2: There are three possibilities.
1st possibility: Both an inferential valid cognizer and mistaken
consciousness because inferential valid cognizer is necessary mistaken
consciousness
Illustration: Eye consciousness upon seeing smoke and the thought thinking
there is a fire.
2nd  possibility: It is a mistaken consciousness but not an inferential
valid cognizer.
Illustration: Doubt consciousness.
3rd possibility: It is not an inferential valid cognizer and non-mistaken
consciousness.
Illustration: A direct perceiver, eye consciousness apprehending form.
2. How many possibilities are there between correctly assuming
   consciousness and conceptual consciousness?
Student 3:  There are 3 possibilities.
1st possibility: Both correctly assuming consciousness and conceptual
consciousness.
2nd  possibility: A conceptual consciousness that is not a correctly
assuming consciousness.
Illustration: A doubting consciousness - Thought thinking whether someone
standing there is Patricia or not. It looks like but not sure.
3rd possibility: Neither a conceptual consciousness nor a correctly
assuming consciousness.
Illustration: A direct perceiver – an eye consciousness apprehending vase.
Khen Rinpoche: Why is an eye consciousness apprehending vase not a correct
assumption?
Student 3: Because correctly assuming consciousness necessarily is a
conceptual consciousness.
Khen Rinpoche spoke in English; Why?
Student 3: Because it is a determinative knower.
Khen Rinpoche spoke in English: How do you know that?
Student 3: Because the definition says so.
Khen Rinpoche spoke in English: That’s the way.
3. How many possibilities are there between wrong consciousness and
   mistaken consciousness?
Student 4: There are 3 possibilities.
1st possibility: Neither wrong consciousness nor mistaken consciousness.
Illustration: A direct valid cognizer.
Khen Rinpoche: Why is a direct valid cognizer not a mistaken consciousness?
Student 4: Because it is an incontrovertible knower.
Ven Gyurme: It follows that an inferential valid cognizer is non-mistaken
because it is incontrovertible knower.
Student 4: It is non-mistaken with respect to its appearing object.
Khen Rinpoche: What is its appearing object?
Student 4: If it is an eye consciousness apprehending vase, the appearing
object is vase.
Khen Rinpoche: Is the appearing object of an eye consciousness apprehending
vase necessarily vase?
Student 4: Yes.
Khen Rinpoche: Everything that appears to an eye consciousness apprehending
vase can be posited to be the appearing object to that consciousness or
not?
Student 4: The eye consciousness has to apprehend all these objects as
well.
Khen Rinpoche: Everything that appears to this eye consciousness
apprehending a vase, isn’t its appearing object?
Student 4: Yes and it necessary has to apprehend it.
Khen Rinpoche: If it appears to an eye consciousness apprehending vase,
does it have to be its’ appearing object?
Student 4: Yes
Khen Rinpoche: So everything that appears to eye consciousness apprehending
vase is its appearing object. So therefore if it appears to an eye
consciousness apprehending vase, it is not necessary a vase.
Student 4: Why?
Khen Rinpoche: When a direct perceiver engages its object, for example an
eye consciousness apprehending vase, it engages its object in totality.
What does it mean when we say that a collective engager engages its object
collectively, entirely or in totality? In the case of an eye consciousness
apprehending vase, everything about the vase appears to the eye
consciousness apprehending it. The impermanence of the vase appears to the
eye consciousness apprehending that vase.
2nd possibility: A mistaken consciousness that is not a wrong
consciousness.
Illustration: An inferential valid cognizer.
Khen Rinpoche: Why an inferential valid cognizer is not a wrong
consciousness?
Student 4: Because it realizes its object.
Khen Rinpoche: Isn’t it mistaken? How can you realize an object while it is
mistaken?
Student 4: It realizes it inferentially via a mental image.
Khen Rinpoche: It realizes its object therefore it is not mistaken. In the
case of inferential valid cognizer apprehending vase, isn’t it mistaken
with regards to vase?
Student 4: Yes
Khen Rinpoche: If that mind is mistaken, it has gotten the vase wrong. If
it is mistaken about vase then how can it realize vase?
Student 4: It realizes through correct sign.
Khen Rinpoche: If it is mistaken, what is there to realize?
Student 4: Through the correct sign it is able to realize vase via
reasoning.
Khen Rinpoche: Is inferential valid cognizer apprehending vase mistaken
with regards to vase?
Khen Rinpoche spoke in English: Think carefully. It is not easy.
Student 4: It is mistaken with respect to its appearing object but it does
realize vase.
Khen Rinpoche spoke in English: That is not my question.
Khen Rinpoche: Is inferential valid cognizer apprehending vase mistaken
about vase?
Student 4: No.
Khen Rinpoche spoke in English: So far you say yes then you say no. You are
not hearing the question.
The inferential valid cognizer apprehending vase is not mistaken with
respect to vase.
Is the inferential valid cognizer apprehending vase mistaken with respect
to vase?
Khen Rinpoche spoke in English: This is the way to debate, first listen to
the question. When you go to court, what the judge say you must listen.
Is the inferential valid cognizer apprehending vase mistaken with respect
to vase?
Student 4: No
Ven Gyurme: Then why is it a mistaken consciousness?
It is very clear that an inferential valid cognizer apprehending vase is a
mistaken consciousness and it is a conceptual consciousness. What we have
to think is; “Is the inferential valid cognizer apprehending vase mistaken
with regards to vase?
If the inferential valid cognizer is mistaken with regards to vase, then
how can it realize vase?
It is not mistaken about vase, otherwise it cannot realize vase. Because it
realizes vase, it is not mistaken with respect to vase but that
consciousness is a mistaken consciousness.
This is what the AMWS and the schools below it assert. Of course, if you
bring in the CMWS for discussion, then it is very different.
3rd possibility: Both a wrong consciousness and a mistaken consciousness.
Illustration: An eye consciousness apprehending blue-snow mountain.
Student 5: Is there four possibilities for question three. Something that
is a wrong consciousness but it is not mistaken because it is non-
conceptual. Illustration: Eye consciousness which see snow mountain as
blue. It is non-conceptual.
Ven Gyurme: Is it non-mistaken?
Student 5: If it is conceptual consciousness then it is necessarily
mistaken.
Ven Gyurme: Give an example on something that is wrong consciousness and
not a mistaken consciousness .
Student 5: Because we say mistaken consciousness is necessary conceptual?
Ven Gyurme: No, we didn’t
Student 5: Oh! Then it is ok. Then I have to do my homework.
Student 6: (Audio 103:03 – 104:12) During meditation, when one shuts down
all the sense consciousness and only mental perceiver observing one’s
thought. When the thought arise, that is conceptual. At the time when
knowing awareness is awareness and based on awareness, there is a thought
that separate from you. At that time that is non-conceptual. Which
awareness is this? It is not sense consciousness, not a yogic direct
perceiver, is it a mental that experience non-conceptuality as direct
perceiver but not apprehending the thought?
Khen Rinpoche: Most of them are conceptual thoughts. If you are talking
about the direct actual experience, non-conceptual nature of the experience
of the mind, then you can posit that to be a mental direct perceiver.
If you remember the quotation from the LRCM about bringing a sign, bringing
an appearance to mind, conceptual appearance, most of them are basically
conceptual.
Student 7: (105:24 – 108:45) What is the relationship between the implicit
realization of opposite of non-blue and the appearing object of the
conceptual consciousness apprehending blue which is a meaning generality?
Ven Gyurme: Is opposite from non-blue according impermanent or permanent?
Student 7: I don’t know.
Khen Rinpoche: We will use the conceptual consciousness apprehending vase
as the example.
This conceptual consciousness apprehending vase explicitly realizes vase
and also implicitly realizes the opposite from non-vase.
All that appears to a conceptual consciousness apprehending vase, vase is
not its appearing object because the appearing object is posited to be the
meaning generality of vase.
Vase appears to the conceptual consciousness apprehending vase, but vase is
not its appearing object.
Why is vase not the appearing object of conceptual consciousness
apprehending it?
The explanation for this is already been given.
Whatever appears to a conceptual consciousness apprehending vase is not
necessary the appearing object.
We talked about the appearance as opposite from non-vase. In general,
appearance as opposite from non-vase is an imputed factor; imputed by
thought. But whatever is an appearance as opposite from non-vase is not
necessary an imputed factor.
Question: Is the appearance as opposite from non-vase necessarily
permanent?
Khen Rinpoche spoke in English: Think about this question and bring the
answer.



