Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Lorig/Transcript/lesson25.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:53:23.754801
================================================================================


Recap the eleven mental factors.
[Root text: page33] [C] The Eleven Virtuous Mental factors (dge ba)
There are eleven virtuous mental factors:
(1) faith
(2) shame
(3) embarrassment
(4) non-attachment
(5) non-hatred
(6) non-ignorance
(7) effort
(8) pliancy
(9) conscientiousness
(10) equanimity
(11) non-harmfulness
We should have a rough idea of these eleven mental factors by way of their
respective three features -objects, aspect and function. Then we should try
to develop these mental factors in our own mind. This is the essence. We
have to see for ourselves what benefits are there for us if these eleven
virtuous mental factors arise in us.
It is mentioned in the text that these eleven mental factors by entity are
virtuous from their own side without depending on any kind of motivation.
It is mentioned that the predispositions/imprints of these virtuous mental
factors are also virtuous. The physical and verbal actions following from
these mental factors also become virtuous. These eleven virtuous mental
factors can only arise in our mind through putting in effort. Subsequent to
the arising of these virtuous mental factors in our mind, imprints of the
virtue are left in our mind. When the imprints of the virtue are left in
our mind, more likely we will perform virtuous physical and verbal actions
motivated by such mental factors. These positive effects don’t just occur
in this life, they will stay with us from life to life. Then from life to
life we just have to familiarize ourselves with these over and over again.
It is quite obvious that in order for any of our physical and verbal
actions to be virtuous, they have to arise from the imprints of virtue. In
order for there to be imprints of virtue, first a virtuous mind must arise.
Therefore, we have to put in effort to generate virtuous minds. These
virtuous minds leave positive imprints which then give rise to virtuous
physical and verbal actions. By thinking on this process, one should get
the idea that it is extremely important to develop virtuous minds.
The text talks about virtue by way of attaining at birth. This is not
something that just happened without reason. In order for there to be
virtue by way of attaining at birth, in the first place, there has to be
virtue by way of application. Virtue by way of application means putting in
efforts to develop virtuous minds. If we put effort into developing
virtuous mind and when the virtuous mind arises, definitely there is hope
in the future. So from the moment you are born, you will have all these
virtues. In essence, we have to know what these virtuous mental factors and
their respective entities are and we have to know what is in for us when we
develop these in our minds. Following from this, as said in The Engaging
Bodhisattva Deeds, we just have to do it. We just have to depend on joyous
perseverance; which is essentially an enthusiasm for virtues.
Student: Since the virtues by way of application have these four conditions
-relying on the virtuous spiritual guide, listening, reflecting and
meditating- could we equal that with the second type of joyous perseverance
-the joyous perseverance of application- which has two: constant and
respectful application? Can we relate:
 -the respectful application to rely on the spiritual guide and
 -the constant application refers to listening, reflecting and meditating
on the teachings?
I am just trying to connect the constant and respectful application to the
virtues by way of application to the four conditions.
Khen Rinpoche: Not sure.
Khen Rinpoche spoke in English: Last time I saw one commentary explaining
these two, but now I don’t remember that.
Student: Can I say non-harmfulness is no different from compassion?
Khen Rinpoche: Can’t say 100% for sure but it would seem like it is saying
it is compassion. If you look at the definition of non-harmfulness, it
seems to be saying that. The definition of non-harmfulness is pretty much
the same as the definition of compassion.
(Note: Root text: page 48: Non-harmfulness is a mind of compassion and is
involved with non-hatred.)
Student: That will lead to another question. Out of the four immeasurables,
we have equanimity and compassion among the eleven virtuous mental factors.
There seem to be no mentioning of joy and love.
Khen Rinpoche: The equanimity that is part of the eleven virtuous mental
factors is not the immeasurable equanimity.  In general, there are three
types of equanimity:
   1) equanimity of application
   2) equanimity which is feeling
   3) immeasurable equanimity
The mental factor of equanimity that is part of the eleven virtuous mental
factors is the equanimity of application. Not everything is listed there
but we can see whether immeasurable love or love and immeasurable joy can
come under non-hatred or not. This is something to think about.
Student: (Summarized by Ven Gyurme): How does pliancy overcome obscuration?
Khen Rinpoche: This has already been explained. In this context, remember
that there are five obscurations;
   1. aspiration for desire object
   2. malice
   3. sleep and lethargy
   4. excitement and regret
   5. doubt
Student: Is wisdom necessarily a conceptual mind? In the definition:
 - wisdom strongly differentiates the qualities of things that are to be
examined
 - non-ignorance is knowledge arisen from fruition, scripture,
contemplation or realization, and is a wisdom of individual investigation.
So when one directly realizes emptiness, is the mental factor of wisdom
inside the continuum?
If wisdom is a conceptual mind, non-ignorance is present in the continuum
of a mind that directly realized emptiness, how about wisdom?
Ven Gyurme: Can a direct realization of emptiness still perform analysis?
Khen Rinpoche: You are saying that the mental factor of wisdom is
necessarily conceptual going by the reason that it is analysis. Mental
factor of wisdom is not necessarily conceptual because there is also non-
conceptual one as well, for example, there is a direct perception of
emptiness.
Student:  Equanimity has the function of not allowing opportunity for
afflictions to arise. It gives the impression that we don’t have to realize
emptiness because by merely achieving the level of equanimity, affliction
does not arise.
Khen Rinpoche: The answer to that is in the text (page 48): “The function
of equanimity is specified as "not allowing an opportunity for
afflictions," because upon attaining the ninth mental abiding, the manifest
afflictions of the desire realm are easily overcome, and in particular,
laxity and excitation do not arise during meditative equipoise.”
The afflictions here refer to the manifest afflictions of the desire realm.
Without the wisdom realizing emptiness, it is not possible to abandon the
afflictions of the three realms. Therefore, in order to destroy the
afflictions of the peak of cyclic existence -the highest possible existence
in samsara- one needs the wisdom realizing emptiness. Without which, there
is no way to destroy the afflictions of the peak of cyclic existence.

[Root text: page 53] [D] The Six Root afflictions (rtsa nyon)
The six root afflictions are:
(1) attachment
(2) anger
(3) pride
(4) ignorance
(5) doubt
(6) afflicted views


In the section of the six root afflictions, first an explanation of
affliction is given.
[Root text: page 53] Regarding the general defining characteristic of
afflictions, the Compendium of Knowledge says:
   The definition of an affliction is a phenomenon such that when it
   arises, the characteristic of being very unpeaceful arises, and due to
   its arising, the mental continuum arises as being very unpeaceful.
Just as it has been said above, it is an awareness that causes the mental
continuum to be very unpeaceful when it arises.
When any mind arises causes one to be very unpeaceful, that very mind is
called affliction.
There are the six root afflictions and the twenty secondary afflictions.

[Root text: page 54] [D1] Attachment ('dod chags)
Regarding attachment, the Compendium of Knowledge says:
QUESTION: What is attachment?
RESPONSE: It is clinging of the three realms. It has the function of
producing suffering.
Just as it has been said above, it is a mental factor that perceives a
contaminated thing to be attractive by way of its own entity and thereupon
seeks it.
Regarding this, the Foremost Omniscient [Tsong-kha-pa] says in [his Great
Exposition of the Stages of the Path]:
  Attachment observes an external or internal object that is beautiful and
  attractive and then becomes attached to it. For example, just as oil that
  has soaked into a piece of cloth is difficult to remove, likewise
  [attachment] spreads on and adheres to its object of observation, making
  it difficult to tear oneself away from it.
What is the object of observation of attachment?
    ⇨ It is either an external or internal object that is beautiful and
      attractive.
What is the aspect of attachment?
    ⇨ Difficulty of separating from the object.
What is the function of attachment?
    ⇨ It produces sufferings.

[Root text: page 54] Attachment is of three types:
(1) attachment of the desire realm
(2) attachment of the form realm
(3) attachment of the formless realm

The Treasury of Knowledge divides it into two:
(1) attachment of the desire realm
(2) attachment for [cyclic] existence

[The Treasury of Knowledge] condenses the attachment of the two upper
realms [i.e., form realm and formless realm] into one.
(1) Attachment of the desire realm is aspiration for and attachment to the
five qualities of the desire realm – form, sound, and so forth – within
observation of them.
(2) The attachment of the two upper realms is condensed into one, known as
the "attachment for [cyclic] existence," because the two upper realms are
referred to as "[cyclic] existence" in order to overcome the mistake of
taking the meditative absorptions of the form and formless realms as a path
of liberation.
The “attachment for cyclic existence” includes the attachment for form and
formless realms; which are counted as one.
[Root text: page 55] The function of attachment is specified as "producing
suffering" for the purpose of making us understand that the root of all
suffering within the three realms of cyclic existence is rebirth which
connects us to cyclic existence, and the principal cause for rebirth within
cyclic existence is attachment, craving itself.

One has accumulated the projecting karma for a rebirth in cyclic existence,
but just having that karma alone doesn’t necessarily means that you will
experience the result of that karma of rebirth in cyclic existence. What
nourishes that projecting karma is attachment and craving. Attachment and
craving nourishes the imprints of that karma and give it power such that it
can then throw us into a rebirth in samsara.
Attachment nourishes the projecting karma that has been accumulated and
gives it strength and power to actualize rebirth in cyclic existence. It is
said that attachment is the principal cause for rebirth within cyclic
existence. Due to attachment, karma is nourished and we will be reborn in
cyclic existence. Rebirth in cyclic existence means sufferings.
[Root text: page 55] [D2] Anger (khong khro)
Regarding anger, the Compendium of Knowledge says:
QUESTION: What is anger?
RESPONSE: It is a malice towards sentient beings, suffering, and phenomena
that are sources of suffering. It has the function of acting as a support
for not abiding in contact and for misconduct.
Just as it has been said above, anger is a malice that, upon observing the
three objects of observation of anger, cannot tolerate them and wishes to
harm them. The three objects of observation of anger are:
(1) sentient beings,
(2) one's own sufferings, and
(3) the sources from which these sufferings arise
In order to get angry, there must be an object in which the anger is
focused on. The three objects are:
(1) sentient beings,
(2) one's own sufferings, and
(3) the sources from which these sufferings arise
What is the aspect of this anger? It is malice. Malice is essentially very
gross mind, rough mind or hard mind that wishes to harm.
The function of anger acts as a support for not abiding in contact. It
means not coming in contact with happiness
[Root text: page 55] Regarding the teachings on "the nine bases of malice",
the Precious Garland (stanza 5.31) says:
  Harmful intent arises from nine causes
  Of intending to harm others:
  Bearing senseless misgivings in the three times
  With regard to oneself, one's friends and one's enemies.
So, with regards to oneself, it also applies to the three times: past,
present and future:
   1. I was harmed [past]
   2. I am being harmed [present]
   3. I will be hurt / I will be harmed [future]
So these are the three.
Anger arises because of these reasons. When you think:
   1. I was harmed, I get upset or
   2. I am being harmed, I get upset or
   3. I will be harmed or he is going to hurt me, I get upset
The same thing with one’s friend i.e. people who we consider to be on our
side:
   1. They were harmed.
   2. They are being harmed.
   3. They will be harmed.
Again one gets upset or angry because of these three reasons.
With regards to one’s enemy, people who are not on our side. We think:
   1. They were benefitted, we get upset.
   2. Someone is helping them now, they are being benefitted/ helped, we get
      upset.
   3. In future they will be benefited /be helped, we also get upset.
So these are nine causes of malice; with regards to oneself, one’s friend
and one’s enemy. One looks at them in term of the past, present and future.
[Root text: page 55] This is just as it has been said in the Great
Exposition of the Stages of the Path:
  Anger is malice, a harsh mind that observes sentient beings, suffering,
  and the sources of suffering such as weapons and thorns, and intends to
  harm those objects.
It has the function of causing one not to abide in happiness in this
lifetime, and produces immeasurable suffering in future lives.
When we are feeling happy, generally we are quite steady and peaceful. But
the moment anger arises, that peace degenerates. When we get very angry, we
forget every good thing that the person has done for us and the benefits we
have received from that person. As the result of anger, we make a lot of
enemies and even our loved ones who have helped us. The function of anger
is to increase the numbers of enemies that we have.
Usually we are able to sleep well, but when we get very upset, we find it
difficult to fall asleep. Anger also hurt our reputation. Because of anger,
we will not have a good and happy life. Of course, without saying, anger
will affect our future lives in which we have to experience lots of
sufferings.
[Root text: page 55] In this vein, Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds says
(stanza 6.3-5):
      If one maintains a painful mind of hatred,
      mind does not experience peace,
      Nor obtain joy and happiness;
      Sleep does not come and there is no stability.
So with anger, we can’t experience physical nor mental happiness.
      He saddens his friends.
      He gathers them with generosity but is not served.
      In brief, joy does not exist in one
      Where anger abides comfortably.
With anger, we destroy friendship. In brief, joy does not exist in one
where anger abides comfortably.
[Root text: page 56] The Garland of Birth Stories (stanza 21.29-33) also
says:
      Due to the fire of anger, one colors unflatteringly,
      Even adorned with ornaments, one does not look good.
      Even though one may lie on a comfortable bed,
      One's mind suffers due to the agony of anger.
      Forgetful of the benefits one has enjoyed,
      Tormented by anger, one proceeds on a bad path.
      One's reputation and achievements degenerate,
      Like the waning moon, one's glory fades.
      Although supported by friends,
      Due to anger, one plummets senselessly into the abyss.
      One's contemplation of benefit and harm degenerates;
      One becomes erratic and confused.
      Due to anger, one becomes habituated to misdeeds,
      And will experience suffering for hundreds of years in the bad
      migrations.
      Even an enemy who goes to great lengths to inflict great harm cannot
      manage more than this.
As said in the Jataka Tales, when you look at a person who is generally
regarded as attractive and pleasant and even the person has a lot of
makeup, jewelry and adornment, get mighty upset, I don’t think you will
find that person attractive.
By not controlling our anger and just getting upset over and over again, we
will get use to anger. What anger does is to create cause for us to be
reborn in the lower realms and to stay there for a very long time. This is
something that an external enemy cannot do to us. So the essential advice
is to see the anger as a fault, then we just try to manage and reduce it.
We just have to see it for ourselves and look into our mind; when anger
manifest, do we feel happy? Do we feel peaceful? We should analyze and
think about the faults of anger: what is its function? What does it do to
me? Through thinking about this, so when we start to get upset or angry, we
have to remind ourselves of what we have reflected on and then just try to
manage it.

[Root text: page 56] [D3] Pride (nga rgyal)
Regarding pride, the Compendium of Knowledge says:
QUESTION: What is pride?
RESPONSE: It is a puffing up of the mind in dependence on the view of the
transitory collection. It has the function of acting as a support for
disrespect and suffering.
Just as it has been said above, it is a mental factor that has the aspect
of a puffing up of the mind upon observing the basis for puffing up – one's
own wealth, qualities and so forth.
The object of pride is one’s own wealth, one’s possession and one’s
qualities.
The aspect is puffing up of the mind or the inflating of the mind i.e. the
mind taking on an aspect of feeling very superior.
The function of pride is acting as a support for disrespecting others and
support for suffering in the future lives.
All the disrespects we show basically come from pride and following from
that, comes the different negative actions. Our mind gets inflated and by
focusing on our wealth or qualities, we feel superior and thinking that we
are very high.

[Root text: page 57] Here the Great Exposition of the Stages of the Path
says:
  Pride is based on the view of the transitory collection and is a puffing
  up of the mind upon observing an external or internal phenomenon that is
  high or low, good or bad; it involves an aspect of loftiness.
"In dependence on the view of the transitory collection" is specified
because all pride is generated in dependence on the innate conception which
thinks "I". Pride is of seven types:
   1. pride
   2. exceeding pride
   3. pride beyond pride
   4. pride of thinking "I"
   5. pride of vanity
   6. pride of slight inferiority
   7. wrongful pride
1) Pride is a puffing up of the mind, thinking that one is superior to
   lower persons.
2) Exceeding pride is a puffing up of the mind, thinking that one is
   superior to peers.
3) Pride beyond pride is a puffing up of the mind, thinking that one is
   greatly superior even to other superior persons.
4) Pride of thinking "I" is a puffing up of the mind, thinking "I" within
   observing the appropriated aggregates.
5) Pride of vanity is a puffing up of the mind, thinking that one has
   attained what has not been attained.
6) Pride of slight inferiority is a puffing up of the mind, thinking that
   one is just slightly lower than others who are actually greatly
   superior.
7) Wrongful pride is a puffing up of the mind, thinking that one has
   attained excellent qualities when one has actually gone astray.
For example, you may feel very proud because you have bash up someone or
have given someone a hard time and thinking “I really did well”.
[Root text: page 58] However, the Precious Garland explains them as follows
(stanza 5.6cd-12):
Pride is of seven types;
I shall explain each of them.
In the Precious Garland, seven types of pride were mentioned, but the
Precious Garland described the first two prides -pride and exceedingly
pride - differently.
  Regarding these, being conceited that one is lower than the lowly,
  Or equal with the equal,
  Or greater than or equal to the lowly
  Is called the {1} pride of selfhood.
In the Precious Garland, the first verse is the description of the first
type of pride –pride itself.
The following second paragraph describes the “exceeding pride”.
  Being conceited that one is equal to those
  Who by some quality are superior to oneself
  Is {2} exceeding pride.
  Being conceited that one is superior to the superior,
  Thinking that one is higher than the very high,
  Is {3} pride beyond pride;
  Like sores on an abscess,
  It is exceedingly virulent.
  Conceiving through obscuration an "I"
  In the five empty [aggregates]
  Which are called "the appropriated"
  Is explained to be the {4} pride of thinking "I."
  Thinking that one has attained fruits not yet attained
  Is the {5} pride of vanity.
  Praising oneself for committing negative actions
  Is known by the wise as {6} wrongful pride.
  Deriding oneself, saying,
  "I am useless," is called
  The {7} pride of lowliness
  Such is a brief description of them.
In the Precious Garland, the pride of lowliness refers to putting down
oneself; “I am stupid”, “I am useless”, etc. It is considered to be a kind
of pride. You have to think about this; how is it a pride?
Pride has an aspect of puffing up of the mind. If oneself think; “I am
useless” or “I am stupid” is considered to be a pride of lowliness, then
how does it has the aspect of the puffing up of the mind?
If you look at the first verse of the Precious Garland, the first type of
pride refers to:
being conceited that one is lower than the lowly, or equal to the equal, or
greater than or equal to the lowly”.
How does the feeling of one is lower than the lowly becomes a pride?
Khen Rinpoche spoke in English: If that is pride then it is not a practice
of bodhisattva? You have to think; “I am lower than the lower”. If that is
pride, then when you feel you are lower than the lower you are more humble,
you feel comfortable, that is the practice of bodhisattva, isn’t it? How
can it be a pride? Reasonable humble? Maybe reasonable humble or
unreasonable humble. I don’t know.

[Root text: page 59] Pride has the function of obscuring any new attainment
of the Dharma of scriptures and realization due to its disrespect for those
who possess excellent qualities, causes rebirth in bad migrations in future
lives, and even when reborn as a human, acts as the cause for rebirth in a
low caste, as a servant and the like. Therefore, it produces the
undesirable in both this and future lives. In this way, the Precious
Garland (stanza 1.17cd-18) says:
  Through being inflated comes a bad lineage,
  Through jealousy little magnificence.
  Through anger comes a discolored face, and
  Through not questioning the wise, stupidity.
  These are the results for humans,
  But prior to all of them there is a bad migration.
The Stages of the Path to Enlightenment says:
 Since pride is the greatest hindrance in developing the path in this life,
 and is the cause for becoming a servant and the like in future lives,
 abandon it.
These are the seven types of pride. So you just have to understand what the
seven are and also the function of pride. In brief, in this life pride
obstructs the generation of qualities and in future lives cause a lowly
rebirth. By thinking on the faults of pride then we just try to reduce it
in this life.

[Root text: page 59] [D4] Ignorance (ma rig pa)
Regarding ignorance, the Compendium of Knowledge says:
QUESTION: What is ignorance?
RESPONSE: It is unknowing of the three realms. It has the function of
acting as a support for the arising of wrong ascertainment, doubt and
afflictions with respect to phenomena.
Just as it has been said above, it is the mental factor of unknowing that
is obscured regarding the mode of abiding of all phenomena. It is of two
types:
   1. obscuration that is the mental factor of unknowing
   2. an awareness that apprehends erroneously
From among these two, the explicit indication in the Compendium of
Knowledge explains [ignorance] to be the mental factor of unknowing. Since
Acharya Vasubandhu also explained it in this way in his A Discussion of the
Five Aggregates, the assertions of both Asanga and his brother agree.
However, Acharya Dharmakirti asserts [ignorance] to be an awareness that
apprehends erroneously. In this way, although there are two types of
assertions with regard to ignorance –
(1) the assertion that it is a wrong conception and
(2) the assertion that it is an awareness that does not realize –
[both] are alike in asserting that the principal antidote to ignorance is
the wisdom realizing selflessness.
Ignorance is of two types which either refers to:
-a mind that apprehends erroneously or
-a mind that doesn’t know
Both lower and higher Abhidharma agreed that ignorance refers to the mind
that doesn’t know. This mind that doesn’t know is ignorance and ignorance
is the opposite of knowledge. Here in this context, ignorance is posited to
be not knowing.

[Root text: page 60] Ignorance is of two types:
   1. ignorance that is obscuration with respect to actions and their
      results
   2. ignorance that is obscuration with respect to the meaning of suchness
1. The ignorance that is obscuration with respect to actions and their
  results causes one to accumulate actions for rebirth in the lower realms.


2. The ignorance that is obscuration with respect to the meaning of
  suchness causes one to accumulate actions for circling in the good
  migrations.
Its function is specified as "acting as a support for the arising of wrong
ascertainment, doubt and afflictions with respect to phenomena," because
other afflictions arise in dependence on ignorance; in dependence on them
[i.e., afflictions] actions arise; in dependence on actions all sufferings
of cyclic existence arise. Therefore, all afflictions and faults arise in
dependence on ignorance.
[Root text: page 61] In brief, this ignorance is the root of circling in
the three realms of cyclic existence. Since it is the basis for all actions
and afflictions, ignorance is taught at the beginning of the twelve links
of dependent-arising.
(Note: The twelve links are: (1) ignorance, (2) action, (3) consciousness,
(4) name and form, (5) sources, (6) contact,
(7) feeling, (8) attachment, (9) grasping, (10) existence, (11) birth, and
(12) aging and death.)

[Root text: page 59] [D5] Doubt (the tshom)
Regarding doubt, the Compendium of Knowledge says:
QUESTION: What is doubt?
RESPONSE: This is being two-minded with regard to the truths. It has the
function of acting as a support for not engaging in the class of virtue.
Just as it has been said above, it is a mental factor that wavers between
two points within observation of the four truths, cause and result, and so
forth. This doubt hinders all virtuous activities and especially hinders
the seeing of the truth. Since it will be overcome when one sees the truth,
it is said to be a thorough entanglement that is an object of abandonment
of the path of seeing.
(Note: The three thorough entanglements are: (1) view of the transitory
collection, (2) view holding [bad] morality and conduct as supreme, and (3)
doubt.)
Here doubt is the afflicted doubt. Afflicted doubt is abandoned by the path
of seeing, so it is an object of abandonment of the path of seeing. Unlike
anger, ignorance, the afflicted view and so forth, those are not abandoned
by the path of seeing.
When we have doubt regarding karma and their results, we have doubts
regarding the four noble truths. Then we will not cast aside those things
that need to be cast aside and we will not adopt those things that need to
be adopted. Therefore it hinders virtue.
We will look at the afflicted views in the next lesson.

Question: What are the objects for doubt and ignorance?
Khen Rinpoche: The object of observation for the afflicted doubt can be
posited as the four noble truths, and the presentation of karma and their
effects. And I guess the object of observation for ignorance can be all
phenomena.
Question: Regards to the pride of lowliness and the pride of selfhood, to
explain how the aspect of it being inflated has got to do within observing
the “I” which is the view of the transitory collection, wishes to cherish
this “I”, and wishes it to be that way, so when I think that I am lower
than the lowly, I am actually seeking attention to myself. Comparing that
to bodhisattva who cherishes others, and thinking “I am lower than the
lowly” because I am cherishing others, observing others, then there is a
big difference between the two. Just to postulate and guess whether this
could be the case for all, but specifically for these two -the pride of
selfhood and pride of lowliness. The subjective aspect is within observing
the “I” which is from the view of the transitory collection, cherishes this
“I” greatly.
Khen Rinpoche: Good suggestion.
Question: On ignorance, I am not sure of “unknowing of the three realms.”
If it is means unknowing of all phenomena, how would the wisdom realizing
selflessness will make us know all the three realms?
Ven Gyurme: If I do not know this is a microphone, I have the wisdom
realizing selflessness, how does it help me overcome the ignorance that I
do not know this is a microphone, for example, all phenomena.
Khen Rinpoche: There is always an answer to everything. It is the principal
antidote. So the final ultimate antidote is the wisdom realizing
selflessness. Of course the mind not knowing that this is a microphone is
basically opposed by the mind that knows, i.e. you just learn that this is
a microphone. Of course there is a mind that doesn’t know the final mode of
abiding of the microphone and the antidote to that is the wisdom realizing
selflessness.

Discussion Questions (23 September  2012):
1. (a) What is the difference between a main mind and a mental factor?
    (b) Explain their concomitance by way of the five similarities.
2. (a)  What is the difference between discrimination and attention?
  b) Is discrimination necessarily conceptual?
3. Is there a difference between aspiration and belief?
4. What is the difference between wisdom and non-ignorance?
5. Is there a common locus between faith and aspiration?
Some of the questions may be difficult. There are times you may not be able
to find a conclusion but that are not the point of the discussion. The
point of discussion is an opportunity for you to go into the text and read
it. The whole idea is to get a clearer idea of what is being discussed.



