Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Lorig/Transcript/lesson15.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:53:23.981019
================================================================================


Student: To understand the forward pervasion, it says that the sign and
similar class must be equal in extent or that the sign must be lesser in
extent than the similar class. (Handout dated 24 July page 5).
So the sign must be equal to the similar class; which is the predicate or
the sign must be lesser than the similar class, therefore the sentence:
The subject, sound, is an impermanent phenomenon because of being a
product.
Product and impermanent phenomenon are equal in extent.
If I look at the list of things which are mutually inclusive, let say
functioning things, which has product, specifically characterized
phenomenon etc., can I say:
The subject, sound, is a functioning thing because of being an impermanent
phenomenon.
Can I swop around because they are mutually inclusive and are equal in the
extent?
Khen Rinpoche: Can.
The sign that is stated in the syllogism, the extent of the pervasion may
be the same. Having said that, it is not necessarily so. The sign that is
posited:
    • if the extent of its pervasion is equal to the predicate to be proven,
      it is ok
    • if the extent of its pervasion is greater than the predicate to be
      proven, then it is not correct.
    • if the extent of its pervasion is lesser than the predicate to be
      proven, it is ok
If the extent of the pervasion of the sign is greater than the predicate to
be proven than you cannot establish the forward pervasion.
|Handout dated 24 July page 5:                                                  |
|However, although the sign must exist exclusively in the similar class, it is  |
|not specified that the similar class must exist exclusively in the sign.       |
|Rather, there are two types of correct signs in this regard:                   |
|(1) those such that the sign and similar class are equal in extent and         |
|(2) those such that the similar class is greater in extent than the sign.      |
|In the sample syllogism:                                                       |
|The subject, sound, is an impermanent phenomenon because of being a product,   |
|the sign and the similar class are equal in extent.                            |
|All products are impermanent phenomena and all impermanent phenomena are       |
|products. There is nothing which is the one and not the other.                 |
|However, in the syllogism:                                                     |
|The subject, sound, is an impermanent phenomenon because of being an object of |
|hearing,                                                                       |
|the similar class is greater in extent than the sign.                          |
|There are impermanent phenomena such as consciousnesses which are not objects  |
|of hearing.                                                                    |
|The specification requires that the sign must exist exclusively but not        |
|necessarily universally in the similar class.                                  |
|The extent of the sign may be equal to or lesser than the similar class, but it|
|cannot be greater.                                                             |
|“Pervasion” means that the reason is pervaded by the predicate to be proven.   |
|The extent of the reason is either less than or equivalent to the extent of the|
|predicate to be proven.                                                        |
|In general, if the subject has the quality of being that sign and whatever is  |
|that sign is the predicate to be proven, then the subject must have the        |
|predicate to be proven.                                                        |
|Applied to the sample syllogism, sound is a product and whatever is a product  |
|in an impermanent phenomenon; thus sound is an impermanent phenomenon.         |


The syllogism: The subject, the sound of the conch, is impermanent because
it arises through human effort.
If it is a result of human effort, it is necessarily impermanent, but
whatever is impermanent is not necessary a result of human effort.
The extent of pervasion of the sign is either less than or equivalent to
the predicate to be proven.
If the extent of pervasion of the sign is greater than the extent of the
predicate to be proven, then the forward pervasion cannot be established.
So in the syllogism that we have been using, the subject, sound is
impermanent because of being an instance of product.  The sign is an
instance of product.
Student: Is human effort referring to thought consciousness?
Khen Rinpoche: You need effort to blow the conch shell to make sound.
[Handout dated 7 August ]
From the sevenfold division of consciousnesses, these five -subsequent
cognizer, correctly assuming consciousness, awareness to which an object
appears and is not ascertained, doubting consciousness, wrong consciousness
- are  non-valid consciousnesses.
Of these five non-valid consciousnesses, the first is subsequent cognizer.
The definition of subsequent cognizer is: a knower which realizes what has
already been realized.
That main thing to understand about this definition is not just about a
mind that knows something that has already been realized, but rather the
import is that whatever the subsequent cognizer realizes, it realizes it
through the force of the realization by a valid cognizer in the first
place. That is the meaning.
So this is how you should understand the definition.
A subsequent cognizer is a knower which realizes what has already been
realized (the meaning is by a valid cognizer). So whatever a subsequent
cognizer knows, its knowledge is induced by the prior realization of the
object by a valid cognizer
[pic]
When subsequent cognizer is divided, there are three,
1) Directly perceiving subsequent cognizer
2) Conceptual subsequent cognizer
3) Subsequent cognizer that is neither of those two











1. Directly perceiving subsequent cognizer has five divisions:
1) Directly perceiving subsequent cognizer that is a sense direct perceiver
  e.g. second moment of a sense direct perceiver apprehending blue
2) Directly perceiving subsequent cognizer that is mental direct perceiver
  e.g. the second moment of a clairvoyance knowing another’s mind
3) Directly perceiving subsequent cognizer that is self-knowing direct
  perceiver
  e.g. the second moment of a self-knowing direct perceiver experiencing an
  eye consciousness
4) Directly perceiving subsequent cognizer that is a yogic direct perceiver
  e.g. the second moment of an uninterrupted path of a path of seeing
5) Directly perceiving subsequent cognizer that is none of those four
  e.g. the second moment of a direct perceiver
Student: Why is there a directly perceiving subsequent cognizer that is
none of these four?
Khen Rinpoche:  If you are asked, “If it is a directly perceiving
subsequent cognizer, is it necessarily one of those four?” Here the fifth
one is: Directly perceiving subsequent cognizer that is none of those four.

Khen Rinpoche spoke in English: Whether you say ‘Yes’ whether you say “No”,
you must have confidence of whatever you say.
Khen Rinpoche: Whether it is a ‘Yes’ or ‘No’, you have to be confident and
know why you are taking that position. As in the handout, there is
something other than these four, and the illustration is the second moment
of a direct perceiver.
So if you asked; “Is a second moment of a direct perceiver a mental direct
perceiver?
Khen Rinpoche spoke in English: Your mind must be active when I am asking;
otherwise there is no point to debate because you won’t get anything. What
you are saying you must have confident. You must understand.
Khen Rinpoche: Is a second moment of a direct perceiver, a directly
perceiving subsequent cognizer, a mental direct perceiver?
Khen Rinpoche: Is a person necessarily a human being? Is person a human?
(Students feedback: No)
Khen Rinpoche: Why ‘No’? A person is not a donkey.
Khen Rinpoche spoke in English: If somebody asks; “Is a person a donkey?” A
person, not human being, is all living beings. No, isn’t it? If you say a
person is a donkey, what is the problem?
Student: We will all be donkey.
Khen Rinpoche: No it is not like. You cannot say that, that is not the
logic. If a person is a donkey, it doesn’t mean you become donkey, isn’t
it? It is not like that. The logic doesn’t work that way.
If you say; “Person is donkey”, you have to say; “Person is horse also,
person is elephant”, then something is common locus between elephant and
the donkey. It is not about you become donkey. Not like that. You must get
the idea. What is the problem if you say; “The person is donkey.” You say
“Yes.” Then immediately someone ask the same question; “Is person horse?”
What you have to say? You cannot say’ “No” because you already said “Yes”.
Then somebody ask; “Is person elephant?”  What do you say? Then person
become everything.
Khen Rinpoche: Is the second moment of a direct perceiver a mental direct
perceiver?
Khen Rinpoche spoke in English: No.
Khen Rinpoche: If it is not mental direct perceiver, it is also not a yogic
direct perceiver, it is also not a self-knowing direct perceiver and it is
also not a sense direct perceiver. But it is a direct perceiver.
The thing here is using the brain, because when somebody debate with you,
you have to be able to say something. You can’t say, for example, it is a
mental direct perceiver because you will run into problem.
If you think about direct perceiver, the second moment of a direct
perceiver has to be one of this four: a direct perceiver subsequent
cognizer that is a sense direct perceiver, mental direct perceiver, a yogic
direct perceiver or a self-knowing direct perceiver. During debate if
somebody states; “The subject, the second moment of a direct perceiver.”
What are you going to say?
Khen Rinpoche spoke in English: Now you can bring this logic there. How are
you going to answer in debate?
Khen Rinpoche: Earlier on we looked at direct perceiver and direct
perceiver is divided into four -sense direct perceiver, mental direct
perceiver, self-knowing direct perceiver and yogic direct perceiver. Only
four are posited. So those are the four divisions of direct perceivers. The
thing to think about is; “Is there a direct perceiver that is none of these
four?”
If somebody were to ask you; “Is there a direct perceiver that is none of
these four?” What would you say?
Khen Rinpoche spoke in English: You understand my question? Or you don’t
get? If you don’t get, then I have to explain every one again, each one,
what is direct perceiver, what is mental direct perceiver, what is self-
knowing direct perceiver. I have to explain everything again. You know all
these four. So now the question is: “If it is a direct perceiver, is it
necessary any of these four?”
Student: This category is just a generic term describing the class of
direct perceiver. A direct perceiver necessary has to be one of the four,
but at the same time this generic class is none of the four because it
cannot be any one of them.
Khen Rinpoche spoke in English: Yeah.
Khen Rinpoche: If a directly perceiving subsequent cognizer is not
necessarily one of the four direct perceivers, then what about the category
of direct perceiver itself?
If it is direct perceiver, is it necessary one of these four?
That is a question so you have to answer “Yes” or “No”, because if there is
no answer there is no discussion and there is no debate. It is only through
debate then it becomes clearer, but you have to give an answer.

Conceptual subsequent cognizer has two divisions:
   1. Conceptual subsequent cognizer that are induced by a direct perceiver
   2. Conceptual subsequent cognizer that are induced by inferential
      cognizers.
Illustration of conceptual subsequent cognizer that are induced by a direct
perceiver is a factually concordant ascertaining consciousness ascertaining
blue that is induced by a sense direct perceiver apprehending blue.
First you have a sense direct perceiver ascertaining blue and subsequently
you have a remembering consciousness thinking of blue.
Illustration of conceptual subsequent cognizer induced by inferential
cognizer is the second moment of an inferential cognizer realizing sound to
be impermanent. By depending on the sign, product, one generate an
inferential cognizer realizing sound to be impermanent.
The first moment is a valid cognizer.
The second moment would be a conceptual subsequent cognizer.
In this illustration, that is induced by an inferential cognizer.
Is there a subsequent cognizer that is neither a direct perceiver nor a
conceptual consciousness?
In the division of subsequent cognizer there are three:
   1) Directly perceiving subsequent cognizer
   2) Conceptual subsequent cognizer
   3) Subsequent cognizer that is neither of those two.
Can you posit an illustration for a subsequent cognizer that is neither a
direct perceiver nor a conceptual consciousness? An illustration would be
subsequent cognizer.
If it is a conceptual subsequent cognizer, is it necessary one of these
two?
   1. Something that is induced by a direct perceiver or
   2. Something that is induced by inferential cognizer
If you think about it, probably it would be ‘No,” for example, the
subsequent cognizer that is induced by a conceptual subsequent cognizer. In
debate, you can say, “Conceptual subsequent cognizer itself”.
What we have just brought out here is a subsequent cognizer that is induced
by a subsequent cognizer and that is none of the two.
Student: On the sequence of the sense direct perceiver apprehending an
object followed by a mental direct perceiver in the shortest moment of time
and then the conceptual consciousness realizes the object, can that
conceptual consciousness realizing the object be understood to be this
conceptual subsequent cognizer that is induced by a direct perceiver?
Khen Rinpoche: Yes.
Student: What do we mean by the term “induced” in the definition conceptual
subsequent cognizer that is induced by direct perceiver?
Ven Gyurme: Brought about, following, to lead, to guide.
Why do we generate a remembering consciousness remembering blue? Because of
having realized blue sometime in the past. Blue was realized by a valid
cognizer, so valid cognizer realizing blue is the condition. That is the
thing that induced and that is the condition which then leads one to
remember blue.
In order to remember something, the thing that you remember, does it need
to be realized by a valid cognizer earlier? In the first place, without
realizing something by a valid cognizer, is it possible to remember it
later on? Is it possible to remember something that you did not realize?
Student: Remembering eye consciousness apprehending two moons which is a
wrong consciousness.
Khen Rinpoche spoke in English: Do you remember two moons or not in your
life?
Student: No, because there is no such a thing as two moons.
Khen Rinpoche spoke in English: So you don’t remember two moons in your
life. Not possible to remember two moons.
Student: I remember the experience of the appearance of two moons. There is
no such a thing as two moons in the sky.
Khen Rinpoche spoke in English: So you don’t remember, isn’t it?
Student: Yeah cannot say remember two moons, but can remember the
experience of seeing two moons.
Khen Rinpoche spoke in English: So you accept that two moons that you
cannot remember.
Student: Probably have to accept that.
Khen Rinpoche spoke in English: So what do you remember?
Student: Can remember the appearance of seeing two moons. That would become
a remembrance of an appearance of non-existent. So this is an example
remembering something that is not realized by a direct perceiver, because
there is no such a thing as two moons.
Khen Rinpoche: Okay.
I think it is difficult to be able to remember something if you have not
realized earlier with a valid cognition. According to the Sutra School,
which is also a proponent of self-knowers, why do they assert self-knowers?

It boils down to memory, especially being able to remember the experience
of having seeing something; not remembering the object but the experience.
Why do we remember there was an eye consciousness apprehending blue
earlier? Because at that time there was a self-knower experiencing that eye
consciousness apprehending blue. Basically this is to account for memory.
If you have not realized blue and you don’t know what blue is, it is not
possible to remember blue. This is the assertion of most of the tenets up
to AMWS. Without a prior realization of blue by a valid cognizer, there is
no way you can remember blue later on. Similarly, in layman English, why do
we remember the experience of having seeing blue? Technically, why do we
remember the eye consciousness that apprehended blue earlier on? Why?
Because at that time when the eye consciousness was apprehending blue,
there was a self-know experiencing that eye consciousness. That self-knower
is a valid cognizer realizes it and experiencing it. Therefore,
subsequently, then it is possible for us to remember the experience of
having seen blue i.e. remember the eye consciousness apprehending blue.
It is possible to remember the appearance of two moons if you had the
experience of seeing two moons for whatever reasons, and later on you can
remember that. Similarly, we do remember of what we dream. For example,
when you dreamt of an elephant, later on you remember you dreamed of an
elephant. We remember what we saw in the dream. If we dream of an elephant,
later on we remember that appearance.
A dream consciousness is not a valid cognizer. However, it is possible to
remember what we dream. So it follows that in order for remembering
consciousness to arise it need not be preceded by a valid cognizer. If that
is the case, then there is no need for self-knower.
Khen Rinpoche spoke in English: I think you get more confused now.
Although there are many tenets assert self-knower, but they are not the
ultimate tenet and it is not the reality.
They have a reason why they posit self-knower, but if you analyze their
logic, you find faults with it.
If we talk about the reality, what exactly is it and what is it not. In
general, how does one remember something that you haven’t realized? It
doesn’t happen, you cannot remember something that you did not see or
realized. Is it possible for someone who has never ever seen blue in his
life to remember blue? What is the reason? From this you can see that it is
very difficult to say that you can remember something without having
realized in the first place.
According to the CMWS, if it is a dualistic mind, it is necessarily valid
with respect to what appears to it.
We are not saying that it is a valid cognizer, but it is valid with respect
to what appears to it. So for this reason, therefore, although a dream
consciousness is a wrong consciousness, let’s say in a dream there is an
appearance of a dream elephant, although that consciousness is a wrong
consciousness, but because it is valid with respect to the appearance of a
dream elephant, in that sense it realizes dream elephant. Therefore,
subsequently, it is possible to remember that appearance of a dream
elephant. This is the position of the CMWS, the highest tenet. Do AMWS,
MOS, and Sutra School assert the same thing? That is something to analyze.

Correctly assuming consciousness
In essence, correctly assuming consciousness is either generated upon a
reason or no reason. Correctly assuming consciousness has five divisions:
1. Correctly assuming consciousness which do not have a reason
Example: In dependence of someone saying; “Sound is impermanent” with no
reason stated. You heard it and think; “Yeah, sound is impermanent” with no
reason whatsoever. That is a correctly assuming consciousness which does
not have a reason.
2. Correctly assuming consciousness which have a contradictory reason
Example: You think that sound is not impermanent because it is not able to
perform a function. This is a contradictory reason but you think: “Sound is
impermanent “. The reason is contradictory because whatever is empty of
being able to perform a function is necessary permanent; not impermanent.
3. Correctly assuming consciousness for which the reason is indefinite {or
  lacks pervasion}
Example: You conclude that sound is impermanent because sound is an object
of comprehension. This is an indefinite reason because whatever is an
object of comprehension is not necessarily impermanent.
4. Correctly assuming consciousness for which the reason is not
  established.
Example: You generate a thought thinking that sound is impermanent by
depending on the sign of being an object of apprehension by an eye
consciousness. The reason is not established because you cannot establish
this sign on the subject.
5. Correctly assuming consciousness for which a reason exists but is not
  settled
Although product is the correct sign in establishing that sound is an
impermanent phenomenon, but in order for product to be a correct sign for
someone, he must have established the three modes -the sign must exist with
the subject, the sign is necessarily the predicate to be proven. When all
these conditions come together, only then he is ready to generate an
inferential valid cognizer.
Although product is a correct sign in the proof that sound is an
impermanent phenomenon but if you state the correct sign to someone who has
not yet ascertained that sound is a product,  and he has not ascertain that
product is necessarily impermanent, then for him it has not become a
correct sign.
The reason proving that sound is impermanent exists, but until that person
has realized it in his mind the three modes, he has yet to generate an
inferential cognizer.
Although in general it is a correct sign, but for that person whom you are
trying to prove that sound is impermanent, it has not become a correct sign
yet. Therefore, although it is a reason but it is a reason that has not
been settled.
Student: In Sutra School, can an ordinary being directly realize
impermanence?
Khen Rinpoche: In the Sutra School, probably not, because to them the mind
that directly realizing impermanence would be a yogic direct perceiver;
which exists only in the continuum of Superiors.
Student: In that sense the syllogisms; “The subject, sound, is an
impermanent phenomenon because of being a product”, that person must
realize that product is an impermanent phenomenon. The product is an
impermanent phenomenon because of something else. It would be an
inferential valid cognizer for an ordinary being.
In another words, when you say ascertained by valid cognition for an
ordinary being, it would be based on an inferential valid cognition.
Ven Gyurme: To the person whom you are trying to proof that sound is
impermanent, that person must necessarily have the inferential cognizer
realizing that product is necessarily impermanent? Can an ordinary directly
realize that product is impermanent?
Khen Rinpoche: In the context when we talking about realizing impermanence
here, it is referring to subtle impermanence.
|Definition of yogic direct perceiver is:                                       |
|that which is generated in dependence on its own uncommon empowering condition,|
|a meditative stabilization which is a union of calm abiding and special        |
|insight, and                                                                   |
|is an other-knowing exalted knower in the continuum of a Superior which is free|
|from conceptuality and non-mistaken.                                           |


Ordinary being cannot realize subtle impermanence directly, only a Superior
can do so.
Also mental direct perceiver apprehending form in the continuum of an
ordinary being is an AAA because it only exists for the shortest of moment.
If you say that mental direct perceiver apprehending form realizes its
object, then it would incurs the fallacy of that that ordinary beings
realizes subtle impermanence. Then that would incur the fallacy that he
becomes the Superior. According to Sutra School, only Superior can directly
realize subtle impermanence.
Student: So that syllogism for ordinary being is just an inferential valid
cognizer, even the sign is also ascertained by an inferential valid
cognizer?
Khen Rinpoche: It is same. Ordinary being cannot directly realize that
product is impermanent.
Student: Functioning thing, manifest phenomenon is explicitly realize by a
direct valid cognizer. In another word, a permanent phenomenon is not
explicitly realized by a direct perceiver, so how a yogic direct perceiver
does realizes emptiness which is a permanent phenomenon? In what way is
yogic direct perceiver realizing it?
Ven Gyurme: Does a yogic direct perceiver explicitly realize emptiness?
Khen Rinpoche: The yogic direct perceiver realizes the selflessness of
persons by explicitly realizing the compositional factors that are devoid
of a self of persons. In dependence on that, it then implicitly realizes
the selflessness of persons.
We mentioned before that whatever is a functioning thing is necessarily the
appearing object of a direct perceiver. Based on this, is the selflessness
of persons the appearing object of a direct perceiver?
The selflessness of persons is a permanent phenomenon. Does the
selflessness of persons then appear to a yogic direct perceiver? Because it
does not appear to a yogic direct perceiver apprehending the selflessness
of persons, therefore the selflessness of persons is not directly realized
by a yogic direct perceiver.
But if you were asked, “Does a yogic direct perceiver realize the
selflessness of persons?” you probably have to say, “Yes.”
  • A yogic direct perceiver realizes the selflessness of persons.
  • The yogic direct perceiver realizes the selflessness of persons
    directly.
  • The selflessness of persons is not directly realized by a yogic direct
    perceiver.
The appearing object of a direct perceiver is necessarily a functioning
thing. That being the case, is the selflessness of persons the appearing
object of a direct perceiver? We have to say, “No.”
If someone were then to say, “The selflessness of persons is the appearing
object of a direct perceiver because the selflessness of persons is
realized directly by a yogic direct perceiver” …
Khen Rinpoche: What are you going to say?
The selflessness of persons is not the appearing object of a direct
perceiver. But you accepted that the selflessness of persons is the
appearing object of a direct perceiver because the selflessness of a person
is realized directly by a yogic direct perceiver.
The selflessness of persons is not the appearing object of a direct
perceiver because there is no direct perceiver that directly realizes the
selflessness of persons.
Student: Regarding this yogic direct perceiver that realizes selflessness
of person, what is its object of engagement?
Khen Rinpoche: Selflessness of person.
For the remaining consciousnesses, AAA, doubt, and wrong consciousness, you
read it on your own. I am not going through it. If you have any questions
you can ask; otherwise I am not going through it. If you have questions on
the remaining non-valid awarenesses you can bring it up; otherwise we will
start on the mental factors.
Khen Rinpoche spoke in English: For the collected topics, first discuss
with first and leaders to discuss. If no answer to the difficult question,
then ask in class.
The 51 mental factors are easier to deal with because it is straight
forward.
Khen Rinpoche spoke in English: Just introducing what are the 51 mental
factors, what is anger, what is attachment. Now this is more complicated.
Next class another one or two months, more easy. Hope.
The subject is challenging and intriguing but nevertheless you have tried;
you are listening, you are thinking about it, you are studying, that is
very good. On my side, it is quite difficult to really teach this, but
because of your continuing effort of listening and learning, that gives me
some encouragement.
Those of you who had studied this in the previous BP, and you are now
studying this for the second time, I guess most of you find it relatively
easier. The reason why it is easier for them is because they have heard it
before.  For those of you who are now hearing this for the second time,
when I say this I don’t have to say anything else, it is very obvious
because it is your own experience. Perhaps for those who are listening for
the first time may not understand what I am trying to say. It is a fact and
it is a nature that when you do thing again and again, it become easier.
Khen Rinpoche spoke in English: So make sure it becomes your subsequent
cognizer next time, the new ones.
Student: Can I say that the appearing object of a wrong consciousness is
not necessarily an existent?
Khen Rinpoche: Perhaps it may be alright to say something like this. You
remember when we were looking at the facsimile of a direct perceiver, the
non-conceptual facsimiles of a direct perceiver which is sense
consciousness, their minds have a clear appearance of a non-existent.
Non-conceptual wrong consciousness, non-conceptual facsimile of a direct
perceiver, consciousness that has a clear appearance of a non-existence are
mutually inclusive. So a non-conceptual wrong consciousness can have a
clear appearance of a non-existence.
Student: So does the clear appearance of a non-existent, for example, the
eye consciousness seeing one moon as two moons. The appearing object of
that eye consciousness seeing one moon as two moons is two moons or is the
clear appearance of two moons?
Khen Rinpoche: If you accept that a wrong consciousness can have a clear
appearance of non-existent, so you don’t have to say appearance of two
moons because two moons is a non-existent. Is it okay to posit two moons as
appearing object?
Student: Of that consciousness, yes.
Khen Rinpoche: Could be.
Khen Rinpoche: Whether you say two moons or appearance of two moons, it
should be okay.
You have to analyze whether to posit one moon or not? To the consciousness
where one moon appears as two moons, does one moon appear? Is one moon its
appearing object?



