Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Lorig/Transcript/lesson21.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:53:23.814223
================================================================================



[A] The Five Omnipresent Mental factors (kun 'gro)
The five omnipresent mental factors are:
(1) feeling
(2) discrimination
(3) intention
(4) contact
(5) attention



|Five Omnipresent Mental   |Function                                         |
|Factors                   |                                                 |
|Feeling                   |is that which experiences suffering, happiness or|
|                          |neutral feeling.                                 |
|Discrimination            |is that which apprehends the uncommon sign or the|
|                          |uncommon entity of an object.                    |
|Intention                 |is that which move the mind to an object         |
|Attention                 |is that which directs the mind to an object      |
|Contact                   |to enable the mind to meet with an object        |


A main mind is necessary accompanied by these five omnipresent mental
factors; it does not matter what kind of main mind. As long it is a main
mind, it is necessary accompanied by these five omnipresent mental factors.
From your side, you just need to have a rough idea of what these five
omnipresent mental factors are and the kinds of function they perform.









[B] The five object-ascertaining mental factors (yul nges)
[Root text: page 26] The five object-ascertaining mental factors are:
(1) aspiration
(2) belief
(3) mindfulness
(4) meditative stabilization
(5) wisdom


[B1] Aspiration ('dun pa)
Aspiration is a knower that focuses on the desire and wishes to be endowed
with it.
Basically aspiration is a mind that desires a particular object.

[B2] Belief (mos pa)
Belief is a mind which apprehends an object that has been ascertained by
its valid cognition and hold on to this object by thinking; “It is just
like this and not otherwise.”
Belief is an ascertainment of an object.
Belief is very important especially having belief in karma and its effect.
Belief in karma and its effect is the very root of all wholesome qualities.
It is important to gain an ascertainment of karma/actions and its effect
through the process of learning about it and then reflecting on it.
Through the process of hearing, learning and reflecting on karma & its
effect, it is possible to entertain some kinds of qualm about karma. You
may have doubts but it can be a doubt tending toward the factual. On the
basis of that, through further learning and reflection, one can gain a
correctly assuming consciousness in relation to this karma & its effect
i.e. you gain a correct assumption which is like a realization. Having this
correct assumption or correct belief in karma and its effect can help us to
live a life and practice that is based on the belief in karma and its
effect. Of course, it would be the best if one can gain a valid cognition
of karma and its effect. Do you remember about inferential cognizer that we
have talked about? If one can generate an inferential cognition of karma
and its effect in dependence upon correct logics and reasonings, then that
kind of faith in karma and its effect that you have acquired will be very
stable and irreversible.  With this kind of irreversible faith in karma and
its effect, one’s practice will be greatly enhanced and one will achieve
the goal of one’s practice.
Of the five object-ascertaining mental factors, in the context of
discussing belief, here the belief in karma and its effect is not just
having some belief as in the usual usage of English word “belief,” here the
belief is a knower that which hold its object that has been ascertained by
its valid cognition. That mean the object of the mental factor belief is
something that has been ascertained by a valid cognition. Belief basically
holds on to this object as it is ascertained by valid cognition to be as it
is; just like that and not something else. So it is not just mere some kind
of faith or some belief as in the normal English usage.
Belief is a mind which possesses three features:
1. The object of this mind is something that has already ascertained
   beforehand.
2. The subjective aspect of this mind hold on to this object and think, “It
   is just like that and not something else.”
3. The function is non-captivation.
Because belief is a mind that hold on to an object that has already been
ascertained and determined by valid cognition, therefore it is impossible
for you to change your mind about that object because you have realized as
it is. So no matter what you hear or what people say about it or the kind
of conditions you meet, you will not sway i.e. you will not be captivated
by those arguments or views. So this is the function of non-captivation.
So belief is very important in particular for spiritual development,
training the mind and practicing the dharma because once you have
ascertained something through valid cognition and you hold on to that
realization, then whatever practice you do, you will achieve the purpose
and goal. In general, belief is also important in whatever we do in life.
We need this kind of belief.
Is there a difference between belief and subsequent cognizer?
Subsequent cognizer is a knower that realizes what has already been
realized.
Belief and subsequent cognizer are not the same. Subsequent cognizer can be
a main mind. Of course there are subsequent cognizers that are mental
factors. If it is belief it is necessary mental factor.
Belief is not a knower that realizes what has already been realized but it
just holding on to the object and believing that it is that and not
something else. So this is the difference between belief and subsequent
cognizer.
[B3] Mindfulness (dran pa)
[Root text: page 28]  Regarding the entity of mindfulness, the Compendium
of Knowledge says:
  QUESTION: What is mindfulness?
  RESPONSE: It is a non-forgetfulness of the mind with respect to a
  familiar object. It has the function of non-distraction.
Just as it has been said above, it is a knower that possesses three
features. These three features are:
(1) objective feature – a familiar object
(2) [subjective] aspect feature – a non-forgetfulness upon having observed
that object; and
(3) functional feature – non-distraction
The object of mindfulness is a familiar object. Why is this so?
1) Since mindfulness is not produced with respect to that which has not
   been previously familiarized with, the objective feature is stated as "a
   familiar object."
Mindfulness is not forgetting that object. So you cannot have mindfulness
with respect to an object that you are not familiar with.
2) Even though the mind might have previously familiarized itself with an
   object, if it does not presently dawn as an object of the mind,
   mindfulness will not occur. Thus, [the subjective aspect feature] is
   specified as "non-forgetfulness of the mind."
3) Since the stability of the mind is enhanced in dependence on special
   mindfulness, its functional feature is specified as that of "non-
   distraction."
Following are quotations from Arya Nagarjuna and Shantideva stating the
importance of mindfulness.
[Root text: page 29] And Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds (stanza 5.26-30)
says:
Even though learned,
Faithful and diligent in effort,
Many become tainted by downfalls
Due to committing the fault of lacking introspection.
Although this particular verse is talking manifestly about introspection
but it is also highlighting the importance of mindfulness. Mindfulness and
introspection (also translated as vigilance) are very important. The verse
says that even though one maybe learned, have a lot of faith and
hardworking but if one does not know the essential point of how to practice
then one can be tainted by various downfalls and faults as the result of
lack of mindfulness.

Though they have amassed merit,
It is pilfered by the thief of non-introspection
Who follows upon degeneration of mindfulness;
They proceed to a bad migration.
If one loses the mindfulness of a virtuous object of observation, if one
forget to focus the mind with virtuous object and if the mind forget that
virtuous object when the mindfulness degenerates then all the merits that
one has amassed may decline. As the result, one may go to the lower realms.
This band of thieves, the afflictions,
Looks for an opportunity;
Upon finding an opportunity, it pilfers my virtue and
Even destroys the life of a good migration.

When you lose the mindfulness of a virtuous object and you forget to place
your mindfulness on the virtuous object, then in its place all kinds of
afflictions will come readily. The moment you forget to focus your mind on
the virtuous object all the afflictions will come readily to take over its
place. Due to that, you virtues decline. When your virtues are stolen by
afflictions you will not be able to obtain a good rebirth.
Therefore, mindfulness should never be displaced
From the door of the mind;
If it does go, recalling the anguish of bad migrations,
Place it back.
These few verses are talking about the importance of mindfulness and the
great importance of not forgetting to focus the mind on the virtuous
object. You are reminded not to forget to focus your mind on the virtuous
object. If you find your mindfulness is indeed degenerating then you must
recall the sufferings of the lower realms and think, “If I forget to place
my mind on virtue then this will happen to me”. With that you put the mind
back on the virtuous object.
Due to association with spiritual teachers,
The teachings of the abbot, and fear,
Fortunate ones who act respectfully
Easily generate mindfulness.
This verse highlights the external conditions for generating mindfulness,
which is the virtuous friend - the guru.
Mindfulness and introspection are extremely important for developing a good
quality and it is said to be indispensable.
In this vein, Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds says (stanza 5.22-23):
Let my gain and honor,
My body and livelihood vanish;
Let even my other virtues degenerate,
But may my mind never degenerate.
I urge you, (In Tibetan, I put my palms together)
Those who wish to guard their minds,
Guard your mindfulness and introspection
Even at the cost of your lives!
Shantideva is advising us to rely on mindfulness and introspection and
always protect/guard the mind. Just as we would protect/guard our
possessions, body and so forth, likewise, we must protect/guard our mind
with mindfulness and introspection. Between protecting our body and mind,
it is said that protecting/guarding our mind is more important.
If you think about it from various angles, you will understand how
important it is to protect the mind with mindfulness and introspection. If
you were to compare physical suffering and mental suffering, mental
suffering is more difficult to bear. Which is greater: physical bliss or
mental bliss? I think mental bliss is more important.
It is not the body that goes on to the next life; it is the mind that goes
on to the next life. It is the mind that determines the kind of rebirth you
will get in your next life. As the mind moves from life to life, so no
matter from whichever perspectives you look at it, you will understand how
it is important to guard/protect the mind.
How do we differentiate between a good person and a bad person?
The difference is not made based on some differences on how they look
physically such as the size of the body but rather we distinguish a bad
person or a good person by the virtuous state of their mind. Essentially, a
good person is different from a bad person because he has a better quality
of mind such as more good hearted.
When we say we love somebody or when we show affection to someone or we
like somebody, we like the person that has more to do with that person’s
mind. Of course the mind is there in the body but if you do think about it,
the person is alive because the consciousness is still in the body, then we
say we like the person and has affection for that person. When the person
is dead and the consciousness is not in the body, then we look at the body
we will not have the same affection or love. In fact, when we look at the
body, we may get scare. The essential point is that the state of the mind
is important. So it is extremely important to guard/protect the mind. Just
as we put in a lot of effort in protecting our body, Shantideva is saying
that we should in fact put in more effort to guard our mind. Shantideva
urges us and plea to us. In Tibetan it say, “I put my palms together and I
request you to guard your mind”
This discussion of mindfulness here is in the context of virtuous mind i.e.
the mental factor of mindfulness in the retinues of a virtuous mind. Since
it is so important to guard the mind and to place the mind on the virtuous
object, what allows us to do so is the mental factor of mindfulness. So,
therefore, it is important to understand what mindfulness is and also to
understand the importance of mindfulness.
With a good mindfulness and introspection, one can achieve meditative
stabilization.
Meditative stabilization (ting nge 'dzin) is sometime translated as
concentration.
ting nge 'dzin and sam ten are used interchangeably by many translators.

[B4] Meditative stabilization (ting nge 'dzin)
Regarding the entity of meditative stabilization, the Compendium of
Knowledge says:
  QUESTION: What is meditative stabilization?
  RESPONSE: It is a one-pointedness of the mind with respect to an imputed
  thing. It has the function of acting as a support for knowledge.
Just as it has been said above, it is a one-pointedness of mind that,
within observing an imputed thing, is continuously set upon it.
Meditative stabilization is a knower which also possesses the three
features.
The objective feature of meditative stabilization is specified to be "an
imputed thing," because, when cultivating meditative stabilization, one
holds the mind to an object of observation that is imputed by the mind.
Meditative stabilization is a knower which also possesses the three
features.
   1. The object of this mind is specified to be an imputed thing.
   2. The subjective aspect of this mind is single-pointedness.
   3. The function is to develop wisdom.
Why the object of meditative stabilization is specified to be an imputed
thing?
This is because, when cultivating meditative stabilization, one holds the
mind to an object of observation that is imputed by the mind.
There are four types of object of observations that are used for developing
meditative stabilization.

Furthermore, although there appear to be many enumerations of objects of
observation for meditative stabilization, when condensed, it is taught that
there are four [categories]:
(1) objects of observation for purifying behavior
(2) objects of observation for purifying afflictions
(3) pervasive objects of observation
(4) objects of observation for [developing] skill
There are four types of object of observation that are used for developing
meditative stabilization:
   1) objects of observation for purifying behavior
   2) objects of observation for purifying afflictions
   3) pervasive objects of observation
   4) objects of observation for [developing] skill
1. Object of observation for purifying behavior
What is purifying behavior? We look into our own mind. We look at our own
afflictions and observe which is predominant; whether it is anger,
attachment, or pride and so forth. By observing whichever affliction is
predominant, then we apply the antidote to that particular affliction.
If the afflictions are too strong, it will be difficult even if you try to
develop single-pointedness of mind.
First we have to purify the behavior. This is what it means here, i.e. to
look at which affliction is predominant and apply the respective antidote.
For example, if the predominant affliction:
 - is desire or attachment, one can meditate on ugliness,
 - is anger, one can meditate on love,
 - is ignorance, one can meditate on dependent arising,
 - is pride, one can bring to mind the list of things in this universe that
we do not know of,
 - is discursive thought, one can meditate on the breath i.e. focusing the
mind on breathing.
2. Object of observation for purifying afflictions
Purifying affliction means purifying the manifest afflictions by observing
the next higher realm:
- looking at the good qualities of the higher realm
- how the quality of current realm is not as good as the one above it, and
- how coarse it is compared to the one above it
This is the meditation in which you look at your current realm as coarse
and not as inviting as the realm above it that is peaceful and nice
thinking: “How nice if I can achieve that state.” Similarly, there is a
meditation on the sixteen aspects of the Four Noble Truths.
3. Pervasive object of observation
This refers to all existents or phenomena.
4. Object of observation for [developing] skill
This has to do with meditation on selflessness; selflessness of person and
selflessness of phenomenon. For example, meditating on whether the self
does exist on the body or aggregates?.
Basically you can posit on any object to be the object of observation for
meditative stabilization.
One important thing that is mentioned here is that meditative stabilization
is in relation to mental consciousness. Meditative stabilization is not
produced in the sense consciousnesses; rather it is produced in the mental
consciousness. You don’t produce concentration in eye consciousness.
Therefore, the visible form that appears to an eye consciousness is not
posited to be the object to developing meditative stabilization.
It is said that you do not develop concentration just by staring at
something without closing the eye or just focusing your mind without being
distracted from the cup. That is not how one develops meditative
stabilization.
Moreover, its object of observation is not form appearing to a sense
consciousness; rather it is only a mental object imputed by the mind.
When we are trying to develop concentration by focusing on a particular
object, we first look at it and have a clear idea on how the object looks
like. When we try to develop meditative stabilization focusing on that
object, what we are doing is focusing on the mental image of the object in
our mind. Of course when we look at the object, we do get the clear idea,
then we try to reproduce that image in our mind. The image is the thing
that we focusing on when we are trying to develop meditative stabilization.

Student (Ven Gyurme rephrased it): Can the object of observation of a non-
conceptual meditative stabilization be a non-imputed thing? Because the
object of observation is said to be an imputed thing.
Student: Can there be imputation by non-conceptual mind?
Khen Rinpoche: In general something that is imputed by mind, the mind may
not necessarily be a conceptual consciousness.
Student: All the while I thought there can be imputation by non-conceptual
sense consciousnesses because we understand from Special Insight class that
even sense consciousness imputes object. But during the discussion of the
mental factor of discrimination, I asked a question on designating of an
object by a non-conceptual mind, Khen Rinpoche explained that the
imputation is done by a conceptual consciousness only.
Khen Rinpoche: If you remember in the mental factor of discrimination:
⇨ The discrimination that is in the retinue of the sense consciousness is
  an apprehension of the sign.
⇨ The discrimination that is in the retinue of the mental consciousness
  is an apprehension of a mark.
The mental consciousness is primarily conceptual consciousness.
The question now is: Does the sense consciousness imputes or designates
such as an eye consciousness designate this is form?  Similarly, how does a
mental consciousness designate something?
If you think about it, perhaps it is not really necessary for imputation to
be done by conceptual consciousness. Regards to this imputed thing, when
you are trying to meditate, the object of observation for developing
meditative stabilization is essentially an appearance to the mind.
From the perspective of this appearance appearing to this mental
consciousness, we say it is imputed -appearing to mind.
I guess this is what the text is trying to say when we say the object of
observation is imputed thing; it is that appearance appearing to the mental
consciousness.

Nowadays, it seems that there are some instructions at odds with the
wording of the Conqueror's scriptures that clearly teach the method of
performing staring meditation within observation of a form appearing to the
eye consciousness. However, Arya Asanga clearly stated that meditative
stabilization is not produced in sense consciousnesses; rather, it is only
produced in a mental consciousness. Moreover, its object of observation is
not form appearing to a sense consciousness; rather, it is only a mental
object imputed by the mind.

If you stare at the cup without being distracted, you don’t see the cup
very clearly.
Khen Rinpoche spoke in English: You look at the picture on the cup and
without being distracted, the picture must be blur. If the picture is
clear, then your eye consciousness already being distracted. When you look
at the picture is not so, when you are stable, you see clear but you see
many up and down, different picture. If your eye is very focused on the
object, no distraction, even people go in front of you, doesn’t bother you,
that time, even you don’t see the picture very clearly. You will be very
concentrated. When you put your fingers like that (Khen Rinpoche put his
two finger close together), don’t touch, you blur your eyes, then you will
see another finger between them. If you concentrate you don’t see. When you
are blur, nothing distract you, you see another finger between there. Long
time ago I saw somebody meditated like that. They open the eye, look at the
picture, eyes never close for one two hours. If you really want to see
clear the picture, your eyes will blink.
When you are trying to develop meditative stabilization, you focus on a
chosen object. There is a factor of stability, and there is also a factor
of clarity. What you are trying to do is to achieve these two factors.
When focusing on an object with your eye consciousness, you may be able to
stay on the object but the clarity may not that great. This is like laxity
that is experienced by people who are trying to develop concentration.
If you try for a while, your mind is placed on the object and you don’t
move, but it is not clear. This is what we call laxity.
In short, meditative stabilization is generated in a mental consciousness;
not in a sense consciousness.
The object of observation is not the form that is appearing to the sense
consciousness; but rather by looking at an object, we make an image of the
object in our mind and then focus on that mental image.
Can one achieve meditative stabilization by focusing on the breath?
The object is moving. Is your breathing in and out an imputed object?
Does an object of observation for meditative stabilization necessarily an
imputed thing?
Khen Rinpoche spoke in English: What do you think?
The text then brings up a qualm.
QUALM: Well then, does the object of meditative stabilization definitely
have to be a real object?
RESPONSE: No. Whether the object be real or erroneous, if one attentively
familiarizes oneself with it internally over and over again, clear
appearance and non-conceptuality with respect to that object will arise. It
is just as it has been said in [Dharmakirti's] Commentary on (Dignaga's)
'Compendium of Valid Cognition'(Pramanvarttikakarika):
    Therefore, utmost familiarization with whatever – whether real or
    unreal
    – Results in a clear non-conceptual mind
    When that familiarization is thoroughly completed.
How do we posit the difference between a real and unreal object?
Khen Rinpoche spoke in English: How do you differentiate what is real and
what is unreal?
Do you think real and unreal is differentiated by depending on whether the
object in question is an existent or not?
You can meditate on horns of a rabbit. While there is no such thing, but
you can conceive of horns of a rabbit and then meditate on it.
Khen Rinpoche spoke in English: You can imagine the rabbit has horn and you
can meditate on that image, isn’t it?
A horn of a rabbit is a non-existent and is something that is not possible
to exist i.e. an existent of which is impossible. I am not sure whether
“real” here refers to an existent and “unreal” refers to a non-existent. If
you choose to meditate on the horns of a rabbit which is not something that
appears to a sense consciousness as it is a non-existent, but it is
possible to have a mental image of horns of a rabbit. If you decide to
meditate on the horns of a rabbit, essentially what is your object of
observation? The mental image, isn’t it?
Khen Rinpoche spoke in English: I am not sure what they mean. You can give
better idea next time, I am not sure.

The functional feature of meditative stabilization is specified to be
"acting as a support for knowledge," because, through the force of analysis
with the wisdom of individual investigation in dependence on calm-abiding
in which the mind is internally set in equipoise, one achieves the special
insight observing modes and varieties.
Note: "Modes and varieties" is an expression referring  to  ultimate  truths
and conventional truths, that is, all phenomena.
The functional feature of meditative stabilization is specified to be
acting as a support for knowledge; it acts as a support for generating
special insight. The root of cyclic existence is ignorance. The root of
afflictions is ignorance. In order to destroy ignorance, we first have to
develop calm-abiding. In dependence upon calm-abiding, one achieves special
insight. If you have special insight focusing on emptiness, then finally
you will have the direct antidote to the afflictions in your hand.

Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds says (stanza 8.4):
   Having understood that afflictions are destroyed
   By special insight that is fully endowed with calm-abiding,
   First seek calm-abiding;
   That is achieved through taking joy in non-attachment to the world.
Also, the Scripture on Discipline repeatedly teaches the ways in which the
training in meditative stabilization depends on the training in ethics, and
the training in wisdom depends on the training in meditative stabilization.
In this manner, those who wish for liberation from their hearts should
regard these great texts as supreme quintessential instructions.
Again this paragraph is saying the importance of learning the teachings,
even in the context of someone who is seeking to develop a single-
pointedness of mind. Before you can do that, you must know exactly:
- what you are trying to achieve,
-what exactly is meditative stabilization and
-what are the objects you can choose to meditate on.
You also have to know how meditative stabilization is achieved in a mental
consciousness; not a sense consciousness. Without learning and studying on
how to achieve meditative stabilization, even though you wish to achieve
calm-abiding, you may spend your whole life trying to practice and thinking
that you are actually practicing the right thing to achieve calm-abiding
but you will never achieve your goal. In that way, you waste your life
thinking that you are actually achieving something. From this example, so
it is very important to study.
Lama Tsongkhapa, Je Rinpoche, basically saying how important it is to study
the great treaties, in particular looking at the texts of the great Indian
masters because all of them can be traced back to these great Indian
masters. In this context of developing meditative stabilization, the
primary source that is often cited is the text of Arya Asanga. All the
compositions and the explanation of the Buddha’s teachings of these great
Indian masters can be traced back to the Buddha himself. The purity of the
source is very important, so it is important to rely on unmistaken
explanation.
While really difficult to achieve meditative stabilization is single-
pointedness of mind, but at least what we can do is to place special
imprints or predispositions to be able to achieve it in the future. At
least now by gaining a complete correct understanding on what exactly
meditative stabilization is, how to do it and placing the special imprints
in the mind, then there is always hope in the future.  The extensive
explanation on cultivating meditative stabilization is found in the Lamrim
Chenmo, the Great Treaty of The Stages of the Path to Enlightenment. But in
the context here of discussing the 51 mental factors, we are essentially
looking at the entity of meditative stabilization.
We will look at the last object ascertaining mental factor, wisdom, in the
next lesson. Then we will go through the eleven virtuous mental factors. I
would be good if you can read that on your own. It is not difficult as it
is quite straight forward. You just go through the eleven mental factors
and  it is very important that you read.



