Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Lorig/Transcript/lesson07.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:53:23.900687
================================================================================


At the end of the previous class, there was a question about whether the
eye consciousness that see a shadow is valid. Here we are talking about how
our mind works, so please pay attention.
With respect to what is apprehending the shadow, the eye consciousness
apprehending the shadow is valid because the shadow exists in the way it
appears. The eye consciousness apprehends the shadow realizes the shadow
and knows it is a shadow.
You see the shadow with your eye. The eye consciousness apprehending the
shadow realizes shadow. It is valid because it realizes the shadow as it
is.
While the eye consciousness apprehending the shadow is in operation, at the
same time it is possible to have a thought wondering about the nature of
the shadow; “Is it a shadow of a leaf or is it a shadow of a bird?” It is
possible to have a doubting consciousness which is two-pointed and not
exactly sure what kind of shadow it is. Doubting consciousness is included
within the sevenfold division of consciousness. (Definition of doubting
consciousness is a knower which has qualms two-pointedly by its own power.)
Let’s say the shadow is a shadow of a bird.  The eye consciousness sees the
shadow but at the same time wondering what kind of shadow it is. So here
you can see that there are two consciousnesses at the same time:
   1. An eye consciousness apprehending shadow which is valid as it is
      apprehending the shadow as it is.
   2. A thought wondering what kind of shadow it is and this is a doubt.
These two different consciousnesses are operating at the same time.
After some thinking, you concluded in your mind; “That is definitely the
shadow of a bird. The reason is it looks like a shadow of a bird.
Therefore, it must be the shadow of a bird.” This is the conclusion you
have in your heart.
The doubt you have earlier is transformed into a correct assumption. In
reality it is true that it is a shadow of a bird and your mind has
concluded correctly that it is a shadow of a bird but nevertheless this
mind, which is just an assumption, has not realizes it is a shadow of the
bird yet. So it is not a valid cognition of it being the shadow of a bird.
You can make an assumption which accord with the reality. You can also make
assumptions with all kind of reasons and many of which can be wrong. You
can put whatever reasonings but you may arrive at the correct conclusion
with a wrong reason. A correctly assuming consciousness is like. A correct
assumption is a mind that is a decisive conclusion that accord with the
reality of that object but the conclusion may not necessary reach with a
correct reason.  So whatever the correctly assuming consciousness
apprehends, it has to exist in reality as it is. The definition of a
correctly assuming consciousness is a factually concordant determinative
knower which is controvertible with regard to determining its object.
So from here you can see that it is important to memorize the definition of
the correctly assuming consciousness in order to know what a correct
assumption is.
It is possible for the correctly assuming consciousness to be transformed
to a valid cognizer. Initially in your mind you have the correct assumption
that it is a shadow of a bird but you may not have arrived at it through a
valid reason. Then subsequently when you look up, you can see a bird flying
and there is a shadow of that bird on the ground. Based on this, now you
are very sure that is the shadow of a bird. You eye consciousness is
apprehending the shadow of a bird and in your mind you know it is the
shadow of a bird.
While it is a shadow of a bird but you apprehend it to be a shadow of a
leaf. The mind that apprehends it as a shadow of a leaf would be a wrong
consciousness because the principal object that this mind has is the shadow
of a leaf. The definition of the wrong consciousness is a knower which
engages its object erroneously.
After you have generated a valid cognizer realizing the shadow of a bird,
then from the second moment of that valid cognizer and so forth, you
remember the shadow of a bird. Basically, from the second moment of that
valid cognition and so forth are subsequent cognizers because it is a
knower which realizes what has already been realized.
I do remember that there was a question about the shadow that was brought
up at the end of the previous lesson. An eye consciousness apprehending a
shadow is valid with respect to what it is apprehending; which is a shadow
but yet at the same time, it is possible to have doubt; “What exactly the
shadow is?” You may doubt and wonder. At that time there isn’t any valid
cognition of the shadow of a bird but through the process of thinking, you
may generate a correctly assuming consciousness. Then subsequently you have
a valid cognizer apprehending the shadow of the bird.
On the basis of this example, you have the rough understanding of the
sevenfold division of consciousness; what is wrong consciousness, correctly
assuming consciousness, valid cognizer and so forth. From here, you can try
to apply to other examples.
There is a shadow of a bird on the ground. The shadow appears to the eye
consciousness apprehending it.
Question: Does the shadow of a bird appear to the eye consciousness
apprehending it?
There is a consciousness to which the shadow of a bird is appearing to. I
have just explained that the consciousness to which the shadow of a bird is
appearing to is a valid cognizer. It is valid with respect to the shadow
that is appearing but this consciousness is not valid cognizer to the
shadow of the bird.
Khen Rinpoche spoke in English: Do you agree with that? There are two
things. In reality it is the shadow of a bird. When you see the shadow,
your eye consciousness understands the shadow but your eye consciousness
does not understand the shadow of a bird. If the eye consciousness realizes
the shadow of a bird, then that person would not have a doubt. But that
person has a doubt; “What kind of shadow is it?” This means that he does
not realize that is the shadow of a bird.
Question: To the eye consciousness apprehending shadow, does the shadow of
the bird appears?
It is clear that whatever appears to a collective engager or a direct
perceiver is not necessarily ascertain. Everything that is going to appear
but not everything that appears is ascertained.
Student 1:  According to what Lama Zopa Rinpoche use to teach, he says that
when you see something, e.g. the bird, the first time you see it, it appear
to you fully. But immediately after that, what you see is an inherent
existing bird. So when you talk about subsequent cognizer, are you seeing
that inherently existing bird or the bird as it is (which is not an
inherent existing)? (Audio file 30.15~31.15)
Khen Rinpoche: First, from which tenets perspective are you asking? Because
according to the Sutra School, if it exist, it is necessarily truly
established, existing from its own side, existing inherently. Do you
remember the definition of specifically characterized phenomenon?
Specifically characterized phenomenon is a phenomenon which is established
by way of its own character without being merely imputed by a term or
thought consciousness. If you think of memories, it is remembering of
something that you have already realized. So remembering consciousness is a
conceptual subsequent cognizer.
Eye consciousness apprehending blue is a direct perceiver.
It is a sense consciousness. It is a valid cognizer.
Specifically, an eye consciousness apprehending blue is a sense direct
perceiver.
After the generation of the sense direct perceiver apprehending blue, then
a mental direct perceiver apprehend blue is generated.
After that you have the conceptual consciousness apprehending blue.







So this is the order.
 1. First sense direct perceiver apprehending blue realizes blue.
 2. Following that is the mental direct perceiver apprehending blue but in
    the continuum of ordinary beings, blue is NOT realized by this mental
    direct perceiver apprehending blue. This is because mental direct
    perceiver apprehending blue in the continuum of an ordinary beings last
    for only very short moment i.e. the shortest moment of time. It is so
    brief that ordinary being cannot realize it.
 3. After the mental direct perceiver apprehending blue is generated for
    the shortest moment of time then come the conceptual consciousness
    apprehending blue; the thought thinking blue. This conceptual
    consciousness apprehending blue realizes blue.
(BP1 Module 11 Lesson 9 Ornament for Clear Realization:  When  the  duration
of a finger snap is divided into 65 parts, 1/65 of  a  finger  snap  is  the
shortest moment of time).
We have discusses in the previous lesson that conceptual consciousness
apprehending blue does realize blue but it can only realize blue by way of
generic image of blue or meaning generality of blue. This conceptual
consciousness has to realize blue by depending on a medium which is meaning
generality of blue.
What I have mentioned here is for the purpose of trying to gain a rough
understanding of how the mind work because in reality, it may not be
exactly like this as this depend on whose view you take. Different scholars
have different views on this issue. This can be a very complicated issue.
Student 2:  I am trying to understand the logic of the mental direct
perceiver not realizing blue. Can I compare this with the first moment of
the sense direct perceiver apprehending it? The way the direct perceiver is
together with its first moment and the subsequent moment. Therefore, can I
also say that then because the first moment of the mental direct perceiver
does not realize blue, it follows that the sense direct perceiver also does
not realize blue. It is only able to realize blue through its subsequent
cognizer; which is the direct perceiver. (Audio file 41.50~42.40).
Khen Rinpoche: It depends on how you define the first moment of the
comprehension by the sense direct perceiver apprehending blue.
Student 2: I also have this qualm of whether the first moment is the first
time you see in your life time and after that that is no more the first
moment. Different schools have different assertions; some say it is the
first moment in the life time and others say it is not. (Audio file
43.12~43.30)
Khen Rinpoche: In the definition of the valid cognizer, “new” refers to the
first time in the lifetime.
Student 2: Then after that, it will not be considered as first time. (Audio
file 44.32~44.34)
Ven Gyurme: As for the “moment” that we are talking about, we are not
talking about the smallest moment of time.
Student 2: The first moment you look at blue which is not the first time
you realize it in your life, is that considered as valid cognizer for this
school?  (Audio file 44.56~45.46.28)
Khen Rinpoche spoke in English: Are you talking about the same blue?
Student 2: Same blue
Khen Rinpoche spoke in English: Then that become the second time; not the
first time.
Student 2: Same blue at different time, is that considered as second
moment?
Khen Rinpoche spoke in English: Yeah, same blue seeing second time is
considered as subsequent cognizer.
As mentioned before, it is very important to gain an understanding of the
sevenfold division of consciousness on the basis of having memorized the
definition.  On the basis of having memorized the definition, then you can
do the comparison between the two valid cognizers, for example, what is the
difference between the inferential valid cognizer and direct valid cognizer
based on their definitions. After that, you follow up with subsequent
cognizer and so forth. After you have understood the definitions that you
have memorized, then just take up any specific mind as the subject and
check whether it is within any of the seven consciousnesses or is it not
part of the seven consciousnesses?
Khen Rinpoche spoke in English: Anybody see some kind of mind that is not
part of the seven minds? Can give example?
Regarding the dream elephant, there is a consciousness to which a dream
elephant appears.
To that consciousness to which the dream elephant appear:
 - between sense consciousness and mental consciousness, it is a mental
   consciousness
 - between conceptual consciousness and non-conceptual consciousness, it is
   a non-conceptual consciousness
In this case, this dream consciousness is a non-conceptual wrong
consciousness.
Dreaming of an elephant is wrong consciousness because, as in the
definition, it is a knower which engages its object erroneously.
What is this consciousness dreaming of an elephant engages in? It is
engaging a dream elephant and it take the dream elephant to be a real
elephant but a dream elephant is not an elephant.
What is the different between a mistaken consciousness and a wrong
consciousness?
The analysis has to be done on the basis of the definitions.
Wrong consciousness is a knower which engages its object erroneously.
Mistaken consciousness is a knower that is mistaken with regards to its
appearing object.
First we have to be clear with the definition then only we start to
analyze.
Illustration: A conceptual consciousness apprehending vase.
Specifically, it is an inferential valid cognizer realizing vase.
An inferential valid cognizer realizing vase is not a wrong consciousness.
An inferential valid cognizer is a newly incontrovertible knower.
(Definition of inferential valid cognizer: a new incontrovertible
determinative knower that is directly produced in dependence on a correct
sign which is its basis)
It is incontrovertible with respect to the principle object. What is its
principle object? It is vase because it gets vase and realizes vase. So
with respect to vase, it is valid and it is a newly incontrovertible.
Because it is a valid cognizer, it is necessarily not a wrong
consciousness.
Valid cognizer and wrong consciousness are mutually exclusive. There isn’t
any common locus between two of them.
The inferential valid cognizer apprehending vase is not a wrong
consciousness. It is a valid cognizer.
While it is not a wrong consciousness, it is a mistaken consciousness. Why
it is a mistaken consciousness?
From the definition, mistaken consciousness is a knower that is mistaken
with regards to its appearing object.
As mentioned earlier, the appearing object of a conceptual consciousness
(thought consciousness) is necessarily permanent.
The appearing object of a conceptual consciousness apprehending vase is the
meaning generality of vase and NOT the actual vase. This meaning generality
is a factor that is imputed by thought, therefore it is necessarily
permanent. Whatever that appears to the conceptual consciousness
apprehending vase is not posited to be appearing object but rather the
factor that is the imputation by thought that appears as vase. That is
posited to be the appearing object of the conceptual consciousness
apprehending vase; which is the mental image of vase (or meaning generality
of vase).
The appearing object of the conceptual consciousness apprehending vase or
the appearing object of the inferential valid cognizer apprehending vase is
the appearance appearing as vase. This appearance as vase to the conceptual
consciousness apprehending vase is not the actual vase.
Let’s visualizing gold and diamond as we do in the puja, so whatever gold
and diamond you are thinking of now, are they the actual gold and diamond?
If this appearance appearing as vase is the actual vase, or the appearance
appearing as gold is the actual gold, then it absurdly follow that there
will be no poverty in the world.
What is the appearing object of the conceptual consciousness apprehending
vase?
It is the appearance appearing as vase. While the appearance appearing as
vase is not the actual vase, it appears as the actual vase.
So the conceptual consciousness apprehending vase is not able to realize
the appearance appearing as vase is not the actual vase. It is mistaken
with regards to its appearing object.
Do you know how conceptual thought is mistaken with regards to its
appearing object?
What is the appearing object of a conceptual consciousness apprehending
vase? Meaning generality of vase
The appearing object of your thought thinking of vase is the meaning
generality of vase. While the meaning generality of a vase is not a vase,
it appears as a vase and not anything else. If that is the case, then it is
mistaken with regards to its appearing object.
Student 3:  What is the relationship between the conceptual consciousness
and the mental image? Are they one entity? (Audio file 64~64.44)
Khen Rinpoche: Conceptual consciousness and its appearing object are not
one substantiality because one is a functioning thing and one is a
permanent phenomenon. But it is questionable if they are one entity.
Student 3:   They look like one entity.
Khen Rinpoche spoke in English:  I need to think on this.
Student 4: What is a mental sense power?  (Audio file 66.44~69.53)
Khen Rinpoche: The mental sense power is posited as any of the six
consciousnesses in the immediately preceding moment. Back to the example of
the sense direct perceiver apprehending blue.
Sense direct perceiver apprehending blue is generated and last for a
certain moment but when that sense direct perceiver apprehending blue
ceases, immediately the mental direct perceiver apprehending blue is
generated.
The uncommon empowering condition for this mental direct perceiver
apprehending blue is the mental sense power. For this consciousness, it is
the sense direct perceiver apprehending blue that just immediately preceded
it.
Khen Rinpoche spoke in English: Sense direct perceiver apprehending blue,
say for 10 minutes. On the very last moment, it becomes the mental sense
power.
The last moment of the sense direct perceiver apprehending blue is the
mental sense power.
In dependence upon this last moment of this sense direct perceiver
apprehending blue which acts as uncommon empowering condition, in the next
moment a mental direct perceiver apprehending blue is generated. However,
in the continuum of an ordinary being, this mental direct perceiver lasts
only for the shortest moment of time.
In the monastery, there was an example where the teacher was giving an
illustration of a functioning thing saying: “The illustration of a
functioning thing is blue”. Then the student thought that functioning thing
is necessary blue.
The mental direct perceiver is posited as the thing that immediately comes
after the any of the six consciousnesses. The consciousness that arises
immediately after the cessation of the sense direct perceiver apprehending
blue is the mental direct perceiver apprehending blue.
By using the example of sense direct perceiver apprehending blue, once it
ceases, immediately it follows by a mental direct perceiver apprehending
blue. It is said that this mental direct perceiver is an awareness to which
an object appears but is not ascertained (AAA) for an ordinary being. After
that comes the conceptual consciousness apprehending blue. So it is the
conceptual consciousness that induces the ascertainment of blue because it
is the mind that thought “This is blue” or “This is not blue.” Based on
that, comes the convention “blue.”
The handout that was given out today is about direct perceiver. Please read
on your own and try to understand them. Memorize and think about the
definition. We have to look at direct perceiver. There are four divisions:
Sense direct perceiver, mental direct perceiver, self-knowing direct
perceiver and yogic direct perceiver. These terms will come out very often
especially when we look at the new modules Tenets. You have no choice to
get some ideas about it now. So when it comes out again when we look at
Tenets, over time it will become clearer. But what really important is to
understand the way how direct perception and thought work because the way
they engage the object is different. So you have to have the rough idea.
Conceptual consciousness or thought can only apprehend its object by way of
the meaning generality or the generic image of the object.
Direct perception does not require the help of any mental image but rather
it perceives its object as it is. Everything about the object appears to
the direct perceiver.
This is the minimum that you must keep in mind.
On the basis of the rough idea of how direct perceiver and conceptual
consciousness apprehend their object, then comes the sevenfold division of
consciousness. You need to know the names and the meanings of these seven
consciousnesses. In order to know the meaning, you need to memorize their
definition. On the basis of memorizing their definition, then you can
understand what these seven consciousnesses are.
When we talk about valid cognizer, what exactly is a valid cognizer? Valid
cognizer is a new incontrovertible knower. From the definition, then you
try to understand what does ‘new’ refers to, what is ‘incontrovertible’ and
what does ‘knower’ means. On the basis of the definition of valid cognizer,
you will be able to get a very clear idea of what a valid cognizer is. This
clear understanding of the valid cognizer has to come by depending on the
definition. That means you have to know the definition. On the basis of
this process, you know what these seven consciousnesses are: their names
and their definitions. Then you know what a valid cognizer is and its
definition. If someone were to ask you: “What is an AAA? Is AAA a valid
cognizer?” From the definition, the answer is then very clear; which is NO!
In order to be able to say with definite certainty that AAA is not a valid
cognizer, it all depends on whether you know what an AAA is. By knowing the
definition, an AAA is a knower that is a common locus of:
(1) having clear appearance of the specifically characterized phenomenon
which is its object of engagement and
(2) being unable to induce ascertainment with respect to the specifically
characterized phenomenon which is its object of engagement.
The key word “unable to induce ascertainment with respect to its object of
engagement” indicates that it is not a valid cognizer because a valid
cognizer necessarily induces ascertainment with respect to its object of
engagement i.e. necessarily realizes its object.
Similarly, if you were asked: “Is a wrong consciousness a valid cognizer?”
Then you must immediately say: No!
Then you are asked: Why?  Then the answer is: No, because of the definition
of wrong consciousness is a knower which engages its object erroneously. A
valid cognizer NEVER engages its object erroneously.
Is a correctly assuming consciousness a valid cognizer? The answer is very
clear if you look at the definition: A correctly assuming consciousness is
a factually concordant determinative knower which is controvertible with
regard to determining its object.
A valid cognizer is a new incontrovertible knower whereas correctly
assuming consciousness is a determinative knower which is controvertible
with regard to determining its object. There isn’t any common locus between
incontrovertible and controvertible i.e. there is nothing that is both.
Is doubting consciousness a valid cognizer? The answer has to come by
looking at the definition:
A doubting consciousness is a knower which has qualms two-pointedly by its
own power.
A valid cognizer is never wishy-washy. A valid cognizer realizes its object
completely and it never doubts its object or has any qualm whatsoever.
From this you can see that when you bring the two minds to compare, if you
don’t know what they are, then there is nothing to compare. You only know
what they are by depending on their definitions. So without knowing their
definition there is no way to gain an understanding of what they are. So,
it is important that you must memorize the definition, only then you can
compare. On this basis, then slowly you will know whether these
consciousnesses are mistaken, non-mistaken, conceptual, non-conceptual,
factually concordant, discordant, realizes its object, not realizes its
object and so forth. All this boils down to the definitions.
There are many things to think about. How many possibilities are there
between inferential valid cognizer and mistaken consciousness? By engaging
in this process and by knowing the number of possibilities, the end result
will be that it will become clearer as to what inferential valid cognizer
is and as to what mistaken consciousness is.
Homework:
Define the number of possibilities between:
1. Inferential valid cognizer and mistaken consciousness
2. Conceptual consciousness and correctly assuming consciousness
3. Wrong consciousness and mistaken consciousness
Do this homework on your own. By doing this, you will get clearer idea
about these seven consciousnesses. In order to understand this topic, just
listening alone will never get you any understanding. You have to think
about it. If you don’t think about it, then there is no way to understand
this topic.  When you do your homework, please do not refer to the table on
the Sevenfold Division of Consciousness as the answer is there. It will be
a waste of time and defeat the purpose if you look at the table when you do
the homework. The most important thing is not so much as to whether the
answer is yes, no or both possibilities. The most important is why you say
yes or no.
Handout Page 3: Sevenfold division of consciousness
|Consciousness           |Definition                                           |
|Direct valid cognizer   |a new incontrovertible knower that is free of        |
|                        |conceptuality                                        |
|Inferential valid       |a new incontrovertible determinative knower that is  |
|cognizer                |directly produced in dependence on a correct sign    |
|                        |which is its basis                                   |
|Subsequent cognizer     |a knower which realizes what has already been        |
|                        |realized                                             |
|Correctly assuming      |a factually concordant determinative knower which is |
|consciousness           |controvertible with regard to determining its object |
|Awareness to which an   |a knower that is a common locus of (1) having clear  |
|object appears and is   |appearance of the specifically characterized         |
|not ascertained         |phenomenon which is its object of engagement and (2) |
|                        |being unable to induce ascertainment with respect to |
|                        |the specifically characterized phenomenon which is   |
|                        |its object of operation                              |
|Doubting consciousness  |a knower which has qualms two-pointedly by its own   |
|                        |power                                                |
|Wrong consciousness     |a knower which engages its object erroneously        |


(Tan Seow Kheng sharing her experience of studying BP)
Khen Rinpoche spoke in English: I thought it is good to share of how they
learn, what their feeling is and how they encourage themselves to study
because some of them have been long time here. They have some experience.
They have been in the last BP class and have completed one round (of BP).
Again many of them still coming back to study. Those who come back again
have already completed (the BP). I am wondering why they are coming back.
They have graduated and already have certificate. They come back and they
still enjoy. I guess some of them can share how they feel and how they
enjoy. Not every day but only once a while. I asked some of them to share
their experience on how they study, what benefit they get, why they study
all these difficult topics and what they get at the end of the day. It is
for them to share some of their experience. In this way it will encourage
you to work hard and to study the philosophy. I hope this sharing will help
to encourage you. All are the same and no different. Everybody can study,
definitely, but can be good and can be bad and this doesn’t matter. I think
everybody can study. You have merit to come here. There is no excuse that
you don’t have merit to come here. I don’t think so.  There is merit within
you to study but now how much you want to put in effort and how much you
see the point (of studying). By putting in some effort hopefully you will
be able to enjoy the class. Once you enjoy, my job is that is. That is the
most difficult part of being a teacher. This topic is extremely difficult
but I really don’t know how to make you taste the flavor of the teachings
in your mouth. I don’t know. That is what I am trying to do. I cannot go
through every single word. It is impossible. Sometime I don’t see much
point because it will take time to complete. What I am trying is giving
some points and trying my best to relate and able to give some ideas. Then
when you enjoy you will go deeper. You will read different book and go
deeper and you will be able to understand better and better. Then you will
be able to enjoy the Buddha’s teaching. That’s the whole idea. I cannot go
through every single thing in the text. It is impossible but I am trying to
give some flavor of the teachings and some time it is extremely difficult.
I don’t how to make the make the favor and you do not know how to enjoy the
flavor. Some time that make it difficult but we will try. Hope you enjoy.
For reference
|Object possessor       |Object of       |Appearing      |Determined     |
|                       |engagement      |object         |object         |
|Eye consciousness      |Blue            |Blue           |None           |
|apprehending blue      |                |               |               |
|Conception of pen      |Pen             |Mental image of|Pen            |
|                       |                |pen            |               |
|Thought consciousness  |movie           |Mental image of|movie          |
|remembering a movie    |                |movie          |               |
|Eye consciousness      |Two moons       |One moon       |none           |
|apprehending one moon  |                |               |               |
|as two moons           |                |               |               |
|Eye consciousness      |Blue snow       |Snow mountain  |none           |
|apprehending snow      |mountain        |               |               |
|mountain as blue       |                |               |               |

Mistaken consciousnesses are mistaken with respect to their appearing
objects
Wrong consciousnesses are mistaken with respect to their objects of
engagement
A mistaken consciousness is not necessarily a wrong consciousness, but a
wrong consciousness is necessarily a mistaken consciousness.














-----------------------
Mental direct perceiver apprehending blue that last for the shortest moment
of time and blue is not realized in the continuum of ordinary being

Conceptual consciousness apprehending blue realizes blue


Sense direct perceiver apprehending blue realizes blue


