Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Lorig/Transcript/lesson27.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:53:23.744684
================================================================================


[D6] Afflicted views (lta ba nyon mongs can)
Afflicted views are of five types:
(1) view of the transitory collection
(2) view holding to an extreme
(3) conception of a [bad] view as supreme
(4) conception of [bad] ethics and modes of conduct as supreme
(5) wrong view






Student: Regarding [D6.3] Conception of a [bad] view as  supreme,  the  root
text mentioned that it  observes  any  of  the  three  –  the  view  of  the
transitory collection, the conception of a [bad] view as  supreme  or  wrong
view. Instead of the conception of a  [bad]  view  as  supreme,  the  Lamrim
stated it  as  “extremist  view.”  I  am  wondering  why  there  is  such  a
difference.
Khen Rinpoche: In Tibetan “mthar mtha” is extremist view; the  view  holding
to an extreme. (The text is wrong. The three views should  be  the  view  of
the transitory collection, the view holding to an extreme and wrong view)
We will go through the afflicted views again:
The view of the transitory collection observes the appropriated  aggregates.
Through observing the appropriated aggregates, an ‘I’ is conceived.  ‘I’  is
apprehended as something separate, different or independent of the body  and
mind.
The mind  which  conceives  the  self  or  the  ‘I’  to  be  self-sufficient
substantially existent or conceive it as something independent of  the  body
and mind is called the view of the transitory collection.
Does the ‘I’ which is conceived by the view  of  the  transitory  collection
exist? Is there such an ‘I’ that is self-sufficient substantially  existent?
No!
Such kind  of  self  that  is  conceived  by  the  view  of  the  transitory
collection is the self-sufficient  substantially  existent  ‘I’  or  person.
That self does not exist; therefore is selfless.
As mentioned in the previous  lesson,  vast  majority  of  the  non-Buddhist
traditions, especially those who have their own  philosophical  systems,  do
talk about the ‘I’ or person, but they assert that there is a soul; the  ‘I’
or person is eternal, unchanging  or  permanent,  unitary  and  independent.
This is their belief.
The Buddhist’s position is that such kind of soul-  the  unchanging  ‘I’  or
person that is unitary and independent- does not exist  whatsoever.  On  top
of that, it is also the Buddhist’s position that the  self  or  ‘I’  is  not
self-sufficient and is not substantially existent. The  mind  which  believe
in this soul and the mind which conceives the person or the ‘I’ to be  self-
sufficient is given the  technical  name  of  the  view  of  the  transitory
collection.
When we talked about  the  self  that  is  conceives  by  the  view  of  the
transitory collection, it is not about somebody else identity, it  is  one’s
own identity -‘I’ or person exist  in  one’s  continuum.  The  view  of  the
transitory  collection  apprehend  the  ‘I’  in  one’s  own  continuum   and
apprehend the ‘I’ to be self-sufficient substantially existent. Such a  mind
is the view of the transitory collection.
The view of the transitory collection does not refer to just any  mind  that
conceive of the ‘I’ to  be  sufficient,  rather  it  is  the  ‘I’  in  one’s
continuum. Such a mind is called the view of the transitory collection.  You
could  also  call  it  as  an  apprehension  of  a  self  of  person.   This
apprehension of a self of person is the essentially is the root of  all  the
problems. It is the root of cyclic  existence.  All  the  other  destructive
emotions arise with this as a basis.
This is what you should understand if you are asked what  the  view  of  the
transitory collection is. You should be able to say this.
View holding to an extreme -also translated as the extremist view. The  view
holding to an extreme is a mind that observes the self that is held  by  the
view of  the  transitory  collection.  Through  observing  that,  this  view
apprehends  this  ‘I’  to  be  either  permanent  (eternal  in  being  never
disintegrating and unchanging)   or annihilated (an ‘I’ that cease to  exist
at the time of death).
Conception of a [bad] view as supreme observes any of the three  views-  the
view of the transitory collection, the view holding to an extreme and  wrong
view- and holds them to be superior.
Conception of [bad] ethics and modes of conduct as supreme is  a  mind  that
believes something which is not the cause of liberation to be the  cause  of
liberation. It is a mind which believes that something which is not  a  path
leading to liberation to be a path leading to liberation.

[D6.5] Wrong view (log lta)
[Root text: page 65] Regarding wrong view, the Compendium of Knowledge
says:
QUESTION: What is wrong view?
RESPONSE: It is any endurance, desire, intelligence, conception, or view
which deprecates cause, result or functionality, and wrongly conceives
existent disintegrating things. It has the functions of severing roots of
virtue, holding tightly to roots of non-virtue, and acting as a support for
engaging in non-virtue and not engaging in virtue.
Just as it has been said above, it is an afflicted wisdom which views the
cause and result of actions, past and future lives, and so forth as non-
existent.
Wrong view is a mind which views past and future lives,  cause  and  effect,
and the four noble truths as non-existent.
Student: Regarding  conception  of  bad  ethics  and  modes  of  conduct  as
supreme, what is  the  difference  between  bad  ethics  and  bad  modes  of
conduct?
Khen Rinpoche: I would think that modes of conduct relates to  physical  and
verbal activities such as adopting certain kind of demeanor or conduct  with
the body and speech. Ethics perhaps is more to do with the mind.  You  could
say immoral or unethical, which is the opposite of ethics.
Student: Regarding the view of the transitory collection and the  other  two
arise, do these mental factors arise in one mind at  the  same  time  or  do
they arise distinctively?
Khen Rinpoche: The five views don’t arise simultaneously but  the  basis  of
all the views is the view of the transitory collection.  With  that  as  the
condition, the other four views can arise. The function of the view  of  the
transitory collection is stated as acting as  a  support  for  all  the  bad
views. If that is the case, they do not arise simultaneously.
We will skip the [Discussion of the category of afflicted views].
[pic]
[E] The Twenty Secondary Afflictions (nye nyon)
[Root text: page 69] The twenty secondary afflictions are:

|1. belligerence   |8. dissimulation    |15. non-faith       |
|2. resentment     |9. haughtiness      |16. laziness        |
|3. concealment    |10. harmfulness     |17.                 |
|4. spite          |11. non-shame       |non-conscientiousnes|
|5. jealousy       |12.                 |s                   |
|6. miserliness    |non-embarrassment   |18. forgetfulness   |
|7. deceit         |13. lethargy        |19.                 |
|                  |14. excitement      |non-introspection   |
|                  |                    |20. distraction     |


[E1] Belligerence (khro ba)
[Root text: page 69] Regarding belligerence, the Compendium of Knowledge
says:
QUESTION: What is belligerence?
RESPONSE: It is a malice when the cause of harm abides nearby, and is
involved with anger. It has the function of acting as a support for taking
up weapons, punishing, and so forth, and preparing to injure others.
Just as it has been said above, it is a malice that wishes to harm, by
striking and so forth, when any of the nine bases of malice abides nearby.
The nine bases of malice are:
(1-3) the thoughts that this person has harmed me, is harming me, and will
harm me;
(4-6) the thoughts that this person has harmed my friend, is harming my
friend, and will harm my friend;
(7-9) the thoughts that this person has benefited my enemy, is benefiting
my enemy, and will benefit my enemy.

I have already given the nine bases of malice before; they are the same.
Anger is  classified  as  the  root  afflictions,  whereas  belligerence  is
considered to be a secondary afflictions. There is a  discussion  about  the
difference between the two.

[Root text: page 70] [Discussion on the pair, anger and belligerence]
QUALM: Since anger occurs in the context of root afflictions and
belligerence in the context of secondary afflictions, what is the
difference between anger and belligerence?
RESPONSE: Perhaps anger is an intolerant malicious mind occurring when the
three objects dawn as objects of observation, whereas belligerence is an
extremely disturbed state of mind which, upon a great intensifying of
anger, wishes to strike physically when the cause of anger abides nearby.
The source for  this  response  is  given  in  the  Asanga’s  Compendium  of
Knowledge and Vasubandhu’s A Discussion of the Five Aggregates.
[Root text: page 70] [Asanga's] Compendium of Knowledge refers to:
 • "malice towards the three phenomena" in the context of explaining anger,
   and
 • "when the cause of harm abides nearby" and "taking up weapons and so
   forth" and so forth in the context of explaining belligerence.
[Vasubandhu's] A Discussion of the Five Aggregates explains:
 • "malice towards sentient beings" in the context of anger and
 • "abides in causing immediate harm" in the context of explaining the
   secondary affliction belligerence.
Therefore, having contemplated the presentations in these texts of Asanga
and his brother [Vasubandhu], you may wonder whether they are just as they
have been explained above. However, since these are very difficult to
realize, the intelligent should analyze them in detail further. It is
simply to be understood that anger acts as a support for harming others.
“malice towards the three phenomena” - the three  phenomena  are  the  three
object of anger:
(1) sentient beings
(2) one's own sufferings
(3) the sources from which these sufferings arise
Anger is a disturb mind; which arises when one see, hear or think  of  those
three phenomena. Literally, it is the mind that cannot tolerate.
Belligerence follows from anger.
Belligerence arises when anger is very strong.  Anger ( Belligerence
Belligerence is like a mind which wishes to  hit  or  do  something  to  the
person or the object of anger.
I guess you can liken anger to a small fire. The fire can  grow  bigger  and
bigger when you add in more fuel. When  the  fire  is  bigger,  then  it  is
belligerence. For the difference between anger  and  belligerence,  this  is
what I think in terms of the strength.
[E2] Resentment (khon du 'dzin pa)
[Root text: page 70] Regarding resentment, the Compendium of Knowledge
says:
QUESTION: What is resentment?
RESPONSE: It is a refusal to let go of thoughts of harm following that
[i.e. belligerence] and is involved with anger. It has the function of
acting as a support for intolerance.
Just as it has been said above, it is a mind that, refusing to let go of a
continuum of anger, wishes to harm or retaliate. It is simply to be
understood that resentment acts as a support for intolerance.
Arising from anger is belligerence.
Resentment is holding on to the causes of anger in  the  mind;  not  letting
go.
Resentment is the mind that wishes to harm or retaliate.
Belligerence follows from anger. Resentment just cannot  let  go  anger  and
belligerence.
The function of resentment is acting as a support for intolerance
[E3] Concealment ('chab pa)
[Root text: page 71] Regarding concealment, the Compendium of Knowledge
says:
QUESTION: What is concealment?
RESPONSE: It is a hiding of misdeeds when one is justly accused and is
involved with ignorance. It has the function of acting as a support for not
abiding in contact with regret.
Just as it has been said above, it is an awareness that wishes to hide
faults through the force of ignorance when another person, such as a
spiritual guide, benignly points out one's faults. Refusing to accept one's
own faults, this concealment causes even small faults to greatly increase.
It serves as a cause of not abiding in contact with regret [for one's
faults] and with happiness, and has the function of impelling one into
lower rebirths in future lives.
Concealment is hiding one’s faults.
Concealment prevents you from  generating  regret  and  obstructs  you  from
abiding in happiness.
The essential point behind this is that we should not conceal  the  misdeeds
but rather we should confess and  purify  it  immediately  through  applying
regret. If we conceal and not confessing it, even  a  small  negativity  can
multiply and increase. As mentioned in  the  teaching,  the  negative  karma
from killing a small little insect  such  as  a  bug,  if  you  conceal  the
negativity without confessing it, after a period of time, example  a  month,
the karma increases to such  that  similar  in  strength  to  the  karma  of
killing a human being.
If through concealment one does not confess  one’s  fault  and  negativities
then these negativities increases  and  the  results  is  the  lower  realms
rebirth. Therefore, as mentioned in the  teaching,  we  should  confess  our
negativities daily through the application of the four opponent powers.   At
least this will prevent the negativities from increasing in strength.
It is often mentioned in  the  teaching  that  if  we  do  the  practice  of
reciting the Hundred Syllables of Vajrasattva mantra at  least  21  times  a
day, that is to effect of preventing one’s negativities from increasing.  So
it is important to confess one’s negativities and purifying  them  with  the
application of the four  opponent  powers.  If  you  look  at  the  crux  of
purification, the essence or the heart of it lies of having regret  for  the
past having committed the negativities and  having  the  mind  of  restraint
from  committing  the  negativities  in  the  future.  So  regret  is   very
important. With regret you are able to purify. It is only with  regret  that
one will have a mind of restraint of not wanting to do  this  again  in  the
future. This is the  crux  of  the  heart  or  essence  of  purification  or
confession by applying the four opponent  powers  particularly  regret,  the
attitude of restraint. Without applying these but by just reciting 21  times
the Hundred Syllables of Vajrasattva mantra a day and saying  that  it  will
stop the negativities from increasing,  perhaps  that  is  something  to  be
analyzed. If you were to  recite  21  times  of  the  Hundred  Syllables  of
Vajrasattva daily without having any regret or restrain, your recitation  of
the  21  times  of  the  mantra  does  not  stop  you  from  committing  the
negativities the next day. If the same thing happen  again,  then  what  are
you going to do? Without regret and restrain, by just  reciting  the  mantra
does not do anything.
[E4] Spite ('tshig pa)
[Root text: page 71] Regarding spite, the Compendium of Knowledge says:
QUESTION: What is spite?
RESPONSE: It is a malicious mind that is preceded by belligerence and
resentment, and is involved with anger. It has the function of acting as a
support for rough violent speech, to increase that which is non-
meritorious, and not abiding in contact [with happiness].
Just as it has been said above, it is an awareness which, for instance,
lacking thoughts of regret and admission when another points out one’s
faults, wishes to utter harsh speech out of hateful thoughts driven by
belligerence and resentment.
Spite is a derivative of anger  and  it  is  preceded  by  belligerence  and
resentment.
Spite occurs when anger is getting stronger  and  stronger.  Acting  out  of
spite, one engages in rough violent speech.
If you look at the development of these various mind in sequence,  it  is  a
derivative of anger.
From anger, comes belligerence. From belligerence comes resentment and  then
spite i.e. you will reach the point in time when you  are  almost  ready  to
utter harsh speech.
Anger ( belligerence (resentment ( spite
These three -belligerence, resentment and spite- come from anger.
The antidotes for dealing with these three are essentially the antidote  for
dealing with anger. In order to manage anger there  is  the  cultivation  of
concern for others, love.
With respect to the  sources  of  sufferings  or  one’s  problems  or  one’s
experience of pains and so forth, just have to realize that  these  are  the
fruitional effects of one’s own negative karma accumulated in the past.  The
way to think about how all our  bad  experiences  are  the  results  of  the
ripening of our own karma is to just reflect what we  have  learned  in  the
Lamrim.  In  the  section  of  the  karma,  it  talks  about   the   general
characteristics of karma.
The first characteristic of karma is actions/ karma is definite.  What  does
it mean? Karma is definite means that virtuous action will  only  result  in
happiness, and a non-virtuous action will only result in suffering. When  we
are able to reflect in this  way,  understand  and  realize  that  karma  is
definite, then in relation to our  own  problems  or  experience  of  pains,
sufferings, or when you  have  interferences,  hindrances,  facing  problems
from others, we will realize that essentially it is  an  experience  of  our
own actions that we have done in the past. This helps to manage our anger.
If you remember the  four  qualities  that  make  one  a  trainee-in-virtue,
essentially they  are  methods  to  help  us  to  manage  our  belligerence,
resentment and spite. This is how we have to  start  in  the  training  i.e.
taking the first step in using these four practices. So what are they?  They
are:
    Even when derided, do not deride in return.
    Even when someone gets angry at one, do not get angry in return.
    Even when hit, do not hit back.
    Even when one's faults are exposed, do not expose others' faults
If someone gets angry at us, we should try not  to  get  angry  in  return;
which means not to get upset inside and externally not to show or display a
demeanor of showing upset or black face. The main thing  is  to  relax  the
mind and not to get so uptight with anger.  Even  when  derided  i.e.  when
something nasty is said to us, we should not return in kind immediately  or
react immediately. Even when derided, we do  not  deride  in  return,  that
means  we  do  not  retaliate  immediately.  That  doesn’t  mean  just  not
retaliating. You might be thinking “I didn’t say anything this time,  I  am
practicing. I didn’t say anything so I am not saying anything  this  time.”
Externally we don’t react but if we do it internally,  this  doesn’t  help.
Essentially, that is not the practice because the mind is not relax and the
mind is still uptight and there is still unhappiness, resentment so  forth.
It is not just not retaliating, but it is actually loosening up of the mind
and just letting go of it.
So the main thing is to let go in the mind of  the  unhappiness.  Even  you
don’t react externally but inside you cannot let go, it doesn’t really help
at the end of the day. Also, if we remember  our  own  mortality  i.e.  our
impending death, definitely one day we have to die, the time  of  death  is
really uncertain, if you really understand that, I guess  you will not hold
on to these things very long in the mind. It does happen sometimes. When we
think about death or impermanence,  it  may  arise  but  it  doesn’t  stay;
perhaps it doesn’t bother us so much and it doesn’t stay very long  in  the
mind.
In fact we already know all the antidotes. It is all in the Lamrim.  It  is
just a matter of doing it. There isn’t any better solution or  antidote  to
all these problems than the ones you find in the Lamrim  as  everything  is
there.

[E5] Jealousy (phrag dog)
[Root text: page 72] Regarding jealousy, the Compendium of Knowledge says:
QUESTION: What is jealousy?
RESPONSE: It is a deep disturbance of mind that cannot tolerate another's
marvelous attributes due to excessive attachment to gain and honor, and is
involved with hatred. It has the function of [causing] mental unhappiness
and of not abiding in contact [with happiness].
Just as it has been said above, it is a deep disturbance of mind that
cannot bear another's success due to attachment to gain and honor. It
produces serious undesirable [consequences] in both this and future worlds
[i.e., rebirths]; in this life there will be mental unhappiness, and in
future lives one will be impelled into bad migrations.

[E6] Miserliness (ser sna)
[Root text: page 72] Regarding miserliness, the Compendium of Knowledge
says:
QUESTION: What is miserliness?
RESPONSE: It is a thorough holding of the mind to possessions due to
excessive attachment to gain and honor, and is involved with attachment. It
has the function of acting as a support for non-diminishment of
possessions.
Just as it has been said above, it is a tight holding that is unable to let
go of possessions through the force of attachment to gain and honor. It
produces serious undesirable [consequences] in both this life and future
lives.
Jealousy and miserliness arise mainly due to attachment. Attachment  is  to
gains, which include material  and  so  forth.  I  think  the  function  of
miserliness is that  it  causes  attachment  to  increase.  When  you  have
miserliness, one cannot develop contentment.
[E7] Deceit (sgyu)
[Root text: page 73] Regarding deceit, the Compendium of Knowledge says:
QUESTION: What is deceit?
RESPONSE: It is a display of what is not [one's] good quality due to
excessive attachment to gain and honor, and is involved with attachment and
ignorance. It has the function of acting as a support for wrong livelihood.
Just as it has been said above, it is a display of good qualities one does
not actually possess, due to excessive attachment to gain and honor, as in
the case of pretending to be peaceful and subdued with the thought to
deceive others, even though one's own mind is far from being subdued.
Deceit essentially is cheating others,  for  example,  pretending  to  have
qualities that one doesn’t have and pretending to meditate when you are not
meditating.
[Root text: page 73] The Great Exposition of the Stages of the Path
explains it similarly. Deceit is specified as acting as a support for wrong
livelihood, because apart from being a method to practice wrong livelihood,
a pretentious attitude toward others is worthless. Wrong livelihood is of
five types:
(1) pretension
(2) flattery
(3) hinting
(4) extortion
(5) seeking gain from gain
(1) Pretension is, as explained above, an external pretense  toward  others,
feigning good qualities one does not have.
(2) Flattery is to speak smooth  words  in  conformity  with  the  minds  of
others for the sake of gain and honor.
(3) Hinting is to first flatter others and  then  praise  their  possessions
out of an attachment to gain.
(4) Extortion is to speak about the faults  of  great  miserliness  and  the
like for the sake of gain.
(5) Seeking gain from gain is to seek gain by praising in  the  presence  of
another what one has  previously  obtained,  saying,  "Previously  so-and-so
gave me such and-such."
In brief, without guarding the stipulated boundaries of the trainings, even
wandering to ask for alms in a village out of attachment to gain and honor
is taught to be wrong livelihood. Therefore, if you do not wish to be
defiled by wrong livelihood, do not seek to ingratiate yourself with
others, and protect without duplicity the stipulated boundaries of the
Vinaya in a place of solitude.

If you live in a society, the opportunity or  the  danger  of  engaging  in
wrong livelihood is always there. So it is safer to go into isolation.

[E8] Dissimulation (g.yo)
[Root text: page 74] Regarding dissimulation, the Compendium of Knowledge
says:
QUESTION: What is dissimulation?
RESPONSE: It commits faults due to excessive attachment to gain and honor,
and is involved with attachment and ignorance. It has the function of
hindering the acquisition of perfect instructions.
Just as it has been said above, it is an awareness that wishes to hide
one's faults, not revealing them to others through the force of attachment
to gain and honor.
(Dissimulation is also translated as guile)
Dissimulation is a mind that wishes to hide one’s faults out of  attachment
to gain and honor.
[Root text: page 74]  Nowadays, hiding our faults, we act smart and clever
if we can get away with it. But going by the yardstick of Dharma, we have
deceived ourselves. Regarding this, Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds says
(stanza 5.31-32ab):
    "I am constantly dwelling in the presence
    Of all the buddhas and bodhisattvas
    Who are always endowed
    With unobscured vision."
    By thinking in this way,
    I shall likewise develop a sense of shame, respect, and fear.
[Discussion of the pair - deceit and dissimulation]
Since these two – deceit and dissimulation – hinder the acquisition of
perfect instructions in this life, and produce various kinds of undesirable
[consequences] in future lives – not meeting with Great Vehicle spiritual
guides, not gaining perfect instructions, and so forth – deceit and
dissimulation are enumerated among the four black dharmas in the Questions
of Kashyapa (Kashyapaparivarta).
Is there a difference between concealment and dissimulation?
They seem to be talking about the same thing.
Concealment observed one’s misdeeds or one’s faults. It has the  aspect  of
concealing it and keeping  it  secret.  Dissimulation  has  the  aspect  of
striving in whatever way to conceal those faults.
If you differentiate concealment and dissimulation in such a way,
-concealment has the aspect of concealing of one’s faults,
-the aspect of dissimulation is actually striving to do  whatever  to  hide
those mistakes or faults.
The essential advice here is that there is no way to hide or to conceal the
faults because they are realized by all the Buddhas and  bodhisattvas.  The
point is to purify and confess the mistake immediately in the  presence  of
all the Buddhas and bodhisattvas.

[E9] Haughtiness (rgyags pa)
[Root text: page 75]  Regarding haughtiness, the Compendium of Knowledge
says:
QUESTION: What is haughtiness?
RESPONSE: It is a joy and mental happiness upon seeing one's own good
health, youth, signs of long life, or contaminated success, and is involved
with attachment. It has the function of acting as a support for all [root]
afflictions and secondary afflictions.
Just as it has been said above, it is a puffing up of the mind due to joy
and mental happiness upon observing one's own good health, prosperity, and
so forth. Since it produces all afflictions, it acts as the root of non-
conscientiousness.
The Exhortation to the Exceptional Resolve says:
   This haughtiness is the root of all non-conscientiousness.
   Do not deride an inferior fully-ordained monk;
   You will not attain liberation in an eon.
   This is the sequence in this teaching.
The Letter to a Friend (stanza 12cd) also says:
   Look upon haughtiness on account of youth, or greatness of
   Lineage, physique, learning, or power, as an enemy.
In general, having good health, prosperity, being born in a  good  lineage,
having a nice physical appearance and so forth, are essentially ideal,  but
if one doesn’t know how to think, then these things can become a cause  for
developing haughtiness.
Haughtiness is said to be derivative of attachment.
What is the difference between haughtiness and pride?
Khen Rinpoche (spoke in English): Any difference?
Haughtiness is puffing up of the mind due to joy and mental happiness  upon
observing one's own good health. prosperity, and so forth.
Pride is a puffing  up  of  the  mind  upon  observing  one’s  own  wealth,
qualities and so forth.
The basis of haughtiness is good health and possession.
The basis for pride is one’s own wealth and qualities.
Haughtiness involves mental happiness and joy. You feel good that  you  are
puffed up, but pride doesn’t necessary comes with mental happiness and joy.

So one wonders whether pride involves the puffing up of the mind and coming
along with it comes with all these mental happiness and joy.
We hope to finish the rest of the secondary afflictions on Tuesday.

Examination for BP2 Lorig module
Date (tentatively): 14 October (Sunday) at 3pm.
As said before, exam shouldn’t be the cause of worry.  You  just  try  your
best to study whatever you can and then come for the exam.  Essentially  it
is just a guide for yourself to know how much  you  know.  Exam  is  useful
because when there is exam, you are  more  likely  to  look  at  the  book;
otherwise the book tends to be ignored. Therefore the examination  is  very
kind.


“Belligerence differs from the root affliction anger in that:
-Anger is an impatience and intent to  harm  that  arises  when  a  harmful
sentient beings, or one’s own suffering, or sources of suffering appear  to
the mind.
-Belligerence is an extremely disturbed state of mind, which, upon a  great
increase of anger, is a  wish  to  inflict  harm  on  another  such  as  by
physically striking that person when he is  in  one’s  presence.  (Hopkins,
Meditation on Emptiness)
