Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Lorig/Transcript/lesson12.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:53:23.917116
================================================================================


In the course of studying or learning this topic -Mind and Awareness- there
are times you do not understand the terminologies and the way you are
supposed to approach and look at this topic.  If your mind gets very
uptight because of not understanding the terminologies or the meaning then
I would say that it is not right. At such a time, you must know how to make
the mind a little bit more open, a bit more expansive and a bit more relax.
In the course of studying this topic, it seems that there are people who
get stressed-out and got upset. You may get uptight and stress in the
process of studying of this topic and then becoming unhappy and upset. Then
it is possible that you start to entertain doubts and asking yourself: “Why
am I doing this? Why should I be doing this?”  In the process of learning
whatever in life, when you feel uptight then you must loosen up a bit. On
the other hand, if you are too relaxed, then you need to tighten up a bit.
This not only applies to studying of Lorig but to whatever you study in
life. This is how you should approach it. My purpose of saying this is that
you will not become crazy by studying Lorig. If you think that you will
definitely become crazy by studying this subject, then I will be the first
one to become crazy.
Khen Rinpoche spoke in English: My point is no need to become worry. Put
effort to study. They always give a very good example all the time for
whatever you do.  You know this famous example when you play the guitar, if
the string is too tight then there is no good sound. Another danger is that
the string may break down. If the string too loose the sound doesn’t come
nice and not pleasing. It is exactly the same when you study this topic.
When you are too loosed then it is the same and when you too tight then it
is the same. If you think you are too tight, then loosen a bit. If you
think you are too relax then tighten a little bit. Remember the example. I
mean this work for whatever that you do even in business. Whatever it is,
the example is the same. You shouldn’t be too tight on yourself. When
tight, you must loosen.
At the beginning we looked at the established base.
Established base is mutually inclusive with existent.
Then what is an existent?  It is that which is observed by a valid
cognizer.
So an established base is that which is established by a valid cognizer.
That was what we have looked at in the beginning. How many weeks have
already passed since then? A couple of weeks. Now when you hear the same
words again, is there any difference in your understanding? At least you
have some ideas and there are some meaning generalities appearing in your
mind. This is a sign of having learnt something.
Khen Rinpoche spoke in English: Realization. No other realization. That is
the realization.
The definition of an existent: that which is observed by a valid cognizer.
If you think about it, what essentially it is saying? What is that
distinguishes between an existent and a non-existent? What is that
determines whether that is an existent or not?
If that particular phenomenon is observed or comprehended by a valid
cognizer, then that phenomenon is said to exist; otherwise there is no such
thing.
The definition of existent: that is observed by a valid cognizer.
“Observed” here means realized, i.e. that is realized by a valid cognizer.
Therefore, in order for it to be an existent, it has to be realized by a
valid cognizer.
It does not say “appearing to a valid cognizer” i.e. it doesn’t mean that
you can definitely say that something exist just because it appears to a
valid cognizer.  As I have mentioned before, whatever appear to your mind
does not mean it exist. This is because there can be all sorts of
appearances such as valid and invalid appearances.
The criterion for something to exist is that there being a valid cognizer
realizing it. If there is a valid cognizer realizing the phenomenon then
that phenomenon is said to exist; it is an existent. Otherwise, it is a non-
existent. So that is established right from the beginning and you have to
be clear with that.
If the phenomenon is realized or comprehended by a valid cognizer, that
phenomenon exists. So from this you can see that valid cognizer definitely
has to exist. The next logical question is:  How do we know whether valid
cognizer exist?
Just as an existent is verified by a valid cognizer, what verifies the
existence of a valid cognizer?
Self-knower is posited to verify the existence of valid cognizer. Self-
knower is the mind that exists in one collection together with the valid
cognizer that it is experiencing. The verifier of a valid cognizer cannot
be something that is of a different collection from the valid cognizer that
it is verifying.
What is it that verified an existent? A valid cognizer verifies an
existent, so a valid cognizer has to exist.
How do we know a valid cognizer exist? What is it that verified the
existence of a valid cognizer? It is self-knower. Self-knower is the mind
that exists in one collection together with the valid cognizer that it is
experiencing. The verifier of a valid cognizer, which is the self-knower,
cannot be another valid cognizer that is of a different collection from the
valid cognizer that it is verifying.  If you say it is a separate valid
cognizer that verify the existence of another valid cognizer, then it would
be a problem because then you need another mind to verify this valid
cognizer and there is no end to it. This will incur the fallacy of infinite
regressions.
This is one of the reasons why those who assert self-knower conclude the
existence of self-knower. Although the assertion of a self-knower is not
the final views or is not a reality but nevertheless those who assert self-
knower do so because of such a reason.

Student: For this system, it asserts that external phenomenon exist from
its own side. As it already existing there, would that entails that you do
not really need a valid cognizer to establish its validity because it is
already inherently existent exist from its own side?
Ven Gyurme: The qualm is: If something exists from its own side, you don’t
need a valid cognizer positing it.
Khen Rinpoche: This school does asserts external object but whether it is
an external object or not, it is ultimately dependent on a valid cognizer
that posit external object.
Student: If there are no valid cognizers there are still existent?
Khen Rinpoche: No
Student: Setting aside the definition, how does one understand that it is
already established by itself, it is self-established………..
Khen Rinpoche: It is established because it is realized by a valid
cognizer. It is established to exist by way of its own characters.
Student: The external phenomenon is established by itself?
Khen Rinpoche: In this system, every phenomenon exists by way of its own
characters. If you think along the definition, then that is what it means
but its existence has to be posited by a valid cognizer.
Student: On the relationship between apprehender and apprehended & aspect
of apprehender and aspect of apprehended. For a self-knower experiencing
the eye consciousness apprehending blue:
      - Blue is the apprehended
      - Both self-knower and the eye consciousness apprehending blue are
        the apprehenders since they are apprehending something
Can I say the following?
1. The self-knower experiencing this eye consciousness is the apprehender
  having the aspect of the apprehender
2. The eye consciousness apprehending blue is the apprehender having the
  aspect of the apprehended
Khen Rinpoche: If you are referring to the apprehended object then it is
blue.
Student: The self-knower experiences an eye consciousness apprehending
blue, these two parts are of one collection. Within these two parts there
are two apprehenders:
   1. The self-knower
   2. The eye consciousness apprehending blue
The eye consciousness apprehending blue itself is an apprehender having the
aspect of blue; therefore it is an apprehender having the aspect of
generated into the aspect of the apprehended (the object blue).
Can I say that it is the apprehender having the aspect of the apprehended?
Khen Rinpoche: If you are just talking about the eye consciousness
apprehending blue, the eye consciousness is the apprehender.
This eye consciousness is generated into the aspect of blue. It has the
aspect of the apprehended. Blue is the apprehended.
Student: Can I just summarize into one sentence? It is an apprehender
generated into the aspect of the apprehended.
Khen Rinpoche: The eye consciousness apprehending blue is the apprehender.
In this context, the apprehended is the object blue. Then you can say:
      -the eye consciousness apprehending blue is generated into the aspect
of the apprehended.
Student: Is it okay to say: It is an apprehender generated into the aspect
of the apprehended?
Khen Rinpoche: The meaning is fine but whether we can say like that then it
is another question. I don’t think it is taught in such a way.
Student: If that is the case, then there is no need to talk about the self-
knower. There is also no need to say: It is an apprehender generated into
the aspect of the apprehender.
Khen Rinpoche: If there a need? The self-knower is an aspect of the
apprehender.
Student 1: Itself is also an apprehender?
KR: In general, when we talked about apprehended and the apprehender:
Apprehended refers to the object.
Apprehender refers to the subject.
If it is an established base, it is necessarily an object. Therefore, the
apprehended refers to the object.
Then the apprehender, the subject, is also the apprehended.
When we talk about apprehender and apprehended in general, we are talking
about the two-fold division of object and object possessor.
Apprehended refers to the object. Apprehender refers to the subject-
consciousness
When the subject – consciousness- is divided, it has:
1. Self-knower
2. Other-knower
This is a division of consciousness; not the object.
An eye consciousness apprehending blue would be an aspect of an
apprehended.
The self-knower experiencing an eye consciousness apprehending blue would
be an aspect of an apprehender.

Student: If there is falling tree in the forest and nobody hears the sound
of the falling tree, does sound exists?
Khen Rinpoche: If there is no valid cognizer realizing the sound of the
falling tree then you have to say the sound of the falling tree does not
exist.
Who decides whether something exists or not? How do we know something
exists or not? Do you accept that if something exists it is dependent on
whether there is a valid cognizer verifying that phenomenon?
Khen Rinpoche spoke in English: You must either accept or does not accept.
If you don’t accept, you have to give other reason. If you accept that then
is no question. The answer is already done. If you don’t accept then………
Khen Rinpoche: Just because a tree fall in an uninhabited area (i.e.
uninhabited by human being), it does not necessarily means that there isn’t
any valid cognizer not realizing that sound because there are ants, worms,
spirits, gods, nagas and I guess some of them do get crush by the tree.
Valid cognizers are not necessarily only present in the continuum of human
beings.
Khen Rinpoche spoke in English: Some of them are valid cognizers hearing
the sound of the falling tree; doesn’t have to be human being there.

Student:  If we don’t tune in the radio that does not means the song is not
there. In fact the song is all the while there. It is only until we have
tuned in then we can hear the song.
Khen Rinpoche: Basically she is saying that sound does exists regardless
whether there is a valid cognizer or not.  I would disagree.  The fact that
you can talk about frequency means that there is a mind. The scientists
have found out that there is frequency. The first thing you have to get is:
the existence of an existent is completely dependent on a valid cognizer
certifying it. Just because there is a thing there, does it mean that it
can exist? How does it exist? If there is no one says they exist how do
they exist? In the first place if there is no valid cognizer, how can you
say that whether there is sound or no sound? Even to say no, you also need
a valid cognizer.
Khen Rinpoche spoke in English: So, that is different view. She said not
necessarily there is valid cognizer. I say:  must be valid cognizer. So
need to think.

Student: A human being apprehends a glass of water as water, hell being
apprehends it as pus or blood and the god apprehends it as nectar. Whose
view is the most correct? Are all mistaken?
Khen Rinpoche: We have to say that all three are valid cognizers. If we
look at the issue:
 -a human being seeing a glass of fluid as water
 -a god seeing a glass of fluid as nectar
 -a hungry seeing a glass of fluid as pus
If we look it from the perspective of the higher tenets then it is easier
to understand the reason. From there, you can accept that all three are
valid in their own way. When you talk about it from the perspective of MOS,
their assertion is that everything is in the nature of mind. If you think
about that, I think there is something to say that these three are valid
cognizers.
If you go to the highest school, the CMWS, everything is merely imputed by
mind, then that is quite clear.
If you talk about the lower tenets, whether they assert all three are valid
or not, then it is something that need to be analyzed.
The three different appearances are not said to exist just because there is
such an appearance i.e. just because something appears as pus, that does
not necessarily mean it is pus. The reason why the beings of these three
different realms have the three different experiences is because of their
respective karma that they have accumulated causes them to have that
particular appearance. Let’s say for human being, the fluid appears as
water and you have to say that there is water there because it is
established by their karma and the karmic appearance is the result.
Therefore that experience of water for human being is valid. If you say it
is not valid then the whole presentation of cause and effect will falls
apart.
It is the same as thinking of whether the sufferings of hungry ghosts and
hell realms do exist or not. These sufferings are said to be exist because
there is karma that is accumulated for such sufferings. If you don’t talk
about the cause -the karma- then how are you going to posit the existence
of such sufferings?
Anyway it is a complicated issue and we have to think about it. If we look
at it from the MOS view, everything is in the nature of the mind then there
is something to think about because due to the specific individual’s mind
there is a particular appearance. But if we relate this to the assertion of
an external object that exist from its own side then it is a bit difficult.
In the last session, we look at facsimile of a direct perceiver, basically
a counterfeit direct perceiver. For a non-conceptual facsimile of a direct
perceiver, there are causes of errors which are external and internal.
The four causes of errors are used to explain how non-conceptual facsimile
of direct perceivers which are sense consciousnesses are produced.
There are also non-conceptual facsimile of a direct perceiver which are
mental consciousnesses. An illustration of this is a dream elephant appears
as an elephant.
Our appropriated contaminated physical and mental aggregate, particularly
the contaminated physical body, is by nature dirty, but we apprehend it
instinctively to be clean. This kind of mind is a mistaken mind.
Is the mind that apprehends the contaminated physical body to be clean a
valid cognizer or a wrong consciousness?
In this world, conventionally we say the body is clean once we have washed
it. Due to that we apprehend the body is clean. Because of such
conventional designation that the body is clean after one has taken a bath,
is this mind a valid mind or a mistaken mind?
If you say that this is a wrong consciousness, how does it come about and
what is its cause?
Similarly, in this world of ours, it is conventionally accepted that if one
is able to get a pleasant and desirable object, one will be bliss out and
happy. Is this mind that experiences the bliss a valid consciousness or
mistaken consciousness? You need to analyze.  Conventionally, it is
accepted that when one get the desirable object, one will be happy and
regards this happiness as the perfect real happiness. Is such mind a valid
mind or a wrong consciousness?
When we saw someone yesterday and then we see the person again today, what
we feel is that it is the same person. Based on what appears to us, the
shape and the color that do not change, then we think that person of
yesterday and the person of today is exactly the same person. Is this mind
a valid mind or a wrong consciousness? This is another thing to analyze.
How do you feel when you see the same person on the two consecutive days?
Do you feel that there are two different persons?  You will never ever feel
that there are two different persons.
When we accept reincarnation, we accept that a person moving from life to
life. So we have to posit that definitely there is a person that came from
the previous life move on to this life and then going on to the next life.
It is the same one person who moves from life to life and it cannot be a
different person. So it is possible for us to conceive and believe that
this person is permanent; the same unchanging person and is not the
different person. If you say that there are two different persons then the
person who created the cause and the person who is experiencing the result
would be different. For us, it is definitely the same unchanging person who
goes from life to life. So we have to analyze on whether such conception is
correct or not.
Just as the non-conceptual facsimile of direct perceivers which are sense
consciousnesses that are produced in dependence upon the four causes of
errors, in the same way, to the four examples which I had brought up, we
have to relate them to the four attributes of first Noble Truth - True
Suffering. The four attributes of True Suffering are:
   1. Impermanence
   2. Suffering of misery
   3. Empty
   4. Selfless.
These four attributes of True Suffering definitely do exist. What are their
opposites? There are conceptions holding on to the opposites to these four
attributes.  You need to understand how on one hand there are mistaken
conceptions and on the other hand there are conceptions that realize
reality as it is.
From this you can see that all these have to do with our own practice.
Therefore, it is very important for us to understand the difference between
a valid mind and a wrong consciousness. It is through giving in to the
wrong consciousnesses and believing in them, we are led into problems and
sufferings and all the things that we don’t want in life. It is through
following after the valid minds we get happiness as the result.  So it is
extremely important to distinguish between a valid mind and a wrong
consciousness.
We also talked about subsequent cognizer. The definition of subsequent
cognizer is a knower which realizes what has already been realized.
It is not as simple as saying it is the second moment of the eye
consciousness apprehending vase, or the first moment is a valid cognizer
and the subsequent moment is the subsequent cognizer. That is not the main
point. The main point is that you have to familiarize yourselves over and
over again with what you have already understood and realized and that
process of familiarization has to be continued until the mind is
transformed into a mind that has a very clear appearance of the object that
it has already realized. In some cases, the mind is transformed into the
entity of direct perception. This is what you have to understand from the
definition of a subsequent cognizer.
Then you have the correctly assuming consciousness.  A correctly assuming
consciousness is a factually concordant determinative knower which is
convertible with regard to determining its object.
Is it sufficient just to have a correct belief or a correct assumption? No,
because whatever imprints that is planted in the mind from a correct belief
which you think and believe in it, although it may be true, it is not
stable and that is not a realization. In order to be able to place very
strong and stable imprint in your mind, you have to ascertain the object
completely by having removed all the doubts and superimpositions pertaining
to that object. If you are able to do so then the imprint in your mind will
be very stable. So you cannot be satisfied with just that. You have to work
towards a valid cognition of the object in question. This is related to
practice, isn’t it? So whatever practice you are doing, it will make a huge
difference if you have gained a full certainty and ascertainment after
having removed all doubts and superimpositions. The practice will then come
naturally without the need of someone pushing you to do it. This is because
of you having gained conviction and with certainty.
Next is doubting consciousness. Doubting consciousness is a knower which
has qualms two-pointedly by its own power.  Can you imagine that you are
trying to do your practice with doubt? Nothing will work. It is an obstacle
to your practice and you don’t even get started with doubt. It is a huge
obstacle to entering the path.
Doubting consciousness has two divisions:
   1. Doubts that are beneficial
   2. Doubts that are not beneficial
Here we are talking about the doubting consciousness that is an obstacle in
generating the path. It is an obstacle to our practice. If we have doubts
right from the beginning it is an obstacle that prevents us from engaging
the path and majority of people are practicing at this level. Our practice
will go nowhere with just mere belief. Not eliminating all doubts and
superimpositions, there will be no ascertainment and this will not lead us
to any realization.  So having correctly assumption alone is also not
enough even though it is better than doubt. You have to transform your mind
into a valid cognizer. But just transforming your mind into a valid
cognizer is not enough. You have to transform it into a direct valid
cognizer so that you can directly perceive whatever objects in question.
With that kind of valid cognition, whatever practice you do will become
easy and the quality will becomes very good.
On the handout dated 24 July 2012, read up on inferential valid cognizer
particularly on the presentation of correct reason and what constitutes a
correct sign.
Student:  Blue impermanence is not form. Therefore, it cannot be the
appearing object of eye consciousness apprehending form.
Ven Gyurme: The reason is not established.
Khen Rinpoche: If it appears to a direct perceiver it is necessary the
appearing object.  It is in the Sunday discussion question. Nobody ever
said that if it appears to a sense direct perceiver it necessarily has to
be a visible form. Basically whatever appears to an eye consciousness, it
is not necessary visible form; all the qualities that are in one collection
with the object. Think about this: If it appears to an eye consciousness,
it is not necessary visible form.
____________________________________________________________________________
_________
For reference:
Example: Eye consciousness apprehending blue.
Eye consciousness itself is an other-knower.
The consciousness which experiences that eye consciousness is a self-
knower.
The blue which is the object of the eye consciousness apprehending blue is
the apprehended.
The eye consciousness itself is the apprehender.
The eye consciousness apprehending blue sees the aspect of blue is called
that which has the aspect of the apprehended.
The consciousness, self-knower, which experiences that eye consciousness
sees the apprehender itself is called that which has the aspect of an
apprehender.
