Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Lorig/Transcript/lesson19.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:53:23.765234
================================================================================


When we talk about mind and mental factors, we are not talking about things
that we can perceive with our naked eyes; they are something that we cannot
see. Therefore, whenever we talk about something that we cannot see, it is
a bit challenging to have a feel of what exactly we are talking about. In
describing what a mind and mental factors are, there are many different
terms that are used in the text to help us to understand what the mind and
mental factors are. We also have seen quite a lot of quotations that were
been cited and some are quite challenging. There are some words and
terminologies that are quite difficult to understand. Of course, it would
be ideal if we can go through each and every single word and then have a
good understanding in each and every single word, but that is quite
difficult for us.
Since this is the case, it is possible that sometimes people get
discouraged and depressed when they read the text and found one or two
words that are difficult to understand. When this happen then you must
really know how to think. You must understand that it is not right to be
discouraged. If you do compare the difference between not reading the text
and having read the text, definitely there will be more benefit of having
read the text even though you do not understand everything. Definitely you
will get something from learning at least couples of new words and new
concepts. Everyone just has to try your very best to learn, bearing in mind
that it is impossible to know everything.
It is said in the Buddha’s teaching that everything is the creation of the
mind i.e. everything is created by the mind. In particular our experiences
of happiness and suffering are ultimately the creation of our own mind.
Since that is the case then it is important to understand what a mind is.
Therefore, we are now looking at the presentation of mind and mental
factors. In this particular way of looking at the consciousness, there are
main mind and mental factors.
The main mind is considered to be primary and the mental factors which
accompany the main mind are said to be secondary. The main mind and the
mental factors in its retinues can be likened to a king and his ministers.
A main mind is posited from the perspective of it knowing the mere entity
of an object.
A mental factor is posited from the perspective of the different function
it performs. For example, the mental factor of mindfulness function is to
enable us to not forget a particular object.
In the last lesson, we have discussed on how the main mind and the mental
factors in its retinues are one entity. They are the same entity but they
are not the same. Just as you will not be able to find a main mind that is
of a different entity from the mental factors, similarly, you will not be
able to find a mental factor that is of a separate entity from the main
mind. Therefore, the main mind and the mental factors are one entity.
A main mind is concomitant by way of the five similarities with the mental
factors in its retinues.
What are the five similarities?
1. Similar support (similar basis)
2. Similar object of observation –Both the main mind and the mental factor
   in its retinues observe the same object
3. Similar [subjective] aspect – Both of them have the same aspect
4. Similar time – Both are produced, abide and disintegrate at the same
   time.
5. Similar substance – Just as there is only main mind, for example an eye
   primary consciousness apprehending blue, there can be one mental factor
   of feeling in the retinue of this particular main mind. In that sense,
   they have similar substance. .
These are the five similarities that are mentioned in The Treasury of
Knowledge (Abidharmakosha) by Vasubandhu.
In essence, you have to know how a main mind and the mental factors are
posited.
The main mind is posited from the perspective of it being a knower that
knows the mere entity of the object.
The mental factors know the specifics/ the features/ the particularities of
that object.
Anyway, this is just a summary of what we have already covered in the last
lesson. For the time being and for our purpose, if you are able to
understand what I have just summarized, that is sufficient. It is not
possible to know everything exactly as it is or having the experiences
right now as it takes time. We are just trying to understand what this
topic is talking about. Our understanding is based on looking at what the
Buddha and particularly the Indian masters such as Vasubandhu have said and
presented in their text. We are just trying to understand on what they are
trying to say.
Of course it will be perfect if you have a kind of feel or experiential
kind of understanding that whatever that is mentioned in the text, it is
like that. That will be perfect and ideal but it is challenging and it is
difficult even just to have an ideal of mind; just to understand the
concept itself is difficult.
The Compendium of Knowledge (the higher Abhidharma) has a slightly
different presentation on the five similarities between the main mind and
the mental factors in its retinues.
[Root text: page 13] The explanation in the Compendium of Knowledge
regarding the five similarities is as follows:
(1) similar substance
(2) similar object of observation and [subjective] aspect
(3) similar entity
(4) similar time
(5) similar realm and level

(1) Similar substance refers to the following. In the retinue of a single
main mind, there can arise only one mental factor, for instance, feeling,
of a similar type; two [mental factors] of a similar type but of different
substances cannot occur.
(2-3) Similar object of observation and [subjective] aspect and similar
entity refer to the following.
 • [A mind and the mental factors in its retinue] are similar in observing
   one object – the object of observation – and they are similar in being
   afflicted or non-afflicted in terms of the object of observation and the
   [subjective] aspect.
 • If a main mind has become afflicted, then the mental factors in its
   retinue also become afflicted, whereas if a main mind has become
   uncontaminated, the mental factors in its retinue also become
   uncontaminated.
(4) Similar time refers to the following. A main mind and the mental
factors in its retinue are simultaneous in regard to the three –
production, abiding and cessation.
(5) Similar realm and level refers to the following. If a main mind is a
mind of the desire realm, then it is impossible for a mental factor of the
form or formless realms to arise in its retinue, and it is impossible for a
mental factor of the desire realm to arise in the retinue of a mind of the
form realm. That realm in which the main mind is included is also
necessarily the realm in which the mental factor in its retinue is
included.
Here object of observation and [subjective] aspect is put together and is
count as one.
There is no need to explain on the similar substance, similar object of
observation and aspect and similar time as they are the same [as what were
explained previously.]
For the similar entity, if the main mind is afflicted, then the mental
factors in its retinue will also be afflicted.
If the main mind becomes contaminated, then the mental factors in its
retinues become contaminated.
If the main mind becomes uncontaminated, then the mental factors in its
retinues become uncontaminated as well.
For the similar realm and level, in general, there are the three realms and
the nine levels.
Three realms:
   1. The desire realm
   2. The form realm
   3. The formless realm
The nine levels:
   1. The desire realm
   2. The four concentrations of the form realm
      i. 1st concentration
     ii. 2nd concentration
    iii. 3rd concentration
     iv. 4th concentration
   3. The four levels of the formless realm:
      v. Infinite space
     vi. Infinite consciousness
    vii. Nothingness
   viii. Peak of cyclic existence
You will find these terms - three realms and nine levels - in the
treatises.
What is similar realm?
It is the main mind and the mental factors in its retinues are similar in
terms of realm.
If the main mind is a mind of the desire realm then the mental factors in
its retinues are mental factors of desire realm.
If the main mind is the mind of the form realm then the mental factors in
its retinues are mental factors of the form realm.
Likewise, it is the same for the formless realm. From this you can
extrapolate what a similar level is.
According to the Compendium of Knowledge (Higher Abhidharma), these are the
two differences in term of the similarities. The difference comes in the
presentation of similar entity and similar realm and level.
Student: Since the mind and mental factors are included the continuum of a
person in that particular rebirth, why is it necessarily to mention that
its main mind and its mental factors are concomitant in the realm and
level?
Ven Gyurme (summarized): If you are physically in the desire realm, it
doesn’t mean that your mind is the desire realm’s mind. Let’s say if you
are already in the desire realm then all your minds are part of the desire
realm. Why is there a need to talk about having the similarity in term of
realm?
Student: More precisely, the minds that are found within the continuum of
the person are already within the continuum of the person, why do you need
to mention specifically that they share the similar primary consciousness
and mental factors?
Khen Rinpoche: For a person who is the desire realm being, it is not
necessarily that all his minds are the minds of the desire realm. In order
for someone who is a desire realm being to be born in the form realm, he
must accumulate the projecting karma to be born as a form realm god. Not
only must he accumulate the projecting karma to be born as a form realm
god, the actualizing karma for that rebirth in the form realm must also
manifest.
In order for the desire realm being to accumulate the karma to be born in
the form realm, he must first actualize calm abiding (meditative serenity)
realization. Only on the basis of having that realization, he can
accumulate the projecting karma for a rebirth in the form realm.
As it is possible for desire realm being to have calm abiding, so a desire
realm being with calm abiding realization can accumulate projecting karma
for form realm rebirth.
We cannot conclude that all the minds of the desire realm beings are
necessarily minds of the desire realm.
Student: Why are we presented with the two separate categories of
similarities; according to the Vasubandhu’s Treasury of Knowledge and
Asanga’s Compendium of Knowledge? Is it because the Compendium of Knowledge
by Asanga does not necessarily represent the Sutra School because Asanga
was known to be a proponent of the MOS?
Khen Rinpoche: They are just two different explanations but I don’t know
exactly why there are two different explanations. In general, basically a
lot of things including the explanations of mind from the higher tenets are
usually different.

The Five Omnipresent Mental factors (kun 'gro)
The first five [of the 51 mental factors] are known collectively as the
five omnipresent mental factors; which mean that they necessarily accompany
all main minds. If it is a main mind, definitely you will find these five
in its retinues. Whether it is a sense primary consciousness or a mental
primary consciousness, these five omnipresent mental factors are definitely
in the retinues of this main mind.
[Root page 16:] [A] The Five Omnipresent Mental factors (kun 'gro)
The five omnipresent mental factors are:
(1) feeling
(2) discrimination
(3) intention
(4) contact
(5) attention

[A1] Feeling (tshor ba)
The entity of feeling is just as it has been taught in the Compendium of
Knowledge:
QUESTION: What is the defining characteristic of feeling?
RESPONSE: It has the characteristic of experience; through the entity of
experience, it experiences individually the fruitional results of virtuous
and non-virtuous actions.
What is the entity of feeling?
It is experience.
What is the entity of experience?
It experiences individually the fruitional results of virtuous and non-
virtuous actions.
What is to be understood from this sentence?
Whatever feelings of pleasure or suffering that arise in our mind are the
fruitional results of our own karma/actions.
[Root page 17:] Here, that which is experienced by feeling is taught to be
a fruition; this is taught for the purpose of making known that all
feelings that arise within us, whether pleasant or suffering, are solely
the fruitional result of actions (karma).
Moreover, the Great Exposition of the Stages of the Path says:
The manner in which actions are definite is as follows. Regardless of
whether we are ordinary beings or superiors, all happiness in the aspect of
pleasant feelings – even as slight as that produced in dependence on a cool
breeze when one is born in hell – arises from virtuous actions accumulated
in the past. Happiness cannot arise from a non-virtuous action. Also, all
suffering in the aspect of painful feelings – even as slight as that
produced in the mental continuum of a foe-destroyer – arises from non-
virtue accumulated in the past. Suffering cannot arise from a virtuous
action.
This is related to the presentation of the general characteristics of karma
in the Lamrim: how karma is definite, how we will not experience the result
of an action that we did not do and so forth.  Whatever experience of
pleasure/ happiness or suffering in our minds, and no matter how big or how
small an experience of feeling it is, all of them are the fruitional
results for our own karma/actions. This is something that we have to
understand and is something that we have to gain conviction in it.
This is something we have to think about. Is it possible for there to be an
experience of happiness in our mind due to a non-virtuous action; even
though the non-virtuous action does not look very big and may be something
small?  Is it possible ever that a non-virtuous action can result in some
kinds of happiness?
This goes back to the presentation of how karma is definite. Whatever
result, includes the happiness that we are looking for, cannot arise
without a cause. It has to arise from a cause. Not only must it arise from
a cause, it must arise from a concordant cause. Therefore, it is impossible
for a pleasurable feeling or happiness, no matter how big or how small, to
arise from non-virtue. It is just as what Arya Nagarjuna said in his
Precious Garlands:

[Root text: page 17] The Precious Garland (stanza 1.21) says:
                From non-virtue comes all sufferings
                And likewise all bad migrations.
                From virtue comes all happy migrations
                And the happiness within all rebirths.
Therefore, happiness and suffering neither arise without cause nor arise
from discordant causes such as the fundamental nature, Ishvara and so
forth. Rather, in general, happiness and suffering come from virtuous and
non-virtuous actions [respectively], and even the various instances of
happiness and suffering arise individually, without even the slightest mix-
up, from the various instances of these two types of actions. Hence,
gaining certainty regarding this definiteness or infallibility of actions
and their results is known as "the correct view of all Buddhists" and is
praised as the foundation of all wholesome qualities.
So it is very important for you to gain an understanding and a definite
conviction in:
- how karma/actions are definite,
- how you will never ever meet with a result if you never created the cause
in the first place,
- how non-virtue can only lead to suffering and
- how virtue can only lead to happiness
So far in our study of Lorig, there is always the discussion of cause and
effect externally. Even in the production/generation of various types of
minds, different kinds of minds arise from different kinds of causes.
This is just a kind of more in depth presentation of cause and effect. At
the end of the day, the main import of understanding how causality works
externally is to relate to our experience of happiness and suffering.
Basically how the natural principles of cause and effect apply to our own
experience of suffering and happiness.
We have been talking about eye consciousness apprehending blue and you may
probably wondering what is this all about and what is there to do with my
life? The point of using the eye consciousness apprehending blue as the
subject and in order for this consciousness to arise, you must have the
observed object condition -blue.
Without blue you cannot have eye consciousness apprehending blue.
Similarly, without the eye sense power, you are not going to have eye
consciousness apprehending blue.
Basically, we are talking about causality i.e. the effect has to be
preceded by a cause.
By applying that to the internal world of our experience of happiness and
suffering, the happiness (which is the pleasurable/pleasant feeling) that
we are looking for can only arise after having created the cause; which is
virtuous action.
By gaining conviction and certainty in karma, the action and the result is
known as the correct view to all the Buddhists. This correct view is
praised as the very foundation of all the wholesome qualities. Gaining an
ascertainment of actions and their effects, karma, become the foundation
for all good qualities to arise in our mind. This is like the root, and
without this, it is very difficult to practice dharma. At the end of the
day, whether we can succeed in our spiritual transformation or not, our
practice basically depends on whether we have this wholehearted conviction
in karma or not. Without this, it is very difficult.
When we talk about the noble eightfold path, the first of the eightfold
path is right view.
Right view here also refers to this conviction; the right view about action
and their effect.
Therefore the root of the spiritual transformation, so right from the very
beginning it is important to learn and then to reflect on the natural
principles of causality- cause and its effect. Note that cause and effect
is not karma. Based on the natural principles of causality, one tries to
understand actions/ karma and their results. So it is very important to
develop this root at the beginning.
It is very important to gain an understanding and the conviction about the
infallibility of karma - actions and their effects. So this becomes the
correct view. With this as the basis, by keeping with this conviction in
our mind, our whole life change. However in future, how we look at the
world and how we think, everything will be colored by this conviction.
In the Noble Eightfold Path, there is the right view and, right thought,
right speech and so forth.
[BP text: Maitreya's "Ornament of Clear Realisation", Chapter 4, pg 64:
Under "37 aspects of an exalted knower of all aspects harmonious with
hearers, Eight branches of a superior's path:
1. Correct view
2. Correct thought (rather than 'understanding')
3. Correct speech
4. Correct aims of actions
5. Correct livelihood
6. Correct effort
7. Correct mindfulness
8. Correct meditative stabilisation]

Khen Rinpoche (spoke in English): Try to understand the difference between
right understanding and right view. They look similar. Right view is right
understanding, isn’t it? When you don’t understand there is no right view,
isn’t it? For me, right view is right understanding.  Without right
understanding is there right view?
On the basis of right view, this conviction in karma, whatever perspective
of thing that one may have will be correct. If one have a right perspective
of thing and the right thought, then the speech will also be correct.
Then there is also right action which refers to the physical demeanor.
Whatever physical demeanor one does will also be correct.  When one
accumulates karma one does it through the body, speech and mind. So on the
basis of right view, one accumulates virtuous karma with one’s mind, with
one’s speech one can create virtuous karma, and similarly, the right
physical action can also be virtuous karma.
At the end of the day, whether one accumulates virtue or non-virtues with
one’s body, speech and mind, it boils down to whether one has the correct
view of the Buddhist; i.e. whether one has the conviction and ascertainment
in the actions and the effects. If one has this conviction then it is
possible to accumulate virtuous actions, but without this conviction, one
may only accumulate non-virtuous actions. Then on the basis of right view,
it is also possible to have right livelihood in one’s life. With the
conviction in karma, one will also have right effort. So whatever endeavors
one works at will be right. Then there is right mindfulness. Whatever
effort one is making, one works at whatever one aiming to achieve with
right mindfulness. When right effort is accompanied by right mindfulness,
then one is able to have the condition, tool to develop single pointed
mind. When one is able to develop a very strong stable concentration, and
have calm abiding, then one can have right concentration.
Khen Rinpoche spoke in English: I think many of you have seen the cartoon
“The Inner Peace”? Ok that is.
From this you can see how it is extremely important to have an
ascertainment and conviction in karma and its effect, for it is the
foundation of all wholesome qualities.
Just by using the Noble Eightfold Path as an example, this is how the Noble
Eight-fold Path is based on right view. So without this conviction in karma
in our own minds, then it is really difficult to engage in virtue, which is
the foundation of all the wholesome qualities. If you are not able to
generate wholesome qualities, then liberation and enlightenment will never
happen. So without conviction in karma there is no way to achieve
liberation and enlightenment.
Therefore developing a conviction in karma and its effects is extremely
important, particularly in relation to all our unhappy experiences,
sufferings and problems. We have to understand and ascertain how all our
pains, unhappiness and sufferings are our own doing. They are the result of
our own actions/ karma and afflictions and this is where the Four Noble
Truths comes in. Generally we talk about true suffering first. The purpose
of looking at true suffering is to get an introduction to what suffering
is. It is not looking at somebody else sufferings. We should be looking at
own sufferings first, i.e. sufferings on individual basis.
First we look at ourselves; where do our sufferings and pains come from? We
need to understand how we are tormented by the sufferings and pains. While
we don’t like it at all, it still comes our way. The reason for this is
because we have already accumulated the cause of non-virtue. Since the
cause has been accumulated, whether we like it or not, it still comes our
way. Therefore we need to develop an understanding of how this is so and
have a conviction in this. Only if we are convinced of this, then in
relation to ourselves we shift this understanding looking at how others are
suffering as a result of their own actions. Without having a thorough
understanding of how we are tormented by the various kinds of sufferings
and the causes of the sufferings that we have experienced, then it is not
possible for us to have a thorough understanding of why and how others are
suffering.
Without the thorough and decisive understanding of why and how others are
suffering, it is impossible to develop love and compassion when we focus on
these suffering sentient beings. The realization of love and compassion can
only arise in one’s mind is completely dependence on how one is suffering
first. This is an extremely important point. That is why the Buddha said:
“This is the truth of suffering” when he first taught the Dharma, the Four
Noble Truth. So it is very important to acknowledge the suffering first by
looking inside; not looking outside of how we are suffering.
On the basis of having gained a thorough understanding of why and how our
own sufferings arises, when we see other sentient beings, then we also know
why and how they are tormented by suffering. When we see suffering sentient
beings with this understanding, then we will have the right understanding
rather than having all kinds of perverse or wrong understanding. On the
basis of understanding how our own suffering with all our problems arise
from our own karma and afflictions, then we will also be able to understand
how this is the case for others. With the right view on this conviction in
karma and its actions, we will be able to develop love and compassion for
others and this is right thought. Once we have this, then right speech will
arise, and right livelihood and so forth will naturally come. What we have
to do is to gain an understanding of how a conviction in the infallibility
of actions and the effects is the root of every good quality.

Feeling (tshor ba)
[Root text: page 12]
When feelings are divided, there are three:
                (1) pleasant feelings
                (2) suffering feelings
                (3) neutral feelings
Furthermore, it is just as it has been said in A Discussion of the Five
Aggregates:
QUESTION: What is feeling?
RESPONSE: It is the three types of experience – pleasant, suffering, and
that which is neither suffering nor pleasant.
 • Pleasant [feeling] is that which, when it ceases, you wish to meet with
   again.
 • Suffering is that which, when it arises, you wish to be separated from.
 • That which is neither pleasant nor suffering is that which, when it
   arises, neither of the two wishes occurs.
When these three types of feeling are differentiated in terms of the
supports of body and mind, there are six types – three bodily feelings and
three mental feelings.
First, the three bodily feelings are:
 (1) bodily pleasant feelings
 (2) bodily suffering feelings
 (3) bodily neutral feelings
Second, the three mental feelings are:
 (1) mentally pleasant feelings
 (2) mentally suffering feelings
 (3) mentally neutral feelings
What is the difference between bodily and mental feelings?
 • Feelings that arise in the retinue of the five sense consciousness are
   called "bodily feelings";
 • feelings that arise in the retinue of the mental consciousness are
   called "mental feelings."
Feeling is essentially experience.
When feelings are divided, there are three:
   1. Pleasant feelings
   2. Suffering feelings
   3. Neutral feelings
When feelings are divided into two:
   1. Bodily feelings
   2. Mental feelings
When each of these is divided into three, there are:
A: Three bodily feelings

   1) bodily pleasant feelings

   2) bodily suffering feelings

   3) bodily neutral feelings
B: Three mental feelings

   1) mentally pleasant feelings

   2) mentally suffering feelings

   3) mentally neutral feelings
The bodily feelings refer to the mental factor of feeling accompanying
sense primary consciousness.
The mental feelings accompany the mental primary consciousness.
Materialistic and Non-materialistic feelings
[Root text: page 19]  Also, when these six feelings are differentiated into
the two – the materialistic and the non-materialistic – [feelings] are of
twelve types.
QUALM: What do materialistic and non-materialistic mean?
RESPONSE: Feelings that are concomitant with the craving for the
contaminated appropriated aggregates are called "materialistic feelings."
Feelings that are concomitant with the exalted wisdom directly realizing
selflessness are called "non-materialistic feelings."
• Feelings that are concomitant with the craving for the contaminated
  appropriated aggregates are called "materialistic feelings."
• Feelings that are concomitant with the exalted wisdom directly realizing
  selflessness are called "non-materialistic feelings."
After stating what a non-materialistic feeling is, then there is a natural
qualm:
[Root text: page 19]
QUALM: Well then, if one were to explain the above-mentioned "non-
materialistic suffering feeling," how can a suffering feeling be present in
those who possess the exalted wisdom directly realizing selflessness?"
RESPONSE: There are many such cases. For example, the Scripture on
Discipline (Vinayagama) says that even foe-destroyers who have abandoned
the conception of self experience suffering feelings such as headaches due
to the fruition of past actions.
[Root text: page 19]  Moreover, when feelings are divided by way of object
of abandonment and antidote, there are two:
    1. feelings that support adherence and
    2. feelings that support deliverance.

1. Feelings that support adherence are feelings that are concomitant with
   the craving for the attributes of the desire realm.
2. Feelings that support deliverance are, for example, feelings that are
   concomitant with the mental consciousness that, having turned away from
   the attachment to the attributes of the desire realm, is included within
   the actual first concentration.
There is nothing much to say about these two other than what is stated
there.
Feeling is essentially experience. A main mind is necessarily accompanied
by feeling.
Example: An eye primary consciousness apprehending blue.
There is a mental factor of feeling in its retinue. Since feeling is
essentially an experience, so what does the feeling in the retinue of this
eye primary consciousness apprehending blue experience? It experience blue.

Discrimination ('du shes)
[Root text: page 20]  Regarding the entity of discrimination, the
Compendium of Knowledge says:
QUESTION: What is the defining characteristic of discrimination
[Tibetan:'du shes, literally, aggregation-knowing]?
RESPONSE: It has the characteristic of knowing upon aggregation. It has the
entity of apprehending the sign and apprehending the mark, through which
one designates an expression to objects of perceptions, hearing,
differentiation and knowledge.
Just as it has been said above, discrimination is a knower that, upon the
aggregation of the three – object, sense power, and primary consciousness –
apprehends the uncommon sign of an object.
Discrimination apprehends the uncommon entity of an object.
If discrimination is a knower that apprehends the uncommon sign of an
object, then we must be able to posit the uncommon sign of any object. So
what is the uncommon sign?
You think about what the uncommon sign of an object is and we will continue
in the next lesson.
Student: Are sense consciousnesses necessarily non-conceptual? The qualm I
have is assuming that all the 51 mental factors can be concomitant with the
sense primary consciousness, so the mental factor of doubt that is
concomitant with a sense perceiver would end up being a sense consciousness
that is conceptual.
Khen Rinpoche: Is there in the first place? I wonder whether there is such
a thing as doubt accompanying sense consciousness.
Student: So we cannot assume that all 51 mental factors would be able to be
concomitant with sense consciousness?
Ven Gyurme: How are you going to have sleep with your eye consciousness?
Student: Sense consciousnesses are necessarily non-conceptual?
Khen Rinpoche: Yes.
Student: The definition for the sense consciousness did not say it is free
of conceptuality. It only says that it is a knower that is generated in
dependent on a physical sense power.
As I mentioned before, the entire text of mind and mental factor is
translated in English. You should read it before class.
Student: For the five omnipresent mental factors that are present in all
minds, would that mean these five mental factors will always with the
respective main mind at any one time?
Khen Rinpoche: Yes.

Questions for Sunday discussion:
1. The definition of a doubting consciousness is a knower  that  has  qualms
   two-pointedly by its own power. What is the reason for including, “by its
   own power” in the definition?
2.  If  it  is  a  mental  factor  that  has  qualms  two-pointedly,  is  it
   necessarily doubt?
3. Is a doubting consciousness and a wrong consciousness mutually  exclusive
   or is there a common locus between them?
4. Can a sense  consciousness  become  a  conceptual  consciousness?  Can  a
   direct perceiver become a conceptual consciousness?
5.  Is  the  subsequent  consciousness  induced  by  the  eye  consciousness
   apprehending blue necessarily a sense consciousness?
6. What is the Sutra School’s reason  for  positing  self-knowers?  Why  are
   self-knowers not main minds and mental factors?


For reference only (Please do not quote any of these references in the
class)

|Five similarities according to     |Five similarities  according to Asanga’s |
|Vasubandhu’s Treasury of Knowledge |Compendium of Knowledge                  |
|(Abhidharmakosha):                 |(Abhidharmasamuchchaya):                 |
|Similar support                    |1. Similar substance                     |
|Similar object of observation      |2. Similar object of observation and     |
|                                   |[subjective] aspect                      |
|Similar [subjective] aspect        |3. Similar entity                        |
|Similar time                       |4. Similar time                          |
|Similar substance                  |5. Similar realm and level               |

|Five similarities according to Asanga’s Compendium of Knowledge                 |
|(Abhidharmasamuchchaya):                                                        |
|1. Similar substance|In the retinue of a single main mind, there can arise only |
|                    |one mental factor, for instance, feeling, of a similar     |
|                    |type. Two [mental factors] of a similar type but of        |
|                    |different substances cannot occur.                         |
|2-3  Similar object |-A mind and the mental factors in its retinue] are:        |
|of observation and  |similar in observing one object –the object of observation |
|[subjective] aspect |–and                                                       |
|and same entity     |similar in being afflicted or non-afflicted in terms of the|
|                    |object of observation and the [subjective] aspect.         |
|                    |–If a main mind:                                           |
|                    |has become afflicted, then the mental factors in its       |
|                    |retinue also become afflicted                              |
|                    |has become uncontaminated, the mental factors in its       |
|                    |retinue also become uncontaminated.                        |
|4. Similar time     |A mind and its mental factor are simultaneous with respect |
|                    |to their production, abiding and cessation.                |
|5. Similar realm and|If a main mind is a mind of the desire realm, then it is   |
|level               |impossible for a mental factor of the form or formless     |
|                    |realms to arise in its retinue.                            |
|                    |It is impossible for a mental factor of the desire realm to|
|                    |arise in the retinue of a mind of the form realm.          |
|                    |That realm in which the main mind is included is also      |
|                    |necessarily the realm in which mental factor in its retinue|
|                    |is included                                                |



