Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Lorig/Transcript/lesson04.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:53:23.925785
================================================================================


Sometimes people may feel that Lamrim - the stages of the path to
enlightenment- is easier to understand. But when we talk about the study of
the Buddhist philosophy such as this particular subject here –the study of
mind and awareness- some people may think that it is much more difficult
than Lamrim. But things are not like that. In order to have a good
understanding of the Lamrim, it is essential to gain a good understanding
of these various philosophical treatises because the subject matter of
Lamrim is essentially the essence of all these great philosophical
treatises. So, in order to know the Lamrim well, you really need to know
all these philosophical treatises.
One of the purposes of studying the Lorig -the study of mind and awareness-
is to help us to gain a better understanding of the Lamrim teaching. To
illustrate of what I have just said, in order to understand the Lamrim
well, you have to understand the philosophy well. For those who of you who
remember that at the beginning of the Lamrim in the section where it
mentioned about the activities that one needs to carry out during the post-
meditation session. It talks about the causes and conditions that we need
to bring together in order for us to develop calm abiding and special
insight. The Lamrim talks about the four pre-requisites and the first one
is restraining one’s sense faculties. Restraining one’s sense faculties is
one of the pre-requisites for developing calm abiding and special insight.
[LRCM V1 Page 101] How to restrain the sensory faculties has two parts, and
they are as follows:
   1) Guarding the sensory faculties:  After the six consciousnesses arise
      based upon their sensory objects and faculties, the mental
      consciousness produces attachment for the six attractive sensory
      objects or hostility toward the six unattractive ones. “Guarding the
      sensory faculties” means protecting your mind against such attachment
      and hostility, and making a great effort not to produce them.
In order to understand the above statement, you have to study the
presentation on mind and its function; otherwise there is no way for you to
understand this statement well. As it says here, in order for any of the
six consciousnesses to arise, it must depend on its respective sensory
objects and the sense faculties (also translated as sensory powers). So,
without understanding what the objects and the sensory faculties are, how
can one understand this particular statement?  It says that in dependence
upon the respective sense objects and sensory faculties, the six
consciousnesses arise. The mental consciousness produces attachment or
hostility by depending on the object involved. The advice in the Lamrim is
for us to develop a concentrated mind -calm abiding and special insight-
and we have to guard our sensory faculties; that mean protecting our mind
against such attachment and hostility and making effort not to produce
them. Therefore, in order to develop calm abiding and special insight, we
have to guard our sensory faculties. In order to that, first you have to
understand what the sensory objects and what the sensory faculties are. I
brought this up as an illustration of how importance it is to study. In
order to really understand this statement here, without studying the
presentation of mind, then it is not possible at all to really understand
the import of the statement.
The mind is so important particularly in Buddhism because it is said that
everything is created by the mind. When we talk about mind, there are
varieties of mind; there are positive virtuous states of mind and there are
negative states of mind. Different kinds of mind work differently. The way
they engage their objects are also different. So, it is important to
understand the working of the mind and in particular, it is important to
know the types of mind that are considered as correct or valid. It is
important to know what non-valid or incorrect minds are because by
understanding the virtuous and valid states of mind, you will achieve the
purpose if you follow after the valid states of mind. You also have to
understand that by following the incorrect state of mind, you will not
achieve your goals or purposes. Therefore it is crucial for you to gain an
understanding of the working of the mind.
We talk about karma in the Lamrim. Likewise, in order to understand what
karma is and to understand karma well, you have to understand the
difference between mind and mental factor because karma is being a mental
factor. Likewise, in the section of the path that is shared with the person
of medium capacity, there is quite an extensive discussion on the different
kinds of afflictions. In order to understand afflictions well, again you
have to depend on the topic we are doing here.
What we are going to do in this module is that we will be looking at the
sevenfold division of consciousness. We will go through that briefly and
then carry on with the fifty-one mental factors. There is a translated text
on the fifty-one mental factors which we will be using. We will probably
upload it (in the web) and you have to download it and print it out.
Studying this subject can be challenging and difficult. In general, it is
difficult to talk about mind because it is difficult to have an idea of
what the mind is; even just try bringing to your mind of what a mind is. It
is really difficult. Trying to understand the nature or the entity of the
mind itself is challenging. Due to the many new terms and most of you are
seeing them for the first time makes, it is more challenging. You have no
choice but you have to learn it. It all depends on whether you see the
purpose of learning these terms and this subject.
In the previous class, one student gave us a scientific presentation as to
how the visual images are formed.
According to his understanding, the light has to strike at the object that
is being looked at and the light is then reflected back to the eyeball.
Hence the image is formed in the brain. The light from the object that one
is seeing is reflected back into the eye through the pupil and then the
retina. The retina is asserted to be clear form. This is what the
scientists say. I am not sure whether this is the eye sense power that we
have been talking about.
According to the scientific presentation, there is retina and the retina is
made up of many minute particles which we call them as cells. This is form.
There is optic nerve that connects the retina to the brain where the
message is sent. The brain then processes the information of the perceived
object as yellow or blue or red.


















When we take a photo of an object with a camera, the image of the object is
imprinted onto the film. Similarly, when the light is reflected from the
object, it goes into the eyeball and fall onto the retina. The retina is of
clear form that make up of many particles. The image of the object is
formed on the retina.
Science explains that the different cells recognize different colors. Some
cells have the powers to identify colors such as red, yellow and so forth.
Due to the deficiency of certain cells which are not working well, they are
not able to recognize certain colors which then cause the symptom of color
blindness.
I don’t know the eye sense power that we are talking about here. Is the eye
sense power the entire retina or it is some of the particles that made up
the retina? There was a question in the previous class about the eye sense
power and why the eye sense power is clear form. The scientific position on
the nature of this retina is clear form, which is the same as our position
here and is being mentioned in the text that the eye sense power is clear
form.
Student 1: (29:48 – 31:45) What is the difference between:
   1. A phenomenon form source which is impermanent (example: dream
      elephant) and
   2. The imputed factor which is meaning generality which is permanent
      (example: visualized elephant)
Khen Rinpoche (spoke in English): I will go through this. It will come
soon.
In the twofold division of object and object processor:
   1. All consciousnesses ( object processor.
   2. Every other phenomena that is non-mind ( object.
In general, if it is a phenomenon or anything that exists, it is
necessarily an object.
Established base, existent and object are mutually inclusive.
(Note that Venerable Gyurme use the term consciousness, mind and awareness
interchangeably)
Note: Handout here refers to handout titled “The study of mind and its
function”
Handout page 1: Object
Definition of object: that which is known by an awareness
When objects are divided, there are:
   1. Appearing object
   2. Determined object
   3. Object of engagement
Handout page 1: Appearing object
The appearing object and apprehended object refers to the object which is
appearing to the consciousness (non-conceptual and conceptual) and not
necessarily to what it is comprehending.
The appearing object of a particular awareness and apprehended object of
that awareness are synonymous.
Appearing object is also called as the apprehended object.
Appearing object and apprehended object are mutually inclusive.
For direct perceiver, the following three are mutually inclusive:
   1. Appearing object of a direct perceiver
   2. Apprehended object of direct perceiver
   3. Functioning thing
(Note synonymous and mutually inclusive means the same thing)
For conceptual consciousness (or thought), the following three are mutually
inclusive:
   1. Appearing object of conceptual consciousness
   2. Apprehended object of conceptual consciousness
   3. Permanent phenomenon
For direct perceiver, the following two are mutually inclusive:
   1. Object of engagement of a direct perceiver
   2. Object of the mode of apprehension of a direct perceiver
For conceptual consciousness (or thought), the following three are mutually
inclusive:
   1. Determined object of a conceptual consciousness
   2. Object of engagement of a conceptual consciousness
   3. Object of the mode of apprehension of a conceptual consciousness
.Handout page 5:

Subject  |Object of engagement |Object of the mode of apprehension
|Appearing object  |Apprehended object  |Determined object  |Object of
observation  | |Eye consciousness apprehending blue  |Blue |Blue |Blue
|Blue |None |Blue | |Conception of iphone |iphone |iphone |Mental image of
iphone |Mental image of iphone |iphone |iphone | |Thought remembering a
movie |the movie |the movie |Mental image of the movie |Mental image of the
movie |the movie |the movie | |An eye consciousness apprehending blue is an
example of a direct perceiver.
What is the object of engagement of eye consciousness apprehending blue? It
is blue.
What is the object of the mode of apprehension of this consciousness? It is
blue.
What is the appearing object of this consciousness? It is blue
What is the apprehended object of this consciousness? It is blue
The eye consciousness apprehending blue doesn’t have a determined object
because determined object exist only for conceptual consciousnesses. Only
conceptual consciousnesses have determined object.
Direct perceivers do not have determined object.
Broadly speaking, non-conceptual consciousnesses do not have determined
objects.
The conception of an iphone or thought thinking of an iphone is an example
of a conceptual consciousness.
What is the object of engagement of this consciousness? It is iphone
What is the object of the mode of apprehension of this consciousness? It is
iphone.
Why is iphone the object of engagement and the object of the mode of
apprehension of a conceptual consciousness thinking of iphone?  As
explained earlier:
For conceptual consciousness (or thought), the following three are mutually
inclusive:
   1. Determined object of a conceptual consciousness (or thought)
   2. Object of engagement of a conceptual consciousness (or thought),
   3. Object of the mode of apprehension of a conceptual consciousness (or
      thought)
For the conception of iphone, it is a conceptual consciousness. The
difference here is that the appearing object is not iphone (but a mental
image of iphone).
Thought remembering a movie is an example of a conceptual consciousness.
The object of engagement and the object of the mode of apprehension is the
same: the movie.
It is the same as the previous example except the subject. Because it is a
conceptual consciousness, the appearing object and the apprehended object
are necessarily the same; they are mutually inclusive.
Therefore the appearing object and apprehended object of this thought
remembering a movie is the mental image of the movie; not the movie.
One can look at the consciousness in terms:
   1. Non-conceptual consciousnesses
   2. Conceptual consciousnesses
The difference lies in the way they engage their objects.
In many of the treatises dealing with valid cognition, conceptual
consciousness is refers to as:
   1. Conventional awareness (or conventional mind)
   2. Mistaken consciousness
   3. Obscuring mind
   4. False mind
Is conceptual consciousness an obscurational truth (or conventional truth)?
No
A conceptual consciousness (or thought) is a conventional awareness. It is
a mistaken consciousness, it is an obscuring consciousness but it is not an
obscurational truth (or conventional truth).
Why? This is because conventional truth is mutually inclusive with
permanent phenomenon.
A conceptual consciousness is called a conventional mind because it is
obscured in that it cannot directly perceive the actual object without a
mental image.
Unlike a conceptual consciousness, a direct perceiver can directly perceive
the actual object.
Conceptual consciousness cannot directly perceive. What is it that obscured
the conceptual consciousness from seeing the actual object directly? It is
meaning generality (or the mental image).
To the conceptual thought, the mental image of the object is mixed with the
actual object.
This mental image of the object appears as the actual object but it is not
the actual object. This obscured the conceptual consciousness from directly
perceiving this object. Therefore the conceptual consciousness is a false
mind. Conceptual consciousness is a conventional mind because it does not
perceive the object in the way it exists. Therefore a conceptual
consciousness is a false mind and it is a mistaken mind because it cannot
directly perceive the actual object without a mental image.
A direct perceiver (or a direct valid cognizer) is called an ultimate mind
because it is non-mistaken.
A direct valid cognizer is a mind that sees phenomenon as it is; the way it
appears accords with the way it exists.
A direct valid cognizer is an ultimate mind.
Conceptual consciousness is conventional mind because it is obstructed from
seeing the object as it is.
Specifically characterized phenomenon is mutually inclusive with
functioning thing. A functioning thing is a specifically characterized
phenomenon because it can appear to the direct perceiver directly without
the need for a mental image as the medium.
Functioning thing is a specifically characterized phenomenon means that it
can appear directly to the direct perceiver perceiving it without depending
on a mental image. It appears as it is.
Generally characterized phenomena are those objects or phenomena that
cannot appear to the consciousness without depending on a mental image.
So you have to know and understand the meaning of the following terms:
functioning thing, permanent phenomena, specifically characterized
phenomenon, and generally characterized phenomenon.
A direct perceiver is also referred to a collective engager.
How does direct perceiver engages its object? Direct perceiver engages its
object completely and fully; it engages all the characteristics of the
object without leaving any part of the object behind.
However the way a conceptual consciousness engages its object is different
from a direct perceiver.
The conceptual consciousness is also called an eliminative engager.
Conceptual consciousness engages its object in an eliminative way; it
eliminates what is not the object in order to arrive at the object.
Functioning thing and specifically characterized phenomenon are mutually
inclusive.
I have talked about what a specifically characterized phenomenon is. When a
specifically characterized phenomenon appears to the mind, everything about
the object, the actual object, appears to the mind.
The functioning thing which is mutually inclusive with specifically
characterized phenomenon appears to a direct perceiver. The way functioning
thing appears is that everything about the object, all its characteristics,
appears to the direct perceiver apprehending it.
When a direct perceiver engages its object, which is a functioning thing
(which is also an impermanent phenomenon and a specifically characterized
phenomenon), it engages in the entire object and everything about the
object, without any mental image.
On the other hand, the conceptual consciousness is different from the
direct perceiver.
The conceptual consciousness does not engage its object as a whole with all
its characteristics and is perceiving the actual object through a mental
image. The object doesn’t appear with all its characteristics to the
conceptual consciousness but only certain characteristics of the object
appears to the conceptual consciousness apprehending it. The conceptual
consciousness can only apprehend the object via a mental image of the
object.
When a conceptual consciousness realizes its object, it has to realize its
object via a mental image; whereas a direct perceiver directly realizes its
object as it is. So for a direct perceiver, everything is coming from the
side of the object.
An eye consciousness apprehending blue is a collective engager.
A conceptual consciousness apprehending blue is an eliminative engager.
What appears to an eye consciousness apprehending blue? It is blue.
Not only does blue appears to the eye consciousness apprehending it, all
the characteristics that are included in blue such as its impermanence and
so forth. But we are not saying that the eye consciousness apprehending
blue realizes everything about blue that is appearing to it.
For a conceptual consciousness apprehending blue, how does the thought
apprehends blue?
Conceptual consciousness apprehending blue can only realize blue through a
mental image of blue.
What appears to the conceptual thought apprehending blue?  Only the
likeness of blue; not the characteristics that comes along with blue such
as impermanence of blue.
When we say blue, we are only referring to blue. For the term blue, what
does it engage in? What does it refers to? It is referring to blue. It does
not refer to the characteristics that come with blue, for example,
impermanence of blue or blue being a product. The sound or term blue does
not refer to the impermanence of blue although the impermanence of blue is
a characteristic of blue. The sound or term blue can only refer to blue and
nothing else
If the term blue can refer to blue and all the characteristics that come
along with blue, then there is no need to say or use the term “the
impermanence of blue”, “blue being a product”, “blue being a functioning
thing” and so forth.
Just as the term blue can only refer to blue and not all its
characteristics, likewise the conceptual consciousness apprehending blue
that follows the sound blue can only engage and realize blue; not all the
characteristics that come along with blue.
The conceptual consciousness (or conceptual thought) apprehending blue can
only realize blue. It cannot realize the characteristics that are part of
blue. Therefore when you realize blue, it doesn’t necessary mean you have
realized blue being an impermanent phenomenon.
When we think of blue, we can only realize blue via the mental image of
blue.
When we think of impermanence of blue, in order to realize blue being an
impermanent phenomena conceptually, we can only realize the impermanence of
blue via a mental image of the impermanence of blue.
So, depending on which characteristics of blue you are trying to realize,
you have to depend on that respective mental image. Therefore, conceptual
consciousness engages its object not in a collective way but only in parts.
Student 2: (86:42 – 87:35) Whatever I lay my eyes on, I can only see them
as pictures but not their characteristics such as impermanent, would this
imply that whatever I see are conceptual phenomena?
Answer: For direct perceiver, example, an eye consciousness apprehending
the floor. Everything about the floor appears to the eye consciousness
apprehending it; not only as floor but also the impermanence of floor,
floor being a product, the floor being a functioning thing and so forth. We
are saying that they appear to the eye consciousness apprehending it. We
also say that it does not necessary mean that the eye consciousness is
apprehending all these characteristics. The floor impermanence appears but
your eye consciousness does not necessary realizing it. Not everything that
appears to the eye consciousness is ascertained because, in the sevenfold
division of consciousness, there is a consciousness that is called an
awareness to which an object appears but it is not ascertained. This will
come later on.
Student 3: (90:24 – 91:26) There are many phenomena that are mutually
inclusive with established base and there are many phenomena that are
mutually inclusive with permanent and impermanent phenomena. These are all
the different names referring to the same thing. Why are there so many
different terms and all referring to the same thing? For example, under
established base, there are eight different terms referring to something
which is an established base. Is it because these terms are used in
different context?
Answer: There are many phenomena that are mutually inclusive with
established base, for example, object of knowledge and existent. Although
they all mean the same thing at the end of the day, but when the different
words are used, how your mind understands it is different because you are
approaching the topic from a different angle, for example, when you say
existent verses the object of knowledge.
You have impermanent phenomenon and specifically characterized phenomenon.
They are mutually inclusive. Impermanent phenomenon refers to momentary
phenomenon; phenomenon undergoing momentary change. Whereas when you say
specifically characterized phenomenon, the meaning is the same and you do
arrive at the same understanding. Just now I have explained what
specifically characterized phenomenon is and the way you understand the
object is different when you are looking at it from a different angle.
Although at the end of day you arrived at the same understanding and the
same meaning but when different words are used, your way of approaching the
meaning is from a different angle.
Student 3: (93:49 – 95:06)  Regarding conceptual consciousness being an
eliminative engager, in the notes, it says that in your conceptual
consciousness you realize an object through eliminating everything else
that is not the object. I don’t quite understand this.
Khen Rinpoche: Next time. This one is too long to explain.
Essentially one way of looking at the difference between a direct
perception and a conception of something lies in how the mind engages its
object, how the mind goes into the object and how it understand its object.
This is very important topic but it is challenging. Even for myself, it is
difficult but I try to think about it and I try to gain a better
understanding or a clearer understanding of it. So, likewise, you should
also try because what we are doing here now will become the seed for you to
be able to understand the teaching of the lamas in the future. It will
become the seed for you to understand some of those teachings, books or the
texts that you will come across in the future. It is important but it is
difficult and challenging. I guess vast majority of you are looking at this
for the first time. Of course it is going to be difficult but the thing is
not to lose heart. You have to develop the courage and determination and
just move on. Just try. This is what you have to keep in mind and to think
about.
Earlier I have said that conceptual consciousness is a conventional mind
(conventional awareness); whereas a direct perceiver is an ultimate mind.
Keeping this as like the capital, you work on this. Try to understand why
and what does it mean when we say that conceptual consciousness is a
conventional awareness.
Direct perceivers are also known as non-mistaken consciousnesses; whereas
conceptual consciousnesses are referred as mistaken consciousnesses. You
have to think about it: why?
Having said this, you must keep in mind and understand when we say all
conceptual consciousnesses are mistaken; you have to understand what it
means. This will come later on. Otherwise, you may think that all
conceptual consciousnesses are mistaken and that means they are useless, so
you don’t have to think about things. Obviously that is not the case. You
have to continue to follow the teaching in order to understand the meaning
of mistaken consciousness. It is not what it means in English.
Those of you who did the previous module, Lamrim, there is a section on the
path of person of great capacity when we talked about wisdom and
compassion, a qualm was brought up. The qualm was that there is a
widespread belief among a lot of people that all thoughts are obstacle to
enlightenment. If it is a conceptual thought it is necessary a mind
apprehending signs or apprehending inherent existent. From here you can see
that if we don’t really understand what a thought is and what a conceptual
consciousness is, we are in a danger of falling into this group of people
thinking that if it is a thought it is useless and what is the point of
thinking. This is another example of how the understanding of Buddhist
philosophy enhances the understanding of the Lamrim. It makes one’s
understanding of the Lamrim perfect. So keeping this in mind, the goal and
the purpose, then you have to work hard and try your best.








-----------------------
Mental image of Rose

Appearing object
Apprehended object
Specifically characterized phenomenon of a direct perceiver
are mutually inclusive

Rose

Appearing object
Apprehended object &
Generally characterized phenomenon
of a conceptual consciousness
are mutually inclusive

                        Thought thinking about  Rose

Eye consciousness apprehending Rose


