Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Lorig/Transcript/lesson17.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:53:24.030900
================================================================================


In the Heart Sutra, the following five aggregates are mentioned:
   1. Aggregate of form
   2. Aggregate of feeling
   3. Aggregate of discrimination
   4. Aggregate of compositional factors
   5. Aggregate of consciousness
All impermanent phenomena can be subsumed into these five aggregates. If it
is an impermanent phenomenon, it is one of these aggregates.
All form is subsumed by the aggregate of form.
Functioning thing can be divided into:
   1. Matter
   2. Consciousness
   3. Non-associated compositional factor (NACF)
All phenomena that are in the category of matter can be put under the
category of aggregate of form.
Consciousness can be looked in term of:
   1. Main minds
   2. Mental factors
All the main minds are classified under the aggregate of consciousness.
In general, there are fifty one mental factors.
- The mental factor of feeling comes under the aggregate of feeling
- The mental factor of discrimination comes under the aggregate of
discrimination.
- The remaining forty nine mental factors come under the aggregate of
compositional factors.
- The third division of functioning thing – the non-associated
compositional factor- comes under the aggregate of compositional factors.
















Why the mental factor of feeling and the mental factor of discrimination
are highlighted separately and the rest of the forty-nine mental factors
are under the aggregate of compositional factors?
As mentioned in the Treasury of knowledge:
 1. The mental factor  of feeling is listed separately because:
   a. The pleasant feeling arise due to the attachment for the object of
      desire become a basis for conflict.
   b. Due to being emotionally involved with feeling, one generates a very
      strong desire for this feeling.  This strong attachment for feeling
      then perpetuates cyclic existence.
 2.  The mental factor  of discrimination is listed separately because:
   a. Due to discriminating that which is dharma to be non-dharma and
      discriminating that which is non-dharma to be dharma, this becomes a
      basis for conflict.
   b. Due to discriminating erroneously with reference to an object, one
      accumulates the projecting karma for rebirth and cyclic existence.
So, as mentioned in the Treasury of knowledge (Abidharmakosha), these are
the two reasons why these two mental factors are listed separately.
These two -mental factors of feeling and mental factor of discrimination-
are:
   1. The basis for conflict and
   2. The two primary causes for perpetuating cyclic existence
So in order to highlight these two facts, the mental factors of feeling and
the mental factor of discrimination are listed separately.
The aggregate of form, feeling and discrimination are straightforward. The
aggregate of compositional factors encompasses the rest of the mental
factors and the non-associated compositional factors. In short, all
composed phenomenon or impermanent phenomenon can be subsumed by the five
aggregates.
Student: A cup is subsumed under the aggregate of form. How would a cup be
my aggregate of form?
Khen Rinpoche:  The aggregate of form primarily refers to the coarse
physical body that we possess. Although that is what the aggregate of form
is primarily referring to, but whatever is the aggregate of form is not
necessarily included in your continuum i.e. it doesn’t have to be your
appropriated physical aggregates.
Just as in the definition of matter that which is atomically established,
form is a collection of many parts/ many atoms/ many particles coming
together. The literal translation for the Tibetan word “phung po” is a
heap. It is an aggregation with the collection of many things.
In the Heart of the Perfection of Wisdom Sutra, the aggregate of form is
primarily refers to our contaminated appropriated physical body, the
aggregate. However, all instances of form, such as cup, would come under
that aggregate as well.
In the earlier lesson, we saw awareness, knower and consciousness are
mutually inclusive. Consciousness is “shes pa” in Tibetan. In the context
of mind and mental factors, we are talking about main mind in which mind,
sentience and primary consciousness /perceiver are mutually inclusive. So
we have two groups of three different phenomena:
      -awareness, knower and consciousness are mutually inclusive
      -mind, sentience and primary consciousness /perceiver are mutually
inclusive
These two groups are different.
Consciousness (shes pa) and primary consciousness (nam she or nam par shes
pa ) are different. Somebody has translated “nam par shes pa” as
consciousness and that is a problem because they (consciousness and primary
consciousness) are different. That is why I started with the original
translation as “primary consciousness”.
In the last lesson, we looked at the four possibilities between sentience
(yid) and mental consciousness (yid she).
One comes to know both sentience and mental consciousness well by knowing
the illustration for the four possibilities between sentience and mental
consciousness. It would be good if you can do it as homework.
What are the four possibilities between exalted wisdom (ye she) and mental
consciousness (yid she)?
If you think about it, the difference between a consciousness (shes pa) and
primary consciousness (nam par shes pa), it seems that one would have to
posit the difference between a mental consciousness (yid she) and a mental
primary consciousness (yid nam par shes pa).
How many possibilities are there between mental consciousness and mental
primary consciousness?
I guess maybe there are three possibilities.
You are not going to have something which is a mental primary consciousness
but not a mental consciousness.
How many possibilities are there between a sense consciousness and a sense
primary consciousness?
I think there are three possibilities.
Something which is a sense primary consciousness but not a sense
consciousness cannot exist.
The sense consciousness and the sense primary consciousness are not the
same. So, if you look at the number of possibilities that exist between
these two then your understanding of these two would become clearer.
Is there something which is a sense consciousness but not a sense primary
consciousness? Yes.
Illustration: The mental factor of feeling in the retinue of an eye
consciousness apprehending blue.
That mental factor of feeling accompanying the eye consciousness
apprehending blue is a sense consciousness but it is not a sense primary
consciousness; it is not a main mind.
Something that is a sense consciousness and a sense primary consciousness.
Illustration: An eye perceiver or an eye primary consciousness apprehending
blue is a sense primary consciousness. It is also a sense consciousness.
Something that is not both (sense consciousness and a sense primary
consciousness).
There are many things that you can posit.
In order to be able to figure this out, you must commit to memory.
    • Knower, awareness, consciousness are mutually inclusive
    • Mind, sentience, primary consciousness are mutually inclusive
In general, when we talk about knower/ awareness /consciousness, they
actually encompass both main mind and mental factors.
When we talk about mind/ sentience/ primary consciousness, we are only
talking about main mind.

|Mutually inclusive              |Referring to…             |
|Knower, awareness, consciousness|Main mind and mental      |
|                                |factors                   |
|Mind, sentience,  primary       |Main mind                 |
|consciousness                   |                          |


Based on what we have discussed, it seems that we have to posit a
difference between:
    • A mental consciousness and a mental perceiver / primary consciousness.
    • A sense consciousness and a sense perceiver / primary consciousness.
How would you answer the question that was brought up earlier about the
seven-fold division of consciousness; are they main mind or mental factors?
It would be seem that besides doubt, it is possible that the remaining six
types of mind are both main mind and mental factors.
    • Are there wrong consciousnesses that are main minds?
    • Are there wrong consciousnesses that are mental factors?

[Root text: page 8] Intelligent beings who have in mind their welfare in
future lives, not being content simply with acquiring food and clothing for
the duration of this life, thinking, "What will become of me in future
rebirths?" should wonder, "I have circled powerlessly in the three realms
of cyclic existence since beginningless time, continuously experiencing
suffering. What is the root of this?"
Who should wonder about this? The intelligent ones, those who are not just
concerned with this life but look beyond the happiness of this life, should
investigate the cause of circling endlessly in the three realms of cyclic
existence. To this person, the profound advice in the Buddhist teachings is
given. In order to answer this question, then there is an extensive
presentation on Mind and Mental Factors
In the context here, the “intelligent beings” refer to those who look
beyond the happiness of this life; whereas those who are concerned primary
with the happiness of this life are not intelligent beings.
For such an intelligent person, he should investigate and find out the root
cause of the cyclic existence.
Why must one need to find out the root cause of cyclic existence? This is
because when one circle in cyclic existence, one suffers.
What is the root of this?
[Root text: page 8] Having contemplated in this manner, you must come to
understand that these sufferings of cyclic existence neither arise without
cause, nor arise from a discordant cause; rather, they arise from their own
causes – actions and afflictions.
You must come to understand that the suffering of cyclic existence that you
experience do not arise without cause. You must have ascertainment in your
heart of why suffering of cyclic existence cannot arise without cause. It
is not sufficient just to say that but you must understand the reason for
that. On top of that you must also be able to understand why the suffering
of cyclic existence cannot arise from a discordant cause.
On the basis of understanding the reason why suffering of cyclic existence
cannot arise without cause and cannot arise from a discordant cause then
you come to understand that the suffering of cyclic existence must arise
from a cause. You need to understand why the suffering of cyclic existence
arises from a concordant cause. One must induce a definite ascertainment of
these points.
In order for an eye consciousness to be generated, it must arise in
dependence upon its own uncommon empowering condition. In the case of an
eye consciousness, the uncommon empowering condition has to be an eye sense
power. For example, an eye consciousness cannot arise in dependence upon an
ear sense power.
In order to generate an eye consciousness apprehending blue, a physical
sense power must be present.  The physical sense power has to be the eye
sense power, and without the eye sense power, you are not going to have an
eye consciousness apprehending blue.
What is it that enables an eye consciousness to be able to apprehend
visible form? It is the physical sense power - the eye sense power.  That
is the basis. The eye consciousness apprehending blue has to be generated
in dependence upon an uncommon empowering condition – an eye sense power.
When an eye consciousness apprehending blue is generated, it is generated
into an entity of that which is clear and knowing. It is a consciousness.
What is that causes an eye consciousness to have this entity?
It is not the eye sense power but rather, it is the immediately preceding
condition – the consciousness which existed just one moment prior to the
generation of this eye consciousness.
By using the production of an eye consciousness apprehending blue as an
example, one can see that effect can only arise from concordant cause.
With this understanding, then you apply it to what it really matters – the
suffering that we do not want.
The suffering that we want to avoid arises from its own concordant cause.
If you analyze it from the various angles by using logics and reasonings,
you will come to the conclusion that the primary cause of all the
sufferings that you do not want are your actions/karma and the afflictions.
So it is important to gain an ascertainment on this.
This is something that you need to debate, not necessarily with others, but
with yourself.
When we talk about the suffering that we do not want and the happiness that
we want, try to figure out for yourself whether the suffering that we do
not want  arise due to some reasons or just arbitrary or just bad luck or
with no reason?
Will you accept if somebody say to you that the suffering that you do not
want arise due to a discordant cause? Is it possible for suffering to arise
from an incorrect cause?
When we say that the suffering that we experience do not arise without a
cause, we are essentially establishing that the suffering that we do not
want arise from a cause.
When we say that the suffering that we do not want do not arise from
discordant causes, we are essentially establishing that the suffering that
we do not want arise from concordant causes.
At the end of the day, when we do think about it, what are the two primary
causes for suffering?
They are basically actions/karma and afflictions
We need to sort this out for ourselves in our own mind. We need to reach a
very decisive and definite conclusion about this. It is not just be able to
say so.
There are many quotations being cited just to provide the scriptural
authority for establishing how karma and afflictions are the primary causes
of cyclic existence.
[Root text: page 8] The Protector Nagarjuna says [in his Precious Garland
(Rajaparikatharatnavali)] (stanza 1.35):
                 As long as the aggregates are misconceived,
                 There will be the conception of an I.
                 When there is conception of an I, there is also action.
                 Due to that there is rebirth.
What Nagarjuna is saying? In dependence upon an apprehension of a self of
phenomenon, there come to be an apprehension of a self of a person which is
posited to be ignorance.
Due to ignorance, we accumulate actions. So, this is how the twelve-link of
dependent arising are set forth.
The main thesis that which is to be proven is: The cyclic existence arises
primarily from karma and afflictions.
[Root text: page 8]  And [his Treatise on the Middle Way
(Madhyamakashastra)] (stanza 26.10) says
                 The root of cyclic existence is compositional actions.
                 Therefore, the wise do not create compositional actions.
                 Hence, the unwise are creators;
                 The wise are not, because of seeing thusness.
The root of cyclic existence here is compositional actions (compositional
activities), which is the second link of the twelve-link of dependent
arising.
The ones who accumulate the compositional actions are the unwise ones. The
wise do not accumulate projecting karma.
“The unwise are creators” are those who accumulate projecting karma.
“The wise” are the ones who do not accumulate projecting karma for cyclic
existence.
Why is it that the wise do not accumulate projecting karma?
This is because the wise are those who have seen the truth directly do not
accumulate projecting karma.
Those who have not seen the truth directly accumulate projecting karma.
That is how you differentiate superior beings and ordinary beings.
Superior beings do not accumulate fresh projecting karma, whereas ordinary
beings accumulate projecting karma.
Why superior beings do not accumulate fresh projecting karma? Because they
do not have the ignorance of the twelve-link of dependent arising.
Therefore, they do not accumulate the compositional activities; the second
link.
It is not that once one has seen the truth directly, ignorance disappears
there and then. From the moment the superior beings have seen the truth
directly they do not accumulate fresh projecting karma because they do not
have the ignorance that is from the twelve-link of dependent arising. After
having seen the truth directly, the superior beings still have ignorance
but they do not have the ignorance that is powerful enough that will lead
to the accumulation of new projecting karma.
[Root text: page 8]  Acharya Aryadeva is saying the same time in his
Treatise of Four Hundred Stanzas (Chatuhshatakashastrakarika) (stanza
14.25ab):
                 The consciousness that is the seed of [cyclic] existence
                 Has objects as its objects of activity.
“The consciousness that is the seed of cyclic existence” -the seed of
cyclic existence is consciousness and consciousness here refers an
apprehension of true existence, which is an affliction.
“The consciousness that is the seed of cyclic existence has objects as its
objects of activity” - objects refer to form and so forth. These objects
such as form and so forth become the object of observation by this
ignorance - an apprehension of true existence- apprehends these objects to
be truly existence. Through this, karma is accumulated.
[Root text: page 8] Acharya Chandrakirti says [in his Supplement to the
Middle Way (Madhyamakavatara)] (stanza 6.89abc):
                 The very diverse worlds of sentient beings and
                 Their environments are established by the mind itself.
                 It is taught that all migrating beings without exception
                 are born from actions.
Almost the same thing, Chandrakirti is saying that the environment, the
world itself and the inhabitants of the world -the sentient beings- are the
results of actions.
[Root text: page 9]  Acharya Vasubandhu says [in his Treasury of Knowledge
(Abhidharmakoshakarika)] (stanza 4.1a):
                The various worlds are produced from actions.
And (stanza 5.1a):
                The root of [cyclic] existence is the six subtle-increasers.

Likewise, Shantideva's Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds
(Bodhisattvacharyavatara, stanza 5.6) says:
                The Propounder of the Truth has taught
                That in this way, all fears and
                The immeasurable sufferings
                Arise from the mind.

And (stanza 5.17-18ab):

                Those who do not understand this secret of the mind,
                The great objective of the Dharma,
                Wander aimlessly,
                Even though they wish to attain happiness and destroy
                suffering.
                Therefore, I should hold well and guard well
                This mind of mine.
The reason for citing all these various quotations from the authoritative
texts of Nagarjuna and his spiritual sons and other great Indian masters is
to show what they have already concluded is that all the sufferings of
cyclic existence is the results of karma and afflictions.
We take these texts to be authoritative. What we have to do is to learn
these teachings, analyzed them and develop an ascertainment for ourselves
that the cause of cyclic existence is karma and afflictions.

[Root text: page 10]  Likewise, it has been taught that all the excellent
qualities of the paths and grounds of the three vehicles, the resultant
buddha field, exalted bodies, lifespan, deeds, as well as exalted
activities arise solely from their own causes, wholesome virtuous minds.
Therefore, the root of all of cyclic existence and nirvana is established
to be the mind itself.
Likewise, it has been taught that all the excellent qualities of the paths
and grounds of the three vehicles as well as the all the qualities of the
buddhas, which are inconceivable for us and are very difficult to fit into
our mind. At the end of the day, these qualities have to come from a
concordant cause and the concordant cause doesn’t come from outside, but it
has to come from the mind; a virtuous and wholesome state of mind.
In short, all the problems and the sufferings in cyclic existence that we
experience have its origin in the mind. Likewise, all the happiness up to
the state of ultimate happiness, full enlightenment, has to come from
within the mind itself.
In general, whatever appears to our mind, there is this factor of
appearance, i.e. there is something that is appearing to the mind; whatever
the object may be. This object appears in a particular way and we believe
in that appearance. We believe that object in question exist in the way it
appears to us. Due to this belief and holding onto this appearance as being
so real, then we accumulate actions/karma.
This thing that is appearing to the mind which we hold onto as being so
real is an appearance to the mind. Without the mind, even though the object
appears, we cannot have this appearance. Without this appearance we do not
grasp at it. Without grasping at this appearance, we cannot accumulate
actions/karma.
This factor of appearance to the mind is dependence on the mind. Without
the mind, we cannot have the factor of appearance. So independence on this
factor of appearance to the mind, we apprehend it as so real and existing
in the way it appears, then we accumulate actions.
Just like friend and enemy, what is a friend or an enemy? It is basically
an appearance to our mind i.e. how the person appears. Whether the person
is appearing as a friend or the person is appearing as an enemy, it is an
appearance to the mind. Then based on what is appearing to our mind, we get
emotionally involved. From that, there is either attachment or anger.
By grasping at the appearance of the enemy as so real, then strong anger
arises.
By believing in the appearance of a friend existing in the way it appears
to us then there is strong attachment.
So this factor of appearance -the appearance of an enemy or a friend- is
something that arises from the mind. But without realizing this, we feel
that there is something separate from the mind, there is a real enemy or a
real friend. With that belief, we get involve and then there is strong
hatred or strong attachment comes about. From this you can see how
important it is to realize that the appearance of object such as appearance
of friend and enemy is a factor of appearance to the mind.  If you realize
the appearance of these various objects arises from the mind, definitely it
helps in reducing our afflictions, anger, attachment and so forth.
We think of the appearance to the mind and the mind itself as completely
separate and not understanding that actually they are closely related, we
then react to those appearances and experiencing unhappiness.
For us, this is how the mind works. However with practices, when the mind
advances, then one can reach a point where the dualistic appearance
subsiding. We can talk about dualistic appearances in many ways, for
example dualistic appearance of subject and object as being very distinct
and separate.
At this present moment, we have the feeling that the mind and that which is
appearing to the mind is something different from the mind. But with
practice and with some advancement, one can narrow the distance between
these two, and then one comes to really understand that these two are not
really exactly separate or different.
By understanding what is appearing to the mind is just the mere factor of
appearance, and together with the understanding of how everything is in the
nature of emptiness then definitely we can reduce our negative actions.
So by understanding these two:
    • How all appearance arises from the mind and
    • How these appearances are the display of emptiness
And put them together, this is how we turn back cyclic existence.
We have to think about how the mind is the creator of all i.e. how
everything arises from the mind.
As I have said earlier, all kind of appearances appearing to the mind. When
we believe in whatever is appearing to the mind to exist in the way they
appear, that is when we get emotionally involved with the appearance. Then
we accumulate actions which lead to the results - suffering. So we have to
understand and experience of how all these different appearances to the
mind arise from the mind itself. Ultimately everything is created by the
mind, includes the sufferings which we do not want. So we have to
understand how suffering arises from our mistaken beliefs in all those
appearances to the mind.
So therefore the author says:
[Root text: page 10] Hence, it is of utmost importance to understand the
modes of minds and mental factors. Thus, here I shall compose a brief
presentation on minds and mental factors. This has two parts:
   1. The individual entities and divisions of minds and mental factors
   2. A summary of the salient points and their application to practice
First we will look at the explanation of mind and mental factor separately.
The main mind and the mental factors in its retinue are concomitant by way
of the five types of similarity. They have a similar support or bases and
so forth.
You should read the following pages on your own. There is a slight
difference in what is posited to be the five types of similarity. There is
an explanation according to the Treasury of Knowledge, and there is another
slightly different explanation according to the Compendium of Knowledge;
basically the lower and higher Abhidharma.
So please read the pages that deal with the five types of similarity.  If
you read it, think about it for two to three times. It makes a huge
difference if you read them before class. When you come to class and when I
explain it, because of you have read it before, then whatever I say will
make your understanding better and clearer. If you read it before class,
and then come to listen to what I say, then it is possible to have a
subsequent cognizer arising.
Khen Rinpoche spoke in English: Make sure your mind become subsequent
cognizer.
Student: Page 9, can I confirm that the root of cyclic existence, the six
subtle increases are referring to the six root afflictions?
Khen Rinpoche: Yes
Student: This presentation of mind and mental factor is also according to
the Sutra School?
Khen Rinpoche: Yes
Student: Can we say that a factually concordant knower is a mind that
correctly engages its object which exists in the way it appears?
Khen Rinpoche: If the object exists in the way the mind apprehends it to
be, then it is a factually concordant knower. So if your mind apprehends an
object in such a way that is not how it exists in reality, then it wouldn’t
be factually concordant.
Do you agree that it is okay to say that a factually concordant knower is a
mind that apprehends the object in the way that it exists? If the way in
which the mind apprehends the object is not exactly how the object exists
then it is not a factually concordant knower. Is it okay to say this? Think
about it.
Student: The mental factor of feeling that is with a sense consciousness,
are we aware of these feeling that arises together with the sense
consciousness. For example the eye consciousness apprehending blue, when I
say I like blue, is the feeling (mental factor) that arises with the eye
consciousness or is it due to the feeling (mental factor) that is due to
the mental consciousness apprehending blue?
Khen Rinpoche: There is a mental factor of feeling accompanying or in the
retinue of this eye consciousness.
Student: Are we aware of that?
Khen Rinpoche (In English): I think so.
Student: I always thought it was a mental factor that “I like when I see
blue”.
Khen Rinpoche: It will be apparent soon. We have to posit a mental factor
of feeling that is in the retinue accompany an eye consciousness. In fact
there are the five omnipresent factors: feeling, discrimination, intention,
contact and attention. These five omnipresent factors are necessarily
accompanying all main minds.
Student: What is the difference of these three terms: appearance, factor of
appearance and mere factor of appearance? Is there a question of
translations?
Ven Gyurme: They are the same.

For reference only
[pic]







