Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Lorig/Transcript/lesson03.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:53:24.021963
================================================================================


As mentioned to you before, the main objective of this Basic Program is to
provide you a foundational understanding and knowledge so as to enable you
to look and study those great treatises in the future. Many of these great
treatises are already available in English. So whatever foundational
understanding that you have gained from this BP will then enable you to at
least understand these texts when you read them in the future. When we are
learning something like this for the first time, of course it may be a bit
challenging. As I have mentioned to you before, first you must memorize the
terms so that at least you are able to repeat some of these terms. On this
basis, you should be able to explain what these terms mean. In the very
first place, you must know what those many new terms that you see in the
handouts and teaching are. You have no choice. You really have to memorize
these terms. We have finished with two lessons. If there is anything that
you do not understand or need further clarification, you may bring it out
right now.
Student 1: On the divisions of functioning thing into matter, consciousness
and non-associated compositional factor (NACF) (Audio5.15~7.27)
Khen Rinpoche: As I have said that the comparison of phenomena is very
important. Phenomena can be compared in different ways such as the three
possibilities and four possibilities. They are very important in the
investigation of phenomena. Example, what are the possibilities existing
between object of knowledge and consciousness?
Answer from student: Three
Khen Rinpoche: When you say that there is something that is object of
knowledge but not a consciousness, from this you can see the limit of
pervasion of the object of knowledge is greater than the limit of pervasion
of consciousness. In simple English, object of knowledge covers more thing
than consciousness.

|Comparison of object of knowledge and      |Illustration                     |
|consciousness                              |                                 |
|1. Something which is both object of       |Eye consciousness                |
|knowledge and consciousness                |                                 |
|2. Something which is an object of         |A horse                          |
|knowledge but not consciousness            |                                 |
|3. Something which is consciousness but not|Not possible because if it is a  |
|an object of knowledge                     |consciousness it is necessarily  |
|                                           |an object of knowledge; it is an |
|                                           |existent                         |
|4. Something which is neither object of    |Sky flower                       |
|knowledge nor consciousness                |                                 |


Student 1: Matter and consciousness are not mutually exclusive because
there is something that is both, for example, functioning thing.
(Audio13.37-15.12)
Khen Rinpoche: There isn’t something that is both matter and consciousness
because they are mutually exclusive. If someone says: The subject,
functioning thing, is both matter and consciousness. What are you going to
say? There are two ways of asking the question:
   1. Are both matter and consciousness functioning thing?
   2. Is functioning thing both matter and consciousness?
Is functioning thing a consciousness?
Is functioning thing a person? If you say functioning thing is a person,
then you also have to say that functioning thing is horse, cow and
elephant.
Khen Rinpoche (spoke in English): Is functioning thing an elephant?
Elephant is a functioning thing. The question is: Is functioning thing an
elephant?
Khen Rinpoche: There is no problem of saying: matter and consciousness is
functioning thing. If you are ask: Is functioning thing consciousness?  If
you were to say: Functioning thing is a consciousness, then questions will
be raised: Is it a horse? Is it a person? Then it becomes difficult to
answer.
Student 1: Both matter and consciousness is functioning thing so they are
not mutually exclusive.
Khen Rinpoche: Are you saying that there is a common locus between both
matter and consciousness i.e. there is something that is both matter and
consciousness? Please give an illustration.
Student 1: Impermanent phenomenon
Khen Rinpoche: Is impermanent phenomena both matter and consciousness? Are
you saying that?
Student 1: No
Khen Rinpoche: So there is nothing that is both matter and consciousness.
Student 1: OK, I got it.
The question and answer is not between two people. It is for everyone here.
You must pay attention to what is being asked and what is the answer
because this is an important part of the learning process.
Student 2: What is the difference between eye sense power and eye
consciousness?
Ven Gyurme: In English, the eye means eye ball. I think she is asking: What
is the eye sense power?
Khen Rinpoche: What exactly is eye sense power?  Great Exposition School
(GES) and Sutra School (SS) assert that eye sense power is form;
specifically it is a clear form. I don’t think the eye sense power refers
to the entire eyeball but something that is inside the eyeball.  In
Abhidharma, the size of the eye sense power is posited to be the size of
raisin.
So the eye sense power is a clear form that exists inside the eye ball. The
eye sense power is form. In dependence of this eye sense power, eye
consciousness is generated.
Eye consciousness is consciousness; not form.
Therefore you cannot posit eye sense power and eye consciousness to be the
same; they are different.
An eye consciousness apprehending form can only apprehend a form source; it
cannot apprehend sound. It can only apprehending form source because of its
uncommon empowering condition. So the uncommon empowering condition for the
production of an eye consciousness is the eye sense power.
So in order for an eye consciousness apprehending form to be generated, it
must depend on three conditions:
    - Its uncommon empowering condition : the eye sense power
    - Its observed object condition : form
    - Immediately preceding condition: consciousness that exists just prior
      to the production of this eye consciousness. That must be a
      consciousness
What is that causes an eye consciousness apprehending form to be generated
in the aspect of that is clear and knowing?
It is the immediately preceding consciousness; the consciousness that
exists just prior to the production of this particular consciousness.
What is that causes an eye consciousness apprehending form to be generated
in the aspect of form?
It is the observed object condition - form.
The eye sense power is form; but whether it is a form that can be
apprehended by naked eye is another question.
There are five objects: form, sound, smell, taste and touch. There is also
a sixth category: the phenomenon form source.
Is eye sense power a form or phenomenon form source?
So the eye sense power is form. The eye consciousness that is generated in
dependence on the eye sense power is consciousness. Although the eye sense
power is form, I don’t think it refers to the entire eye ball but rather
there is some kind of form that is located inside the eye ball. So that is
posited as eye sense power; which is the uncommon empowering condition for
the production of the eye consciousness.
Student 3: Is the combination of eye sense power (which is form) and eye
consciousness a NACF? Is NACF something that is being labeled onto
something, e.g. because a person is labeled on the aggregates, that person
is NACF. If you label the concept of time, then time is NACF. (Audio:
40.17~44. 30)
Khen Rinpoche: When we use the word ‘eye’, it either has to refer to the
eye sense power or eye consciousness. There isn’t an eye that is both. When
we use the word ‘eye,’ it refers primarily to the physical eye which is
form. Therefore, it is necessarily not NACF. In the Heart Sutra, there is
“no eye, no ear,…”, all these refer to the physical sense bases.  In that
sense, the ‘eye’ refers to the eye sense power. Therefore, it is
necessarily not NACF.
Student 4: What is phenomenon form source?
Khen Rinpoche: There is such a thing call phenomenon form source e.g. dream
elephant.  A dream elephant does not appear to eye consciousness; in fact
to any sense consciousness.  The dream elephant can only appear to the
mental consciousness.
The phenomenon form source is a subtle form that can appear to a mental
consciousness. Phenomenon form source cannot appear to the sense
consciousness.
Student 4: Is phenomenon source atomically established; which is matter?
Khen Rinpoche: Something for you to think about. In the divisions of
functioning thing, one of them is matter. If we adopt the position ‘matter
is mutually inclusive with form’, then we have to say the phenomenon form
source is atomically established.
In the case of a dream elephant, we have to analyze whether it is
atomically established or not. It is not something that you can just easily
say “Yes” or “No”. It is easy to understand that the form that appears to
the sense consciousness is atomically established. What about form that
appear to the mental consciousness? This is from the perspective of the
position that asserts that form and matter are mutually inclusive, but not
all Buddhist tenets assert that. Some other Buddhist tenets assert that
form and matter are NOT mutually inclusive. Even then, we have to analyze
whether the phenomenon form source, for example, a dream elephant, is
atomically established or not. It is very clear in many texts that
phenomenon form source is form. The question to think about is: Is it
atomically established?
Student 5: As quoted from Debate in Tibetan Buddhism on the three
possibilities “If there are three possibilities between two phenomena,
there must be a common locus of the two points of difference.” Does this
statement still stand?
Ven Gyurme: I don’t think it is necessarily that you must have a
possibility that is both between the two objects in comparison.
Student 5: That means this statement is not that accurate?
Ven Gyurme: Yes, that is more from the existential point of view.
Khen Rinpoche (spoke in English): Can give an example that is both or
neither.
Student 5: If it is mutually exclusive, is it necessarily three
possibilities as it was mentioned previously “can be three but not four
possibilities.” For example, pillar and pot, there is always three
possibilities. Therefore, if it is mutually exclusive, it is necessarily to
have three possibilities.
Khen Rinpoche (spoke in English): You can say that. It is not possible to
have four (possibilities).
Student 5: Regarding immediately preceding condition, at the manifest
level, are the six consciousnesses manifests at the same time? All of these
have their respective immediately preceding condition i.e. at every moment
all the seven consciousnesses manifest at the same time? If that is the
case, how do we posit a single continuum of consciousness within a person?
(Audio 57.10~61.07)
Khen Rinpoche: The immediately preceding condition for the production of
any consciousness can be any consciousness that immediately precede it. In
the case of the eye consciousness apprehending form, it doesn’t have to be
the former moment of eye consciousness.
The uncommon empowering condition for the production of the mental
consciousness is the mental sense power. This mental sense power can also
acts as the empowering condition for the production of a sense
consciousness. In that case, it becomes the common empowering condition.
Student 6: Q1: As in the handout, “In order to understand selflessness, it
is necessary to understand the phenomena that are the bases of selflessness
because only through this understanding can we gain liberation and thereby
relieved of powerless rebirth into the suffering of cyclic existence.” The
presentation of Lorig is according to the Sutra School. Why is it so since
we are supposed to learn ultimately the highest view for full
enlightenment? Why is this presentation not studied in accordance to the
highest school?
Q2; Do the terms “established”, “observed”, “realized” by a valid cognizer
and known by an awareness have common meaning or they have specific
meaning?
Khen Rinpoche: (Q1) There are four tenets: GES, SS, MOS and MWS. It is good
to know why there are four tenets. In order to know well the assertions of
higher tenet, therefore there is a clear explanation of the assertions of
tenets that is lower than it.
Why there is a study of Lorig? Why the study of Lorig is based on the
assertions of the Sutra School and not the higher school? The study of
Lorig here is based mainly from the perspective of the SS because the vast
majority of the Buddhist tenets have similar assertions as to what
constitute a valid cognizer and so forth. Basically the presentation with
regards to mind is mainly the same for GES, SS, MOS and Autonomy Middle Way
School (AMWS) except for Consequence Middle Way School (CMWS). In order to
appreciate the unique feature of the higher tenet, we need to know the
assertions of the lower tenets. On the basis of knowing well the assertions
of the lower tenets, when the higher system are presented then we will be
able to see the differences. This make the higher tenet stand out.
(Q2) The terms mean the same.
Student 7: How does the dream elephant which is a phenomenon form source is
different from the sky flower? (Audio 71.18~74)
Khen Rinpoche: Does the elephant that is conjured by an illusionist exist?
The question is not: “Does elephant exist?”
If you ask: Is the elephant conjured by an illusionist an elephant?
Everybody will say “No”.
Is the elephant conjured by an illusionist form, consciousness or NACF? Of
the five senses, form, sound, smell, taste and touch, which is this? Is
this atomically established?
The elephant that is conjured by an illusionist appear to the eye
consciousness, so it is form and it exists. So we have to say the dream
elephant exist. What is the reason for saying the dream elephant does not
exist?
Dream elephant is posited as impermanent phenomenon so it has to be either
matter or consciousness or NACF. What we see as a cup of water as water but
this is perceived as blood and pus by hungry ghost. The god will perceive
it as nectar. So depending on the power of the individual karma, in that
one base, there is nectar, water and blood and pus.
Student 8: Is day dreaming or visualization of celestial mansion a
phenomenon form source?
Khen Rinpoche: You need to understand the difference between non-conceptual
consciousness and conceptual consciousness as the way they work are
different. In the case of day dreaming or visualization, it is an
appearance to a thought. Whatever appears to a thought consciousness is not
the actual object but is a mental image of that object that you are
thinking. Although sky flower does not exist, there can be a conception of
sky flower. When you think of sky flower, there is mental appearance of sky
flower. Although sky flower does not exist but the appearance of sky flower
to the thought consciousness (or conceptual consciousness) apprehending it
exists. The sky flower that appear to a thought consciousness which
apprehending it as a mental image (meaning generality) and that is not
form; it is just a mere imputed factor.  However, thing that is appearing
to a non-conceptual mental consciousness is form.  This will come later.
Student 9: Is the mental image of sky flower an existent?
Khen Rinpoche: Of course
Student 9: So all mental images are existent?
Khen Rinpoche: Yes
Ven Gyurme: Because they are permanent phenomena.

Student 10: What is internal matter and external matter? (91.31~93.55)
Khen Rinpoche: The baby body inside the womb is an internal matter because
it is included within the continuum of that baby; the baby is a person.
Is the subject, baby body, an internal matter? Yes, it is an internal
matter because it is included within the continuum of the baby.
Is that (the baby body) included within the mother continuum? Is there any
problem of saying the baby body is within the continuum of the mother? When
the baby is still inside the womb it is included within the continuum of
the mother, so it is an internal matter.
Is the faeces inside your body an internal matter?
Khen Rinpoche: Think about this. If it belongs to you, then cherish it.
Sometime it is good that you feedback the difficulties and challenges that
you encountered in your studies. I guess one of the difficulties you all
are facing is seeing all these new terms for the first time. The only
solution is that you have to memorize them; otherwise there is no way out.
For example, you have to know the word mutually exclusive and you have to
know what it means as well. In order for any two phenomena in comparison to
be mutually exclusive, the objects that are to be compared must be an
existent, the two must be different and there should not be any common
locus between these two i.e. there is nothing that is both.
If you think about it more, if it is an existent, it is necessarily a
singular phenomenon or different phenomenon. Having said that, do you agree
that it has to be like that? Is this necessarily so?
Question: If it is an existent, is it necessarily a singular phenomenon or
different phenomenon? Isn’t there something that is not these two? Example,
horse is a singular phenomenon. How about horse and elephant? They are
different phenomenon because horse and elephant is not one. So whatever
illustration that is thrown to you, it can be either one or many. Can you
point to something that is both one and many? Can you look at one and many
in terms of three or four possibilities?
If someone were to posit: Is the subject, different, a singular or
different phenomenon?

