Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Lorig/Transcript/lesson11.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:53:23.953267
================================================================================


Clarification on questions that are related to the Sunday discussion class
Student: Is sense consciousness and sense direct perceiver the same?
Khen Rinpoche: Sense consciousness is not necessarily a sense direct
perceiver. This will become apparent today when we look at the different
kinds of mistaken consciousnesses.
[Sense direct perceiver is:
1) that which is produced in dependence on its own uncommon empowering
condition, a physical sense power,
2) is a knower that is free from conceptuality and non-mistaken]

As in the definition, it is clear that a sense direct perceiver is
necessarily non-mistaken. If that being the case, to say that all sense
consciousness are non-mistaken would not be tenable because there are sense
consciousnesses that are mistaken. Therefore, if it is a sense
consciousness, it is not necessarily non-mistaken.
Student:  I thought sense consciousness which is a non-conceptual
consciousness is necessarily non-mistaken.
Khen Rinpoche: There is something that is both a sense consciousness and is
mistaken. In fact there are many instances. Anyway it is coming.
Student: Does the three conditions (observed object condition, uncommon
empowering condition and the immediately preceding condition) also apply
for the production of mental direct perceiver?
Khen Rinpoche: Mental direct perceiver is produced in dependence upon the
three conditions. Depending on which mental direct perceiver it is.
Example: For a mental direct perceiver apprehending form
      -observed object condition is form
      -uncommon empowering condition is the mental sense power
      -immediately preceding condition is also the mental sense power
Student:  For the eye consciousness apprehending blue, in the sequence of
sense direct perceiver, mental direct perceiver and then conceptual
consciousness, the observed object condition for the mental direct
perceiver should not be blue because it cannot be a sense object.
Khen Rinpoche: Conceptual consciousnesses are necessarily mental. For
example, there is a conceptual consciousness apprehending vase. The
conceptual consciousness apprehending vase realizes vase; and not realizing
anything else. It is the actual vase (which is form) that is being realized
by this conceptual consciousness. It is a mental consciousness realizing
form.
Student: If it a conceptual thought, it is necessarily a generic image and
not a form.
Khen Rinpoche: Conceptual thought apprehending form realizes form. It
realizes form but not directly. It is via generic image or meaning
generality.
If you are asked: “Does thought apprehending vase realize vase?”  Yes, it
realizes vase.
From this, you can posit that there is a mental consciousness that can
realize form.
So the conceptual consciousness apprehending vase realizes vase. To this
conceptual consciousness vase appear.
A conceptual consciousness is necessarily a mental consciousness. So, it
follows that the mental consciousness can realizes form. So, it follows
that form also can appear to a mental consciousness. So there is no
problem.
The consciousness to which form appears is not necessary a sense
consciousness. Form can appear to mental consciousness.
For phenomenon source, it is a form that can only appears to the mental
consciousness and not to sense consciousness.
Student: The mental direct perceiver following an eye consciousness
apprehending form would be a mental direct perceiver apprehending form.
What is the observed object condition?
Ven Gyurme: The observed object condition is form. The uncommon empowering
condition is mental sense power.
Khen Rinpoche spoke in English:  Only related to last Sunday discussion
question. If you people found it difficult, there is no solid answer only
then you can ask. Only those questions that you cannot resolve and cannot
find any final answer to it. If you have already got the answer, then don’t
ask.
Student: On the question: If it is a consciousness that arises in
dependence on a mental sense power, is it   necessarily a mental direct
perceiver? The answer is No because the mental sense power can also act as
the uncommon empowering condition for the production of the sense
consciousness in which case it become a common empowering condition. Can a
physical sense power act as a common empowering condition for the
production of a mental consciousness.
Khen Rinpoche: Yes
Student: On the question: If it is an established base, is it necessarily
all three of the following: (1) appearing object (2) determined object, and
(3) object of engagement?
Khen Rinpoche spoke in English: There is no problem. First you must
understand the question.
Khen Rinpoche: The question is: If it is an established base (EB), is it
necessary all three: (1) appearing object (2) determined object, and (3)
object of engagement?
Student: No
Khen Rinpoche spoke in English: Give me an example.
Khen Rinpoche: Is there is something that you can point to is an existent
but is not one of these objects?
Khen Rinpoche spoke in English: Human being must necessarily have life. If
you say no, you must give an example on what is human being that doesn’t
have life.
Khen Rinpoche: If it is an EB, is it necessarily an object of engagement,
is it necessarily an appearing object and is it necessarily a determined
object?
If it is an EB, is it necessarily an appearing object?
Student: Yes
Khen Rinpoche: If it is an EB, is it necessarily an object of engagement?
Student: Yes
Khen Rinpoche: If it is an EB, is it necessarily a determined object?
Student: No
Khen Rinpoche: Give an example of what is EB but is not a determined
object.
Student: Consciousness apprehending a cup because determined object only
appear to the conceptual consciousness.
Khen Rinpoche: Is consciousness a determined object? If it is a
consciousness, it is necessarily a determined object because consciousness
necessarily has a thought apprehending it.
Why do you say if it is an EB, it is necessarily an appearing object?
Why if it is an EB, it is necessarily an object of engagement?
Student: An object of engagement is necessarily a functioning thing.
Ven Gyurme: Not necessary
Student: I approach the question on the basis of permanent phenomenon and
impermanent phenomenon.
Khen Rinpoche: If it is an object of engagement, it is not necessarily a
functioning thing. If you say that an object of engagement is necessarily a
functioning thing, it follow that emptiness cannot be an object of
engagement? Uncomposed space cannot be realized?
Are you able to find anything that is an EB but not an appearing object?
Not object of engagement? Not determined object?
If you can find one, of course the answer would be no.
If you cannot find one of this, that the answer is definitely yes.
Student: So the way to approach this question is to check on the
possibilities of EB with these three objects?
Khen Rinpoche: If you compare EB and appearing object is there any
possibility?
Student: EB is necessarily an appearing object.
Khen Rinpoche: So there is no possibility. If you know they are mutually
inclusive then EB is necessarily this this and this.
Student: Does wrong consciousness has an object of engagement?
Khen Rinpoche: Based on Sera Je’s position, there is no object of object of
engagement for wrong consciousness. There are other colleges that assert
that wrong consciousness has object of engagement.
The definition of wrong consciousness as stated in other textbook from some
schools is:
Wrong consciousness is a knower that is mistaken with regards to its object
of engagement.
In our system, the definition is:
Wrong consciousness is knowers that engage its object erroneously
We will cover this soon.
Student: Because a self-knowing direct perceiver has three divisions, I
find it difficult to relate this and the fact that all consciousnesses have
self-knower.
Khen Rinpoche: There are three divisions for self-knowing direct perceiver
which are:
   1. Valid cognizer which is self-knowing direct perceiver
   2. Subsequent cognizer which is self-knowing direct perceiver
   3. AAA which is self-knowing direct perceiver
If this is being the case, how is it that, for example, a wrong
consciousness having a self-knower.
The first thing to note is: all consciousnesses are necessarily have a self-
knower experiencing it.
Here we are not talking about self-knower. We are talking about a valid
cognizer.
That valid cognizer has a self-knower experiencing it but the self-knower
experiencing a valid cognizer is NOT necessarily a valid cognizer.
Then you have a wrong consciousness. A wrong consciousness is a
consciousness. Therefore a wrong consciousness necessarily has a self-
knower experiencing it but that self-knower experiencing the wrong
consciousness is NOT a wrong consciousness.
There is no problem with a wrong consciousness having a self-knower
experiencing it.



[Handout 10 July 2012 page 5]
Yogic direct perceiver
Definition of a yogic direct perceiver is:
1) that which is generated in dependence on its own uncommon empowering
condition, a meditative stabilization which is a union of calm abiding and
special insight, and
2) is an other-knowing exalted knower in the continuum of a Superior which
is free from conceptuality and non-mistaken.
When divided there are two which are yogic direct perceivers:
    • valid cognizer
    • subsequent cognizer
There are no awarenesses to which an object appears but is not ascertained
which are yogic direct perceivers because whatever is a yogic direct
perceiver necessarily ascertains its object of comprehension

➢ A yogic direct perceiver is not generated in dependence on just a mental
  sense power. The uncommon empowering condition of a yogic direct
  perceiver has to be something that is more exalted than a mental sense
  power.
➢ A yogic direct perceiver has to be generated in dependence on its own
  uncommon empowering condition, a meditative stabilization which is a
  union of calm abiding and special insight.
➢ A yogic direct perceiver has to free from conceptuality and non-
  mistaken.
➢ A yogic direct perceiver has to be included in the continuum of a
  Superior and it has to be an other-knower.

A self-knower experiencing a yogic direct perceiver is NOT a yogic direct
perceiver:
-although it is generated in dependence upon meditative stabilization which
is a union of calm abiding and special insight
-although it is free from conceptuality and non-mistaken
-although it is included in the continuum of a Superior
- because it is NOT an other-knower

Therefore there is no fallacy in that self-knower experiencing a yogic
direct perceiver is a yogic direct perceiver.
If you understand the divisions of sense direct perceiver, mental direct
perceiver and self-knowing direct perceiver, there are instances of all
three being:
   1. A valid cognizer
   2. A subsequent cognizer
   3. An AAA
However when yogic direct perceiver is divided, there is only yogic direct
perceiver which is:
   1. A valid cognizer
   2. A subsequent cognizer
There is no yogic direct perceiver which is an AAA.
[pic]
Why there is no yogic direct perceiver which is an AAA?
This is because if it is a yogic direct perceiver, it is a mind that
necessarily ascertains its object.
Because a yogic direct perceiver is necessarily a knower that ascertains
its object therefore we cannot have a yogic direct perceiver which is an
AAA.
For sense direct perceiver, mental direct perceiver and self-knowing direct
perceiver, there are instances of them being an AAA because whatever is a
sense direct perceiver, a mental direct perceiver or a self-knowing direct
perceiver, it is not necessarily the mind that ascertain its object.
If you look at the divisions of these four types of direct perceivers, on
yogic direct perceiver there is only two divisions whereas the rest (sense
direct perceiver, mental direct perceiver and self-knowing direct
perceiver) has three divisions: valid cognizer, subsequent cognizer and AAA
which are three out of the sevenfold division of consciousness.
Why there are no sense direct perceivers which are doubting
consciousnesses?
Because doubting consciousnesses is a conceptual consciousness.
Why there are no sense direct perceivers which are correctly assuming
consciousnesses?
Because correctly assuming consciousness is a conceptual consciousness.
Why there are no sense direct perceivers which are wrong consciousnesses?
Because wrong consciousness is necessarily a mistaken consciousness.
A sense direct perceiver is necessarily non-mistaken. Therefore there
cannot be any sense direct perceivers which are wrong consciousness.
Therefore you must not forget the definitions and the definitions must
ready inside your hand.
Student: Due to some eye conditions, for an eye consciousness apprehending
a white snow mountain as blue snow mountain, is that a wrong consciousness?
Khen Rinpoche spoke in English: That is a wrong consciousness. You have
doubt on that?
Student: I thought it is mistaken and wrong consciousness.
Khen Rinpoche spoke in English: Yes, it is. 100% confirmed.
Student: Isn’t that eye consciousness seeing white snow mountain as a blue
snow mountain wrong and mistaken?
Khen Rinpoche: Is that valid direct perceiver? Are you trying to prove that
there are direct perceivers which are wrong consciousness? Is the eye
consciousness apprehending a white snow mountain as blue a direct
perceiver?
Student: Yes
Khen Rinpoche spoke in English: What is the definition for direct
perceiver?
Khen Rinpoche: The consciousness to which the white snow mountain appear as
blue, that consciousness is mistaken. A direct perceiver is a knower that
is necessarily non-mistaken and free of conceptuality. If that is what
defines a sense direct perceiver, can the eye consciousness apprehending
blue snow mountain be a sense direct perceiver?
If it is a sense consciousness, it is not necessarily sense direct
perceiver. Of course, if it is a sense direct perceiver it is not
necessarily a valid cognizer. Why is it not necessarily a valid cognizer?
When sense direct perceiver is divided, there are:
   1. Valid cognizer which is sense direct perceiver
   2. Subsequent cognizer which is sense direct perceiver
   3. AAA which is sense direct perceiver
If you memorize this division then you will know immediately that if it is
a sense direct perceiver, it is not necessarily a valid cognizer.
Give an illustration of a sense direct perceiver which is not a valid
cognizer.
Student: The illustration is the second moment of an eye consciousness
apprehending blue.

The definition of sense direct perceiver and sense direct valid cognizer is
about the same. Sense direct valid cognizer is built upon the definition of
sense direct perceiver.

Sense direct perceiver is:
1) that which is produced in dependence on its own uncommon empowering
condition, a physical sense power,
2) is a knower that is free from conceptuality and non-mistaken

Sense direct valid cognizer is:
1) that which is produced in dependence on its own uncommon empowering
condition, a physical sense power,
2) is a new incontrovertible knower that is free from conceptuality and non-
mistaken

Facsimile of a direct perceiver
The definition of a facsimile of a direct perceiver is: a knower that is
mistaken with regard to its appearing object.
Facsimile of a direct perceiver and mistaken consciousness are mutually
inclusive

Facsimile of a direct perceiver has two divisions:
    - Conceptual facsimile of a direct perceiver
    - Non-conceptual facsimile of a direct perceiver
OR
Facsimile of a direct perceiver has two divisions:
    - Facsimile of a direct perceiver which is sense consciousness
    - Facsimile of a direct perceiver which is mental consciousness
Conceptual facsimile of a direct perceiver
Examples:
• [a mistaken conception], a thought apprehending sound as permanent is a
wrong consciousness
• [a conventional conception], an inferential cognizer that realizes sound
to be impermanent is a valid cognizer
These two are same in being mistaken consciousness.
To understand a wrong consciousness is a mistaken consciousness is straight
forward.
However for an inferential cognizer that realizes sound to be impermanent,
it is valid cognizer but yet it is a mistaken consciousness. Why?
To understand how and why an inferential cognizer that realizes sound to be
impermanent is a mistaken consciousness, you need to refer to the
definition of mistaken consciousness.

Definition: A mistaken consciousness is a knower that is mistaken with
regards to its appearing object.
 • If a mistaken consciousness is a knower that is mistaken with regards to
   its appearing object,
 • an inferential cognizer that realizes sound to be impermanent is a
   mistaken consciousness
 • this inferential cognizer is mistaken with regards to its appearing
   object
What is the appearing object of this an inferential cognizer that realizes
sound to be impermanent?
The appearing object of this inferential cognizer that realizes sound to be
impermanent would be:
    ➢ the appearance as impermanent sound or
    ➢ appearance as opposite from non-impermanent sound
How is this inferential cognizer mistaken with regards to these appearing
objects?
These two appearances, while it is not impermanent sound, it appears as
impermanent sound.
For this reason, it is mistaken.
If you find impermanent sound is a bit confusing you can change it to
iPhone if you think it can make it easier for you.
An inferential cognizer realizing iPhone is a valid cognizer. Is it a
mistaken consciousness? Yes
Why is it a mistaken consciousness?
This inferential cognizer realizing iPhone is mistaken with regards to its
appearing object.
Then what is the appearing object of this consciousness?
Appearing object of the inferential cognizer realizing iPhone is:
    -the appearance as iPhone
    -appearance as opposite from non-iPhone
How is the inferential cognizer realizing iPhone mistaken with regards to
this appearing object?
The inferential cognizer realizing iPhone is mistaken with regards to this
appearing object because:
- the appearance as opposite from non-iPhone while it is not the actual
iPhone appears as the actual iPhone. Therefore it is mistaken.
Khen Rinpoche spoke in English: That is the final destination and there is
no more questions.
This is how you reach the end of the process in determining that this
consciousness is mistaken. We have brought it to conclusion and there is
nothing else you can ask beyond this.
Student: Is it the same reason as why the conceptual thought is mistaken
because it apprehends the meaning generality of the iPhone?
Khen Rinpoche: It is mistaken because while the meaning generality of an
iPhone is not the actual iPhone but it appear as if it is the iPhone. It is
alright to say in such a way but to say it is exactly the same, we have to
think about it.
Khen Rinpoche spoke in English: OK. You say like that is no problem.
In the above illustrations, one is conceptual consciousness and one is a
valid cognizer but both are mistaken consciousnesses.
Basically, you can say that a conceptual consciousness is a necessarily a
facsimile of a direct perceiver.
Is a facsimile of a direct perceiver necessarily conceptual?

Non-conceptual facsimiles of a direct perceiver
There are many non-conceptual facsimiles of a direct perceiver.
From among the two,
(1) Non-conceptual facsimiles of a direct perceiver that are mental
consciousnesses
(2) Non-conceptual facsimiles of a direct perceiver that are sense
consciousnesses
According to the Sutra School, non-conceptual facsimile of a direct
perceiver is a mistaken consciousness but it is mistaken due to temporary
conditions i.e. it is a temporary error and not due to long lasting error
or permanent type of error. The causes of errors are of two types:
   1. Causes of error which are external
   2. Causes of error which are internal
An eye impaired by obscuring disease is a cause of error for a sense
consciousness which is non-conceptual facsimile of a direct perceiver. In
this case, the cause of error is internal.
In dependence on the internal cause and internal conditions then you have
an eye impaired by obscuring disease.  Due to that, one sees one moon as
two. The appearance of one moon as two is not due to there being two moons
out there but is due to the condition in the eye.
Illustration: A quickly whirling firebrand that gives the appearance of a
fire wheel. This appearance of a fire wheel is due to an external
condition; not due to an internal condition.
On the basis of these two illustrations do you understand the difference
between an internal condition which is the cause of error and an external
condition which is the cause of error?
Illustration: Seeing trees as moving when you are travelling in a car.  The
appearance of moving trees again is due to an external condition. Here the
cause of error existing in the abode.
Illustration: Seeing the surrounding as unpleasant when your mind is being
upset. This appearance is due to an internal condition.
By understanding how you can have mistaken appearance in dependence on
external condition then one can also come to understand how mistaken
appearance can arise due to internal condition.
Here we are talking about the non-conceptual facsimile of a direct
perceiver that is according to the Sutra School. You have to understand
that the causes of error are temporary. The mistaken appearances as
describe here are not due to some long lasting fault or cause. Here the
explanation of the mistaken consciousness is not done from the perspective
of there being a long lasting cause of error. This is not what is being
taught here.
These are all temporary causes of error. Let’s say you have a faulty eye
for the whole life and it does not seem to be a temporary problem and feel
like it last for a long time. But this still consider being temporary. The
point here is that in order for it to be an ultimate or long lasting cause
of error is related to grasping a self of a person.
Here you have to know that for a non-conceptual facsimile of a direct
perceiver which is sense consciousness can be generated in dependence of
either an external condition or an internal condition. Whatever it may be,
they are posited to be temporary conditions; therefore they can be averted.
You just have to identify what is the cause of the error and then seek to
avert it.
If you continue to think about it and try to understand the ultimate cause
of error, then one is led to the presentation of grasping at the self of a
person; basically it is ignorance; which is apprehending a self of a
person. That is the ultimate cause of error. If you avert and destroy that
then all mistaken conceptions are removed. So by depending on this
presentation then the presentation of the path is also presented.
According to the Sutra School, when we talked about the cause of error for
producing mistaken consciousnesses, they are temporary.
Non-conceptual wrong consciousness, non-conceptual facsimile of a direct
perceiver, and consciousness that has a clear appearance of a non-existent
are mutually inclusive.
The consciousness to which has an appearance of fire wheel due to a quickly
whirling firebrand is non-conceptual wrong consciousness, non-conceptual
facsimile of a direct perceiver, and consciousness that has a clear
appearance of a non-existent. In reality there isn’t a fire wheel but you
have a clear appearance of a fire wheel which is a non-existent. Therefore
the eye consciousness that sees the fire wheel due to a quickly whirling
firebrand is a consciousness that has a clear appearance of non-existent.
You see trees as moving when you are travelling in a car and that is a
consciousness that has a clear appearance of non-existent.
You see thing falling in your eye (due to defective eye) and that is a
consciousness that has a clear appearance of non-existent.
You eye consciousness seeing the ground as red due to very strong anger in
the mind and that is consciousness that has a clear appearance of non-
existent.
Next lesson we will look at inferential valid cognizer.
Student: What is the meaning of facsimile and why must we talk about
facsimile of a direct perceiver? Is facsimile of a direct perceiver other
knower or not?
Khen Rinpoche: There are direct perceivers and there are counterfeit direct
perceivers.
Khen Rinpoche spoke in English: Facsimile of a direct perceiver is not the
real one.
The consciousness that sees the fire wheel due to a quickly whirling
firebrand sees whatever appears very clearly. This consciousness is non-
conceptual. It feels as if it is a direct perceiver but it is not a direct
perceiver.
The consciousness that sees the fire wheel due to a quickly whirling
firebrand is generated in dependence upon a physical sense power. It is
free from conceptuality. It is mistaken. It is mistaken then it cannot be
the real direct perceiver. While it is like a direct perceiver but it is
not a direct perceiver.
Why do we need to know this facsimile of a direct perceiver?
Because there are many mistaken consciousnesses. There are mistaken
consciousnesses which are sense consciousness and there are mistaken
consciousnesses which are mental consciousness. The point here is to
examine what are the mistaken consciousnesses, their causes and whether the
causes can be averted. Through knowing the causes of mistaken
consciousnesses then we can avert them and gradually eliminate them. What
we want at the end of the day are the correct minds; which are the valid
cognizers.
