Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Lorig/Transcript/lesson16.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:53:24.013885
================================================================================


Student: As you mentioned that a mental direct perceiver for an ordinary
being is only an AAA. How about a direct valid cognizer? Which continuum of
beings does it exist at?
Ven Gyurme summarized: Can there be mental direct perceivers which are
valid cognizers?
Khen Rinpoche: Not all mental direct perceivers in the continuum of
ordinary bei1ngs are AAA.  Example: The mental direct perceiver
apprehending form in the continuum of an ordinary being is an AAA. Are
there mental direct valid cognizers in the continuum of an ordinary being?
Yes, it is possible.
When mental direct perceivers are divided, there are:
   1. Valid cognizer which is mental direct perceiver
   2. Subsequent valid cognizer  which is mental direct perceiver
   3. AAA which is mental direct perceiver
The clairvoyance in the mind of an ordinary being that knows another person
mind in the first moment can be posited as mental direct valid cognizer.
Student: When the consciousness apprehends an object, at which stage it is
known as appearing object and at which stage it is known as object of
engagement?
Khen Rinpoche:  For an eye consciousness apprehend blue:
- when blue appears to the eye consciousness apprehending it, it become the
appearing object.
- when the eye consciousness realizes blue, then the blue become the object
of the mode of apprehension.
Khen Rinpoche spoke in English: I don’t understand the timing when it
happens.
Student: As I understood that from the Sera College’s perspective, there is
no object of engagement for wrong consciousness.  Why? Also what exactly is
the appearing object for this consciousness?
Khen Rinpoche: I have already explained the reason for not positing object
of engagement for a wrong consciousness.
Student: (Refer to Page 3handout dated 07 Aug)
|1. However, one should know the manner in which not to posit as the definition |
|of “something’s being an awareness to which the object appears without being   |
|ascertained,” “that which is a common locus of                                 |
|(1) having clear appearance of the specifically characterized phenomenon which |
|is its object and                                                              |
|(2) being unable to induce ascertainment with respect to the specifically      |
|characterized phenomenon which is its object.”                                 |
|2. A mind which possesses similarity with doubt and the feelings, etc., which  |
|are accompaniers of that [mind possessing similarity with doubt] have qualms by|
|the power of doubt, but do not have qualms two pointedly by their own power.   |


Please explain on this.
Khen Rinpoche: According to the author, how you should posit the definition
of AAA is:
|Awareness to which an object appears and is not ascertained is a knower that is|
|a common locus of :                                                            |
|(1) having clear appearance of the specifically characterized phenomenon which |
|is its object of engagement and                                                |
|(2) being unable to induce ascertainment with respect to the specifically      |
|characterized phenomenon which is its object of operation                      |


The author is saying that you should not posit the definition of an AAA as:
that which is a common locus of
(1) having clear appearance of the specifically characterized phenomenon
which is its object and
(2) being unable to induce ascertainment with respect to the specifically
characterized phenomenon which is its object.”
That means you should say “object of engagement” instead of just “object.”
You cannot say: AAA is a knower that is a common locus of: (1) having clear
appearance of the specifically characterized phenomenon which is its
object.
You should say: AAA is a knower that is a common locus of: (1) having clear
appearance of the specifically characterized phenomenon which is its object
of engagement.
In the definition of AAA, if you just say: having clear appearance of the
specifically characterized phenomenon which is its object, then that would
incur a fallacy that an eye consciousness apprehending a blue snow mountain
would be an AAA. That mean an eye consciousness apprehending a blue snow
mountain would fulfill the definition of having clear appearance of the
specifically characterized phenomenon which is its object; which without
the object of engagement.
However if the definition of AAA is: is a knower that is a common locus of
(1) having clear appearance of the specifically characterized phenomenon
which is its object of engagement, then this will eliminate the eye
consciousness apprehending a blue snow mountain to be an AAA; as this is
not an AAA.
Having said this, you must figure out how does eliminating “object” from
the definition or having “object of engagement” in the definition will
solve the problem which we have just brought up.
Based on the correct definition of an AAA, is an AAA is a factually
concordant knower or is a factually discordant knower?
Is an AAA is necessary a factually concordant knower?
For example, when you are engrossed in an activity but have sense of
something flying passing by but cannot at all identify what it is, then it
is an AAA. Is it a factually concordant knower?
From the handout page 3, the illustrations of AAA:  a sense direct
perceiver apprehending blue which induces the doubt that wonders, “Did I
see blue or not?”
This is something for you to think about.

Ven Gyurme: In the definition of AAA,  jug.yul in Tibetan apply to both
object of engagement and object of operation but the author translated it
as “object of operation” in the second part of the definition. I believed
the author is trying to bring across something.
|Doubting consciousness is: a knower which has qualms two-pointedly by its own  |
|power.                                                                         |


In the definition, why “by its own power” is included?
The reason is because there is a main mind that is concomitant with doubt.
In the retinue of this main mind, there are other mental factors such as
feeling, discrimination, and so forth.
Are those mental factors knowers which have qualms two-pointedly?
Yes, but these mental factors that are in the retinue of the main mind is
concomitant with doubt.
Although these mental factors have qualms two-pointedly, they do not have
qualms two-pointedly by their own power.
The main mind that is concomitant with doubt is not doubt.
The difference between a main mind and a mental factor: doubt is a mental
factor.
Doubt is concomitant with the main mind. This main mind that is concomitant
with doubt is not doubt. Why? If it is a doubt, it is necessarily a mental
factor.
The main mind that is concomitant with the mental factor doubt has qualms
two-pointedly but it does not have qualms two-pointedly by its own power.
So the main mind is not doubt.
Doubting consciousness has three divisions:
   1. Doubt tending toward the factual
      e.g. doubt which thinks that sound is probably impermanent
   2. Doubt tending toward the non-factual
      e.g. doubt which thinks that sound is probably permanent
   3. Equal doubt.
      e.g. doubt which wonders whether sound is permanent or impermanent.
The illustration for doubt tending toward the factual is doubt which thinks
that sound is probably impermanent. In reality, sound is impermanent. The
mind has doubt but thinking: “Sound is probably impermanent.” Although it
is a doubt but the doubt is tending toward the factual in accordance with
how sound does exist.
The illustration for doubt tending toward the non-factual is doubt which
thinks that sound is probably permanent but in reality sound is not
permanent.
Student: It seems that doubt and doubting consciousness are referring to
the same entity. I remember Khen Rinpoche mentioned in the sevenfold
divisions of consciousness, consciousness refer to as the main mind.  If
doubting consciousness is not the main mind but a mental factor how we
reconcile for that?
Khen Rinpoche: If that was said, then it should not be the case.
Student: So out of the seven consciousnesses, doubting consciousness is the
mental factor and the other six consciousnesses are the main mind?
Khen Rinpoche: We have to think about this. If it is direct perceiver, is
it necessarily a main mind? Is inferential valid cognizer a main mind?
|Sense direct valid cognizer is: a new incontrovertible knower, free from       |
|conceptuality, which arises in dependence upon a physical sense power that is  |
|its uncommon empowering condition.                                             |


In the sevenfold division of consciousnesses, is doubt the only mental
factor and the remaining consciousnesses are the main minds?
From the definition of sense direct valid cognizer, is it necessarily a
main mind?
In the retinue of this sense direct valid cognizer, there is a mental
factor of discrimination.
Is this mental factor discrimination necessarily a valid cognizer?
Is the mental factor discrimination which is concomitant with the sense
consciousness a sense consciousness?
In general, ‘mind’ refer to as main mind (tso sem).
Mind (sem), sentience (yid) and primary consciousness (nam she) are
mutually inclusive. They all are talking about main mind.
Sometime primary consciousness is translated as perceiver.
Having said mind, sentience and primary consciousness are mutually
inclusive, definitely there is a difference between sentience and mental
consciousness (yid she).
In term of possibility, there are four possibilities between sentience and
mental consciousness:
   1. Something that is sentience but not a mental consciousness, example,
      eye perceiver (or eye primary consciousness) is a sentience because it
      is a main mind. It is not a mental consciousness because it is a sense
      consciousness.
   2. Something which is a mental consciousness but is not a sentience,
      example, mental factor of feeling that is concomitant with a mental
      primary consciousness is a mental consciousness but is not a sentience
      because it is a mental factor. Note that sentience is a main mind.
   3. Something that is both sentience and mental consciousness is a mental
      primary consciousness. Mental primary consciousness is a sentience (a
      main mind) and it is a mental consciousness.
   4. Something that neither a sentience nor a mental consciousness is a
      mental factor of feeling that is concomitant with an eye primary
      consciousness. That mental factor of feeling is not a sentience become
      it is a mental factor. It is not a mental consciousness because it is
      a sense consciousness.
In Tibetan, yid is usually translated as mental. When yid is on its own as
main mind, it is translated as sentience.
When it is yid nam she, then it is mental primary consciousness.
We do this exercise of the four possibilities is to show their difference.
Student: Awareness, consciousness and knower is mutually inclusive, why
mind is not included here?
Khen Rinpoche: When we say mind (sem) it means main mind; therefore it is
not mutually inclusive with awareness, consciousness and knower.
Student: Ascertain and realize mean the same thing?
Khen Rinpoche: Yes
Student: On the sequence of eye consciousness apprehending blue, follows by
mental direct perceiver apprehending blue and then conceptual consciousness
apprehending blue, that conceptual consciousness is a subsequent cognizer
but for an ordinary being, that mental direct perceiver is an AAA. Seem
that this mental direct perceiver cannot realize but yet it can induce a
subsequent cognizer realize something that it has already realized.
Khen Rinpoche: A subsequent cognizer is knower that realizes what has
already been realized and it has to be induced by a valid cognizer. That
which induces the subsequent cognizer may not be the mental direct
perceiver apprehending blue. It is the eye consciousness apprehending blue.

Student: Is it necessary for the mental direct perceiver to be in the
between?
Ven Gyurme: You mean since it is not necessary, you can take it out? But it
exists.
Student:  Why can’t the conceptual consciousness be induced by the eye
consciousness directly without through the mental direct perceiver?
Khen Rinpoche: This is what being said in the text. It is difficult for us
to experience it because of the reason it last for only the shortest of the
moment.
This mental direct perceiver apprehending form in the continuum of ordinary
being is posited to be an AAA; therefore it cannot induce the subsequent
cognizer. Subsequent cognizer has to be induced by a valid cognizer. In
this case, it has to posit the eye consciousness apprehending blue to be
the valid cognizer that induces the subsequent cognizer.
Student: (Refer to Page 3handout dated 07 Aug) This is because a sense
consciousness that sees snow mountains as blue sees as blue the white color
of the snow mountains, which is its object of operation, and therefore does
not see clearly the specifically characterized phenomenon which is its
object of operation.
Please explain:  Still, since its appearing object, the white color of snow
mountains, appears clearly as blue whereas it does not exist [as blue],
there is clear appearance of the specifically characterized phenomenon
which is its object. Also it is unable to induce ascertainment with respect
to that because it engages that [object] perversely.
Khen Rinpoche: The definition of AAA: having clear appearance of the
specifically characterized phenomenon which is its object of engagement. So
you cannot posit blue snow mountain. Is there such a blue snow mountain
which is a specifically characterized phenomenon?
It is alright if you posit snow mountain or white snow mountain.
This is a bit complicated. If you posit snow mountain or white snow
mountain to be the appearing object, does the snow mountain appear as
white?
To the eye consciousness which blue snow mountain appear, how does the
white snow mountain appear to the eye consciousness?
Does the white snow mountain appear? We have to say white snow mountain but
the white snow mountain does not appear as white.
Based on the definition of AAA, having clear appearance of the specifically
characterized phenomenon which is its object of engagement you cannot say
it is blue snow mountain. You have to say it is snow mountain or white snow
mountain.
Seem that it is mentioned somewhere that whatever appear to that non-
conceptual consciousness that which appear is posited to be its appearing
object.
If that is the case, there is nothing wrong in saying that blue snow
mountain is the appearing object of the consciousness to which the blue
snow mountain appear.  Blue snow mountain is the appearing object of the
non-consciousness to which blue snow mountain appear.
In general, blue snow mountain is not the appearing object.
I don’t remember exactly where but it seems there is a text that says:
Whatever appears to the non-conceptual consciousness is its appearing
object.
Student: For Sutra School, in the first moment of realizing the
selflessness of persons directly, for such person, nothing appears except
emptiness as being explained in the special insight class. In this school,
in the first moment, what exactly appear to that consciousness?
Khen Rinpoche: Yogic direct perceiver explicitly realizes the composed
phenomenon, the aggregates, which are the base of selflessness of persons.
Implicitly he realizes the selflessness of persons.
Student: So the composed phenomenon is its appearing object and it does
appear to such consciousness. So such consciousness realizes two truths
simultaneously.
Khen Rinpoche: I am not sure and I need to think.
Student: On top of that, appearing object is the composed phenomenon
whereas the object of engagement is the selflessness of persons.
Ven Gyurme: You have problem with the appearing object? Whatever is a
functioning thing is necessarily the appearing object of direct perceiver.
Student: Then is sound like a mistaken consciousness because the appearing
object is a composed phenomenon.
Ven Gyurme: Are you saying that the appearing object is impermanent and the
object of engagement is permanent?
Khen Rinpoche: What is wrong with the composed phenomenon as the appearing
object for this mind?
Whatever a mind realizes does it necessary appear to it? When we talk about
realization here, we talk about explicit realize and implicitly realize.
When the mind realizes something, that thing is realized need not be
appearing to it. Following this, you have to say the selflessness of
persons does not appear to the yogic direct perceiver apprehending it.
Is the selflessness of persons realized by a yogic direct perceiver? Yes.
Does the selflessness of persons appear to the yogic direct perceiver
apprehending it? No.
Student: Is the forward pervasion is established the counter pervasion is
necessarily established as well?
Khen Rinpoche: Are you saying that the correct sign that which is the two
modes sufficient? If the sign is present in the similar class then it is
definitely universally absent from the dissimilar class. When we say that
which the three modes is, we are talking about in relation to the person
whom we are trying to establish something.
For the person whom we are positing the sign it is not sufficient for him
to realize that the sign exist only in the similar class. He may have
realized that but he may still has doubt as to whether the sign is
universally absent from the dissimilar class. He is not sure about that
yet. For that reason, therefore the correct sign is that which is the three
modes.
When we talk about that which is the three modes and the correct sign, we
are not so much talking about the sign itself. If the sign exist in the
similar class, the sign is definitely universally absent from the
dissimilar class. Although that is the case, we are not talking about the
sign itself, we are stating the reason in order to establish something. To
the mind of the person whom we are proving this, that person must have
established the three modes.
According to Sera Je college’s position, there is a common locus between
doubting consciousness and wrong consciousness. Illustration: a mind which
thinks reincarnation most likely does not exist. It is a doubt tending to
non-factual and is a wrong consciousness. It is a knower which engages its
object erroneously.
What is being posited to be the object of this mind?
The object is reincarnation. This mind engages its object erroneously.
However there are also people saying that there isn’t a common locus
between doubting consciousness and wrong consciousness but they are
contradictory.  There are those assert wrong consciousness and doubting
consciousness are mutually exclusive so there isn’t common locus between
these two. Why?
This is because wrong consciousness is very decisive about what it
believes.  Example, reincarnation does not exist whatsoever and it is
decisive. Doubting consciousness is two pointed; maybe and maybe not.
So that is about it for the sevenfold divisions of consciousness. We will
start mental factor on the next class. It is easier to handle mental factor
so please start reading the text.
Student: (Refer to Page 4 handout dated 26 June) Please explain:
Whatever is an established base is necessarily the object of the mode of
apprehension of both a conceptual and a non-conceptual consciousness.
Example: Uncompounded space is a permanent phenomenon. How can a permanent
phenomenon be an object of engagement of a non-conceptual consciousness?
Another Student reply: For a yogic direct perceiver realizing selflessness
of persons. Selflessness of persons is a permanent phenomenon but is not
the appearing object.
Khen Rinpoche: Is there a valid cognizer that directly realize uncomposed
space?
Student: Yes
Khen Rinpoche: So no problem. Uncomposed space is the object of the mode of
apprehension of a non-conceptual consciousness.
Student: How existent and non-existent are regarded as selfless?
Khen Rinpoche: The non-existent is not established as self.

(For reference only)
[pic]
