Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Lorig/Transcript/lesson06.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:53:23.909013
================================================================================


In the meditative serenity section of the LRCM, there is a section that
says:
  [LRCM V3 Page 44] When you seek your object of meditation, the basis upon
  which you first keep your attention, look for an excellent painting or
  sculpture of the Teacher’s body and view it again and again. Remembering
  its features, firmly familiarize yourself with the mental appearance of
  the object. Or, seek your object of meditation by reflecting upon the
  meaning of the eloquent descriptions of the Buddha’s form which you have
  heard from your guru and make this image appear in your mind.
  Furthermore, do not let the object of meditation have the aspect of a
  painting or sculpture; rather, learn to have it appear in your mind with
  the aspect of an actual buddha.
“When you seek your object of meditation, the basis upon which you first
keep your attention”- when you are trying to focus on Buddha either by
looking at a painting or a sculpture, you have to look at it over and over
again. By remembering its features, then you have to firmly familiarize
yourself with the mental appearance of the object. Then you try to create
an appearance of the object that you have chosen to focus on. This mental
appearance is an appearance to the conceptual consciousness.
Here, when you are trying to meditate, let’s say, on an image of the
Buddha, what are you focusing on? What are you holding onto as the object?
It is an image that is appearing as a Buddha. You are holding onto that
image and then meditate on that. You have to understand when we say
“meditate.” Meditation is an activity of the mental consciousness i.e. it
is done with the mental consciousness and is not done with the sense
consciousness.
At the beginning, we have to meditate on an image or the appearance of the
object that we are focusing on. Initially, it has to done conceptually with
a conceptual consciousness and slowly that conceptual consciousness can be
transformed into the entity of a direct perceiver. One starts with the
conceptual understanding by meditating with the conceptual thought focusing
on the appearance of the object that one has chosen. Then slowly come a
time when one will directly perceive the object. Therefore, conceptual
thought (conceptual consciousness) which is a mental consciousness is very
important. Meditation is done with the mental consciousness and initially
with thought. In order to be able to do this, you first have to understand
well what is the appearing object of a thought consciousness?
Here the text says: “remembering its features.” Let’s say you choose a
buddha’s image or drawing as the representation of a Buddha and look at it.
Through looking at it, you have to remember its features. From remembering
its features, you firmly familiarize yourself with the mental appearance of
the object. Here we are talking about the way to meditate. Meditation is
done first with thought consciousness (conceptual consciousness). Without
understanding how the conceptual consciousness works and without
understanding what its appearing object, and so forth, there is really no
way to understand Lamrim – the Stages of the Path to Enlightenment- well.
In order to have a full, complete and correct understanding of Lamrim, one
has to study the various teachings such as what we are doing here now.
Sometimes people may think that Lamrim is easy and is so much easier than
what we are doing here. But if you actually start to look at the individual
words and what they mean, then one starts to realize one actually doesn’t
know anything about it.
Student 1: (audio 18:00 – 20:45) Subsequent cognizer can be both conceptual
and non-conceptual consciousness. If it is a conceptual consciousness, when
you saw blue and then trying to remember seeing blue, there is a mental
image of blue. Is that mental image of blue a permanent phenomenon?
Khen Rinpoche: You main question “Is the mental image a permanent
phenomenon or impermanent phenomenon”?
The appearance which is the appearance as blue to the thought consciousness
apprehending blue has two parts:
   1. Specifically characterized phenomenon
   2. Generally characterized phenomenon

One Entity Different isolates
We have been looking at phenomena that are mutually inclusive with
functioning thing.
Functioning thing is mutually inclusive with cause, effect, impermanent
phenomena, composed phenomenon, ultimate truth, specifically characterized
phenomenon and so forth.
Mutually inclusive means they are of one entity but different isolates.
Now it is the time to talks about the meaning of one entity but different
isolates.
All those phenomena that are mutually inclusive with functioning thing are
of one entity but different isolates.
On the eliminative engagers and collective engagers, how does conceptual
consciousness (conceptual thought) and term engage their object?
Conceptual consciousness (conceptual thought) and term engage their object
through elimination.
Direct perceiver engages its object in a collective manner
On the divisions of object possessors, when object possessors are divided,
there are:
   1. Persons
   2. Awarenesses
   3. Expressive sounds
Here the expressive sound is called term.
The way in which conceptual thought engages its object is the same as the
way in which expressive sound engages its object.
Product and impermanent phenomenon are of one entity but different
isolates.
There is a term expressing product. This term product eliminates non-
product.
How does the term product engage in the meaning?
The term product eliminates everything else that is non-product.
So, when the term product engages its object, it does so through
eliminating everything that is non-product.
What is the opposite from non-product? The opposite from non-product is
product.
The conceptual thought apprehending product that is induced by the term
product engages in product by eliminating non-product. What the conceptual
thought realizes is product.
To the conceptual thought apprehending product that is induced by the term
product:
 - product appears as product
 - the opposite from non-product also appear
The way in which term and conceptual thought engages its object is the
same.
The term (or expressive sound) expressing product expresses product and
that is opposite from non-product.
But it does not express the opposite from non-impermanent phenomenon.
Product and impermanent phenomenon are mutually inclusive. However, the
term product can only express product and it does not express impermanent
phenomenon.
Because the term product does not express impermanent phenomenon, therefore
it also cannot express opposite from non-impermanent phenomenon.
On one basis, there can be many isolates.
Let us take product as the basis. On one basis product, there are many
isolates.
Basis: product
Isolates: opposite from non-impermanent phenomenon, opposite from non-
ultimate truth, opposite from non-composed phenomenon and so forth.
All these isolates exist on one basis product.
Because the term opposite from non-product cannot express the opposite from
non-impermanent phenomenon, therefore these two isolates that exist on one
basis are different.
The product is mutually inclusive with impermanent phenomena, composed
phenomenon, ultimate truth, specifically characterized phenomenon and so
forth.

On the basis of product, there exist the isolates that are opposite from
non-impermanent phenomenon, opposite from non-composed phenomenon, opposite
from non-ultimate truth, opposite from specifically characterized
phenomenon and so forth.
Basis: product
Isolates: opposite from non-impermanent phenomenon, opposite from non-
composed phenomenon, opposite from non-ultimate truth, and so forth.
On the basis of product, there exist the isolate – the opposite from non-
impermanent phenomena
Basis: product
Isolate: opposite from non-impermanent phenomenon
Because of this isolate, it is also an impermanent phenomenon.
On the basis of product, there exist the isolate – the opposite from non-
composed phenomena
Basis: product
Isolate: opposite from non-composed phenomenon.
Because of this isolate, it is also a composed phenomenon.
The term vase expresses vase. It also expresses the opposite from non-vase.

The term vase expresses vase through eliminating non-vase.
The basis of imputation of vase is flat-based bulbous thing that performs
the function of holding water. It is through this thing that the term vase
is imputed.
The term vase expresses vase. It also expresses the opposite from non-vase.

The two appearances – the appearance as vase and the appearance as opposite
from non-vase- is the reason why the convention vase is being used.
To the conceptual consciousness apprehending vase, the appearance of
opposite from non-vase has two parts:
   1. One part is the specifically characterized vase
   2. One part is the meaning generality of vase which is a permanent
      phenomenon
What is the process imputing the term vase to the flat-based bulbous thing
that performs the function of holding water? It is through the appearance
as the opposite from non-vase.
To the conceptual consciousness apprehending vase, the appearance as the
opposite from non-vase is the generality vase.

We don’t time to go through the subject which is called Collective Topics,
the foundation for all these. In the Collective Topics, you study Establish
Bases, cause and effect, the meaning of isolates and entities, one and
different, generalities and instances. Because of not having the ground
work, and here we are trying to take a little here and there and summarize
them up, it become little bit difficult.

Generalities and Instances
When we say vase, vase is a generality.
When we say golden vase, golden vase is the instance of vase. It refers to
a specific vase.
Just as vase is a generality, opposite from non-vase is also a generality.
If it is opposite from non-vase, it is necessarily vase.
(Some feedback from student)
Ven Gyurme: Is horse opposite from non-vase?
Khen Rinpoche spoke in English: Are you saying that?
Ven Gyurme: Then it follows that opposite from non-horse would have to be
vase.
Opposite from non-vase is necessarily vase and it is pervaded by
functioning thing i.e. it is necessarily a functioning thing.
Vase is the generality.
The golden vase is the instance (specific) of vase.
The term vase expresses opposite from non-vase.
Opposite from non-vase is a generality and that make the vase a generality.

Opposite from non-vase pervades golden vase, copper vase, diamond vase.
Likewise the appearance as opposite from non-vase engages all these as
well.
On every single instance of vase, i.e. on every specific vase, the vase
generality which is opposite from non-vase exist and appearance as opposite
from non-vase pervade.
When you first see a golden flat-based bulbous thing that performs the
function of holding water, you don’t have any idea of what it is. Then
someone tell you; “This is a vase.” At the moment when you hear the word
‘vase’, it induces in you a thought apprehending that golden flat-based
bulbous thing that performs the function of holding water as vase.
How does the imputation vase happen to that golden flat base bulbous thing?
It is through the appearance as opposite from non-vase. With vase
generality as the object, then you impute vase on that golden flat base
bulbous thing. Later on, when you see a copper flat base bulbous thing,
immediately upon seeing the copper bulbous flat base thing the thought
thinking ‘This is a vase’ arises automatically. At this time nobody needs
to tell you that this is a vase. It cannot be when seeing every single
bulbous thing, somebody has to tell you “This is a vase.”
Why is it that after you have been introduced the golden flat base bulbous
thing is a vase and subsequently when you see a copper flat base bulbous
thing, innately you know that is a vase?
The term vase expresses vase. It also expresses the opposite from non-vase.
The opposite from non-vase is a vase generality. This vase generality
exists on the copper flat base bulbous thing (the copper vase). Therefore,
when you see the copper flat base bulbous thing, you will be able to
immediately to conceive it as a vase.
The term vase eliminates non-vase. It also expresses the opposite from non-
vase.
When you say vase, you are not saying something else. The term vase
eliminates everything that is non-vase. What it essentially expressing is
opposite from non-vase.
The term vase expresses vase generality. Vase generality is opposite from
non-vase.
This opposite from non-vase pervades all instances of vase.
When we give the name vase to a golden bulbous flat base thing, that term
vase is eliminating everything that is non-vase and is expressing the
opposite from non-vase.
Opposite from non-vase (which is the vase generality) exists on the copper
vase.
Copper vase is an instant of vase. The vase generality is the opposite from
non-vase.
Opposite from non-vase, which is the vase generality, exists on the copper
vase.
So when you see this copper flat base bulbous thing, without thinking,
immediately you can recognize and say that is a vase i.e. you conceive of
it as vase.
This is a complicated topic. This is also one area whereby the non-Buddhist
philosophers disagree with the Buddhist’s presentation. For us, term (or
expressive sound) and conceptual consciousness are eliminative engagers,
whereas for some non-Buddhist philosophical traditions asserted them to be
collective engagers. Accordingly to Buddhist’s epistemology, the text on
valid cognition, what is it that allows you to understand something similar
to what you have seen or have known earlier, for example, vase? This is
because of the generality existing on all the instances of the object.
When the factor of opposite from non-vase on a golden vase and the factor
of opposite from non-vase on a copper vase appear to the conceptual
consciousness, these two appear as if they were the same i.e. you see them
as “vase.”
How does the appearance as opposite from non-vase appear to a conceptual
consciousness apprehending vase?
To a conceptual consciousness apprehending vase, there is the appearance as
opposite from non-vase.
To a conceptual consciousness apprehending vase, this appearance as
opposite from non-vase appears as if it is the actual vase. It is not a
functioning thing but necessarily is a permanent phenomenon.
The appearance as opposite from non-vase to the conceptual consciousness
apprehending vase is a permanent phenomenon because it is an imputed
factor.
However, to a conceptual consciousness apprehending vase, whatever is an
appearance as opposite from non-vase is not necessary permanent.
As mentioned earlier, to a conceptual consciousness apprehending vase,
there is the appearance as opposite from non-vase. This appearance as
opposite from non-vase has two parts:
- one is a generally characterized and
- one is a specifically characterized
Can you find something that is both an appearance that is opposite from non-
vase and a specifically characterized phenomenon?  It is the opposite from
non-vase; which is vase.
What is something that is an appearance that is opposite from non-vase and
a generally characterized phenomenon?  It is meaning generality of a vase.
How does a vase appear to a conceptual consciousness apprehending vase?
The meaning generality of vase appears as one mixed with vase.
Why is a conceptual consciousness apprehending vase a mistaken
consciousness?
Because to a conceptual consciousness apprehending vase, there is an
appearance as opposite from non-vase.
This appearance as opposite from non-vase is not the actual vase, but it
appears as the actual vase.
For this reason, we say that conceptual consciousnesses are mistaken.
To a conceptual consciousness apprehending vase, the appearance as opposite
from non-vase appears as the actual vase, but the conceptual consciousness
apprehending vase does not believe the appearance as opposite from non-vase
is the actual vase. It knows that is not the actual vase.
There are two things to note.
To a conceptual consciousness apprehending vase, there is the appearance as
opposite from non-vase.
This appearance as opposite from non-vase appears as if it was the actual
vase.
For this reason, we say that it is mistaken.
Does the conceptual consciousness apprehending vase believe that this
appearance as opposite from non-vase is the actual vase?  No.
What does the conceptual consciousness apprehending vase apprehends? Vase
A conceptual consciousness apprehending vase does not apprehend vase
generality. It apprehends vase.
What is posited to be the appearing object of a conceptual consciousness
apprehending vase? The meaning generality of vase (or the mental image of
vase), which is the appearance as opposite from non-vase.
What is posited to be the object of engagement, object of mode of
apprehension and determined object for conceptual consciousness
apprehending vase?  It is just vase.
What this conceptual consciousness that apprehending vase is getting at is
vase. It is just involved with vase.
How does conceptual consciousness apprehending vase apprehend vase?
It can only apprehend vase by way of the appearing of the appearance as
opposite from non-vase.
To a conceptual consciousness apprehending vase, the vase appears as mixed
one (the same) with the appearance as opposite from non-vase.
But to that conceptual consciousness apprehending vase, the appearance of
opposite from non-vase appears as well. How does it appear? The appearance
as opposite from non-vase appears as if it was the actual vase.
To a conceptual consciousness apprehending vase, there is the appearance as
opposite from non-vase.
A conceptual consciousness apprehending vase is a mistaken consciousness
because through this conceptual consciousness apprehending vase, the
appearance as opposite from non-vase appears as the actual vase. Therefore
it is mistaken.
Similarly, to the eye consciousness looking at your own reflection in the
mirror, the reflection of your face appears in the mirror appears as if it
was your face; but that is not your face.
When your eye consciousness seeing a reflection of your face in the mirror,
what appears to the eye consciousness? It is a reflection of you yourself.
It looks as if you are in the mirror, but you don’t believe that is you.
Although the reflection appears as you but you don’t normally apprehend and
believe that is you.
Student 2: Trying to understand the concept of a direct perceiver and a
conceptual consciousness by referring to three examples: shadow, a star and
a 3-D picture. (Audio 96.36~101)
Khen Rinpoche: The examples you give is basically a direct perceiving with
sense consciousness. One has to understand that there are different kind of
sense consciousnesses; some are mistaken and some are non-mistaken sense
consciousnesses. The way an object appears to a sense consciousness can
vary:
 -sometimes the difference comes from the side of the object,
 -sometimes it comes from your vantage view point from where you are
viewing the object, and
 -sometimes it comes from a problem within ones’ sensory powers
Many things can appears to a sense consciousness but it doesn’t mean that
whatever appears to a sense consciousness is necessary valid. An example
given in the text is that when one is very upset, whatever you look at with
your eyes appears as unpleasant. But it is not necessarily like that. The
unpleasant appearance is not coming from the side of the object, but rather
due to the mind being disturbed. So it affects how you view things.
Let’s say something happens to your eye or you apply pressure to your eye
ball for a short moment, you will see two moons but the appearance is not
valid as there is only one moon.
Student 2: If you see two moons, is that considered to be a direct
perceiver or conceptual consciousness?
Khen Rinpoche: It is a wrong consciousness and not a valid mind. If you
posit the eye consciousness seeing two moons as valid, then you must find
two moons outside because this is established by a valid cognizer.
Student 3: The conceptual consciousness apprehending vase is a mistaken
consciousness. Is it a wrong consciousness? (Audio 106.17~108.30)
Khen Rinpoche: The conceptual consciousness apprehending vase is a mistaken
consciousness. That is correct, but that is not to be mistaken with wrong
consciousness.  If it is a mistaken consciousness, it is not necessary a
wrong consciousness. For example, the inferential cognizer apprehending
vase, it is a mistaken consciousness but it is not a wrong consciousness.
Why is it not a wrong consciousness? This is because it is a valid
cognizer.
There are consciousness that are mistaken with respect to their appearing
object but can realize its’ object.
If you remember the definition of the facsimile of a direct perceiver which
is mutually inclusive with mistaken consciousness, so what is a mistaken
consciousness? A mistaken consciousness is so called because it is mistaken
with regards to its appearing object.
In preparation for the next Tuesday class, please try to remember the
sevenfold division of consciousness; what they are and their definition. I
will try to clarify these seven consciousnesses again with the help of some
illustrations.
____________________________________________________________________________
____________
For reference only (Extracted from Mind in Tibetan Buddhism by Lati
Rinpoche & Debate in Tibetan Buddhism by Daniel Perdue)
Every thought consciousness is mistaken with respect to its appearing
object – an internal mental image which is meaning generality. So all
thought consciousnesses necessarily take as their appearing object a
meaning generality.
A meaning generality:
- is a permanent phenomenon in that it does not disintegrate moment by
moment as do impermanent phenomena
- is a negative phenomenon, an image which is a mere elimination of all
that is not the object.
Example: the meaning generality of pot that appears to a thought
consciousness apprehending pot:
 - is not an externally existent pot with all its own uncommon features,
 - but just a general image 'pot' which is described negatively as being an
appearance of the opposite of that which is not- pot.
Generally characterized phenomenon is phenomenon which is merely imputed by
a term or thought consciousness and is not established as a specifically
characterized phenomenon.
Permanent phenomena are generally characterized phenomenon because their
characters are known only in a general way by an imputing thought
consciousness. Since they depend on such imputation, they are not
established from their own side. There is no way to realize a permanent or
generally characterized phenomenon by way of its own specific entity.
Specifically characterized phenomena have the character of appearing as
they are, specifically, without depending on the appearance of a meaning
generality. So they are phenomena which are established by way of its own
character without being merely imputed by a term or thought consciousness.
The appearing object of a direct perceiver is necessarily a specifically
characterized phenomenon, a thing with respect to which place, time and
nature are not mixed.
Example:
-The image of pot that appears to thought is general in that it serves to
represent all pots at different times in different places
-A specifically characterized pot is unique - of a certain size, shape,
colour, in a certain place, at a certain time. Furthermore, all the
uncommon characteristics of a pot appear to the direct perceiver that
apprehends it.
-In the Sautrantika system all the qualities that are established, abide,
and cease with a thing - such as its shape, colour, impermanence, nature of
being a product, and so forth - appear to any direct perceiver apprehending
that object. An ordinary direct perceiver is unable to notice all of these,
but a yogic direct perceiver can see and ascertain them
