Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Lorig/Transcript/lesson20.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:53:23.805302
================================================================================


{[A] The Five Omnipresent Mental factors (kun 'gro)
The five omnipresent mental factors are:
(1) feeling
(2) discrimination
(3) intention
(4) contact
(5) attention



[A1] Feeling (tshor ba)
Feelings have three divisions:
   1. Pleasant feelings
   2. Suffering feelings
   3. Neutral feelings   }
{As covered in the previous class}

In some texts, feelings have five divisions:
   1. Pleasant feelings
   2. Suffering feelings
   3. Neutral feelings
   4. Feelings of mental happiness
   5. Feelings of mental unhappiness
When divided in such a way:
    - Pleasant feelings and suffering feelings ( to do with sense
      consciousnesses
    - Feelings of mental happiness and feelings of mental unhappiness (to do
      with mental consciousnesses
    - Neutral feelings
Of the five omnipresent mental factors, we have finished with mental factor
of feelings. Next is the mental factor of discrimination.

[A2] Discrimination (du shes)
[Root text: page 20]  Regarding the entity of discrimination, the
Compendium of Knowledge says:
  QUESTION: What is the defining characteristic of discrimination
  [Tibetan:'du shes, literally, aggregation-knowing]?
  RESPONSE: It has the characteristic of knowing upon aggregation. It has
  the entity of apprehending the sign and apprehending the mark, through
  which one designates an expression to objects of perceptions, hearing,
  differentiation and knowledge.
Just as it has been said above, it is a knower that, upon the aggregation
of the three – object, sense power, and primary consciousness – apprehends
the uncommon sign of an object.
  QUESTION: What is discrimination?
  RESPONSE: It apprehends the sign of an object.
  When discrimination is divided, there are two:
   (1) the apprehension of a sign and
   (2) the apprehension of a mark.
The apprehension of a sign is related to the sense consciousness.
The apprehension of a mark is related to the mental consciousness.
Discrimination is a knower that apprehends the uncommon sign of an object.
What is an uncommon sign of an object?
For example blue and yellow:
    ⇨ Blue holds its own entity. Yellow holds its own entity.
    ⇨ Blue is not yellow. Yellow is not blue.
Discrimination is that which apprehends such uncommon sign of an object.
What is it that allows one to know that is blue? It is the discrimination
that apprehends that which is an uncommon blue.

[Root text: page 21]
(1) The apprehension of a sign is an apprehension of an uncommon sign of an
object which appears to a non-conceptual consciousness.
(2) The apprehension of a mark is an apprehension of an uncommon sign of an
object which appears to conceptual thought.

The mental factor of discrimination occurs in the retinue of both the sense
and mental consciousnesses.
    ⇨ The discrimination that is in the retinue of the sense consciousness
      is an apprehension of the sign.
    ⇨ The discrimination that is in the retinue of the mental
      consciousness is an apprehension of a mark.
Example: An eye primary consciousness apprehending blue.
The eye primary consciousness apprehending blue is a main mind.
In the retinue of this sense consciousness, there is the mental factor of
discrimination.
The discrimination is that which enable this eye primary consciousness
apprehending blue to apprehend the uncommon blue and not apprehend yellow.
It is discrimination that causes the eye primary consciousness apprehending
blue to apprehend the uncommon blue – blue that is unshared with any other
things.
Example: A conceptual consciousness apprehending blue.
In the retinue of this conceptual consciousness apprehending blue, there is
also the mental factor of discrimination. This mental factor of
discrimination is the discrimination that apprehends a mark.
This mental factor of discrimination in the retinue of this conceptual
consciousness apprehending blue enable this conceptual consciousness to not
mix up blue and yellow. It is this discrimination that allows this
conceptual consciousness apprehending blue to designate conventionally that
this blue and not yellow.

[Root text: page 21]   The Treasury of Knowledge explains discrimination as
being twofold:
(1) the apprehension of a sign with regard to an object and
(2) the apprehension of a sign with regard to a convention.
This is just a different way of saying of what I have just said.
Student: Regarding the explanation on the uncommon sign, discrimination is
that mental factor which performs the function of apprehending the opposite
of whatever that is not the object. Another way of saying is apprehending
the isolate. Can we say that to be the same thing?
Khen Rinpoche: If you want to say that, I guess it is fine. Blue is
opposite from non-blue. Opposite from non-blue is essentially blue. It has
to be blue and that only exist on blue and not on any other things.
Therefore it is uncommon/ unshared.
Student: How does one understand positing a non-conceptual consciousness
that the mental factor of discrimination is concomitant with?
Khen Rinpoche: This is related to the second paragraph of the text:
[Root text: page 21] The bases of engagement for these two types of
discrimination are perceptions, hearing, differentiation and knowledge.
Their meanings are as follows.
    • Perceptions involve designating an expression to objects manifestly
      perceived.
    • Hearing involves designating an expression in dependence on hearing
      credible words.
    • Differentiation involves designating an expression to objects
      ascertained in dependence on signs.
    • Knowledge involves designating an expression to objects ascertained
      directly.
Usually it is the conceptual consciousness that designates terms and
determines; “This is this” and “That is that”. I don’t know whether
discrimination in the retinue of the sense consciousness designate an
expression, for example, to an object or not.
When we see blue i.e. the eye consciousness apprehending blue, then almost
quite immediate after that experience, the mind thinking: “This is blue”,
i.e. the mind designate “This is blue”.  Whether this mind that designate
“This is blue” is the eye consciousness or not, we have to think about it.
Or if you hear a sound i.e. the ear consciousness apprehending a sound, I
guess it has to be a conceptual consciousness that distinguishes the kind
of sound that you hear “I heard this” and “I heard that”.
When we talk about designating an expression or designating a term, it is
mainly done by the conceptual consciousness. But with regards to how these
different consciousnesses are generated, we have discussed this before:
sense consciousness ( mental consciousness ( conceptual consciousness
The manners in which they are generated are very quick.
I am not exactly sure whether a sense consciousness designates an
expression or not. Anyway, it is mentioned here that:
- the mental factor of discrimination in the retinue of a sense
consciousness is a discrimination that apprehends a sign
- the mental factor of discrimination in the retinue of a conceptual
consciousness is a discrimination that apprehends a mark.
From this division of discrimination, one can understand that it is mainly
the mental consciousness that designates.

[Root text: page 21]Further, when discrimination is differentiated in terms
of its support, there are six:
1. discrimination arising from contact upon the aggregation of a visible
   form, an eye [sense power], and an eye consciousness;
2. discrimination arising from contact upon the aggregation of a sound, an
   ear [sense power], and an ear consciousness;
3. discrimination arising from contact upon the aggregation of an odor, a
   nose [sense power], and a nose consciousness;
4. discrimination arising from contact upon the aggregation of a taste, a
   tongue [sense power], and a tongue consciousness;
5. discrimination arising from contact upon the aggregation of a tactile
   object, a body [sense power], and a body consciousness; and
6. discrimination arising from contact upon the aggregation of a
   phenomenon, a mental [sense power], and a mental consciousness.

[A3] Intention (sems pa)
[Root text: page 21] Regarding the entity of intention, the Compendium of
Knowledge says:
  QUESTION: What is intention?
  RESPONSE: It is a compositional mental action of the mind. It has the
  function of engaging the mind in virtue, non-virtue, or the unspecified.
[Unspecified is also translated as neutral]

[Root text: page 23] Just as it has been said above, the mental factor
which rouses and moves the mind that is concomitant with it to an object is
called "intention." This is said to be the principal among all mental
factors; it is taught that any mind or mental factor engages an object due
to the power of this mental factor. For example, just as iron is helplessly
drawn by a magnet, the mind helplessly engages an object due to this mental
factor intention.
When we talk about this mental factor of intention, it is basically karma.
Karma is intention.
This mental factor of intention moves the mind towards an object.
There are physical, verbal and mental karma/actions.
-There is a mind that moves the body to engage in a certain action.
-There is a mind that causes a certain kind of speech.
We have talked about quite a lot of details about karma in the previous
modules, Lamrim.

[Root text: page 23]  This intention is mental action. In general, there
are two types of actions:
(1) actions that are intentions
(2) intended actions
It is just as it has been said in the Treasury of Knowledge (stanza 4.1cd):
      They are intention and that produced by it.
      Intention is mental action.
      That produced by it are actions of body and speech.
Intended actions are of two types:
(1) physical actions
(2) verbal actions
The three physical actions and four verbal actions are intended actions.
Intended actions are physical actions and verbal actions
Actions that are intentions are mental actions.
The main thing that you have to understand is what exactly intention is.
    • Intention is an omnipresent mental factor that accompanies all main
      minds.
    • Intention is that which moves the main mind and all the mental factors
      in the retinues of this main mind towards an object.
The analogy given here is a piece of iron that is helplessly drawn by a
magnet.

[A4] Contact (reg pa)
[Root text: page 25]  Regarding the entity of contact, the Compendium of
Knowledge says:
    QUESTION: What is contact?
    RESPONSE: It distinguishes the transformation of the sense power upon
    the aggregation of the three. It has the function of acting as a
    support for feeling.
Just as it has been said above, contact is a knower that, upon aggregation
of the three – object, sense power and primary consciousness –
distinguishes an object in accordance with whatever subsequent feeling,
pleasant and so on, that is to be experienced.
For the purpose of understanding, contact literally is when the mind meets
with the object.
Contact is the knower that moves the mind to come into contact or to meet
with the object.
Intention moves the mind towards the object. Contact causes the mind to
meet with the object.
    ⇨ When contact causes the mind to meet with an unpleasant object then
      unpleasant feeling arise.
    ⇨ When contact causes the mind to meet with a pleasant object then
      pleasant feeling arise.
That is the reason why it is said that contact distinguishes an object in
accordance with whatever feeling that is to be experienced.
Student: Since these five omnipresent mental factors arise, abide and
disintegrate simultaneously, how does one reconcile that contact is a cause
and the rest of the four are the results. It seems that they don’t share a
similar time.
Khen Rinpoche: What we can say with certainty is like what we have already
discussed earlier at the beginning of this text. The main mind and the
mental factors in its retinue are concomitant by ways of the five
similarities, and one of which is similar time.
So, we cannot say the five omnipresent mental factors are generated at
different times. As soon as the main mind is produced, these five
omnipresent mental factors are produced simultaneously.
This is what we can say for sure because this is what all the main
treatises have stated. But in the presentation of the twelve-link of
dependent arising, from the basis of contact ( feeling ( craving ( grasping
( potential existence ( birth, how are you going to explain that feeling
and contact are established simultaneously? I don’t know exactly but you
can say that with contact as the basis then it is possible for the mental
factor of feeling to increase/ strengthen. You cannot say that there is no
feeling when contact comes into being. You have to say that there is
feeling. On the basis of contact, feeling manifest and become stronger.
This is something to think about. Perhaps we can say something like that.
As we are talking about mind, it is very difficult to pin point exactly and
to be able to say: “This is this” and “That is that.”  What we can say for
sure is that all the great treatises have stated very clearly that the five
omnipresent mental factors are established simultaneously.
For now, if we can get some idea about these different mental factors, I
think it is enough.
 • Essentially feeling accounts for the experience.
 • Discrimination allows us to know a specific object and apprehends the
   uncommon sign of the object i.e. it is basically the object and not
   something else.
 • Feeling is that which allows us to experience the object in question.
 • Intention is that which moves our mind towards the object.
 • Contact is that which allows us to distinguish its object. Contact make
   the mind comes into contact or to meet with the object.
The divisions of the various mental factors are there in the text. Read it
on your own and you can bring them up in class if there is anything you
need to clarify.

[A5] Attention (yid la byed pa)
[Root text: page 25]  Regarding attention, the Compendium of Knowledge
says:
QUESTION: What is attention?
RESPONSE: It is an engagement of the mind. It has the function of holding
the mind to the object of observation.
Just as it has been said above, it is a knower that focuses the mind which
is concomitant with it on a particular object of observation. What is the
difference between intention and attention? Intention moves the mind to
general objects, whereas attention directs the mind to a particular object.
 • Attention is that which direct the mind to an object and causes the mind
   to hold on to the object.
 • Attention is liked meditative stabilization (sometime is translated as
   concentration) but it is not meditative stabilization.
 • Attention allows the mind to focus and hold on to its object without
   thinking about something else.
Intention moves the mind towards an object.
Attention holds the mind to that object without moving.
These are the five omnipresent mental factors: feeling, discrimination,
intention, contact, attention. You just have a rough idea of their
individual entities.

[Root text: page 26] [Discussion of the category of omnipresent mental
factors]
What is the reason for calling these five mental factors – feeling and so
forth – "omnipresent" [Tibetan: kun 'gro, literally, go all]? They are so-
called because they are mental factors that accompany [Tibetan: rjes su
'gro ba, literally, go after] all minds.
Furthermore, if any of the five omnipresent mental factors are missing,
then the utilization of an object will not be complete:
 • if feeling is absent, then there will be no experience;
 • if discrimination is absent, then there will be no apprehension of the
   uncommon signs of the object;
 • if intention is absent, then[the mind] will not be directed to an
   object;
 • if attention is absent, then [the mind] will not be focused on a
   particular object of observation;
 • if contact is absent, then there will be no support [for feeling].
Therefore, in order for the utilization of an object to be complete, all
five omnipresent mental factors must be present without exception.
If it is a main mind, it is necessarily accompanied by these five
omnipresent mental factors. Why? Because
 • If there is no feeling, feeling is not there all the time then there is
   no way to experience the object.
 • Without discrimination, one will not be able to distinguish the uncommon
   sign of the object
 • If there is no intention, the mind will not be directed to an object.
 • If attention is absent, the mind will not be able to stay on the object.
 • Without contact, the mind will not be able to meet with the object.
I guess you are fine with the five omnipresent mental factors. If you have
read the text, whatever I have said shouldn’t be difficult. Sometimes it is
difficult to tell the difference between two mental factors as it is seem
that we are talking about the same thing.

|Five Omnipresent Mental   |Function                                         |
|Factors                   |                                                 |
|Feeling                   |To enable the mind to experience the object.     |
|Discrimination            |To enable the mind to distinguish the uncommon   |
|                          |sign of the object.                              |
|Intention                 |To move the mind towards the object.             |
|Attention                 |To direct the mind towards the object.           |
|Contact                   |To enable the mind to meet with the object.      |

The next category of mental factors is called the five object-ascertaining
mental factors.









[B] The five object-ascertaining mental factors (yul nges)
[Root text: page 26] The five object-ascertaining mental factors are:
(1) aspiration
(2) belief
(3) mindfulness
(4) meditative stabilization
(5) wisdom



[B1] Aspiration (dun pa)
[Root text: page 26] Regarding the entity of aspiration, the Compendium of
Knowledge says:
 QUESTION: What is aspiration?
 RESPONSE: It is the very wish to be endowed with this or that [attribute]
 of a desired thing. It has the function of acting as a support for making
 effort.
Just as it has been said above, it is a knower that, upon observing some
intended thing, seeks it. The way in which aspiration acts a support for
effort is as follows. [Maitreya's] Discrimination of the Middle and the
Extremes (stanza 4.5ab) says:
  The support and that supported by it and
  The cause and the result.
We can look at aspiration in terms of three features/characteristics:
   1. The object
   2. The aspect
   3. The function
The feature of the object is the attribute of a desired thing.
What is the subjective aspect of aspiration? It is the very wish to be
endowed with the desired object.
What is the function of aspiration? It is the support for making effort.
A knower which possesses these three features is aspiration. The aspiration
that we are talking in this context mainly refers to the mental factor of
aspiration in the retinue of a virtuous main mind.
There is a quotation from the LRCM which highlight the great importance of
aspiration. If there is aspiration then it is possible to have effort and
all the excellent qualities come from effort.

[Root text: page 27] The Great Exposition of the Stages of the Path also
says:
  If you cannot stop the laziness that is a non-enthusiasm toward
  cultivating meditative stabilization, and that takes joy in its
  discordant class, then from the outset you will not be inclined to engage
  in meditative stabilization. Even if you do achieve it once, it will
  quickly degenerate since you will be unable to sustain it. Therefore, it
  is most crucial to put an end to laziness at the beginning. Regarding
  this, when you attain pliancy in which your body and mind are filled with
  joy and bliss, laziness will be overcome, since no weariness will arise
  in your application to virtue all day and night. In order to generate
  that [pliancy], you must be able to undertake continuous effort in
  meditative stabilization, the cause for generating pliancy. And in order
  to produce that [effort], you need a continuous fervent aspiration that
  seeks meditative stabilization. As a cause for that [aspiration], you
  must have the stable faith of captivation due to having seen the
  excellent qualities of meditative stabilization. Therefore, for a start,
  you should meditate again and again on faith that reflects upon the
  excellent qualities of meditative stabilization. Having witnessed the
  sequence of these through your practice, you will apprehend this
  excellent essential point with the clearest certainty.
In relation to achieving the single-pointedness of mind, it is very
important to have strong aspiration for it.
The cause of such a strong aspiration i.e. for wanting to have single-
pointedness is faith of conviction.
How do you gain this faith of conviction in having the single-pointedness
of mind?
• You get this faith through hearing and then reflecting on the advantages
  of having single-pointedness of mind.
• If you have strong faith of conviction that come from hearing and
  reflecting on the advantages of having single-pointedness of mind, then
  this faith of conviction is the cause for you to aspire to really want to
  have this single-pointedness of mind.
• With strong faith of conviction then you have strong aspiration.
• The strong aspiration leads to strong joyous perseverance.
• Joyous perseverance is a mind that is enthusiastic about virtue.
• With strong joyous perseverance, one then makes effort and come to gain
  physical and mental pliancy.
• When physical and mental pliancy is gained then one overcome laziness.
Here we are just using single-pointedness mind as an example to understand
the importance of aspiration.
When there is strong aspiration, you have strong joyous perseverance. In
relation to actualizing calm-abiding, if you have strong aspiration for
calm-abiding, it leads you to have strong joyous perseverance in working to
attain it. When you have physical and mental pliancy then all kind of
laziness is overcome. For us, whatever we try to achieve, it is always
laziness that block us from achieving whatever we want to achieve.
The text is saying of how important aspiration is; because with strong
aspiration then it is possible to really engage in perfect virtue.

[Root text: page 28] When aspiration is divided, there are three types:
(1) the aspiration wishing to meet
(2) the aspiration wishing not to be separated
(3) the aspiration that seeks
In essence, if you have strong aspiration then you have strong joyous
perseverance.
• With strong joyous perseverance, one will develop qualities that one has
  not yet developed.
• With strong joyous perseverance, the qualities that one has already
  developed, one will be able to maintain those qualities without losing
  them.
• Whatever qualities that you have accumulated with joyous perseverance,
  those qualities can be enhanced.
The essential point of what we are seeking to achieve is:
• to gradually lessen or to remove the non-virtuous mind
• to generate the virtuous mind and
• to increase those that have already been generated
All of these can only come about through joyous perseverance. In order to
have joyous perseverance, one needs to have aspiration beforehand. You have
to understand how aspiration functions as a support for making effort.
What is the cause of aspiration?
• The cause of aspiration is faith.
• Joyous perseverance comes from aspiration, aspiration comes from faith.
• Faith comes from the strong foundation in hearing and reflecting on the
  teachings.
• With this you generate stable faith. Stable faith leads to strong stable
  aspiration which then acts as a support for stable and strong joyous
  perseverance.
Strong foundation in hearing & reflection in teachings ( Strong Faith (
Strong Aspiration ( Strong Joyous Perseverance
That is why Lama Tsongkhapa gave a strong advice on the importance of
hearing, reflection and meditation. Without hearing, studying/ learning,
and without reflection then nothing spectacular happens. Why? Because
without stable learning, reflection and meditation, then there is no faith.
If the faith is neither here nor there then the aspiration is also neither
here nor there, then the effort is also neither here nor there, then
nothing happens. At the end of the day it boils down to whether one has the
stable learning and reflection. This is something that you have to think
about of what we have discussed so far. The threefold process, learning,
reflection and meditation does make sense. Even just by thinking about
this, you can gain faith in study and reflection.

[B2] Belief (mos pa)
[Root text: page 28]  Regarding the entity of belief, the Compendium of
Knowledge says:
QUESTION: What is belief?
RESPONSE: It holds an ascertained thing to be just the way it has been
ascertained. It has the function of non-captivation.
Just as it has been said above, it is a knower which holds the object that
has been ascertained by its valid cognition, thinking, "It is just like
this and not otherwise." Here its function is specified as "non-
captivation,"
Again we can look at belief in term of the three features:
   1. The object of this mind is something that has already ascertained
      beforehand.
   2. The subjective aspect of this mind, in relation with the object of
      this mind, understands the object to be only liked this and not
      something else.
   3. The function is non-captivation.
The function of belief is specified as non-captivation.

[Root text: page 28] Here its function is specified as "non-captivation,”
because when one has gained firm belief in the object that one has
ascertained, an opponent cannot steer one away from it. For example,
reflecting upon the difference between the Buddhist and non-Buddhist
teachers in the context of going for refuge, one analyses, "Which is an
infallible refuge?" and ascertains that only the Teacher, the Buddha, is an
infallible refuge. Then, when the doctrine taught by him and the spiritual
community properly practicing this doctrine are also ascertained by valid
cognition to be infallible refuges, a firm belief in them as final refuges
is gained. Thereupon, Forders and so forth cannot lead one astray and one
has then joined the ranks of Buddhists. Based upon this, all wholesome
qualities will increase. Furthermore, Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds
says (stanza 7.40):
  The Muni has taught that belief is the root
  Of all that belongs to the class of virtue,
  And the root of that is
  Constant meditation on the fruitional results.
What is belief?  Belief is a mind that holds on to an object that has
already been ascertained earlier and it holds on to it as it is and not
something else; “This object is liked this only”.
It is important to have stable belief in the virtuous class of phenomena.
As said by Shantideva in Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds, belief here is
the belief in the class of virtue; it is a stable belief holding on to
virtue. The root of belief is a conviction in cause and effect.
Belief is the root of all virtue. In order to be able to strive in virtue
you need belief in it.
In order to have stable belief, you need to have strong conviction in
karma; cause and effect.
In the previous lesson we saw how conviction in actions/karma is the
correct worldly view. With conviction in cause and effect then one can have
aspiration and one can have belief.
Remember that we talked about inference through belief. By thinking about
this, this is how you can generate inference through belief.
Student: [Root text: page 26] Furthermore, if any of the five omnipresent
mental factors are missing, then the utilization of an object will not be
complete.
Can you please explain the term ‘utilization’ here?
Khen Rinpoche: Here “long zhe” as a verb. As a noun, long zhe, it is
translated as enjoyment. To enjoy means to long zhe pa. In Lamrim context,
you can say enjoy. But in this kind of subject you cannot say “enjoy”. Here
“long zhe” is to utilize.
Student:  [Root text: page 19] QUALM: What do materialistic and non-
materialistic mean?
RESPONSE: Feelings that are concomitant with the craving for the
contaminated appropriated aggregates are called "materialistic feelings."
Feelings that are concomitant with the exalted wisdom directly realizing
selflessness are called "non-materialistic feelings."
1. Please elaborate “craving for the contaminated appropriated aggregates”?

2. If the mental factor of intention can move the mind towards the object,
can it also able to move the mind away from the object?
Khen Rinpoche: You can say that materialistic feelings refer to the mental
factor of feeling that is concomitant with a contaminated consciousness and
non-materialistic feelings are mental factor of feeling that is concomitant
with uncontaminated wisdom.
Intention moves the mind towards an object. When you move the mind towards
an object, essentially you are moving your mind away from another object.
If you think about how you move away from non-virtue state of mind towards
the virtue state of mind, then that would fit what you have mentioned.
Intention is a mover; it moves the mind towards an object. If you think
about it, in order for your mind to move towards the object, basically you
are moving away from something else. There isn’t an intention that doesn’t
move but stay there.
Student: When the time of death is nearing, you crave for yourself to
continue to live longer and during the bardo state; you also crave for a
body to be quickly reborn to take rebirth. Can this be the craving for the
contaminated appropriated aggregates?
Khen Rinpoche: When we talk about materialistic feelings, the feelings are
concomitant with craving. There are different kinds of craving; craving for
the body, craving for existence and so forth. Mental factor of feeling that
is concomitant with craving is materialistic feeling.
Student: The observed object of a sense consciousness would be the sense
object whereas the observed object of a mental consciousness is a
phenomenon source form.
An eye consciousness apprehending blue, the observed object is blue.
A mental direct perceiver apprehending blue, the observed object is also
blue.
Both observed objects are called blue. Is it the same blue?
Khen Rinpoche: Yes, it is the same blue.
Student: The sense object for the five sense consciousnesses there are the
respective sense objects, blue, sound and so forth; whereas for a mental
consciousness (conceptual or non-conceptual), the observed object is that
object itself, blue, sound and so forth. So, it is still the same. So
phenomenon source form and sense object would not be different in that
sense?
Khen Rinpoche: They are different.
Student: The observed object condition of that consciousnesses and the
sense object and the phenomenon source form, they are not the same? How are
they different?
Khen Rinpoche: What is a phenomenon source form? Phenomenon source form is
a form that is not the object of apprehension of a sense consciousness. It
can only be the object of apprehension of a mental consciousness.
We are not saying that whatever that appears to a sense consciousness does
not appear to a mental consciousness. When we are talking about blue,
whether it is an eye consciousness apprehending blue or mental
consciousness apprehending blue, the blue as the observed object is the
same blue.
The form that appears to a conceptual consciousness apprehending blue is
blue; it is not the phenomenon source form.
The object of the conceptual consciousness apprehending blue is
apprehending is not the blue that cannot appear to a sense consciousness.
If you know what is a phenomenon source form then it is clear. What is the
phenomenon source form?
It is a form that cannot be an object of a sense consciousness. It can only
be a form for a mental consciousness. For example, the elephant that
appears in the dream. The dream elephant is the phenomenon source form.
Please continue to read the text on your own on the division of the
respective mental factors. If you have any questions then you can bring
them up in class.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------
---------------------------------------------------------
(For reference only: Minds and Mental Factor by Emily Hsu)
[pic]
