Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Lorig/Transcript/lesson18.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:53:23.775171
================================================================================


In the last lesson, we saw in the text which said that all the qualities of
buddhahood, full enlightenment, are inconceivable and indescribable. In
essence, all these inconceivable and indescribable qualities of full
enlightenment arise from the mind. Likewise, the environment (the world)
and its inhabitants (sentient beings) are the creation of the mind. They
all arise from the mind and that includes all the experiences of happiness
and suffering. In the text many scriptural quotations by the various great
Indian masters were cited in order to highlight this fact.
From our earlier discussion, we saw how everything arises from the mind. At
the end of the day, what is it that determines whether something is an
existent or non-existent? It has to be posited from the perspective of the
mind. If it is observed or verified by a valid cognizer then it is said to
be a phenomenon. If it is not observed or verified by a valid cognizer then
it is said to not exist. Whether something exists or not it boils down to
the mind.
Whether a particular phenomenon is something or is not something it is also
determined by a mind. So whether something is or is not is ultimately
dependent on or created by the mind. Having said that, this does not mean
that whatever the mind conceives, that thing necessarily exists in the way
it is conceived of by the mind.  All the things that the particular mind
does not conceive of or does not think to exist, this does not mean that
the phenomenon is non-existent. In order to highlight this fact, there is a
division of consciousness or mind into those that are valid and those that
are non-valid.
I guess this is the reason why there is a presentation of valid mind and
non-valid mind. While it is true that ultimately everything is the creation
of mind or is determined by mind, whether something exists or not or
whether something is or is not is decided by the mind. But this does not
mean that whatever the mind conceives of exists. If it is not conceives of
by the mind, it does not mean that it doesn’t exists. For this reason, in
order to establish what is and what is not, to establish the thing that
decides whether something is or is not, that decides something exists or
not, then there is this detailed explanation looking at the various kind of
minds. Ultimately, we look at mind in terms of those that are valid and
those that are non-valid.
Having said all these, we have to understand the main import of what we
have just discussed. It is not so much to find out about things that are
outside of us; it is this and it is that. While it is true, the main import
is to apply this to our own experience of happiness and sufferings. That is
the main thing to look at. Basically, all our happiness and all our
sufferings is a creation of our own mind. At the end of it, if we look at
it, what is it that causes sufferings? Basically, it is our own afflictions
which then lead on to actions/karma; so karma and our afflictions.
So the main thing that we have to understand is that all our happiness and
sufferings that we experience is basically the creation of our mind. They
arise from our own mind. In particular, we have to understand the role of
our afflictions and actions. By gaining a good understanding of this point
and having conviction in this, then we apply mindfulness and vigilant to
guard and protect our own mind in our daily life.
As I have described in the last lesson, all our experiences of happiness
and sufferings come from us believing that all things that appear to our
mind are real and apprehending the appearance to exist in the way it
appears to us; all the feelings of pain and pleasure arise.  Our experience
of pleasure and pain basically come from us believing in the various mental
appearances. All these different appearances to the mind do not exist with
the objects. They are the projection of the mind. We have to understand and
we have to explain how everything arises from the mind. As it is said that
everything is a creation of the mind, we react to all those various
appearances, and then experience the feelings of pleasure and pain.
So it is said that since all phenomena arise in dependence on the mind,
therefore it is important to gain a good understanding of the mind itself
and how it works. That is why there is the presentation of Lorig; the study
of mind and its function.
When our mind is not disciplined, everything - the world, the environment,
the people - appears as suffering and problem. But when the mind is subdued
or disciplined, those individuals who have trained their mind perceive the
environment as pure land or celestial mansion, and the sentient beings as
the deities. These appearances depend on whether the mind is disciplined
and subdued. That is why it is always advised in the teaching:
  Happiness comes from a subdued mind.
 Suffering comes from an unsubdued mind.
From this you can say that whether it is an ordinary environment, a
suffering environment, or a pure land basically it depends on the mental
perspectives i.e. how it appears to the mind. So if the mind is subdued and
disciplined, everything appears as pure and nice as in the pure land. But
when the mind is not subdued, there is an appearance that is filled with
suffering. So, all these come from the mind. Therefore it is alright to say
that the pure land is in the mind and the ordinary suffering world is in
the mind. The pure land is not far away and is not something separate from
the mind.

Mind and mental factors
What is the difference between a main mind and a mental factor?
A main mind engages merely in the entity of the object.
A mental factor engages in the specific features/characteristics of an
object.
With more details:
A main mind is a knower that engages in the entity of an object by its own
power
A mental factor is a knower that engages in the features of an object by
its own power.
Example: An eye consciousness apprehending blue.
The eye primary consciousness which is a main mind apprehends the mere
entity of blue.
There is a mental factor of mindfulness which induces a memory holding on
to this blue.
The mind which enable the consciousness to hold on to the object without
forgetting, mindfulness, engages the object by way of its attributes is a
mental factor.
From the perspectives of the mind apprehending the mere entity blue, it is
called the main mind.
From the perspective of the mind functioning to not forget the object blue,
it is called mindfulness.
Are the eye primary consciousness apprehending blue and the mental factor
of mindfulness in its retinue one or different?  These two are different.
While these two - the eye primary consciousness apprehending blue and the
mental factor of mindfulness in its retinue - are different but they are
one entity.
These two are one entity and different isolates.
Let’s look at the meaning of one entity. We say that things are one entity
but different isolates.
What does it mean to be one entity?
Example: Vase and the vase’s impermanence. These two are one entity but
different isolates.
The vase’s impermanence is one entity with vase, but this doesn’t mean that
vase’s impermanence is vase.
Vase’s impermanence is only found on vase. You are not going to find vase’s
impermanence on a non-vase.
You cannot talk about vase’s impermanence is completely separate from the
vase.
You cannot posit vase’s impermanence on a non-vase.
Does vase’s impermanence exists on a non-vase?
Vase’s impermanence cannot be posited as separate from the entity of vase.
You will not be able to find a vase’s impermanence that is of a different
entity from the vase itself.
You cannot find vase’s impermanence separate from vase.
The self, the person and the ‘I’ these are mutually inclusive.
The self and the aggregates are said to be of one entity.
You will not be able to find a self or a person that is separate from the
entity of the aggregates.
You will not be able to find a self that exists separate from the nature of
the aggregates.
You will not be able to posit a self that is of separate entity from the
aggregates.
[Root text: page 11]   QUALM: Are a mind and its mental factors one entity
or different entities?
                 RESPONSE: The Treasury of Knowledge (stanza 2.23) says:
                 A mind and its mental factors are definitely simultaneous.
The Abhidharmakosa says: “A mind and its mental factor are definitely
simultaneous”, so the main mind and its mental factor are one entity.
One will not be able to posit mental factor that is of a separate entity
from the main mind; and just as one cannot posit a main mind that is of a
separate entity from its mental factor.
It is a bit difficult but if you think about mind and mental factor as
being one entity, it feels like as if we are referring to one thing but
calling it different names.
There are some scholars who said that mind and mental factor are the same,
just calling the same one phenomenon by different names.
In our system, we posit mind and mental factor are one entity but different
isolates; mind and mental factor are posited differently due to their
functions.
Basically we do not assert mind and mental factor are the same.
In the text it says that the mind and its mental factor are one entity;
they are not different entity.
Mind and mental factor are not like a pillar and a vase.  A pillar and a
vase are different entity because:
 -you can talk about a vase that is separate from the entity of a pillar,
 and
 -similarly, you can talk about a pillar that is separate from the entity
 of a vase.
Therefore, vase and pillar are separate entity, but a mind and its mental
factor are not like that.
[Root text: page 12] These modes have been set forth in accordance with  how
it has been taught in [Gyel-tsab's] Essence of the Ocean  of  Knowledge:  An
Explanation of the Compendium of  Knowledge.  [Ge-dun  Drub's]  Ornament  of
Reasoning, the Great Treatise on Valid Cognition explains that:
 • the definition of a main mind is that which is concomitant by way of the
   five similarities with the mental factors in its retinue, and
 • the definition of a mental factor is that which is concomitant by way of
   the five similarities with its main mind.
In the Ornament of Reasoning, the Great Treatise on Valid Cognition by
Gedun Drub, the first Dalai Lama, states precisely the definitions of a
main mind and definition of a mental factor. He makes it very precise for
the purpose of debate. He states that:
 ➢ The definition of a main mind is that which is concomitant by way of
   the five similarities with the mental factors in its retinue, and
 ➢ The definition of a mental factor is that which is concomitant by way
   of the five similarities with its main mind.
Example: An eye consciousness apprehending blue and the mental factor of
feeling in its retinue.
These two are concomitant by way of the five similarities.
[Root text: page 12] Regarding the modes of these five  similarities,  there
are two explanations – one from the  Treasury  of  Knowledge  and  one  from
[Asanga's] Compendium of Knowledge (Abhidharmasamuchchaya).
By depending on which text you are looking at, there are slight different
presentation on the concomitant by way of the five similarities between the
main mind and its mental factor.
There is one explanation on the five similarities in the Treasury of
Knowledge, and there is another slightly different explanation of the five
similarities in the Compendium of Knowledge.
Let’s look at the explanation of these five similarities from the Treasury
of Knowledge.
We will look at these five similarities by using the illustration of an eye
consciousness apprehending blue and the mental factor of feeling in its
retinue.
[Root text: page 12] The five similarities  according  to  the  Treasury  of
Knowledge (stanza 2.35a) are as follows:
   1. similar support (similar basis)
   2. similar object of observation
   3. similar [subjective] aspect
   4. similar time
   5. similar substance
Their individual meanings are as follows:
(1) Since a mental factor is also supported by that sense power  upon  which
the mind is supported, their supports are similar.
(2) Since  a  mental  factor  also  observes  that  object  which  the  mind
observes, their objects of observation are similar.
(3) Since, when a mind is generated having an aspect,  for  instance,  blue,
its  mental  factor  is  also  generated  in  that   aspect,   blue,   their
[subjective] aspects are similar.
 (4) Since a mind and its mental factor are simultaneous in  regard  to  the
three –production, abiding and cessation – their times are similar.
(5) Just as minds of a  similar  type  are  distinct  substances,  likewise,
mental factors, such as feelings,  of  a  similar  type  are  also  distinct
substances, therefore their substances are similar.

1. Similar support
An eye primary consciousness apprehending blue and the mental factor of
feeling in its retinue are said to have a similar support. Why?
Just as eye primary consciousness apprehending blue is generated in
dependence upon eye sense power, similarly the mental factor of feeling in
the retinue of this eye primary consciousness apprehending blue is also
generated in dependence upon the eye sense power. In that sense these two
share similar support.
This is just an illustration, but in the retinue of an eye primary
consciousness apprehending blue, there are many other mental factors. Here
we are just using the mental factor of feeling as an example.
These two - eye primary consciousness apprehending blue and mental factor
of feeling in its retinue, abides at the same time, and when they
disintegrate, they also disintegrate at the same time.
2. Similar object of observation
The object of observation of eye primary consciousness apprehending blue is
blue.
An eye consciousness apprehending blue is generated in dependence on the
object of observation blue.
Similarly the mental factor of feeling in the retinue of this eye primary
consciousness apprehending blue is also observing blue. So its object of
observation is blue.
Similar object of observation means that just as the eye primary
consciousness apprehending blue is observing blue, similarly the mental
factor of feeling in the retinue of this eye primary consciousness
apprehending blue is also observing blue.
3. Similar Aspect
Just as these two have a similar object of observation, they also have a
similar aspect.
An eye primary consciousness apprehending blue is in the aspect of blue,
similarly the mental factor of feeling in the retinue of this eye primary
consciousness apprehending blue is also in the aspect of blue.
4. Similar time
A main mind and its mental factor are also similar in terms of the time.
A mind and its mental factor are simultaneous with respect to their
production, abiding and cessation.
5. Similar substance
These two -eye primary consciousness apprehending blue and its mental
factor of feeling in its retinue- have similar object of observation, and
they are generated into a same aspect.
In the retinue of this main mind (eye primary consciousness apprehending
blue), there can only be one mental factor of feeling that has a similar
object of observation, and there can only be one mental factor of feeling
in the retinue of this main mind, having a same aspect.
Basically you cannot have two mental factor of feeling accompanying that
eye primary consciousness apprehending blue.
This is what is meant by similar substance; just as there is only one main
mind, a substance, the mental factor of feeling accompanying the main mind
can only be one.
Khen Rinpoche spoke in English: Are you getting somewhere or are you not
getting anywhere?
Student: On the fifth point about substance, can Khen Rinpoche elaborate on
that.
Khen Rinpoche: As long as you understand the meaning of similar substance
is enough.
Just as there is only one eye primary consciousness apprehending blue at
any one time, in the retinue of this eye primary consciousness, there are
many mental factors and let’s take the mental factor of feeling as an
example. There cannot be two mental factor of feeling accompanying that eye
consciousness.
Just as there is only one main mind, there can only be one mental factor of
feeling.
That is the meaning of similar substance.
In the retinue of this eye primary consciousness apprehending blue there
are the five omnipresence mental factors of feeling, discrimination,
intention, contact and attention. Basically there is only one each.
You cannot have two mental factors of feeling accompanying that one main
mind.
You cannot have two mental factors of discrimination or two mental factors
of the remaining omnipresence mental factors.  As long as you understand
this, that is enough.
Student: On page 13 of the root text, in the sentence “Just as minds of a
similar type are distinct substances, likewise, mental factors, such as
feelings, of a similar type are also distinct substances, therefore their
substances are similar,” what is the word “their substance” referring to?
Khen Rinpoche: Eye primary consciousness is a substance. It is a composed
phenomenon, so it is a substantial phenomenon. Just as there is one
substance which is the main mind, similarly there is only one mental factor
of feeling accompanying it is a substance.
As long as you understand the point then it is okay.
When we say they are distinct substances that mean that they are one. The
main mind is substantially established as one. Similarly, the mental factor
of feeling accompanying the main mind is also substantially established as
one.  These two are similar in being distinct substance. Distinct means
they are one each.
Student: On page 11, “That which sees an object is a primary consciousness.
That which sees its attribute is a mental factor.” At the footnote, it
states that: "consciousness" (shes pa) would encompass both main minds as
well as mental factors.  Should I break the primary consciousness as one
term which is mutually inclusive with mind, sentience or should I break it
up as primary mind and mental factor?
Ven Gyurme: The quotation is referring to primary consciousness, and that
is a main mind. Primary consciousness and consciousness are different.
Student: Main mind is also a perceiver, do we take it as the perceiver (as
in direct perceiver)?
Ven Gyurme: Perceiver and primary consciousness is a translation for nam
par she pa, which is a main mind.
Student: Mind and mental factor seems to be the same. Could the word
“concomitant” be translated as complement or co-exist?
Khen Rinpoche: Mind and mental factor are different. Like product and
impermanent phenomenon are mutually inclusive but they are different. So
here mind and mental factor are different.
Why is product and impermanent phenomenon different?
As we have discussed earlier on one and different, it is important to get
it. So what does it mean when we say something is one, and then the two
things are different?
Therefore we first need to know what is one and what is different and their
definition.
In the case of product and impermanent phenomenon, they are mutually
inclusive but, nevertheless, they are different.
Essentially these two are of the same meaning, but from the perspective of
it being an opposite from permanent, it is called impermanent. From the
perspective of it being from the opposite from non-product is product. They
are of different isolates.
The process, in which the names are imputed, is different based on the
different reason. From it being an opposite from permanent is called
impermanent. From the perspective of it being an opposite from non-product,
it is a product. These two are different because the names are different.
Product and impermanent, although they have the same meaning, but because
they are different names, so they are different.
When two phenomena are in comparison, even though they are different, it
doesn’t necessarily mean they have different meaning.
In the case of product and impermanent phenomenon, these two are mutually
inclusive. Because they are mutually inclusive therefore they can have the
same meaning but having different names.
It is not the case that when you compare two phenomena, as long as they
have different names means they necessary have the same meaning. No.
In the case of mind and mental factor, we are not saying that mind is a
mental factor and mental factor is the mind. These two are not mutually
inclusive but they are one entity.
These two -mind and mental factor- are not one, they are different.
Do they have the same entity or different entity? We say these two are one
entity.
Student: Can we understand main mind to be like a collective engager and
mental factor to be like a partial engager?
Khen Rinpoche: We use the object blue. The eye primary consciousness
apprehending blue and blue is the entity.
What is the feature of blue? I can’t say exactly because it is not so
straight forward.
The main mind and its mental factors have a similar object of observation
and similar aspect.
A main mind engages the mere entity of the object, whereas the mental
factor in its retinue engages the different features of the object.
Just as an eye primary consciousness apprehending blue is generated in
dependence upon blue, observing blue. Similarly, the mental factor in its
retinue must observe blue.
What does this eye primary consciousness apprehending blue know? It knows
the mere entity of blue.
Just as it knows the entity blue, then the mental factor in its retinue
must also know blue, which is the entity.
So whatever the main mind knows, the mental factor in its retinue also
knows.
For this reason, therefore in some texts it is mentioned that it is not
sufficient to posit a main mind to be a mind that knows the mere entity of
an object and that a mental factor knows the features of the object; rather
you have to add the words “by its own power”. Therefore in some text they
say that you have to posit:
  -a main mind to be a knower that knows the mere entity of the object by
  its own power; and
  -a mental factor knows the features of an object by its own power.
The definition of a doubting consciousness is a knower that has qualms two-
pointedly by its own power. Doubting consciousness is a mental factor and
is in the retinue of a main mind.
Let’s say that this main mind is a mental consciousness.  This mental
consciousness (the main mind) which has doubting consciousness in its
retinue also has qualms two-pointedly about the object but it doesn’t have
qualms two-pointedly by its own power. The main mind doesn’t have qualms
two-pointedly by its own power.
Therefore in some texts it is mentioned that both main mind and mental
factor:
- know the entity of the object and
- know the features of the object
But the main mind knows the entity of the object by its own power. The
mental factor also knows the mere entity of the object but not by its own
power.
The mental factor knows the features of the object by its own power. The
main mind also knows the features of the object but not by its own power.
For this reason, if you think about it, the main mind and the mental factor
in its retinue are not the same; not one. They are different.
Come back to blue, blue is the mere entity of blue. Maybe we can posit the
feature of blue being nice blue or, ugly blue. What about short blue, long
blue, bright blue, dull blue?
Student:  Root text page 12: Khen Rinpoche said that the definition of a
main mind according to Gedun Drub’s Text is used in debate. If a question
comes up in exam asking for a definition of a main mind, is this the
definition we must use? The reason I am asking because this definition
doesn’t tell me anything about what a main mind is. Whereas in page 11,
the definition “a main mind is a knower distinguished by mere observation
of the object itself and does not need to be posited in terms of the other
attributes” -can that also be seen as a definition of a main mind? Or we
must stick to the earlier definition according to Gedun Drub?
Khen Rinpoche: The earlier explanation of a main mind and a mental factor
is from the perspective of what they do and it is to help us to understand
what exactly a main mind is and what exactly a mental factor is. The
definition that is in Gedun’s text, is a matter of establishing the
boundary of pervasion; what is and what is not.
Student: Should we keep the earlier presentation of the sevenfold division
of consciousnesses and the presentation of the Mind and Mental factor
separate?
Ven Gyurme (summarized): There are different ways of looking at mind. One
way is looking at mind in terms of mind and mental factor. If it is a
consciousness is either necessarily a main mind or a mental factor. So the
question is: if it is a consciousness is it necessary one of the sevenfold
division? Is seven-fold division exhaustive?
Student: Is there anything that we can carry over from what we learned from
the sevenfold into mind and mental factors? Or we should keep it separate?
Khen Rinpoche: That way of presenting mind by the sevenfold division of
consciousness is just to understand mind in general; the general procedure
of mind; whereas in the study of main mind and mental factors, the emphasis
is on the mental factor. The study is done by identifying their respective
entities.
When we study the 51 mental factors such as afflictions, virtuous mental
factors and so forth, it is to learn them individually by knowing their
individual entities. If we talk about anger or attachment, then obviously
you can definitely connect it to the sevenfold division of consciousness .
Within the 51 mental factors, there are virtuous, and non-virtuous. Within
them there are subsequent cognizers, some are valid cognizers and some are
wrong consciousnesses.
Student: From the footnote on page 11 on the term “isolate”, can I say that
isolate can also be understood as opposite of something as it is translated
as a double negation?
Khen Rinpoche: To clearly explain this paragraph:  “Just as it has been
said above, that which knows the mere entity of an object is called a mind.
That which, taking the observation of that very object as its basis,
engages the object by means of the isolates of other attributes, such as
its function, is called a mental factor,” Gyelstab Je’s text (on page 12)
says:  “To explain this clearly, when the mindfulness of an object, for
instance, a form, is produced, the two – the mind and the mindfulness in
its retinue – are similar in observing the object, form; nevertheless, they
are posited separately. The knower of the mere entity of the object, form,
is called "mind," but from the point of view of the function of acting not
to forget, "mindfulness".” So that is the isolate.
In the next lesson we will look at the five similarities that are as
described in the Compendium of Knowledge. We will go through that quickly
and hope to finish the five omnipresence factors. It would be good if you
can read up these five omnipresence factors. I think the best way to
conduct class is through Q&A. So you read beforehand and we discuss through
Q&A in class.
I think the best approach is this; as the text is translated already then
you should read. If there is anything that you don’t understand from your
reading, you can ask and then I can make it clearer. So I think this is the
best approach. Otherwise you just read everything in class, it is
difficult.
Student: On page 11, the definition of mental factor “A mental factor is a
knower that, taking the observation of that very object as its basis,
engages the object by means of the isolates.” Is it a collective engager?
Ven Gyurme (summarized): To know the mere entity of an object, does it mean
you know it collectively? Is the mind engaging everything about the object?
Khen Rinpoche: It is not exactly like that. In terms of an eye
consciousness, it is a non-conceptual consciousness, it is a collective
engager, but eye consciousness can be a main mind and it can also be a
mental factor.
So the mental factor in the retinue of non-conceptual consciousnesses, such
as sense consciousnesses, is also sense consciousness.
Having said that, you cannot say that all mental factors are eliminative
engagers and all main minds are collective engagers.
Just as an eye primary consciousness apprehending blue is a collective
engager, the mental factors in the retinue of this eye consciousness are
also collective engagers.
Basically, you should not think that a main mind is a necessary collective
engager just because a main mind is a knower that knows the mere entity of
an object.
You should not think that a mental factor is an eliminative engager just
because it knows the features of an object.
For reference only (Please do not quote any of these references in the
class)
Mind in Tibetan Buddhism (page 143) by Lati Rinpoche:
A mode of having similarity exists because, for example, the  two,  an  eye-
perceiver and the feeling accompanying it have:
   1) the same object of observation and thus are similar with regard to the
      object of engagement
   2) the same mode of apprehension and thus are similar in aspect
   3) occur at the same time and thus are similar in time. This  means  that
      their time of production, abiding and cessation are the same
   4) the same uncommon empowering condition and thus are similar in basis
   5) only a single substantial entity of feeling arises as the  accompanier
      of a single substantial entity of an eye perceiver and thus  they  are
      similar  in  substantial  entity.  This  means  that   two   different
      substantial entities of feeling or any other mental factor  would  not
      be generated as the accompaniers of one main mind.
|Five similarities   |Main mind               |Mental factor               |
|according to        |                        |                            |
|Vasubandhu’s        |                        |                            |
|Treasury of         |                        |                            |
|Knowledge           |                        |                            |
|(Abhidharmakosha):  |                        |                            |
|Similar support     |Eye primary             |Similarly the mental factor |
|                    |consciousness           |of feeling in the retinue of|
|                    |apprehending blue is    |this eye primary            |
|                    |generated in dependence |consciousness apprehending  |
|                    |upon eye sense power    |blue is also generated in   |
|                    |                        |dependence upon the eye     |
|                    |                        |sense power.                |
|Similar object of   |Eye consciousness       |Similarly the mental factor |
|observation         |apprehending blue is    |of feeling in the retinue of|
|                    |generated in dependence |this eye primary            |
|                    |on the object of        |consciousness apprehending  |
|                    |observation blue.       |blue is also observing blue.|
|Similar aspect      |Eye primary             |Similarly the mental factor |
|                    |consciousness           |of feeling in the retinue of|
|                    |apprehending blue is in |this eye primary            |
|                    |the aspect of blue.     |consciousness apprehending  |
|                    |                        |blue is also in the aspect  |
|                    |                        |of blue                     |
|Similar time        |A mind and its mental factor are simultaneous with   |
|                    |respect to their production, abiding and cessation.  |
|Similar substance   |Just as there is only one main mind, there can only  |
|                    |be one mental factor of feeling.                     |

