Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Lorig/Reference material/Lorig Commentary - Geshe Jampa Tegchok Nalanda.pdf
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:53:39.931646
================================================================================

 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
                  KNOWING AND AWARENESS  -  LO RIG  
  
   
 
An explanation of Purbuchok Jampa Gyatso's lo.rig given by Geshe 
Jampa Thegchog at Nalanda Monastery, France. The teachings, given in 
1984 and 1987, were translated by Thubten Sherab Sherpa and edited 
by Gelong Thubten Gyatso.  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
First published 1991  
Copyright:  Nalanda Monastery, France 1991 
 All rights reserved.  
No portion may be reproduced by any means  
without permission from Nalanda Monastery,  Labastide St Georges, 81500 Lavaur, France. 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
 2 
 
CONTENTS 
 
 
                                                             Page  
PART ONE     OBJECTS   ....................................     3 
  
PART TWO     OBJECT POSSESSORS  
              Prime cognition  ............................     9 
             Direct cognition  ...........................     9              Prime direct cognition  .....................    12 
             Facsimiles of direct perception  ............    13 
             Prime inferential cognition  ................    16              Second classification of prime cognition  ...    20 
             Third classification of prime cognition .....    23 
  PART THREE   NON-PRIME COGNITION  
 
             Subsequent cognition  .......................    26 
             Presumption  ................................    27 
             Inattentive perception  .....................    28              Doubt  ......................................    28 
             Wrong consciousness  ........................    30 
  PART FOUR    OTHER CLASSIFICATIONS OF MIND  
 
             The 3-fold classification of mind  ..........    31 
             The 7 ways of knowing  ......................    34 
             Self-cognizers and other-cognizers  .........    34  
 
PART FIVE    MAIN MINDS AND MENTAL FACTORS  
              Main minds and mental factors  ..............    35 
             The 5 omnipresent mental factors  ...........    39              The 5 object-ascertaining mental factors  ...    43 
             The 11 virtuous mental factors  .............    47 
             The 6 root afflictions  .....................    57              The 20 secondary afflictions  ...............    69 
             The 4 changeable mental factors  ............    75 
  PART SIX     EXPRESSIVE SOUNDS  
 
             Definitions and divisions  ..................    78 
 
 
PART SEVEN   THE CONCLUSION   .............................    81 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 3 
 
PART ONE                OBJECTS  
 
The definition of an object is that which can be cognized by mind.  
Everything that exists is an object because object of knowledge, established base, and existent thing, are synonyms, they are things that 
are known by a prime cognizer, realized by a prime cognizer, and perceived by a prime cognizer. 
  The many aspects of mind include correct minds and incorrect minds. 
Correct minds are of two types: prime cognizers and subsequent cognizers. Incorrect minds include other aspects of mind such as wrong consciousness, 
presumption, doubt, and inattentive cognition. These minds are incorrect 
because they do not realize their objects properly.     To know whether something is an object or not, you simply have to see 
whether it exists or not - if it exists, it is an object. Objects are 
described in six ways:  
1  Engaged object  (jug.yul): the factual, main object of  
     cognition. 2  Conceived object  (zhen.yul): the engaged object of conception. 
3  Appearing object  (nang.yul): the object that appears to the  
     particular cognition. 4  Beheld object  (zung.yul): synonymous with appearing object. 
5  Apprehended (grasped) object  (dzin.tang.kyi.yul): the object  
     that is understood by the cognition. 6  Referent object  (migs.yul): the object that is observed. 
 
 
Appearing object and beheld object  
For the object that appears to either conceptual or non-conceptual 
consciousness, appearing object and beheld object are synonymous. They refer to the actual object that is held by the mind. If something is an 
established base, it is necessarily an appearing object because among the 
two divisions of established bases, all functional things are appearing objects to direct perception and all permanent things are appearing objects 
to conception. 
 
Objects that are functional things  
Functional things are necessarily appearing objects to direct cognition  
because they must be perceived by manifesting towards a direct cognizer. If something is a functional thing it is also necessarily an apprehended 
object of a direct cognizer. The five divisions of form - visible forms, 
sounds, smells, tastes, and tangibles - are all objects to be held by their respective direct sense perceivers, for example, visible form is the 
appearing and the beheld object of visual consciousness. 
  The color blue is called the appearing object to the visual consciousness that apprehends blue because it is the object that appears to, or is beheld 
by, this consciousness. Just as all functional things are appearing objects 
to direct perception, all appearing objects to direct perception are functional things.  Appearing object to direct perception, beheld object of 
direct perception, and functional thing are synonyms. There is no permanent 
phenomenon that appears to direct perception.   The synonyms of functional thing - product, cause, and so on - are 
impermanent phenomena and are also appearing objects to direct perception 
because they are directly perceived by the omniscient mind of Buddha. Subtle impermanence appears to direct yogic cognition that apprehends, 
realizes, and cognizes it. 
  Minds are also functional things. They are appearing objects to direct cognizers because they appear to self-cognition (apperception), which is a 
direct cognizer. The remaining functional phenomena - functional phenomena 
that are neither form nor consciousness - appear to and are known by direct mental cognition. All functional things are apprehended by omniscient mind, 
realized by omniscient mind, and beheld by omniscient mind.   
 Thus it has been shown that anything that appears as an object to a direct 
cognizer is always a functional phenomenon; it cannot be a permanent 
phenomenon. Even when a yogic direct perception realizes selflessness (a permanent phenomenon), it only does so through the appearance of a 
compositional factor that is the lack of an autonomous self. This 
compositional factor is the subtle impermanence of the person - the fact 
 
 4 
that the person does not have autonomous self-existence and that it 
disintegrates moment by moment.   When we say that appearing object to direct perception is synonymous with 
functional thing it may sound simple, but it is very profound. Remember 
that this explanation is according to the Traditionalists (Sautrantikas). In general, "appearing object to direct cognition" refers to the five sense 
objects but, even though these are the principal appearing objects, there 
are other direct cognizers - yogic, mental, and self direct cognizers - whose objects we must understand. 
 
Objects that are permanent things  
Permanent phenomena are necessarily the appearing and beheld objects for conceptual consciousness. Appearing object to conception, beheld object of 
conception, and permanent phenomenon are synonyms.    Conception is a consciousness that is aware of its object by means of a 
mental image. For example, when we describe something from memory we have a 
conceptual apprehension of that object, it appears to our mind through a mental image - a "meaning generality." The mental image is the appearing 
and the beheld object of the conceptual mind. Conceptual minds must realize 
their objects through mental images; unlike perception, they never directly perceive their objects. 
  A direct perceiver apprehending vase usually refers to the visual 
consciousness apprehending a vase, although it can also refer to the mental consciousness of a Buddha. On the other hand, a conception apprehending 
vase is the remembering consciousness that recollects the details of a vase 
that has been seen before.  It apprehends these recollected details, and the appearing object of this mind is the mental image of the vase. The 
actual vase is not the appearing object; it is the referent (observed) 
object. The actual vase is an impermanent phenomenon and cannot be an appearing object to conception. 
  Since "permanent phenomenon" is synonymous with appearing object to 
conception, we have to say that space is an appearing object to conception. It is easy to see that the appearing and the beheld objects of conception 
are permanent phenomena, but it is not so easy to say how they are the 
appearing and beheld objects. Space and true cessations are appearing and beheld objects of conception because they are apprehended by the conceptual 
cognizers to which they appear.   
 How does space appear to conception? When there is a visual perception of 
an empty area (bar.nang - sky), the mind thinks: "This is empty of 
obstruction, it is space." Thus, in dependence upon the visual cognition, conception thinks that the empty area is space. Space is the appearing 
object for the conception that apprehends space because it appears as a 
mental image; it is also the referent object for conception because the conception observes the actual object - space.   
 
Student  Why can't the lack of obstructive contact appear to conception without depending upon visual perception of an empty area? 
Geshe  Seeing the empty area is the basis for conceiving "space" because 
without this perception there would be nothing to point out as being space. To see an object on the other side of a river, we have to see through the 
clear area between us and the object. In the same way, we have to realize 
space through the image of an empty area. Student  Is meaning generality synonymous with appearing object to 
conception? 
Geshe  The meaning generality is the appearing object to conception, they are one. If it is asked: "What is the appearing object to the conception 
that apprehends vase?" we have to say that it is the appearance of vase to 
that conception. On the other hand, the appearing object to the conception apprehending space is space itself, but space is not the meaning 
generality. Thus there is a difference between the two relationships of 
vase and the conception apprehending vase and space and the conception apprehending space. 
 
Apprehended object and engaged object  
For a direct perception, such as the visual consciousness that apprehends blue, the color blue is both the apprehended and the engaged object. It is 
also the referent, the appearing, and the beheld object. It is "apprehended" because the visual consciousness grasps at the color blue, 
and it is "engaged" because the visual consciousness focuses upon the color 
 
 5 
blue. Grasping and engaging refer to different ways in which the mind 
becomes involved with its object. Although the ways of apprehension are different, the object remains the same. 
  For the mental consciousness that directly perceives the impermanence of 
the color blue, the impermanence of blue is the engaged object and the apprehended object. The referent object is the color blue itself. 
  Although the apprehended, beheld, and appearing object to the visual 
consciousness apprehending blue are the same thing, for that visual consciousness "appearing object" does not only refer to the color blue. The 
appearing object is everything that came into existence together with the 
color blue - its substance, its impermanence, and so on. All the attributes of blue appear to the visual consciousness but they are not necessarily 
realized by that consciousness, and so we say that visual consciousness 
engages in its object through establishment. This means that the color blue first appears to the visual consciousness together with its attributes (but 
not selflessness) and the consciousness engages in all those attributes 
that are one substance with the color blue.   
Conceived
 object  
Conceived objects only occur with conception, not direct cognition. Form is 
not the conceived object for the visual consciousness that apprehends form 
because the visual consciousness apprehends form without conception - form is the appearing object.   
  For the subject that is a conception, the conceived, engaged, and grasped 
objects are synonymous. The beheld object (zung.yul) is another way of referring to the appearing object (nang.yul). For the conception 
apprehending form, the conceived, engaged, and grasped objects are all the 
same - form. The different names are given according to the ways in which the subject - conception - functions. 
  For the conception apprehending form, the appearing object is 
contradictory to the engaged object because the conceived, grasped, and engaged objects of the conception apprehending form refer to form itself - 
a functional thing - whereas the appearing object is permanent, it is not a 
functional thing.   If something is an established base, it is not necessarily an appearing 
object for both direct cognition and conception, but an established base is 
necessarily a grasped object of conception because whatever exists is necessarily realized by conception - all existent things are realized by 
conception. 
 Student  Can omniscient mind be realized by the conception that apprehends 
it? 
Geshe  There can be a conception that realizes omniscient mind; even Buddha is an object of conception. It is grasped by conception and we can say that 
it is realized by conception because nothing is not realized by inferential 
cognition. The fact that Buddha's mind is omniscient can be realized by inference. 
 
Since everything is necessarily realized by an inferential cognizer, everything is necessarily grasped by conception - because inferential 
cognition is conceptual. If something is an established base it is also 
necessarily a grasped object of non-conceptual consciousness because non-conceptual consciousness includes Buddha's omniscient mind. When omniscient 
mind realizes all phenomena, however, all phenomena do not necessarily have 
to be realized through being appearing objects to that mind.   We can also say that even if something is an object of conception for the 
particular conception that apprehends it, it is not necessarily a 
conceptual object in general, for example, the horn of a rabbit. A rabbit's horn is not a conceptual object in general because it is not suitable to be 
an object of mind - it is not an object of knowledge. Nevertheless, we can 
say that rabbit's horn is the conceptual object for the particular conception that apprehends it.  
  In a similar way, a white snow mountain appearing as blue, and one moon 
appearing as two moons, are conceptual objects for the conceptions apprehending them but they are not conceptual objects in general. 
 
Everything that exists is an object of mind, but whatever exists is not necessarily an object within the pair "subject and object." For example, 
omniscient mind. This is not an object within the pair subject and object 
 
 6 
because it is a consciousness. Object possessor (subject) is synonymous 
with consciousness, whereas the object within the pair, subject and object, is synonymous with a phenomenon that is not consciousness. 
 
Student  Does the appearing object appear in a dualistic way? Geshe  For the Sautrantikas, the appearing object necessarily appears 
dualistically because they accept external objects. 
Student  So the yogic direct perceiver realizing selflessness has dualistic appearance? 
Geshe  Yes, but we mean the compositional factor that is the lack of self-
existence of the person is appearing dualistically.  
Vase can appear to the conception apprehending vase, but we do not say vase 
is the appearing object for that conception. The way a vase appears to the conception apprehending vase is that it appears as being mixed with the 
meaning generality (mental image) of vase. That very mixture, the mental 
image, is the appearing object of the conception apprehending vase; we can apply this to all functional things. On the other hand, when we say vase 
appears to the visual consciousness apprehending vase, there is no 
contradiction, the vase clearly and directly appears - it is the appearing object. While the vase is appearing to the visual consciousness 
apprehending vase, all of its relative qualities appear at the same time.   
  We know that when a vase appears to the eye consciousness apprehending vase, the vase is the appearing, engaged, and apprehended object. Can we 
say that, at the same time, the impermanence of vase is also the appearing 
object? Is it the engaged and the apprehended object as well? Think about it. 
 
Student  Is space or the meaning generality of space the appearing object to the conception apprehending space? 
Geshe  They both appear to this conception. As space is permanent we can 
say that space itself is also the appearing object to the conception apprehending space, but with respect to a vase we do not say that vase 
itself is an appearing object to conception - because vase itself is 
impermanent.  Are non-existents objects of mind?  
A sky flower and the horn of a rabbit are not to be known as "objects" 
because they are not able to be cognized by mind. They cannot be realized 
by a mind and they are not imputed by conception. If they were imputed by 
conception, they would be objects of conception and they would have to exist, but they do not exist. Nevertheless, we have to say that they are 
objects for the particular conception that apprehends them. Here we specify 
that if something is an object for a particular mind that apprehends it, it is an object for that conception, but in general it is not an object of 
conception. 
  Rabbits do not have horns, but for a mind that thinks it sees a horn on a rabbit at a distance, a rabbit's horn is the conceived object of that 
conception. Similarly, a sky flower can be an object for the particular 
mind that conceives a flower to exist in the sky. This does not mean that all people would see this appearance, just those with mistaken minds, such 
as those who see a rainbow and think it is a sky flower. Also, sound is 
impermanent, but for a mistaken mind there can be the conception that sound is permanent and, for that particular conception, permanent sound is the 
conceived object. 
 
Whatever is an object is not necessarily an object realized directly by 
direct perception, for example, the selflessness of person  
The selflessness of person is an object yet it is not realized directly by 
a direct perceiver. Direct perceivers do not realize selflessness of person 
directly, nor do prime inferential cognizers. This means that a yogi does 
not realize the selflessness of person through its appearance to a direct perceiver; it seems that it should, but it does not.   
  If we ask: "Isn't there any direct perceiver that realizes the 
selflessness of person directly?" The answer is yes there is, but the yogic direct perceiver does not - it only realizes the selflessness of person 
indirectly, through the appearance of the compositional factor that is the 
lack of self-existence of the person. This compositional factor is simply the fact that the self changes moment by moment - it is the subtle 
impermanence that exists within the person. When a yogic direct perceiver 
 
 7 
realizes the selflessness of person, this compositional factor appears and 
the yogic direct cognizer realizes the selflessness of person through implication - even though it is a non-conceptual mind.  
 
+---------------------------------------------------------------+   ¦Cognition                          Object                      ¦ 
+---------------------------------------------------------------¦ 
¦         ¦ Engaged ¦Conceived¦ Appearing ¦Apprehended¦Referent ¦ +---------------------------------------------------------------¦ 
¦  [1]    ¦ blue    ¦    -    ¦  blue     ¦  blue     ¦  blue   ¦ 
+---------------------------------------------------------------¦ ¦  [2]    ¦ blue    ¦  blue   ¦blue image ¦  blue     ¦  blue   ¦ 
+---------------------------------------------------------------¦ 
¦  [3]    ¦  blue   ¦    -    ¦   blue    ¦   blue    ¦ white   ¦ ¦         ¦mountain*¦         ¦ mountain  ¦ mountain  ¦mountain ¦ 
¦---------------------------------------------------------------¦ 
¦  [4]    ¦permanent¦permanent¦ image of  ¦ permanent ¦ imperm. ¦ ¦         ¦  sound* ¦  sound* ¦perm.sound ¦   sound   ¦  sound  ¦ 
+---------------------------------------------------------------+ 
 [1] = visual perception apprehending blue. 
[2] = conception apprehending blue. 
[3] = visual perception apprehending a "blue snow mountain." [4] = conception apprehending "permanent sound." 
 
*  These objects "exist" for these particular cognitions but are not objects in general because engaged and conceived objects must exist in 
reality. 
 
Omniscient mind  
Omniscient mind is an exalted wisdom of an Arya Buddha; all minds of a 
Buddha are necessarily omniscient. With omniscient mind Buddha directly realizes all phenomena - including the selflessness of person. In another 
way, however, we have to say that the selflessness of person is not 
realized directly even by the omniscient mind of Buddha. In the text there is the statement:  "The selflessness of person is directly realized by a 
direct cognizer because Buddha's omniscient mind directly realizes it."  
  This reason is not correct. We can say that Buddha's omniscient mind directly realizes the selflessness of person, but we cannot say that the 
person's selflessness is directly realized by Buddha's omniscient mind. To 
prove this, we say that the selflessness of person is not directly realized by Buddha's omniscient mind because it never appears to omniscient mind - 
it is simply a non-affirming negative phenomenon, it is permanent, and 
permanent phenomena never appear to perception. The fault in saying that the person's selflessness does appear directly to Buddha's omniscient mind 
is that person's selflessness would have to appear to direct perception, 
but if that were so it would have to be a functional phenomenon, which it is not.  
 
Prime cognizers are also objects  
We have said that whatever exists is necessarily an object, therefore, a prime cognizer is necessarily an object. This means that a prime cognizer 
is realized by another mind; for example, my own prime cognizer is an object because it is realized by a prime cognizer of another person, such 
as Buddha. Also, a Buddha's prime cognizer is realized by the prime 
cognizer of another Buddha. With respect to extraordinary beings, such as Guru Shakyamuni Buddha, we can say that his prime cognizer is realized by 
his own prime cognizer because his mind is omniscient and it realizes 
everything.    Whatever exists is an object, but whatever exists is not necessarily an object within the pair, subject and object    
In discussing objects in the context of subject and object we do not refer to mind as an object because mind refers to the subject within this pair. 
Objects distinguished within this pair are all phenomena other than consciousnesses, and subjects distinguished within this pair are all minds.  
  Also, with regard to objects, we said that if it is a conceptual object 
for a particular conception it is not necessarily a conceptual object in general. Similarly, if it is a grasped object of conception it is not 
necessarily a grasped object of conception in general, otherwise it would 
 
 8 
have to be an object for mind in general and then it would have to exist in 
reality.   Whatever is a subject is not necessarily a subject contained within the pair, subject and object  
Consciousness is a particular subject, but there are other subjects. Expressive sound is also a subject because it conveys the meaning of 
something. The sound "vase" conveys to us an understanding of the object vase. Simply by expressing the sound "vase," one eliminates non-vase, and 
vase is understood. Since the sound "vase" helps us to understand a 
meaning, it is considered to be a subject, but expressive sound is not the subject distinguished within the pair subject and object. The subject 
distinguished within this pair is consciousness, and expressive sound is 
not a consciousness; within the pair subject and object it is an object. "Consciousness" and "subject within the pair of subject and object" are 
synonymous. An object that is not consciousness is necessarily an object 
within that pair.    "Person" is also not distinguished as a subject within the pair subject 
and object. It is a subject because it realizes objects - people realize 
objects, therefore they are subjects.     Since no existent phenomenon has self-existence, all phenomena are 
selfless. "Self" here refers to a self that exists permanently, partlessly, 
and independently. Both existents and non-existents are selfless.  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
PART TWO               OBJECT POSSESSORS 
 
 
An object possessor, or a subject, is defined as a functional thing that 
possesses an object of any kind . 
  There are three types of object possessor: person, consciousness, and expressive sound. 
 
Person  A person is a being imputed upon a collection of four or five 
aggregates . All beings, from the peak of cyclic existence to the lowest 
hell, are persons labelled upon their particular collection of aggregates. 
Beings in the formless realm have only four aggregates, all others have five. Synonyms for person are self, I, and being. Objects possessed by 
persons are the different kinds of knowledge, such as worldly skills, and 
material possessions. Illustrations of persons are humans, gods, and animals. 
  Persons are imputed upon groups of either four or five aggregates, not 
upon any single aggregate. According to the Sautrantikas, the mental consciousness is the basis of imputation of the person and so, in the final 
analysis, the person is only imputed upon the consciousness aggregate, but 
without analysis it is imputed upon all five.   Consciousness  (she.pa)  Consciousness is defined as that which is clear and 
knowing. Consciousness has three synonyms: mind (sems), cognizer (rig.pa), 
and awareness (blo). Consciousness is divided into prime and non-prime 
cognition. 
  In general mind has many types, such as virtuous and unvirtuous minds, 
correct and incorrect minds, love, compassion, and so on, but within the pair, mind and mental factors, "mind" specifically refers to the six 
primary consciousnesses. In that context there are three synonyms: mind, 
mentality, and primary consciousness.  Expressive sounds  are explained in Part Six.  
  
 
 
 9 
PRIME COGNITION 
 
Definition   Prime cognition (Skt. pramana) is a cognizer that is new and 
incontrovertible.   "New" (Skt. pra) excludes subsequent cognition, that is, a mind that realizes an object after it has already been realized. Prime cognizers have 
a quality of originality by which they arise, whereas subsequent cognizers are induced by the force of this initial cognition. The Prasangikas assert 
that a prime cognizer does not need to realize its object freshly (they 
take pra to mean main and mana to mean comprehend; thus pramana means that 
which is incontrovertible with regard to its main object). For them, 
subsequent cognizers are also prime.  
  "Incontrovertible" excludes presumption. An example of a presumption is the thought that thinks sound is impermanent, but is not certain. This 
thought is controvertible and so it is not a prime cognizer. Presumption is 
controvertible because it is not completely certain about the status of its object. 
  "Cognizer" excludes a physical sense base, such as the eye organ, from 
being a prime cognizer. According to the Vaibhasikas, the eye organ is a prime cognizer because it "sees" objects existing in reality, but the 
Sautrantikas do not agree. 
  All consciousnesses of a Buddha are prime or "valid" cognizers. Buddha is a valid person - all beings can rely upon him. Buddha's speech is valid 
because his statements can be relied upon, but it is not a valid cognizer 
because it is sound - a division of form. Buddha is called "valid" but not "valid cognizer" because he is a person, not a consciousness.  
  There are two types of prime cognizer: prime direct cognition and prime 
inferential cognition.  
 
 
 
DIRECT COGNITION  
 
Definition   A direct cognizer is a cognizer that is free from conceptuality 
and is incontrovertible .  
  Direct cognizers are always perceptions - the six main consciousnesses. 
Conceptions are not direct cognizers; they are thoughts that occur within 
the mental consciousness. The four types of direct cognition are:  
 1  Sense direct perception 
2  Mental direct perception 
3  Self-cognizing direct perception (apperception) 4  Yogic direct perception 
 
 
1  Sense direct perception  is defined as an incontrovertible, non-
conceptual, direct perceiver that arises in dependence upon its particular 
dominant condition - a physical sense organ .  
  The sense organ enables the consciousness to function with respect to its 
object; it is essential for sense cognition just as a cup is needed to hold 
tea. There are five types of sense direct perception: visual, auditory, 
olfactory, gustatory, and tactile cognition.    The subjective (dominant) condition is the physical organ, which forces 
the consciousness to engage in its object, it is one of the causes of the 
sense consciousness. The dominant condition of the eye consciousness is the subtle form of the eye organ. It is not the gross eyeball, its nature is 
lucid - the subtle form contained within the eyeball. The other four sense 
organs have their own subtle forms and these are the dominant conditions of their particular sense consciousnesses. The physical organs are like 
cushions upon which the five sense consciousnesses sit. 
 
Visual perception  is defined as a non-conceptual and incontrovertible 
cognizer that arises in dependence upon the eye organ as its own subjective 
condition, and its own referent condition - visible form . 
  The definitions of the remaining sense consciousnesses should be 
understood in a similar way. 
  Visual perception can have three aspects: prime cognition, subsequent 
cognition, and inattentive cognition. If we can understand these in 
 
 10 
relation to eye consciousness we can understand them in relation to the 
other sense consciousnesses.    Prime visual perception  refers to the first moment of visual cognition of 
form. This has all three parts of the definition of a prime cognizer because it is a new cognizer with respect to form, it is incontrovertible 
because it definitely sees and realizes form, and it is a cognition. In the same way, the first moments of the remaining sense consciousnesses are 
prime cognizers. 
 
Subsequent visual perception  refers to the moments of visual consciousness 
following the first moment. These are "subsequent cognition" because the 
object, form, is not being realized newly or for the first time. Form is 
realized in the first moment and the subsequent moments of eye 
consciousness realize form through the power of the first moment of cognition. Just as the second moment of the visual consciousness 
apprehending form is a subsequent cognizer, the second moments of the 
remaining sense consciousnesses are subsequent cognizers.  Inattentive visual perception  occurs when the visual consciousness is 
functioning but the mind is distracted by another object, such as a sound. 
The visual consciousness does not properly cognize its object, form, which appears but is not realized. Just as the mind absorbed in a pleasant sound 
leads to inattentive visual consciousness, there can be inattentive 
cognition in relation to the other four senses.  
Thus the five sense direct perceivers have all three possibilities - prime 
cognition, subsequent cognition, and inattentive cognition. All five are similar in that they arise in dependence upon a specific physical organ - 
the subjective condition - and that they have an external form as their 
referent condition.  
 
2  Mental direct perception  is defined as a non-conceptual, 
incontrovertible, other-cognizing consciousness that arises in dependence 
upon its own subjective condition, the mental organ . 
  The subjective condition for mental direct perception is not physical, it 
is known as the mental organ and is any consciousness - sensory or mental - that immediately precedes the mental direct perception; it can be a 
conceptual consciousness. "Other-cognizing" means that mental direct 
perception is not a self-cognizer.   Mental direct perception also has the three aspects of prime cognition, 
subsequent cognition, and inattentive cognition. An example of prime mental 
direct perception is the first moment of clairvoyance knowing another's mind. Examples of subsequent mental direct perception are the second, 
third, and fourth moments of this clairvoyance. An example of inattentive 
mental direct perception is the mental direct perceiver that apprehends sound but is absorbed in another attractive object. 
 
 
3  Apperception  is defined as  a non-conceptual, incontrovertible cognizer 
that bears the aspect of an apprehender . 
  "Bearing the aspect of an apprehender" means that wherever there is 
apprehension, such as the visual apprehension of the color blue, there is a self-cognizing consciousness - apperception - that perceives the 
apprehending consciousness itself. The object of apperception is always 
another consciousness, something that is clear and knowing; external objects never appear to apperception. 
  Apperception is a substance of any consciousness, for example, visual 
consciousness has its own apperception, which is one substance with the visual consciousness itself. It has the aspect of clear and knowing which 
realizes the external object, and another part, which does not perceive 
external things but simply perceives the state of clear and knowing, and this is the self-cognizer. The self-cognizing direct perceiver is always 
directed inwards, never to other phenomena that are not conjoined with 
one's own mental continuum.   Apperception has the three aspects of prime cognition, subsequent 
cognition, and inattentive cognition. An example of a prime apperception is 
the first moment of apperception experiencing a visual consciousness; the 
 
 11 
following moments are subsequently-cognizing apperception. The Tirthikas 
say that pleasant feeling is not a consciousness, and so an example of inattentive apperception is the apperception experiencing the feeling of 
pleasure when a Tirthika eats nice food. The Tirthika does not realize that 
his pleasure is a consciousness, nor does his apperception realize that the pleasant feeling is a consciousness. Another example of inattentive 
apperception is the self-cognizer that experiences inferential cognition 
within the continuum of a Hearer. Hearers do not accept inferential cognition, nevertheless they do have inferential cognition and that has 
apperception. 
 If we ask: "To which of the mental factors does apperception belong?" The 
answer is that it is neither a main mind nor a mental factor. All 
consciousnesses are called "other-cognizers" because they perceive their own particular objects; each consciousness has its own state of clear and 
knowing and this state itself is apperception. Every consciousness, 
perceptual or conceptual, prime or non-prime, comes into existence at the same time as its self-cognizer. A consciousness that is incorrect but still 
has apperception is the self-grasping attitude. This conception has 
apperception because its nature is clear, and it is an other-cognizer because it conceives self-existence, which appears to it. 
  Other-cognizers and self-cognizers can be explained through the 
illustration of a piece of clear glass placed upon a blue cloth. The transparent glass has its own lucidity, which is like a self-cognizer, and 
at the same time the glass takes on a bluish appearance due to the cloth - 
this is like the other-cognizing aspect of consciousness. Visual consciousness has one part that is an other-cognizer and another part that 
is self-cognizer. When the visual consciousness apprehends the color blue, 
the part that sees blue is the other-cognizer and within that conscious-ness the aspect that is clear and knowing is apperception. 
 
 
 
4  Yogic direct perception  is defined as a non-conceptual, 
incontrovertible, other-cognizing consciousness in the continuum of an Arya 
being that is generated in dependence upon its uncommon subjective 
condition - a concentration that is a unity of calm abiding and higher seeing. 
  The way in which the unity of calm-abiding and higher-seeing acts as the 
subjective condition is that a yogi meditates on any of the sixteen 
attributes of the four noble truths, such as impermanence, and on the basis 
of calm-abiding the yogi analyses this through higher-seeing. The two become one consciousness and from this integration there arises a yogic 
direct perception that is incontrovertible and free from conception. The 
subjective condition functions by strongly inducing direct perception. Yogic direct perception exists only in the continuum of an Arya - one who 
has realized emptiness - not in the mind of an ordinary being. It can have 
only two divisions, prime and subsequent, it can never be inattentive because it is a powerful consciousness that can ascertain any object that 
appears to it and there is no occasion when it can be inattentive. 
  Sensory, mental, and self direct perception can exist in the continuum of any being, ordinary or Arya, whereas yogic direct perception only occurs in 
the mind of an Arya. The object of yogic direct perception is always 
selflessness of person or subtle impermanence. The first moment of yogic direct perception apprehending impermanence is prime cognition and the 
later moments of that apprehension are subsequent cognition. 
 If a yogic direct perceiver can be subsequent cognition, one wonders if a 
Buddha also has subsequent cognition. Buddhas, however, do not have 
subsequent cognition. Once the omniscient mind is attained, all phenomena are realized directly and perfectly in each moment. There are no obscuring 
veils, no mistaken thoughts, and no wrong consciousnesses because all 
objects to be abandoned have been abandoned and there are no causes left for a mistaken consciousness to happen. Ordinary beings cannot easily 
perceive objects, especially those at a great distance in space or time, 
because there are many obscurations within the mind that prevent such perception. Buddhas have removed these veils, but we may still think that 
although the first moment of omniscient mind is a prime cognizer, the later 
moments are subsequent cognizers. In this case, we can say that the second moment of omniscient mind is not a subsequent cognizer because it realizes 
 
 12 
objects without depending upon the power of the previous moment of 
cognition. Subsequent cognizers are usually said to be non-prime because they realize their object in dependence upon the force of the previous 
moment of consciousness. 
 
 
 
 PRIME DIRECT COGNITION  
 
Definition   Prime direct cognition is a new, incontrovertible, non-
conceptual cognizer.  
  The only difference between this and the definition of direct cognition 
is the word new - which indicates that we are referring to the first moment 
of cognition. There are four types of prime direct cognition: 
 1  Sensory prime direct cognition 
2  Mental prime direct cognition 
3  Apperceptive prime direct cognition 4  Yogic prime direct cognition 
 
 
1  Sensory prime direct cognition  is defined as a new, incontrovertible, 
non-conceptual cognizer that arises in dependence upon a physical sense 
power as its uncommon subjective condition . 
  There are five types - the first moments of each of the five sense 
consciousnesses - each of which has its own particular sense organ. 
 
2  Mental prime direct cognition  is defined as a new, incontrovertible, 
non-conceptual cognizer that arises in dependence upon the mental sense 
power as its uncommon or subjective condition.  
  Both sensory and mental direct cognizers have subjective conditions that 
are "sense organs." For mental direct cognizers, the sense organ is the mind itself - any consciousness that arises immediately before the mental 
cognizer. For sensory direct cognition it is the physical sense organs 
themselves.     When the visual consciousness of an ordinary being apprehends a visual 
form a mental consciousness arises, but only the first moment is a mental 
direct cognizer, the subsequent moments are conceptual. This first moment of direct mental cognition is inattentive - ordinary people do not have 
prime or subsequent mental direct cognition unless they have clairvoyance 
such as the clairvoyance of seeing another person's mind.  3  Apperceptive prime direct cognition  is defined as a new, 
incontrovertible, non-conceptual cognizer that bears the aspect of an 
apprehender . 
  The Sautrantikas and the Cittamatrins posit self-cognizers but the Prasangikas refute them, saying that if one posits a self-cognizer of a 
visual consciousness there should be a self-cognizer of that self-cognizer and so on, ad infinitum. The other schools reply that there is a need for a 
self-cognizer of a sense consciousness but there is no need for a self-
cognizer of a self-cognizer because the self-cognizer is simply the clear aspect of an other-cognizing consciousness. 
 
4  Yogic prime direct cognition  is defined as  a new, incontrovertible, 
other-cognizing knower, in the continuum of an Arya, that is free from 
conception and directly realizes either subtle impermanence or selflessness of person (gross or subtle), in dependence upon a concentration that is the 
unity of calm-abiding and higher-seeing . 
  Subtle impermanence is the moment-by-moment change that occurs every 1/65th of a finger-snap. Gross selflessness of person is the person's 
emptiness of existing permanently, part-lessly, and independently; subtle selflessness of person is the person's emptiness of existing self-
sufficiently and substantially. 
 When the mental consciousness of an ordinary being apprehends physical 
objects, such as visual forms or sounds, it is an inattentive mind. 
Ordinary beings see form through the visual consciousness, there is one moment of inattentive direct mental cognition, and this is followed by 
 
 13 
conception. The conception of blue, for example, can co-exist with the 
subsequent moments of visual consciousness apprehending blue.  
Student  What is the object for the first moment of mental direct 
perception of blue? Geshe  The blue form that has been cognized by the visual consciousness. 
The cause (blue color) ceasing and the arising of the first moment of 
visual consciousness apprehending blue occur simultaneously, so when the first moment of visual consciousness apprehending blue apprehends blue, 
does it take as its cause the previous moment of blue or the moment of blue 
that is existing simultaneously with it? Logically, the causal blue ceases at the time the visual consciousness apprehending blue arises, thus "blue 
appearing to the visual consciousness apprehending blue" does not refer to 
the causal blue. The blue appearing to the mental direct perception can only be blue existing simultaneously with the mental direct perception of 
blue. The next moment a conception arises and that also apprehends blue, 
and that blue is the blue that is contemporary with the conception. Student  When visual cognition of blue and a conception of blue occur at 
the same time, is the visual consciousness inattentive? 
Geshe  The visual consciousness existing at the same time as the conception no longer holds the same object. We have form, visual consciousness, and 
conception and by the time the conception arises the visual consciousness 
is a subsequent cognizer with respect to the object blue, but the object is a different blue to that apprehended by conception. 
Student  Can direct eye consciousness and direct ear consciousness exist at 
the same time without one being inattentive? Geshe  It seems that they can exist at the same time without one being 
inattentive because if later on the person can remember both the visual 
object and the sound, there was no inattentive cognition. An inattentive thought cannot induce a later memory of the object. When one becomes an 
Arya, one's consciousness becomes very powerful and every object that 
appears is always realized (ascertained) and is thus able to be remembered.   Another way of looking at this problem is that when two sense 
consciousnesses of an ordinary being are functioning simultaneously they 
seem to apprehend their objects simultaneously, but perhaps there is a changing from one to the other that is too quick to be noticed and it only 
seems that they are experiencing two different sensations without 
inattention. The two objects are said to be experienced simultaneously but one consciousness can be inattentive for a few moments, then become 
attentive while the other becomes inattentive for a few moments and so on. 
Student  Are the sense consciousnesses of an Arya necessarily attentive? Geshe  Yogic direct perception is never inattentive because it is a 
perceiver based upon the unity of calm abiding and higher seeing, but one 
cannot say that there is no inattentive cognizer in the continuum of an Arya because Aryas can still have afflictions. 
 
 
FACSIMILES
 OF DIRECT  PERCEPTION  
 Facsimiles of direct perception are cognizers that are mistaken with 
respect to their appearing object . There are seven types, six of which are 
conceptual and the seventh non-conceptual; they are all mistaken consciousnesses. 
 1  Wrong conception 
2  Conventional conception 
3  Conception leading to an inference 4  Conception arising from an inference 
5  Conception arising from memory 
6  Conception projecting into the future 7  Non-conceptual facsimiles of direct perception - mental and  
     sensory. 
 
1  Wrong conception   A wrong conception is a conception that is mistaken 
with respect to both its appearing object and its apprehended object. 
  An example is the conception that apprehends sound to be permanent. This 
mental consciousness is a wrong thought because, like all conceptions, it is mistaken with respect to its appearing object. To all conceptions a 
mental image mistakenly appears to be the real object. In this case the 
mental image of permanent sound and permanent sound appear to the 
 
 14 
conceptual mind as inseparable. This conception is also mistaken with 
respect to its apprehended object because although sound is impermanent, it is apprehended to be permanent. Thirdly, the conception apprehending 
permanent sound has engaged in its object in a mistaken manner, thus it is 
mistaken with respect to its engaged object as well.   Other examples of wrong conceptions are the conception that apprehends 
blue as yellow, the conception that apprehends the aggregates to be 
permanent, the thoughts that there is no future existence, no law of cause and effect, and so on. A wrong consciousness (log.she) is a mind that 
apprehends an object that does not exist in reality. All conceptions are 
mistaken consciousnesses (tul.she) because they see the mental image as inseparable from the apprehended object. 
 
 
2  Conventional conception  is a conception that is correct with respect to 
its apprehended object, for example, the prime inference apprehending sound 
to be impermanent. This conception is correct because the apprehended 
object, sound, is impermanent in reality. Nevertheless, it is still a 
mistaken consciousness, because it is mistaken with respect to its appearing object - the meaning generality of impermanent sound - which 
appears to be oneness with impermanent sound.   
  The mental image appears as if it is the real impermanent sound and the conceptual mind takes this appearance to be true. All conceptions possess 
this mistake of confusing the mental image with the actual object or the 
real meaning. An illustration of a mental image is when someone sees a particular object, such as a large and expensive table, for the first time 
and this leaves an impression on the mind so that when one goes away from 
the table it still appears to the mind - its shape, color, and so on. This appearance is the mental image. If we close our eyes and think of the 
things we possess, their appearance to our conceptual mind is the mental 
image. The actual objects appear as mixed with this appearance arising from memory and our mind takes the mental image to be the actual objects. 
 
Student  How can the actual object as well as the mental image appear to conception? 
Geshe  The mental image appearing to your conception and the object you 
possess appear as mixed, the object does not appear directly without a mental image, otherwise you would have direct mental perception. 
Student  What is the mental image of permanent sound inseparably mixed 
with? Geshe  The mental image of permanent sound and permanent sound appear as 
one, this is the mistake. Even though there is no permanent sound, it still 
appears. For example, the table appears to us as a permanent table because it was here yesterday, it is here now, and it will be here tomorrow. 
Similarly, when we see a person we think it is the same person we saw 
yesterday and will see tomorrow, and we think the person is permanent. A permanent person can never appear to our perception because such a person 
does not exist. Conceptions apprehending permanence project permanence 
through mistaken reasons; when we understand mistaken conceptions, we will be able to recognize undesirable minds in our own continuum and we will be 
able to abandon them, recognizing that there is a remedy for each. 
 Wrong conceptions are mistaken with respect to their appearing and their 
apprehended objects, whereas conventional conceptions, such as a prime 
inference, are non-mistaken with respect to their apprehended objects. Correct presumption (a non-prime cognizer) is also an example of a 
conventional conception. 
  The conception of sound to be impermanent and the conception of sound to be permanent both have sound as their referent object. The conception of 
sound to be impermanent, however, is a factually concordant mind because 
its apprehended object exists that way in reality, whereas the conception of sound to be permanent is factually discordant because its apprehended 
object does not exist in reality. Thus if a mind is mistaken it is not 
necessarily a wrong consciousness because all conceptions are mistaken but they are not all wrong. After long meditation on the correct conception of 
sound to be impermanent, that mind can turn into a mental direct 
perception. We cannot apprehend sound to be impermanent through our sense consciousness; we can only do so through logical reasoning which leads to 
direct mental perception. 
 
 
 15 
3  Conception leading to an inference  refers to conceptions that are causes 
leading to inferential realizations. They may also be called "minds apprehending logical reasons." For example, to gain the inferential 
realization of impermanent sound we meditate on the reasons why sound is impermanent, such as: "sound is impermanent because it is a product." The 
conception that apprehends the logical sign product is a cause for the 
correct inferential realization - which arises as a result. A conception leading to an inference can be any thought that will turn into a correct 
inferential realization. We cannot directly realize impermanent sound 
through our sense consciousness.  
 
4  Conception arising from an inference.   After meditating on the reasons 
why sound is impermanent, we attain the first moment of inferential 
realization of impermanent sound - the prime inferential cognition. All the subsequent moments are non-prime; they are conception arising from an 
inference. 
  5  Conception arising from memory  refers to any conception that arises by 
remembering a past event. This can include the subsequent moments of 
inferential cognition - as in conceptions arising from an inference, but it usually refers to memories arising after a time gap, not subsequent moments 
of cognition. 
  6  Conception projecting into the future  is any conception planning to do 
something in the future, for example aspirational bodhicitta. The conception apprehending permanent sound is a wrong consciousness 
mistaken with respect to its apprehended object - it grasps sound wrongly. Conventional conceptions are correct with respect to their apprehended 
objects, but mistaken with respect to their appearing objects because the 
mental image and the object itself appear as mixed. Conceptions leading to an inference are causes for inferential realization; they are thoughts that 
apprehend logical signs before the actual realization. Conceptions arising 
after an inference are conceptions that follow the first moment of inferential cognition. Conceptions arising from memory arise after a time 
gap between first cognizing something and then remembering it. Conceptions 
projecting into the future are thoughts of doing something in the future. All six are mistaken with respect to their appearing objects. 
  When we meditate on ourselves as impermanent, our conception is a 
mistaken consciousness, but this does not mean that we have to immediately abandon it. It is essential for us to meditate on ourselves, our body, and 
our human life as impermanent, transient, and easily lost. The conception 
apprehending impermanent sound is a mistaken consciousness but it is not an object to be abandoned. By understanding the impermanence of sound through 
reasoning, we are able to realize the impermanence of other external 
objects by seeing their gross change, and this helps us to understand our own impermanence.   
  Using the three roots and the nine-fold reasoning we meditate on our own 
gross impermanence - we are not immortal, one day we will have to leave this physical body and go elsewhere. To realize subtle impermanence of the 
self, we need to meditate for a long time; eventually we realize the subtle 
moment-by-moment change of the body and we attain the state of an Arya. Only an Arya sees subtle impermanence with direct perception, ordinary 
beings can have an artificial understanding derived from conceptual 
reasoning. Meditating on impermanence and selflessness quickly leads to Buddhahood. Lama Puntsok said: "My meditation on non-true existence is more 
powerful than three years meditation on Yamantaka because it helps me to 
realize reality."   When we meditate on non-true existence we need to analyse why things do 
not exist truly and this analysis directly harms the root of cyclic 
existence. Scientific understanding of subtle impermanence is only presumption, it is not direct cognition. 
 
 
7  Non-conceptual facsimiles of direct perception  
 
A  Sensory facsimiles of direct perception  There are four types according 
to four different conditions, for example: 
 
 16 
 
  (i)  Cause of error in the subject The appearance of hairs in           front of the eyes due to cataract; seeing two moons when  
         one eye is pressed with a finger; jaundiced people  
         seeing a white snow mountain as yellow.  (ii)  Cause of error in the environment When travelling in a  
         car and objects outside seem to be flowing backwards. 
(iii)  Cause of error in the object When a burning stick spun in           a circle causes the appearance of a wheel of flame. 
 (iv)  Cause of error in the immediate (preceding) condition An  
         angry person perceiving the world as red.  
All four examples are wrong consciousnesses, non-conceptual, and mistaken. 
Facsimile direct perceivers are necessarily wrong consciousnesses because they engage in their objects in the wrong way. They are called 
consciousnesses to which a non-existent clearly appears to exist.  
  In general, if it is a wrong consciousness it is necessarily mistaken, but if it is a mistaken consciousness it is not necessarily wrong.  
 
B  Mental facsimiles of direct perception  
An example of a mental facsimile of direct perception is a dream consciousness that perceives a herd of elephants in the bedroom. The sense 
consciousnesses do not function within dreams, they are dormant but can manifest when an external object manifests - such as the sound of your 
alarm clock. The awareness of dream elephants is a mental consciousness 
which, in this example, clearly cognizes a non-existent phenomenon but it seems to be a real direct perception. Some dream consciousnesses can be 
conceptual, others direct. 
 
 
PRIME INFERENTIAL COGNITION  
 
Definition   Prime inferential cognition is a new, conceptual cognizer that 
is incontrovertible with respect to its apprehended object - a hidden 
phenomenon - and is generated in dependence upon a correct logical sign as 
its basis.  
  Inferential cognition is a conceptual awareness of subtle objects that is acquired in dependence upon logical reasoning. Simple objects, such as 
colors and sounds, can be known by direct cognition, but subtle objects, such as the impermanence of compounded phenomena, the misery of 
contaminated phenomena, and the selflessness of phenomena, cannot be 
cognized through the senses, we must rely upon logical signs to know them.   For example, we cannot immediately understand that our aggregates are 
impermanent. To do so, we must follow a process of logical reasoning such 
as: "The aggregates are impermanent because they are products."    The logical sign "product" proves that the aggregates are impermanent, 
and understanding this leads to a prime inferential cognition of the 
impermanence of the aggregates. The prime inferential cognition realizing the aggregates to be miserable can be acquired in dependence upon the 
logical reasoning that the aggregates are miserable because they are 
dominated by karma and affliction. Karma and affliction are the logical signs showing that the aggregates are in the nature of misery. The first 
moment of the realization is prime inferential cognition; the later moments 
are subsequent inferential cognition. Prime inferential cognition of the selflessness of the aggregates can be acquired through the logical sign 
that they are dependent-arisings.  
  As soon as the aggregates come into existence they are functioning things, impermanent, in the nature of misery, selfless, and empty. Even 
though the aggregates and their attributes exist simultaneously, we do not 
realize them all at the same time. For example, first we see the physical body, then we realize its impermanence, then its nature of misery, and then 
its selflessness and emptiness. 
 Inferential understanding is an awareness that arises after first seeing 
three points: 
   (i) The basic agreement : establishing the presence of the  
        reason on the subject. 
  
 
 17 
(ii) The forward pervasion : understanding that the reason is  
        pervaded by the predicate. (iii) The reverse pervasion : understanding that the non- 
        predicate is pervaded by the non-sign. 
 We can understand these three modes in relation to the syllogism: "The 
aggregates are impermanent because they are products."  
  The person who uses this syllogism to prove that the aggregates are impermanent must already understand that the aggregates are impermanent 
through the sign that they are products. He must know the basic agreement 
that the aggregates are products, he must know the forward pervasion that whatever is a product is necessarily impermanent, and he must know the 
reverse pervasion that products do not exist within the class of permanent. 
The person to whom the syllogism is given will then develop these three modes of understanding and will acquire a prime inferential cognition. 
Prime inferential cognition has three divisions: 
 1  Inference through the power of fact 
2  Inference through renown 
3  Inference through belief  1  Inference through the power of fact  is so-called because it is through 
the qualities (the facts) of the phenomenon that we are able to use logical reasoning to understand it. The "power of the fact" means that the quality 
is there through the very existence of the phenomenon. For example, fire has the nature of hot and burning and the qualities of hot and burning 
exist because of the fire itself - as soon as fire arises the qualities 
arise by the power of the fact. Similarly, as soon as the aggregates arise, they arise with their own fact of impermanence. We can also say that the 
aggregates are miserable, selfless, and empty because these qualities also 
arise through the power of the fact, and realizing these qualities by the power of fact is inferential understanding through the nature of the 
phenomenon.  
 Student  How is this different to realizing through logic? 
Geshe  All inferential realizations are based upon logic, including this 
one. "Power of the fact" refers to a particular situation. Here, inferential prime cognition is acquired through logical reasoning based 
upon the natural power or power of fact. This natural power is stable; it 
cannot be changed by anybody, not even by the Buddhas and Bodhisattvas.  2  Inference through renown  is an inferential understanding that can arise 
through knowing something that is commonly held to be true. When a name is given to a particular object, similar objects are then conventionally 
called by the same name. For example, in the beginning somebody had the wish to name an object like this (points to the microphone) "microphone." 
The convention then arose to name all objects with a similar appearance and 
function as "microphones." Thus, whenever we see such objects we have a prime inference understanding that it is suitable to call them microphones. 
  Another example is that "Rabbit Bearer" is an object that is suitable to 
be called moon because it is conventionally held that there is an image of a rabbit on the face of the moon. The moon is known as "Rabbit Bearer" only 
through conventional reputation, not through the power of fact. Fire always 
has the nature of heat and burning, it is not something labelled and then conventionally held to be so. Also, the nature of fire cannot be changed by 
changing the name.  
  We have been introduced to two types of phenomenon: natural phenomena and phenomena that are dependent upon designation. The objects of inference by 
the power of fact exist by themselves, without designation, and the objects 
of inference through renown only exist by being labelled.   3  Inference through belief  is an inference acquired through belief in a 
valid statement, such as the word of Buddha. The object of this inference 
is a very hidden phenomenon, for example, the fact that morality leads to a happy rebirth, or that making charity leads to wealth in a future life. 
Buddha's statements that generosity leads to wealth and so on are correct 
because they are not contradicted by the three-fold analysis: no contradiction is seen by prime direct cognition or by prime inferential 
cognition, and there is no internal contradiction in the words of the 
sutra. 
 
 18 
  To realize very hidden phenomena we must depend on the words of realized 
beings who are able to directly perceive reality.  Buddha's word not being harmed by the three-fold analysis is like when a jeweller buys gold - he 
first checks its gross nature by holding it in a flame, then he looks more 
closely by cutting the gold with a knife, and then he checks the most subtle quality by rubbing it with a special black stone.  
  Flaming the gold is like checking with direct perception to see if there 
is a fault in Buddha's words; cutting it is like checking through inferential cognition; and rubbing it is like checking for any internal 
contradiction in the words of the teaching. 
  Sign-apprehending mind  
 
Compounded phenomena are phenomena produced by causes and conditions, and 
they are all impermanent. Subtle impermanence is too subtle to be perceived 
by the sense consciousness. To cognize subtle impermanence we must first use a logical reasoning to develop a prime inferential cognition and this 
leads to direct mental cognition. Although compounded phenomena have an 
impermanent nature, due to instinctual grasping at permanence they are seen by ordinary beings to be permanent. For example, this instinct manifests in 
our mind when today's table appears to be the same as yesterday's table and 
we grasp at that appearance to be true. Also, whenever we relate to a friend, we regard that person to be the same person we have always known.  
  Meditation on subtle impermanence is the first step towards the 
realization of selflessness - the direct antidote to grasping at self-existence which is the root of cyclic existence. After realizing 
impermanence, we must then understand that all contaminated phenomena are 
miserable, empty, and selfless. Meditation on gross impermanence is a meditation belonging to the level of the being of lowest scope - one who 
aspires only to the attainment of happiness in the future life. Meditation 
on subtle impermanence belongs to the being of the medium scope - one who aspires to personal liberation from cyclic existence.  
  The conception grasping at the aggregates to be permanent is the complete 
opposite of the conception grasping at the aggregates to be impermanent because the former sees the aggregates to be always the same whereas the 
latter sees them to be changing moment-by-moment. When we understand that 
the aggregates are impermanent, there is no way for the conception grasping them as permanent to arise, the two conceptions are mutually exclusive.   
  We must use logical reasoning to acquire the realization that the 
aggregates are impermanent, for example: "The person is impermanent because it is momentary," or we can use the sign that it is a product of causes and 
conditions. 
  Impermanence is defined as "momentariness" and, as the person has a momentary nature, we can say that the person is impermanent. The syllogism: 
"The person is impermanent because it is a product" has three steps of 
logic:   
  (i) Understanding the basic agreement  that the  person is a  
        product.  (ii) Understanding the forward pervasion that if something is a 
        product it is necessarily impermanent. 
(iii) Understanding the reverse pervasion  that products  
        necessarily do not belong to the class of permanent. 
 
These three steps must precede the inferential realization that the person is impermanent; they show us the validity of the logical sign. We then 
meditate on logical signs to realize the remaining three aspects of true 
suffering.  
True cessation is a permanent phenomenon, it is not produced by causes and 
conditions but it seems to be, because it arises after meditating on the true path. Similarly, emptiness is permanent but it seems to be created 
because the emptiness of a vase comes into existence at the same time as 
the vase is made. Also, after meditating on the seven precepts of cause and effect, the mind-generation of bodhicitta arises and at the same time the 
emptiness of that mind arises. The bodhicitta is a new phenomenon, and it 
seems that the emptiness which arises with it is a phenomenon that is newly produced as a result of the meditation, but this is not so. The emptiness 
of a newly created thing arises with it and goes away with its destruction, 
 
 19 
but this arising and ceasing of emptiness is not a result of causes and 
conditions of emptiness.   The moments of cognition that follow a prime direct or inferential 
cognition are subsequent cognition. The first moment is prime because it is 
new, the subsequent moments are non-prime because they cognize the same object that has been cognized before. Prime inferential cognition can also 
be called "inference for ones own purpose," as opposed to "inference for 
another's purpose." The latter is not an actual inference; it refers to the words one uses to generate an inferential understanding in the mind of 
another person.  
  For example, when we say to another person, "If it is a product it must be impermanent, like sound," this can cause the other person to have a 
prime inferential realization of impermanence of an object.  
  In general, impermanence can be realized with respect to any compounded phenomenon - sound, the aggregates, and so on. Things such as a flash of 
lightning or a finger snap are used as illustrations for impermanence 
because they arise and then quickly disappear; this makes it easy for us to understand impermanence. When we understand the logic behind the proof that 
sound is an impermanent because it is a product, we can understand how this 
logic works for all functioning things; we have acquired a sign-
apprehending mind  - the mind which holds the logical reason. This sign-
apprehending mind is conceived before the inferential cognition of the 
impermanence of sound, and it understands the three steps: basic agreement, forward pervasion, and reverse pervasion. 
  The mind that understands the basic agreement  knows that sound is a 
product. The first moment of this mind is a prime cognizer, the remaining moments are subsequent cognition, and it can be direct or inferential.   
  The mind that understands the forward pervasion  knows that products are 
necessarily impermanent, and so it understands that if sound is a product it is necessarily impermanent. This mind can also be a direct or an 
inferential cognizer with subsequent cognition. 
  The mind that understands the reverse pervasion  knows that products 
necessarily do not exist within the class of permanent. This understanding 
comes indirectly, as soon as one realizes the second step. 
  If somebody knows that "product" means necessarily not existing within the class of permanent, that person also has the understanding that product 
is necessarily impermanent. This comprehension also has the aspects of 
prime and subsequent cognition. If it is a result of direct cognition it is a direct prime cognizer and if it is the result of a logical sign it is 
inferential prime cognition. 
  The statement "sound is impermanent because it is a product" is used in the situation where a person does not know whether sound is permanent or 
not, and we want him to know. We tell him that sound is definitely 
impermanent because it is a product, and we support this statement with explanations, such as: "It is a product because it is produced by causes 
and conditions." This leads him to understand the first step, the basic 
agreement. We then explain how products are necessarily impermanent, and he understands the second step, the forward pervasion. 
  At this point, the person has four levels of understanding: if it is a 
product it is impermanent; if it is any product it is impermanent; product does not exist in the class of permanent; and there is no common locus 
between product and permanent. Thus he has all three comprehensions, which 
he must try to maintain and then cultivate the inferential cognition of impermanent sound. This mind holding the logical sign is a mind that 
cognizes the three steps and it is a cause for the realization of that 
which is to be proven.   Cognizing the three steps means that whenever a logical sign is 
established, the three steps are presented and the mind holding the logical 
sign has these three comprehensions. Cognizing the three steps is a general statement, specifically, it means the mind that holds sound to be 
impermanent does so by holding the three steps for the sign "product." This 
sign-apprehending mind is the cause for realizing that which is to be proven - sound is impermanent. 
  When sound comes into existence, its attributes of arising, functioning 
thing, impermanence, and so on, all come into existence at the same time and, as established bases are necessarily realized by prime cognition, it 
seems that when we realize sound we should realize all of its attributes at 
the same time. This, however, is not so because we realize sound through the negation of non-sound, and on the basis of that conceptual realization 
of sound we must then negate non-product to establish its attribute of 
 
 20 
being a product. Similarly, on the basis of the conception of sound we must 
negate permanence to establish impermanence of sound. Some attributes that are one substance (in three ways) with sound are more difficult to realize 
than others. Functioning thing is easy, product is more difficult, and 
impermanence is even more difficult. On the same basis - the conception of sound - we can also negate self-existence and establish the selflessness of 
sound.   
 It is important to know that whenever a conception engages in an object it 
does so by eliminating a negatee. For example, to engage in sound, 
conception eliminates non-sound; to engage in product on the basis of the conception of sound, conception first eliminates non-product. Thus 
conception is known as an "engager through elimination." 
  Even though sound is impermanent, the inferential cognition apprehending impermanent sound is mistaken because it takes the appearing object, the 
mental image of permanent sound, to be the conceived object - impermanent 
sound.  Mental image  (meaning generality)   
For the conception apprehending a table, a mental image of the table appears to the mind. This image is not a functioning thing, only the table 
itself functions as a table. The mental image is permanent because it remains even after the table has been destroyed; it does not appear or 
disappear from the mind as a result of causes and conditions. After seeing 
a table through visual consciousness, a meaning generality or "object image" arises as a result of the direct perception, but this is not a 
"result" in terms of a result arising from causes and conditions. 
  The question to ask at this point is: "Does the actual table appear as mixed with the meaning generality, or does it appear as the opposite of 
non-table?" It must appear as the opposite of non-table, there is no other 
way that it could appear. When you have a conception of table, the appearing object is the opposite of non-table, nevertheless, conception 
does not apprehend  the meaning generality as the actual table even though 
the meaning generality seems to be the actual table.  
  If conception apprehended the meaning generality to be the actual object, 
it would be a wrong consciousness; all conceptions would be wrong 
consciousnesses. For example, when we look at our self in a mirror, the reflection of our face appears to be our actual face. The reflection is 
like a meaning generality, we know that it appears to be a real face but we 
do not apprehend it to be our real face.  
 
SECOND CLASSIFICATION OF PRIME COGNITION 
 
Prime cognizers where ascertainment is induced by self  
 
A prime cognizer where ascertainment is induced by self is defined as  a 
prime cognizer which, through its own power, is able to induce a certainty 
that itself would not have arisen if the essence of its object did not 
abide upon that object.   There are five types: 
 
1  Prime sensory direct perception to which appears a function  
     being performed. 2  Prime sensory direct perception to which appears a familiar  
     object. 
3  Prime self-cognizing direct perception. 4  Prime yogic direct perception. 
5  Prime inferential cognition. 
 
1  An example of a prime sensory direct perception to which appears a 
function being performed  is the tactile consciousness that perceives the 
function of fire burning wood. The essence of the measured object, the 
fire, is fire burning wood. If this essence did not exist on the object, 
the prime cognition could not arise. The tactile consciousness that 
apprehends this function can only arise through this final essence and, as it is there, it can induce a memory of having felt the heat of fire burning 
wood. Visual consciousness perceiving a fire burning wood is also an 
ascertainment that can induce a memory of the function of fire burning wood, but only the tactile consciousness is able to perceive the essence of 
 
 21 
the object - fire - because the tactile consciousness is the only sense 
that perceives heat.   All the qualities of fire appear to the tactile consciousness - such as 
its ability to burn wood, impermanence, product, heat, and so on. The text 
says: "All the simultaneous existences (qualities) appear to the sense consciousness." Although all the qualities of the object appear to the 
sense consciousness, they are not necessarily realized  by that 
consciousness. A difference between perception and conception is that all the simultaneous existences appear to perception but not to conception. 
 
2  An example of a prime sensory direct perception to which appears a 
familiar object  is the visual consciousness of a son perceiving "father." 
The essence of the measured object is the color and shape of the father - which are perceived by visual consciousness and are familiar to the son. If 
this essence did not exist on the object, the son would not perceive father. The visual consciousness that perceives the color and shape of 
father is able to induce a correct memory that father was seen, and this 
memory does not have to depend upon any other cognition.  3  An example of a prime self-cognizing direct perception  is the 
apperception that perceives the visual consciousness apprehending form. 
This is a prime cognizer that induces ascertainment by itself because the essence of its measured object (visual consciousness apprehending form) is 
clear and knowing - which must exist on the object, otherwise the self-
cognizer would not arise. The induced memory is a memory of both the subject and the object: "I (visual consciousness) saw a form (object)." 
Both the subject and object are remembered because at the moment when the 
visual consciousness apprehended the form there was a self-cognizer that apprehended the visual consciousness, and later on there is the memory of 
the experience. The object is remembered because the self-cognizer induces 
a memory of the visual consciousness apprehending form and of itself as well. That is, it induces a memory of both the subject and the object. This 
is the meaning of "inducing ascertainment through self (power)." 
 
4  An example of a prime yogic direct perceiver  is omniscient mind. This is 
a prime cognizer that induces an ascertainment through itself, and the 
essence of the apprehended object - all phenomena - exists upon the object, 
if it did not there would be no way for omniscient mind to arise. The 
second and third moments of omniscient mind are able to induce the ascertainment "I have seen all phenomena." 
 
5  An example of a prime inferential cognition  is the inference realizing 
that sound is impermanent. The essence of this cognition is impermanent 
sound itself. Sound is impermanent, just as it is apprehended to be, and therefore the inference is able to induce that ascertainment - the memory 
arises through the inferential cognition itself.  
  The first moment of all five is prime cognition and the later moments are subsequent cognition. The first four are perception, the fifth is 
conception. The first four include three other- cognizers and one self-
cognizer.  
 
 
Prime cognition where ascertainment is induced by other  
 
The definition of a prime cognizer where ascertainment is induced by other 
is a prime cognizer where the essence of the measured object exists upon 
the object but in which ascertainment of the object is only induced by 
other - not by self.  
 
 
First nominal classification  
 
  (i) Sense direct cognition perceiving something the first time ,  
      for example, the visual consciousness of a person seeing an  
      utpala flower for the first time. 
 (ii) Inattentive direct cognition , for example, an auditory  
      consciousness hearing sound while the mind is engrossed in  
      a beautiful form. 
 
 
 22 
(iii) Direct cognition where the cause is mistaken , for example,  
      the visual consciousness seeing the silvery-blue color of        a mirage which generates the doubt: "Is that water or not?" 
 
All three are direct perceivers because they are cognizers free from conception and are non-mistaken. The person who sees an utpala flower for 
the first time can only have the general ascertainment that he has seen a 
flower of a particular color and shape. When he is told that this is the color and shape of an utpala flower he will then ascertain that he has seen 
an utpala flower.   
  Inattentive auditory consciousness is not a prime cognizer because although sound appears to it, the sound is not ascertained; the complete 
definition is not present in this nominal example.  
  The visual consciousness apprehending the color of a mirage is non-mistaken with respect to that color, but because it generates a doubt as to 
whether it is water or not, this is not a prime cognizer - it does not 
ascertain its object clearly. Thus only the first example is an actual prime cognizer where ascertainment is induced by other, the second two are 
just nominal examples. 
  Second nominal classification   
 
  (i)  Prime cognizer where appearance is ascertained by self and the truth 
is ascertained through other , for example, the sense direct perceiver 
apprehending the red color of a fire at a distance. The appearance of red is cognized but the mind does not know whether it is the color of fire or a 
red cloth.  
  With respect to the color red, it is a prime cognizer ascertained by self because it is able to induce the ascertainment "I have seen red," but with 
respect to a red fire, it can only be a prime cognizer where ascertainment 
is induced by other - because to induce the ascertainment of having seen a red fire it must rely on something else, such as moving closer or being 
told by somebody that there is a fire on the hill. 
  The apprehension of the red color of fire is a prime cognizer because it is a prime cognizer with respect to the color red. It is a prime cognizer 
ascertained by other because although the red fire appears to this 
consciousness it is not realized, the person only realizes the color red and is unsure whether the essence of the object - fire - abides upon it or 
not. To remove this doubt he must rely upon another condition.  
  This example and the previous example of the utpala show us a method for deep contemplation, such as thinking about whether a vase that appears to 
visual consciousness has the essence of impermanence or not. 
  (ii)  Prime cognizer where the generality is ascertained by self and the 
particularity through other , for example, the visual consciousness 
apprehending a tree at a distance that is unsure as to whether it is a juniper or not. 
  This cognition ascertains the generality "tree" through its own power, 
but the particularity - juniper tree - is only ascertained by another condition, such as by moving closer or by being told by somebody that the 
tree is a juniper. The essence of the measured object - tree - is being a 
juniper tree.  
(iii)  Prime cognizer where even the mere appearance is ascertained by 
other, for example, the visual direct perception apprehending blue that 
induces the doubt: "Did I see blue?"  
  Later on, somebody can affirm that blue was seen, but this cognizer is 
not prime. If it were, it should induce an ascertainment by its own power that blue has been seen, and so it is not a real "prime cognizer where 
ascertainment is induced by other." This cognizer only induces doubt 
whereas a prime cognizer should be able to induce an ascertainment at any moment that one has seen a particular object.  
  Among these three examples, the first two are actual prime cognizers 
where ascertainment is induced by other but the third is only a nominal example. 
  There is a sensory consciousness that perceives the body aggregate to be 
pure and permanent, but it is not certain whether or not the body is completely pure and permanent. Thus there is a sensory consciousness 
perceiving the body to be pure and permanent and there is a doubt. 
 
 23 
Similarly, we perceive our enjoyments to be happiness when in fact they 
have the nature of misery. The seven facsimiles of direct perception are internal mistaken views and here we have been discussing unclear views 
related to external objects. By understanding the internal and external 
mistakes we should understand that the body aggregate is not permanent even though it seems to be permanent due to the (internal) conception of 
permanence and its (external) appearance of permanence. 
  In reality our bodies are impermanent, they have many attributes yet when these appear to our sense consciousness we are not able to ascertain them. 
Only by eliminating the wrong consciousnesses do we come to realize the 
attributes, one by one. For example, we can wrongly view our body to be pure and permanent, and to realize the reality of our body we must 
eliminate those wrong views and realize impurity and impermanence. 
  When we see the body aggregate with our visual consciousness we cannot ascertain all the different attributes at one time, we only realize a 
single object. To realize the attributes we must depend upon other 
conditions, such as relying on the fact that it is a product and is therefore impermanent, and so on. This is the way in which the logical 
reasoning is used. To realize that the body aggregate is empty of true 
existence we must depend upon something, such as the reasoning that the body aggregate is non-truly existent because it depends upon causes and 
conditions. 
  A single basis can be observed in different ways: at the same time as a wrong consciousness imposes various negativities on an object, a correct 
consciousness can understand it positively (properly). To abandon the 
negative and to enhance the positive, we must use effort, as it is said: "Please bless me to eliminate the negative thoughts and to cultivate the 
positive mind." 
  The purpose of the discussion was to arrive at this point - we must first understand the way in which the cause of mistake can be on the side of the 
object or the subject (mind), and then we can lead ourselves towards the 
correct understanding.  
 
 
Third classification of prime cognition  
 
1  Prime cognition with respect to valid person 2  Prime cognition with respect to valid speech 
3  Prime cognition with respect to consciousness 
 1  Valid (prime) person   This is a nominal classification of prime 
cognition because only consciousness is a real cognizer and persons and 
speech are not consciousnesses. An example of a valid person is an Arya Buddha, who is valid because he shows non-deceptive teachings to the three 
levels of being, his actions are non-deceptive, and we can always rely upon 
him.  
2  Valid (prime) speech   Examples of valid speech are the three wheels of 
Buddha's doctrine. These are valid because the meaning understood by the three groups of listeners perfectly suited their minds.  
  The first wheel is valid speech for its listeners - those whose minds are 
inclined towards Vaibhasika and Sautrantika tenets - because it is a teaching that they can accept as incontrovertible and it leads them on the 
way to understanding the right view.   
  The meaning of valid speech is a statement whose meaning exists just as the words express. Valid speech, however, is not necessarily definitive. 
According to the Madhyamikas, a definitive sutra explicitly presents the 
subject of voidness, but a statement that is interpretative according to the Madhyamikas is still valid speech because it is definitive for the 
person to whom it is given - such as the third wheel taught for the benefit 
of those inclined towards Cittamatrin tenets.    
3  Prime consciousness   Prime direct cognition and prime inferential 
cognition are the only types of prime consciousness; less than that would be insufficient and more would be superfluous. There are these two prime 
cognizers because objects are of two types: manifest and hidden. Prime 
direct cognition realizes manifest phenomena and prime inferential cognition realizes hidden phenomena. 
  Prime direct cognizers can be sensory, mental, self-cognizing, or yogic. 
 
 24 
Prime inferential cognizers realize hidden phenomena in dependence upon 
logical signs. Slightly hidden phenomena, such as subtle impermanence, are realized through the correct signs of logical reasoning, and very hidden 
phenomena, such as the future result of present karmic actions, are 
realized through the correct sign of scriptural authority.   A second reason why prime consciousness is of only two types is because 
all existent phenomena are either specifically characterized phenomena or 
generally characterized phenomena. A mind that newly realizes a specifically characterized phenomenon is a prime direct perceiver and a 
mind that realizes a generally characterized phenomenon is a prime 
inferential cognizer.  Consciousnesses being "one substance"    
Prime inferential cognition is said to be "one substance" with prime direct 
cognition in terms of it being one substantial entity with its self-
cognizer. Similarly, the direct self-cognizer experiencing direct cognition 
is one substance with the direct cognition. The particularity (self-cognizer) and the generality (direct cognition) are both compounded 
phenomena, and when two things are the same type (compounded phenomena) and 
have a relationship of particularity and generality, they are one substance in entity and in nature. 
  In this context, the meaning of "one substance" is two things that do not 
appear separately to direct cognition, for example, the generality, direct cognition, and the particularity, the self-cognizer that experiences 
inferential cognition. When a person realizes this self-cognizer he sees no 
difference between this particular direct cognition and direct cognition in general. 
  When you perceive the direct self-cognizer that perceives the prime 
inferential cognizer, you see no difference between that particular direct cognition and direct cognition in general; the two do not appear separately 
to your own direct cognition. On the side of the object there is general 
direct cognition and particular direct cognition - the self-cognizer experiencing prime inferential cognition - and these two do not appear to 
your direct cognition as being different, so we say that they are one 
substance.   For example, when we look at a table with visual direct cognition, we 
know that there are two things: the table and the table's attribute of 
impermanence. These two appear in the same aspect to our eye consciousness, they do not appear separately, and therefore we say they are one substance. 
There are many things appearing simultaneously from the side of the table: 
product, momentariness, result of causes and conditions, and so on, but the visual consciousness does not necessarily ascertain all of these 
attributes. 
  We have established that direct cognition in general and the particular direct cognition - the self-cognizer experiencing prime inferential 
cognition - are one substance. Now, that self-cognizer is also one 
substance with the inferential cognition itself. Thus there is a relationship between the direct self-cognizer and the inferential 
cognition, and this is why we say they are one substance. The direct self-
cognizer experiencing the inferential cognition and the inferential cognition itself are one substance in terms of location, time, and nature. 
"Location" means the place where the cognition is happening, "time" is the 
time of day the cognition occurs, and "nature" refers to the same essence.   All consciousnesses have self-cognizers that accompany them and they are 
one substance with their self-cognizers in terms of arising, abiding, and 
ceasing. Similarly, all compounded phenomena have the attributes of momentariness, product, and functioning thing, and these attributes are all 
one substance with the compounded phenomenon in terms of arising, abiding, 
and ceasing.   Even though a table and its attributes arise, abide, and cease at the 
same time, this does not mean that we realize all the attributes at the 
same time. For example, we can easily see the form of a table but it is much more difficult to understand its attribute of impermanence. To 
understand its impermanence we must go through steps of logical reasoning, 
it cannot be understood immediately. The selflessness of table is even more difficult to realize. The realization of the attributes from the subject's 
side is not simultaneous even though from the object's side the object 
exists simultaneously with its attributes.  
 
 
 25 
Student  Is there a way to prove that sense direct cognition is one 
substance with inferential prime cognition? Geshe  No, they cannot be one substance. The difference between direct 
cognition and conception is that a direct cognition must be separate from 
conception. If it is a direct cognizer it must be non-mistaken. This leads us to another question: if it is an eye consciousness, is it necessarily a 
sense direct perceiver? 
Student  Yes. Geshe  You are confused. Eye consciousness can be a wrong consciousness but 
sense direct perception is always non-mistaken. To be certain about these 
differences we must know the definitions by heart.  
There is no common basis between sense direct perception and mental direct 
perception. A mental direct perceiver must arise in dependence upon its own subjective condition - the mental organ - and sense direct perception must 
arise in dependence upon its subjective condition - a sense base - and so 
we can understand that there is no common locus for the two types of cognition. 
  Self-cognition and yogic direct perception both belong to the class of 
mental direct perceiver, and the doubt can arise: why is direct perception divided into four because there only needs to be two categories - sensory 
and mental direct perception? Yogic direct cognition is classified 
separately because it is a mental direct cognition that is special - it only exists in the continuum of an Arya being and it realizes subtle 
impermanence and gross and subtle selflessness. Self-cognizing direct 
cognition is placed in its own group because it is a direct cognizer that simply experiences the nature of consciousness - clarity and knowing.  
  Self-cognizers and yogic cognizers are always mental direct cognizers; 
both arise in dependence upon the mental organ as their subjective condition. The mental organ that is the subjective condition for the mental 
direct perception of form is any consciousness that immediately precedes 
it. First, visual direct perception sees the table, then there is a moment of mental direct perception, then there is conceptual apprehension of the 
table. Mental direct perception comes between the visual apprehension and 
the conceptual apprehension. Thus the preceding visual consciousness is the mental organ for the mental direct perception; the referent condition is 
the table itself. 
  Ordinary beings do not have prime mental direct perception or subsequent mental direct perception of sense objects, but they can have prime mental 
direct perception, for example, clairvoyance. This is a particular prime 
mental direct perception that only arises after strong concentration, but it is not yogic perception. Ordinary beings can attain the unification of 
calm abiding and higher-seeing through which they then develop the mental 
direct perception of clairvoyance. In an ordinary being, the mental direct perception apprehending form is an inattentive mind. 
  If we ask, "Is the order fixed? Does an inattentive mental cognizer 
always follow sense direct perception? The answer is no, for example, when we have a visual consciousness apprehending the final moment of a candle 
flame, it will not be followed by a mental inattentive cognition because 
the flame will have ceased. If the flame is out it is not possible for the mental consciousness to directly perceive it. 
 
Student  Does a subsequently-cognizing visual consciousness continue to perceive form at the same time as the inattentive mental perception and the 
conception of form arise? 
Geshe  It may seem that while you are looking at an object you are able to conceptualise about it at the same time, but what happens is that when you 
are strongly thinking about the object the strength of the visual 
consciousness wanes, and when you are looking intently at the object the strength of conception wanes. 
Student  Can time, space, and mathematics be objects of prime mental direct 
consciousness? Geshe  Space and time are necessarily objects of prime mental cognition, 
for example, omniscient mind; but ordinary beings must go through the first 
step of sensory cognition, inattentive mental perception, and then conceptual awareness. For example, after looking at the position of the 
sun, we can develop a conceptual awareness of time. 
 When we say that mental direct perception only arises after a sensory prime 
cognition, this does not mean that no sense consciousness arises after 
 
 26 
visual consciousness. Any other visual consciousness can arise again, for 
example, the visual consciousness apprehending table is followed by mental direct perception and then conception, but subsequently we can see the 
table again, many times, with fresh sensory direct cognition.  
 
 
  
 
PART THREE         NON-PRIME  COGNITION  
 
Definition   A non-prime cognizer is a cognizer that is not new and 
incontrovertible , (as opposed to a prime cognizer, which is new and 
incontrovertible).     Consciousnesses are necessarily either prime or non-prime cognizers. 
"Consciousness" itself is a substantial generality that has both prime and non-prime particulars. Buddha's consciousness is always prime because it is 
always a new and incontrovertible cognizer. "Consciousness in the continuum 
of an Arya" is a substantial generality that can have either prime or non-prime types, as can the generality "consciousness in the continuum of an 
ordinary being." 
  Prime cognizers are necessarily either prime direct perception or prime inferential cognition. "Prime cognizer in the continuum of a human being," 
is a generality that has these two types. We can understand the relation 
between a generality and its particularities by thinking about the three types of functioning thing: consciousness, matter, and non-associated 
compositional factors. The generality "functioning thing in the East," can 
have all three types.  
There are five types of non-prime cognizer: 
1  Subsequent cognition 2  Presumption 
3  Inattentive perception 
4  Doubt 5  Wrong consciousness 
 
 
1  SUBSEQUENT COGNITION  
 
Definition:   Subsequent cognition is a knower that realizes something which 
exists and has already been realized .  
There are three types:   (i)  Directly-perceiving subsequent cognition 
 (ii)  Conceptual subsequent cognition (iii)  Subsequent cognition that is neither of these 
 
  (i)  Directly-perceiving subsequent cognitions  are the following moments 
of direct perception and are therefore non-deceptive with respect to their 
perceived objects. There are five types:  
(a)  Sensory subsequent cognition,  for example, the second moment  
     of eye consciousness apprehending blue. There are five types       according to the five sense consciousnesses. 
(b)  Mental direct subsequent cognition , for example, the second  
     moment of clairvoyance perceiving another's mind. (c)  Self-cognizing subsequent cognition , for example, the second  
     moment of self-cognition perceiving visual consciousness. 
(d)  Yogic subsequent cognition , for example, the path of seeing  
     that is the continuation of the initial direct realization  
     of emptiness. 
(e)  Directly perceiving subsequent cognition that is none of the above,  
     for example, "the second moment of direct perception." 
     This generality does not specifically belong to any of the above. 
 
 (ii)  Conceptual subsequent cognition  has two types: 
 
(a)  Conceptual subsequent cognition induced by direct perception  
     for example, the memory of the color blue that arises after  
     having seen blue.   
 
 27 
(b)  Conceptual subsequent cognition induced by inference , for  
     example, the second moment of the inferential cognition       realizing sound is impermanent. 
 
(iii)  Subsequent cognition that is neither of these,  for  
     example, the second moment of cognition. This generality is  
     subsequent cognition that has direct and conceptual types,       and therefore it is neither. 
 
Subsequent cognizers realize their objects in dependence upon the force of the previous cognition; they are in the same continuity of a prime cognizer 
that has realized its object by eliminating doubt. The prime cognizer 
realizes the object by the power of eliminating doubt and the subsequent cognizer then realizes the object through the power of the prime cognizer - 
the previous realization. It may seem that Buddha's mind has subsequent 
cognition, but Buddhas do not have subsequent cognizers, they freshly realize all phenomena each moment through their own power - without relying 
on the power of the previous moment. 
  All minds of a Buddha are prime direct perceivers; they have neither non-prime cognition nor inferential cognition. If they possessed inferential 
cognition they would have a mistaken consciousness. 
 
 
2  PRESUMPTION (correct belief) 
 Definition:  Presumption is a factually concordant conceiving cognizer that 
is controvertible in conceiving its object.   Presumptions are controvertible because they do not clearly realize their 
object; all doubt has not been removed. Even though they are deceptive and 
controvertible, they are still factually concordant because their objects exist in the way that they are apprehended. There are five types of 
presumption: 
 
  (i)  Presumption without reason , for example, a cognizer apprehending 
sound to be impermanent merely through hearing the words "sound is 
impermanent." There are reasons to prove that sound is impermanent, but 
this cognizer simply grasps at the words and, without any other reason, believes that sound is impermanent.   (ii)  Presumption with a contradictory reason , for example, a cognizer 
thinking "sound is impermanent because it lacks the ability to perform a 
function." If something lacks the ability to perform a function it is necessarily not impermanent, so this reason is contradictory.   
 (iii)  Presumption with an inconclusive reason , for example, a cognizer 
thinking "sound is impermanent because it is an object of knowledge." This 
reason is not definite because if something is an object of knowledge it is not necessarily impermanent.   (iv)  Presumption where the reason is not established , for example, a 
cognizer thinking "sound is impermanent because it is an object of visual 
consciousness." This reason is not established because the subject, sound, is not an object of visual consciousness; no prime cognizer has established 
such a thing. 
 
  (v)  Presumption with correct reason not well understood, for example, a 
cognizer thinking "sound is impermanent because it is a product," but the 
person has not clearly realized that sound is a product and whatever is a 
product is necessarily impermanent. The correct reason is given, but the 
conclusion is not based upon a thorough understanding of the two important points contained within the reason.  
All five presumptions are factually concordant because sound is impermanent 
- the object exists in the way it is apprehended to exist - but they lack 
complete understanding, there is still some doubt concerning the nature of 
the object. "Controvertible" means that presumption has not eliminated doubt, and this implies that there is still grasping at the permanence of 
sound. 
  Before a person establishes the prime inference that sound is impermanent 
 
 28 
through the reasoning that it is a product, that person has a presumption 
that sound is impermanent. This presumptive consciousness continues until it becomes a prime inference - both presumption and inference are 
conceptual. When the inferential cognition of impermanent sound is 
acquired, he continues to meditate and eventually attains the direct realization on the path of seeing. The same reasoning that is used for 
understanding the impermanence of sound can be used in meditation on ones 
own aggregates, the realization is the same - one just has to turn the mind to a new object. This is so for both inferential and direct realization. 
  There can be a common basis between doubt and presumption: a cognizer 
that thinks sound is either impermanent or permanent, but is probably impermanent.  
 
 
3
  INATTENTIVE  PERCEPTION   
  
Definition:   Inattentive perception is a cognizer whose engaged object is a 
clearly appearing specifically characterized phenomenon but it is unable to 
induce ascertainment of that object . 
  An example of inattentive perception is the auditory consciousness 
apprehending sound while the visual consciousness is attracted by a 
beautiful object. This is an inattentive cognizer because the specifically 
characterized phenomenon, sound, is the engaged object and it appears clearly, but that auditory consciousness is unable to induce a future 
memory of the sound. Inattentive cognizers only exist in the continuums of 
ordinary beings; Aryas never have inattentive cognition because their minds are always alert - whenever an object appears it is quickly ascertained. 
  Other examples of inattentive cognition are all the mental direct 
perceivers and their self-cognizers in the minds of ordinary beings apprehending the five sense objects. These are inattentive because the five 
objects appear to mental direct perception for one moment only, the 
following moments of awareness are conceptual and that moment of direct perception cannot induce a memory of having seen the object. 
  The consciousness to which a white snow mountain appears as blue is not 
an inattentive cognizer because it is not a consciousness to which the engaged object - the specifically characterized phenomenon - clearly 
appears. The engaged object, a white snow mountain, should appear clearly, 
but it does not - it appears as a blue snow mountain. This consciousness is able to induce a memory of a blue snow mountain but not a white snow 
mountain; it is a wrong consciousness because it engages in the object - 
the white snow mountain - erroneously.  
Student  Can an Arya have an inattentive sense consciousness?  
Geshe  Probably not. There are different commentaries on the Pramanavarttika. One text says that those with great intelligence (the 
Aryas) perceive and immediately ascertain, other texts say that it takes 
time to ascertain the object. Thus one text says that there is no inattentive sense cognition and the other text implies that there can be, 
for example, when an Arya's mind realizes the impermanence of omniscient 
mind it ascertains impermanence but is inattentive with respect to omniscient mind - if it ascertained omniscient mind it would mean that the 
Arya has attained Buddhahood. We say, however, that there is no inattentive 
consciousness at all within the mind of an Arya.  
 
4  DOUBT 
  
Definition:  Doubt is  a mental factor that, through its own power, wavers 
between two points. 
  "Through its own power" is in the definition because the main mind that 
accompanies doubt also wavers between two points, but not through its own power. Thus the main mind that accompanies doubt is a wavering mind but it 
is not doubt because it is not a mental factor and it does not waver 
through its own power. The other mental factors existing at that time also waver, but not through their own power. 
  If something wavers between two points it is not necessarily doubt, for 
example, the person who is wavering between two ideas. This person is not doubt because he is not a cognizer. 
  A consciousness which wavers between two points is not necessarily doubt, 
 
 29 
for example, the main mind which accompanies the mental factor of doubt. 
  A mental factor wavering between two points is not necessarily doubt, for example, the feeling that accompanies doubt.  There are three types of doubt:   (i)  Doubt tending towards the factual is a doubt that is becoming 
meaningful, for example, the thought "sound is probably impermanent." The 
mind has some doubt but is leaning towards the correct conclusion.   (ii)  Doubt tending towards the non-factual is a mind leaning towards the 
incorrect conclusion, for example, the thought "sound is probably 
permanent."  (iii)  Doubt with equal tendencies is a mind balanced between the two 
conclusions, for example, the thought "sound is either permanent or 
impermanent." 
 
It seems that the continuity of a doubt tending towards the non-factual is 
the substantial cause for equal doubt; the equal doubt becomes doubt tending towards the factual; doubt tending towards the factual becomes 
presumption (correct belief); presumption becomes prime inference; and the 
continuity of prime inference becomes prime direct perception. Thus it appears that the continuity of the mind grasping at true existence can 
become the mind realizing selflessness and eventually omniscient mind. 
  We can accept that the continuity of the prime inference realizing the aggregates as impermanent can become a yogic direct perceiver, but it is 
dubious that the self-grasping mind can become omniscient mind. The doubt 
thinking that sound is permanent is a mental affliction. When someone with this doubt gradually comes to realize that sound is impermanent, this 
realization will proceed towards omniscient mind. The original doubt, 
however, is not a substantial cause for omniscient mind. In the same way, when we utilize attachment as a path, we cannot say that attachment is a 
substantial cause for becoming enlightened. We can only say that attachment 
is a co-operative condition - because the nine levels of mental afflictions are progressively abandoned by their respective antidotes.  
  Some people find this point rather tricky. The mental afflictions can 
never be the substantial cause of omniscience, but in the context of following the progression through the three levels of doubt and so on, it 
seems that there is a definite continuity from affliction to omniscience. 
  There can be a common basis between doubt and wrong consciousness, for example, the mind thinking that the aggregates are probably permanent. This 
mind is a doubt because it is not sure whether the aggregates are permanent 
or impermanent. It is a wrong consciousness because it is a conception that engages in its object wrongly - it tends towards the wrong conclusion.  
Student  How does a prime inference become yogic direct perception? 
Geshe  The inference realizing non-true existence of the self is acquired 
through reasoning. We then meditate deeply on non-true existence, 
understanding it through a meaning generality, and the greater our understanding becomes, the less we depend upon the meaning generality. Our 
realization grows clearer and clearer until we have yogic direct perception 
of non-true existence, without any meaning generality. The meaning generality had been like a veil between the object and our mind. 
Student  Is the first moment of the path of seeing necessarily direct 
perception of selflessness or can it be direct perception of subtle impermanence? 
Geshe  It necessarily directly realizes selflessness, but selflessness does 
not appear. The appearing object is the compositional factor that is the isolation of the self (non non-self), and that is subtle impermanence. From 
the subject's side there is direct realization, and from the object's side 
we can say that the first moment of the path of seeing directly realizes selflessness. If selflessness actually appeared it would have to be a 
functioning thing because it would be an object of direct perception. 
Student  When we look at a tree, which is a composite of parts, what is the specifically characterized phenomenon that appears to direct perception? 
Geshe  The tree itself. 
 
 30 
5  WRONG CONSCIOUSNESS 
 Definition  A wrong consciousness is  a cognizer that engages in its object 
wrongly.   Such minds do not realize the actual way of existence of their objects; 
they comprehend something different to the actual object. There are two 
types: 
  (i) Conceptual wrong consciousnesses for example, the conception of any 
compounded phenomenon to be permanent. Also, the conception grasping at the 
happiness of a relationship as being real happiness is a wrong 
consciousness. Similarly, the conceptions grasping at food, at our clothes, 
and so on as real happiness are wrong consciousnesses.   Grasping at a permanent person is a wrong consciousness. In reality, the 
person exists as a continuum that goes from moment to moment, and it is 
this continuum that creates karma and experiences karmic results in the future. The conception grasping at the person to exist self-sufficiently 
and substantially is a wrong consciousness; it is not valid with respect to 
the object because it projects something onto the object that is incorrect.   Without realizing impermanence, higher realizations cannot be acquired. 
First we realize impermanence, then suffering, selflessness, and emptiness, 
and then we attain true cessation. To understand the impermanence of an object, the mind grasping and apprehending that object to be permanent must 
be abandoned. There are sixteen attributes of the four noble truths, and to 
realize them one must abandon the sixteen types of wrong consciousness that are opposite to the realizations. 
  There cannot be two mutually exclusive consciousnesses focused upon one 
object. At the same time, we cannot have one consciousness apprehending the body aggregate to be permanent and another apprehending it to be 
impermanent. These cannot abide simultaneously because as soon as we 
understand that the body aggregate is impermanent we naturally abandon the opposite conception. 
  Another conceptual wrong consciousness is the conception apprehending the 
ears of a rabbit to be horns. Wrong consciousnesses related to external objects are easy to understand because we can see our error. Once wrong 
conceptions regarding external objects are understood, we can apply the 
same correction to wrong conceptions about internal things - our own reality. Understanding the wrong conception of a rabbit's horns helps us to 
realize our internal wrong conceptions. 
  Internal phenomena - the true origins, karma and afflictions - must be known well so that we can eliminate them, and this is why we must 
understand the difference between correct thought and incorrect thought.  
 (ii)  Non-conceptual wrong consciousness can be either sensory or mental.   
  An example of a mental non-conceptual wrong consciousness  is the dream 
consciousness to which dream blue clearly appears as blue. This is a non-
conceptual mental consciousness and it is wrong because dream blue is not real blue. The five sense consciousnesses do not manifest during sleep. 
Dream blue is not a mental image; it is simply the appearance of blue to 
the mental consciousness in a dream. This consciousness is non-conceptual because its own object appears clearly - whereas the object of conception 
is not clear. Objects appearing during a dream seem to be real for that 
dream but they are not there when we wake up.   Other examples could be the hallucinations of a crazy person which appear 
clearly to the mind which is a non-conceptual mental wrong consciousness. 
Student  Can conceptual consciousness occur during a dream? Geshe  Yes, we can even have the conception of blue during a dream - the 
object does not appear clearly. 
 
Examples of sensory wrong consciousness  are the visual consciousness that 
apprehends a white snow-mountain as blue, the visual consciousness seeing a 
white conch as yellow, and the ear consciousness to which an echo appears 
as articulate sound. These are wrong consciousnesses because their objects 
do not exist that way in reality. 
 
 31 
PART  FOUR       OTHER  CLASSIFICATIONS  OF MIND  
 
 
 
THE THREE-FOLD CLASSIFICATION OF MIND  
 
1  Conceptual consciousness,  which takes a meaning generality as  
   its beheld object. 
2  Non-conceptual, non-mistaken consciousness,  which takes a  
   specifically characterized phenomenon as its beheld object. 
3  Non-conceptual, mistaken consciousness,  which takes the clear  
   appearance of a non-existent as its beheld object. 
  1  CONCEPTUAL CONSCIOUSNESS  
 
Definition:   A conceptual consciousness is a conceiving cognizer that 
apprehends a sound generality and a meaning generality that are suitable to 
be combined . 
 
Sound generality  
A sound generality is an image that appears to conception after hearing a 
sound, for example, when we hear the name "microphone" but do not know the object to which the name refers, the idea, or mental image that appears in 
our mind connected with the name "microphone" is a sound generality.    
 
Meaning generality  
A meaning generality is the image that appears to conception after having 
seen an object, for example, when we see a microphone and then think about it later on - the image that comes to our mind is a meaning generality. 
 
Sound generalities and meaning generalities are beheld and appearing objects of conception, they are not apprehended objects. Conception takes 
sound generality and meaning generality as its beheld object, and through 
that it apprehends the actual object. For example, there can be a person who does not know that this object is a microphone, but he does have a 
sound generality related to the name "microphone." Through that sound 
generality alone he cannot recognize this object as a microphone because he cannot apprehend that the meaning generality of the microphone and the 
sound generality are suitable to be combined. He can only realize that 
after someone has pointed out that this object is a microphone - then he can combine the two generalities and apprehend the actual microphone, the 
real meaning. 
  Thus there can be conceptions that apprehend only a sound generality, conceptions that apprehend only a meaning generality, and conceptions that 
apprehend both sound and meaning generalities. A conceptual consciousness 
is necessarily a conceiving cognizer that apprehends a sound generality and a meaning generality suitable to be combined, but if a mind is a conception 
it is not necessarily a conceiving cognizer apprehending sound and meaning 
generalities suitable to be combined, for example, the conception that only apprehends a sound generality. This has no combination with meaning 
generality but still the sound generality and meaning generality are 
suitable to be combined. The conception arising after hearing the name "cow" without knowing what this name refers to is a conception apprehending 
sound and meaning generalities as suitable to be combined because although 
the cow does not have this name now, it will have it in the future.   Cognition (engaging) through elimination of the non-object  
Whenever sound and conception engage in an object, they do so by 
eliminating something. For example, as soon as a conception cognizes a 
certain object to be a "table," it does so by eliminating non-table and 
then accepting table. Similarly, the conception apprehending sound as impermanent naturally eliminates sound not being impermanent and accepts 
sound as impermanent.  
  Thus, conception cognizes its object only after eliminating the opposite of the object. For example, the conception of the aggregates to be 
impermanent negates the aggregates not being impermanent; the conception 
apprehending the aggregates to be miserable negates the aggregates not being miserable; the conception apprehending the aggregates to be selfless 
negates the aggregates not being selfless; and the conception apprehending 
 
 32 
the aggregates to be empty negates the aggregates not being empty. 
  Conception cognizes through negation , it never cognizes an object through 
establishment  of the object that is actually there. For example, conception 
does not cognize table together with all the attributes that are 
established with table, such as impermanence, product, functioning thing, and so on. If conception did cognize everything that is established with 
table, it should realize all these things at the same time. 
  Sound also engages in an object through elimination, for example, when we express the sound "table" it naturally eliminates "non-table" and just 
table is accepted. Sound also does not engage in its own object through 
establishment, for example, when the sound "table" is expressed it simply expresses the object, table, but not the other characteristics of table - 
functioning thing, impermanence, etc. If sound did engage in all the 
established attributes, then the sound "table" would have to express all the attributes of table. 
  Sound and conception are similar in that they engage in their particular 
object. For example, sound expresses an engaged object in relation to sound generality, and conception conceives its engaged object in relation to a 
meaning generality. This means that sound expresses through a sound 
generality and conception apprehends through a meaning generality.   Cognition through establishment  
Direct cognition is different to conception, it engages in its object 
through establishment. For example, when a visual consciousness sees form, 
the object form and all of its qualities appear to that consciousness at 
the same time, but the visual consciousness only apprehends the form - such as the color blue. Even though it does not apprehend all the qualities, it 
is still called a direct cognizer that engages through establishment 
because the color blue and all its qualities appear to it at the same time.   When visual consciousness cognizes table, all the qualities of table: 
impermanence, functioning thing, smell, taste, and so on, appear to the 
visual consciousness, but only the table's visible form is apprehended. The other physical aspects are apprehended by their respective sense 
consciousnesses. "Engaging through establishment" refers to all the 
qualities of the object directly appearing to the cognizing consciousness at the same time. Nevertheless, when visual consciousness realizes table, 
it does so by eliminating non-table, so it also realizes by elimination 
because to realize the object there must be certainty, and doubt is removed by the elimination of non-table. The table and its attributes arise 
simultaneously, but when direct cognition realizes certain aspects of the 
table there is no pervasion that it realizes all attributes simultaneously. These are realized by other sense consciousnesses or through logical 
reasoning. 
  Conceptions that connect a name to its object and conceptions that connect a basis to its attribute  
 
Examples of conceptions that connect a name to its object  are the 
conception that connects the name "table" to an object with four legs and a flat top and the conception that connects the name "vase" with a wide-
bellied, flat-bottomed, water container. The definition and the name of the object defined are understood and the conception is able to connect that 
name with the defined object. 
  An example of a conception that connects a basis with its attribute  is 
the conception that apprehends that a table is impermanent - it links the 
basis, table, with the attribute of impermanence. Another example is the conception apprehending a "person with a staff." This conception links the 
basis, a person, with the attribute, a staff. 
 Geshe  Is a conception necessarily one of these two? 
Student  No, for example, the doubt thinking: "Does he have a staff or 
not?" Geshe  Are concordant conceptions necessarily one of these two? 
Student  Probably. 
Geshe  What about the conception apprehending a staff - is it one of these two? How does this conception connect the name with the object? When one 
thinks, "this is a staff," there is a connection, but for the conception 
apprehending a staff alone there is not necessarily a connection between name and object, so this conception would be neither of those two. 
 
 33 
 
Another question to think about is: if a traveller goes from his own country, where vases are made of clay, to another country where he sees a 
golden vase and thinks "this is a vase," to which of the two types of 
conception does this belong? It is the first because the traveller apprehends that it is a vase by connecting the definition and the name to 
the object. The definition is a common cause for both the sound expressing 
"vase" and the thought "vase." The definition of an object is the particular meaning of that object. 
  Is there a cause that is common to sounds and conceptions that engage in 
consciousnesses, forms, and in non-associated compositional factors? Yes there is. They are all impermanent phenomena, they are all functioning 
things, so they can all have a common cause: "that which is able to 
function." Similarly, there is a common cause for sound and conception to engage in permanent and impermanent phenomena: they are both covered by the 
generality "object of knowledge." 
  
 
Conceptions concordant with reality and conceptions not concordant with 
reality 
Both of these minds are conceptions in that they apprehend sound and 
meaning generalities suitable to be combined, but one is correct and the other is not.  If the conceived object, the apprehended fact, is an 
established base it is a conception concordant with reality, but if the 
conceived object is not true, not an established base, it is a conception not concordant with reality. 
  Examples  of  non-concordant conceptions  are  the  conceptions 
apprehending  fire  to be cold, female as male, water as  dry,  a rabbit's ears as horns, sound to be permanent, and so on. 
 
 
2  NON-CONCEPTUAL, NON-MISTAKEN CONSCIOUSNESS  
 
Definition:   Non-conceptual, non-mistaken consciousnesses, which take 
specifically characterized phenomena as their objects, are cognizers that 
are non-mistaken with respect to their appearing object .   
  These are synonymous with direct perceivers - all of which are non-
mistaken with respect to their appearing objects. The divisions are the 
same as the divisions of direct cognizers.     All non-conceptual consciousnesses have specifically-characterized 
phenomena as their appearing objects. For example, the visual consciousness 
that apprehends form: visible forms are specifically characterized phenomena, and they are the appearing and apprehended objects.  
 
 
3  NON-CONCEPTUAL, MISTAKEN CONSCIOUSNESSES  
 
Definition:   Non-conceptual, mistaken consciousnesses, which take the clear 
appearance of a non-existent as their beheld object, are cognizers whose 
appearing object clearly appears but is mistaken.   There are two types - 
sensory and mental. 
  Examples of sensory mistaken consciousnesses  are the eye consciousness 
that perceives falling hairs in a person with cataracts, the perception of 
a blue snow mountain, and the perception of one moon as two. There can be 
many examples, as with the facsimiles of direct perception, where the cause 
of mistake lies upon the subject, on the object, or within the conditions of perception.   An example of a mental mistaken consciousness  is the dream consciousness 
to which dream elephants clearly appear.  
Not all conceptions are to be avoided  
All conceptions are mistaken with respect to their appearing objects, but not all conceptions are to be avoided, for example, the conception 
apprehending emptiness. If we understand that conceptions are mistaken consciousnesses, we will know that Buddhas never have conceptual minds. 
Conceptual realization of emptiness occurs on the paths of accumulation and 
preparation, direct realization only occurs on the later paths.     The three types of conception - conceptions that apprehend a sound 
 
 34 
generality, a meaning generality, or both - all take a generality as their 
appearing object, never the grasped object.  
 
  THE SEVEN WAYS OF KNOWING  
 
These have been well elaborated.  They are:  
1  Prime direct perception, (non-conception) 
2  Prime inferential cognition, (conception) 3  Subsequent cognition, (either conception or non-conception)  
4  Presumption, (conception) 
5  Doubt, (conception) 6  Inattentive consciousness, (non-conception)  
7  Wrong consciousness, (conception or non-conception) 
  
 
 
SELF-COGNIZERS AND OTHER-COGNIZERS  
 
Self-cognizer is synonymous with a mind that only faces inwards; other-cognizer is synonymous with a mind that only faces outwards. The 
Vaibhasikas do not accept self-cognizers; they only accept cognition of 
external objects. The Sautrantikas accept both, whereas the Cittamatrins accept self-cognition but not external objects. 
 
Other-cognizers  are the sensory and mental consciousnesses, they are never 
self-cognizers, and, according to different schools, are enumerated in 
three ways:  
Six:  mental consciousness and the five sense consciousnesses. 
Eight: mental consciousness, five sense consciousnesses, mind-           
basis-of-all, and afflictive mind. 
Nine: mental consciousness, five sense consciousnesses, mind-basis-of-all, 
afflictive mind, stainless mind. 
 Self-cognizers  are an exception. There is a self-cognizer that apprehends 
each type of other-cognizer. Each of those consciousnesses has an aspect that experiences its own nature - clarity and knowing - and this is called 
self-cognition, or apperception. In fact, self-cognition is simply the clarity and knowing within the mind, it experiences itself and nothing 
else. For example, the visual consciousness apprehending blue perceives the 
external object, blue. While it perceives blue, its own nature - the clarity and knowing - is perceiving itself. 
  Clarity and knowing belong to the class of functioning things but not to 
the group of non-associated compositional factors. Apperception is an introverted consciousness because it only looks inward at consciousness - 
it takes the internal continuum of consciousness as its direct object. 
Also, apperception is called "apprehender's aspect" (zing.nam) which means it experiences a consciousness that is conjoined with one's own continuum. 
Other-cognizers are called "apprehendable's aspect" because they take 
objects other than consciousness, that is, they bear the appearance of any object whether it is conjoined with one's own consciousness or not. They 
bear the aspect of any object that appears. The consciousness of another 
person is an "other-object" for the clairvoyant mind perceiving another's mind. Apperception can be prime, subsequent, or inattentive. 
 
Omniscient mind   Upon attaining Buddhahood, all of one's consciousnesses 
become omniscient - the definition of omniscient mind is "an exalted wisdom 
that is the final (supreme) clarity that realizes all phenomena." There is no obscuration to realizing anything, Buddha sees and clearly perceives all 
phenomena. Buddhas also have apperception, and even this must be 
omniscient, therefore we have to say that a Buddha's apperception realizes all phenomena. Thus the question arises: "Is a Buddha's apperception an 
extroverted consciousness?" Buddha's apperception does perceive all 
phenomena, but this is an exception, and we still refer to it as an introverted consciousness. 
  Buddha's consciousness perceives all phenomena but we refer to different 
 
 35 
aspects of omniscient mind as in the illustration of taking waters from the 
four directions and mixing them in a bucket - we can say that we have eastern water, western water, and so on, but all are one. Some people ask: 
"If all aspects of Buddha's mind are omniscient, why divide Buddha's 
consciousness into six types?" The answer is that they are divided into six because Buddha has the continuity of those six consciousnesses from when he 
was an ordinary being. The five sense consciousnesses are simply labelled 
according to their continuity from the previous state, even though each is omniscient and all are one entity, like the bucket of water. 
 
The nature of mind   Every consciousness has the nature of clarity and 
knowing. "Clarity" means the energy of the mind cannot be obstructed by any 
physical thing; "knowing" means that it can bear the appearance of any object, it can also mean that it can perceive other objects but the 
emphasis is on bearing. The nature of mind is unpolluted by any stain, but 
even though it is naturally free from all stains, mind can have superficial veils or obscurations. For example, a piece of glass can be covered in dirt 
but it is not mixed with that dirt and it can be cleaned. If the glass and 
the dirt were of one nature, removing the dirt would also remove the glass. Similarly, when we purify the obscurations from our minds, the nature of 
the mind is able to manifest and appear clearly to us. 
  Different remedies must be applied to remove different afflictions. Development of the mind means to increasingly realize objects correctly. If 
we have an affliction that makes us apprehend sound as permanent, the 
remedy is to meditate on sound being impermanent, and the more we become accustomed to this meditation, the more we become familiar with the right 
meaning of impermanence, and the closer we approach the correct view. 
  An obscuration, such as the self-cherishing thought, requires meditation on a particular path that removes the self-cherishing thought. The more we 
meditate, the more it is decreased. Each obscuration has its specific 
remedy, and all remedies must be known. The goal is to make the mind's nature manifest, and this requires much meditation.   
  Consciousness (shes.pa) is not the same as main mind (gtso.sems) because 
consciousness includes both minds and mental factors, and it also includes apperception. Consciousness (shes.pa), knowing (blo), and cognition 
(rigs.pa) are synonyms, and none of them necessarily refers to main mind - 
they can also refer to mental factors. Apperception is neither a main mind nor a mental factor. 
 
  
 
PART
 FIVE       MAIN   MINDS   AND  MENTAL   FACTORS  
 
Benefit and purpose of studying main minds and mental factors  
We must make full use of our perfect human rebirth with its eight freedoms 
and ten qualities, if we become involved in working only for the happiness 
of this life, we will forget the future life. On the other hand, by 
contemplating future existences, we will realize that the mind never stops, it continues on from one life to another, and by meditating on the 
continuity of consciousness we will realize that the future mind is unable 
to choose the rebirth that it wants. There is no freedom to choose pleasant rebirths and, without choice, we are obliged to take birth in unpleasant 
places.   
  The absence of any choice in our future lives is due to the force of karma - our previous actions. When we understand that karma forces us into 
different situations we will realize that there is a connection between the 
main mind and the mental factors. We will understand that rebirth is determined by karma and karma is created by various mental factors in 
different situations. For example, the mental factor of anger leads to 
actions that create karma for unhappy rebirths, and the mental factor of non-anger leads to actions that create karma for happy rebirths. Realizing 
this, we will decide to make a positive effort to change the situation of 
being reborn without choice.   Through deep meditation on future lives, we will understand that the 
various rebirths are caused by karmas that are determined by the 
afflictions - the root causes for the entire sphere of cyclic existence. By understanding the mental factors, which include the afflictions, we will 
know that, in the end, it is the mind which creates our personal 
environment, whether it is a hell realm or a place of great enjoyment.   
 
 36 
  Without understanding the main minds and the mental factors, we will be 
unable to achieve the things we wish for, in particular, true cessation. On the other hand, when we do understand the minds and mental factors, we will 
say to ourselves: "If I act with a positive mind a pleasant result will 
follow, and if I act with a negative mind an unpleasant result ensues."     By understanding the minds and mental factors, we will know how to create 
virtue through virtuous mental factors and how to avoid non-virtue caused 
by non-virtuous mental factors. The "Utanamje" says:          A (main) mind is that which knows the mere entity  
        of its object. 
 The "Abhidharmakosa" says:   
 
         A (main) mind is simply responsible for cognizing           the mere entity (aspect) of its object. (The mental  
         factors focus on the same object observed by the main  
         mind, but their function is to cognize the particular           qualities of the object).   MAIN MINDS  (Tib: sems; Skt: chitta) 
 A main mind is a cognizer that has mental factors within its retinue.  It is 
defined as a primary aspect cognizer that apprehends only the entity of its 
object.   Objects have a general entity and specific qualities. Main minds 
apprehend the general entity and mental factors apprehend the specific 
qualities. There are six divisions of main mind:  
 
1  Primary visual consciousness 
2  Primary auditory consciousness 3  Primary olfactory consciousness 
4  Primary gustatory consciousness 
5  Primary tactile consciousness 6  Primary mental consciousness (yid.kyi.nam.shes) 
 Main mind (gtso.sems) is synonymous with mind (sems), mentality (yid), and 
consciousness (rnam.shes). The sense consciousnesses are mentality but not 
mental consciousness. 
  Every main mind has five omnipresent mental factors - feeling, recognition, intention, contact, and attention - as well as various 
combinations of other mental factors. A main mind can be virtuous, non-
virtuous, or neutral according to the particular mental factors in its retinue. If a non-virtuous mental factor is manifesting, the main mind is 
non-virtuous, if a virtuous mental factor is manifesting, the main mind is 
virtuous.   An example of a main mind is the visual consciousness apprehending blue - 
this is a mind that simply views the entity of blue, nothing else. We know 
that it possesses the five omnipresent mental factors in its retinue:    
Feeling experiences the color blue as pleasant, unpleasant, or neutral;  
Discrimination discriminates the blue from other colors;  Intention makes the main mind move towards engaging in the blue object;  
Engagement makes the main mind pay attention to that particular blue 
object;  Contact is the experience that is the basis for feeling. 
 
 
MENTAL FACTORS  (Tib: sems.byung; Skt: Chaitta) 
 Mental factors are named according to their specific functions. They are 
consciousnesses distinguished as mental factors because they are accompanied by a main mind. Mental factors are defined  as cognizers that 
apprehend the qualities of an object and which arise within the retinue of 
a main mind with which they have five things in common. 
  
Five things in common  
According to the "Abhidharmakosa," the five things in common between main minds and mental factors are: 
 
 37 
 
1  Similar basis  The dominant (subjective) condition, which is the same for the main mind and its mental factors. For example, the visual 
consciousness apprehending blue has the eye sense base as its dominant 
condition, and this is also the dominant condition for the mental factors in the retinue of that consciousness. 
2  Similar object  The main mind and the mental factors in its retinue 
observe the same object. 3  Similar aspect  Anything that shows a particular aspect to the main mind 
shows the same aspect to the mental factors in its retinue. For example, 
blue appears in the aspect of blue to the visual consciousness apprehending blue and also to the mental factors in the retinue of that consciousness. 
The main mind and the mental factors are generated in the aspect of blue - 
like clear glass placed on a blue cloth taking on the aspect of blue. The aspect of the object is taken up by the subjects. 
4  Similar time  The main mind and the mental factors in its retinue occur 
simultaneously. 5  Similar substance  For example, the main mind cannot be unhappy if it 
has the mental factor of happy feeling in its retinue. Happy feeling and 
unhappy feeling cannot abide together in any one group of mind and mental factors, they must all be the same "substance." 
 
Asanga's "Abhidharmasamuchchaya" has a slightly different presentation of the five things in common:  
1  Similar object and aspect  Includes 2 & 3 above. 
2  Similar entity  If the main mind is virtuous, its retinue of mental 
factors is virtuous; if the mental factors are virtuous, non-virtuous, or 
neutral, the main mind will be correspondingly virtuous, non-virtuous, or neutral. 
3  Similar realm and level  If the main mind is of the desire, form, or 
formless realm the mental factors belong correspondingly to the desire, form, or formless realm, and also to the particular level of that realm to 
which the main mind belongs. 
4  Similar time  As above. 5  Similar substance  As above. 
 
The main mind and the mental factors are one in entity but different in name. Asanga accepts a similar basis, but he does not include it among the 
five things in common. He also adds two more main minds: the mind-basis-of-
all and the afflictive consciousness.  These are not discussed in the "Lo Rig" text because the intention of this text is to show how cyclic 
existence evolves so that we can understand true origins: karma and 
affliction.     This explanation on the main minds and the fifty-one mental factors is 
generally accepted by all schools and is indispensable for understanding 
karma and affliction, but the mind-basis-of-all and the afflictive consciousness are not necessary for understanding karma and affliction, 
they are a particular point of debate between the Cittamatrins and the 
Madhyamikas. Nevertheless, Asanga's presentation of the two extra minds is valid. It was Buddha's prophecy that Asanga would appear and clarify the 
doctrine, and in his commentary to the "Elucidation of Intention Sutra" 
Asanga presented these two minds. His commentaries explain why there is a need to posit a mind-basis-of-all and an afflictive consciousness and why 
all phenomena are the essence of mind, but understanding these minds is not 
necessary for understanding karma and afflictions - true origins.   
 
Mentality and primary consciousness  
The six main minds are mentality and primary consciousnesses. The main 
visual consciousness is primary consciousness and the mental factors in its retinue are simply "consciousness." Thus we can distinguish between primary 
visual consciousness and visual consciousness. The mental factors that 
accompany primary visual consciousness are visual consciousnesses because they have five things in common with primary visual consciousness. The 
primary visual consciousness is a consciousness and it is mentality - 
because it is a main mind - but it is not a mental consciousness.   Similarly, there is a difference between mental consciousness and primary 
mental consciousness. "Mental consciousness" can refer to the primary 
 
 38 
mental consciousness and also to the mental factors within the retinue of 
primary mental consciousness. "Primary mental consciousness" only refers to the mental consciousness that is a main mind. 
  All of these consciousnesses are other-cognizing because they arise in 
dependence upon their corresponding sense organs and engage in objects other than self. Engaging consciousness and primary engaging consciousness 
are different. "Engaging consciousness" refers to any of the divisions of 
consciousness - main minds and mental factors - which are all engaging consciousnesses because they take their own objects. "Primary engaging 
consciousness" is any of the six main minds. 
  "Mind" is not only mental consciousness, it can refer to any of the six primary consciousnesses - all six are primary consciousness, mentality, and 
mind. 
 
Four points of relationship between mentality and mental consciousness  
 
1  Mentality but not mental consciousness  Any of the five primary sense 
consciousnesses. These are mentality because they are main minds; they are 
not mental consciousness because they are sense consciousnesses. 
2  Mental consciousness but not mentality  Any mental factor within the retinue of primary mental consciousness. These are not mentality because 
they are not main minds; they are mental consciousness because they arise 
in dependence upon a particular condition - the mental sense base. 3  Neither mentality nor mental consciousness  The feeling in the retinue 
of a primary visual consciousness. 
4  Both mentality and mental consciousness  Primary mental consciousness.  
Four points of relationship between mentality and sense consciousness 
 1  Sense consciousness but not mentality  Mental factors in the retinue of 
a primary sense consciousness. 
2  Mentality but not sense consciousness  Primary mental consciousness. 3  Neither mentality nor sense consciousness  Feeling arising in the 
retinue of primary mental consciousness. 
4  Both mentality and sense consciousness  Primary visual consciousness.  
 
Four points of relationship between exalted wisdom and mental consciousness  
 
1  Exalted wisdom but not mental consciousness   Visual consciousness of an 
Arya Buddha.   
2  Mental consciousness but not exalted wisdom  Mental consciousness of an ordinary being. 
3  Neither exalted wisdom nor mental consciousness  Sense consciousness of 
an ordinary being. 4  Both exalted wisdom and mental consciousness The uninterrupted path of 
seeing. This is an exalted wisdom because it is a path and it is a mental 
consciousness because it is a yogic consciousness contemplating emptiness.  
The five omnipresent mental factors exist simultaneously with the main 
minds of all beings - in all virtuous, non-virtuous, and neutral minds of the three realms. The mental factors are called "mental events" because in 
the continuity of consciousness, different events arise - virtuous, non-
virtuous, and neutral. Every main mind is accompanied by the five omnipresent mental factors and others. Virtuous minds have virtuous mental 
factors, non-virtuous minds have non-virtuous mental factors, and neutral 
minds have mental factors that are neither virtuous nor non-virtuous. Main minds and mental factors are one in entity and one in substance. Some 
scholars say they are different in substance but most agree that they are 
one substance, one entity, and have the five things in common.  
 
 
The six divisions of mental factors according to the Abhidharmasamuchchaya 
There are fifty-one mental factors grouped into six divisions:  
1  Five omnipresent mental factors 
2  Five object-determining mental factors 
3  Eleven virtuous mental factors 
4  Six primary afflictions 5  Twenty secondary afflictions 
6  Four variable mental factors 
 
 39 
 
 
1  THE FIVE OMNIPRESENT MENTAL FACTORS  
 
  (i)  Feeling  (tshor.ba) 
 (ii)  Discrimination  ('du.shes) 
(iii)  Intention  (sems.pa)  (iv)  Contact  (reg.pa) 
  (v)  Engagement  (yid.la.byed.pa) 
    (i)  FEELING    
These mental factors are called omnipresent because they attend all minds. Feeling refers to the actual experience of an object as a result of 
contact. Pleasant feelings arise from virtuous karma, unpleasant feelings from non-virtuous karma, and neutral feelings from neutral karma. To feel 
pleasure is to experience the object in a particular way, it is the 
experience of satisfaction (sim.pa - smoothness) in which one wants and accepts the feeling. To feel displeasure is to experience the object with a 
sense of rejection, wanting to be apart from that feeling. The feeling of 
indifference has neither a sense of attraction nor of repulsion.   Sim.pa means to experience very well, or pervasively. It does not occur 
when unhappiness is being experienced. While we are experiencing happiness 
with sim.pa we do not have attachment, this arises afterwards as a desire to have the happy feeling continuously.   
  There are many levels of pleasant feeling, from the great bliss in 
heavenly rebirths to the pleasure of a cool breeze in the hell realms, and they all arise as results of virtuous karma. All happinesses, from the 
hells to the level of Buddha, are due to previous good karma; all 
sufferings, from the hells to the level of the Arhats (who can experience headaches etc.,) are due to previous bad karma. 
  There are two negative axioms: virtuous karma never produces an unhappy 
result and non-virtuous karma never produces a happy result; these lead to two positive axioms: virtue always leads to happy feelings and non-virtue 
always leads to unhappy feelings. No feeling, happy or unhappy, arises 
without a cause, or from a non-corresponding cause. All feelings arise from a cause of similar nature. 
  After understanding the two negative and two positive axioms, and that 
results come from causes of a similar nature, we need to know the causal process in more detail: what are the results of particular actions? By 
knowing the four points, we can establish that karma is certain, there is 
no deception, happy feelings and unhappy feelings arise from their particular causes: happiness arises from the karmic paths of avoiding the 
ten non-virtuous actions and unhappiness arises from the karmic paths of 
committing the ten non-virtuous actions.    
The
 three -fold  division  of feeling  
 
  (i) Pleasant feeling   Feelings which, once experienced, are  
      sought after again and again. 
 (ii) Unpleasant feeling   Feelings which, once experienced, are  
      avoided. 
(iii) Neutral feeling   Feelings which one neither pursues nor  
      avoids after they are experienced.  
All three feelings exist among the retinues of sensory and mental consciousnesses.  
  Pleasant feeling in the retinue of the body consciousness is that which renders happiness to the body within the body consciousness. Unpleasant 
feeling within the retinue of the body consciousness is that which does not 
render a satisfied (sim.pa) feeling; it is unhappiness within the body consciousness. "Body consciousness" here refers to all five sense 
consciousnesses. The body sense organ covers the entire body and includes 
the tactile, visual, auditory, olfactory, and gustatory senses.    All sense consciousnesses arise in dependence upon the body sense organ, 
but why do we posit a "body consciousness?" This is because all feelings 
are divided into physical and mental, and the five sense feelings are physical, or feelings of the body. All feelings of the sensory 
consciousnesses are body consciousness because the body organ covers the 
 
 40 
entire body and it includes the specialized sense organs. 
 Main minds cognize the mere entity of objects by their own power, and they 
experience a feeling that is not the same as the mental factor of feeling.  
This is because the mental factor of feeling, and the other mental factors, also engage in objects by their own power. The mental factor of feeling is 
that feeling which experiences pleasure etc., by its own power. If this 
point is not specified, there would not be a precise way to define feeling. The feeling within the main mind itself does not experience the object 
through its own power and so it is not the mental factor of feeling. 
 If we say that a main mind is that which cognizes the entity of an object, 
and a mental factor is that which simply engages in the particularities of 
an object, this is not precise because the main mind can also engage in the particularities of an object, but not through its own power. It engages in 
the particularities because the mind and mental factors have five things in 
common - including the same object.    
The mental factors have five things in common with the main mind and also 
five things in common amongst themselves, that is, something accompanied by a mental factor is not necessarily a main mind, it can be another mental 
factor. For example, the mental factor of feeling is accompanied by the 
other four omnipresent mental factors. We do not say, however, that any of the five is a central mental factor and the others are its retinue - mental 
factors can only be retinues for a main mind. "That which is accompanied by 
its own retinue of mental factors" always refers to a main mind. 
 
 
The
 five -fold  division  of feeling  
 
(a)  Physical happiness (de.wa) 
(b)  Physical unhappiness (mi.de.wa)  
(c)  Mental happiness (yid.de.wa)  
(d)  Mental unhappiness (yid.me.de.wa)  
(e)  Neutral feeling 
 
Mental happiness and physical happiness depend upon the mental factors that accompany the main minds. Mental happiness is a mental consciousness that 
has in its retinue a feeling that experiences happy results through its own power. Mental happiness can occur at all levels below the third trance, but 
not above. In the third trance there is an exceptional type of mental 
happiness, and feelings within the fourth trance and the four formless levels are always neutral feeling, those beings have gone beyond happiness 
and unhappiness. Mental consciousness which has a feeling within its 
retinue that experiences an unhappy or a non-satisfying result is mental unhappiness. 
  Physical and mental feelings are sometimes called external and internal 
feelings but, in general, "happiness" refers to pleasant feeling of either the body or the mental consciousness, and "unhappiness" refers to 
unpleasant feeling of either the body or the mental consciousness. 
 
Contaminated
 and uncontaminated  feeling  
Feeling can also be divided into contaminated and uncontaminated feeling. 
Contaminated feeling is the feeling that accompanies craving or attachment for the contaminated body aggregate. Uncontaminated feeling is the feeling 
associated with the wisdom realizing selflessness. 
  
The
 six-fold  division  of feeling  
 
(a)  Three feelings associated with visual consciousness. 
(b)  Three feelings associated with auditory consciousness. (c)  Three feelings associated with olfactory consciousness. 
(d)  Three feelings associated with gustatory consciousness. 
(e)  Three feelings associated with tactile consciousness. (f)  Three feelings associated with mental consciousness. 
 There are three bases for each of the sensory feelings - the sense 
consciousness, the sense organ, and the sense object. When these three come 
 
 41 
together there is the experience of contact. Contact with pleasant objects 
gives rise to a happy feeling. The wish to not be separated from that happiness is attachment. This gives rise to craving, or grasping for future 
happiness, and this gives rise to karmic actions directed towards acquiring 
that happiness.   Contact with unpleasant objects gives rise to unhappy feeling.  The wish 
to be separated from that feeling is aversion, and this gives rise to 
hatred and anger. These lead to karmic actions directed towards separating oneself from that feeling in the future. Karmic actions motivated by 
craving and by anger bind us to cyclic existence.  
 
 
(ii)  DISCRIMINATION     
Discrimination is a mental factor that apprehends the distinguishing 
feature (sign) of an object by its own power.   
 Discrimination distinguishes between types and classes. When discrimination engages in an object it apprehends or distinguishes the 
object either as a generality or as a particularity.   When the visual consciousness, the visual sense organ, and the visual 
object come together the mental factors of contact and discrimination 
arise. Discrimination simply apprehends the particularities - it does not apprehend "this is blue," "this is yellow," and so on, it simply engages in 
and apprehends the colours. 
  The visual consciousness apprehending yellow apprehends the entity of yellow. Discrimination in the retinue of the visual consciousness 
apprehending yellow distinguishes the entity of yellow as opposed to the 
entity of blue.   Discrimination in the retinue of a sensory consciousness engages in and 
apprehends the particularities of the object but is unable to connect a 
name to the particularity. For example, discrimination in the retinue of visual consciousness engages in and apprehends the yellow color of an 
object but is unable to determine "this is yellow." Such a determination 
can only be performed by discrimination in the retinue of the primary mental consciousness that has the conception: "this is yellow." The 
discrimination in the retinue of the visual consciousness simply engages in 
the particularity and, due to this clear engagement, we can then say "this is yellow," but this second discrimination occurs within the retinue of a 
conceptual mental consciousness. 
  Six types of discrimination according to the basis  refers to the six types 
of discrimination arising with the experience of contact within each of the six main consciousnesses. 
  Six types of discrimination according to the object   
 
(a)  Discrimination with sign  is discrimination skilled in knowing the 
connection between a name and its object. Both the name and the object 
clearly appear to this discrimination. This includes the discrimination 
knowing that all compounded phenomena are impermanent, contaminated, and miserable - which is more closely related to the sign (reason) than to the 
object. 
 
(b)  Discrimination without sign  is discrimination that cannot connect a 
name with its object. Also, this refers to discrimination that regards its 
object in the wrong way, for example, instead of thinking all compounded 
phenomena are impermanent, there can be a discrimination thinking that 
compounded phenomena are permanent, pure, happy, and so on.  (c)  Limited discrimination  is discrimination that does not see the 
disadvantages of the five sense objects of the desire realm but takes them as objects to be acquired - like good qualities. Seeing the five sense 
objects as good qualities to be acquired is a misconception that we all possess. We see pleasurable sights, sounds, smells, tastes, and tangibles 
as good and desirable. This discrimination is limited because it does not 
see the underlying reality, it only sees the superficial attractiveness, and this binds us to cyclic existence because we do not abandon these 
objects. 
 
 42 
 
(d)  Extensive discrimination  is discrimination occurring in the minds of 
beings in the Form Realm. It is extensive because it is above the Desire 
Realm - it has recognized pleasurable objects of the Desire Realm as things not to be acquired but to be abandoned. (e)  Unlimited discrimination  is discrimination within the minds of beings 
in the first two levels of the Formless Realm - unlimited space and unlimited consciousness. This discrimination is unlimited because it sees 
the pleasurable objects of both the Desire Realm and the Form Realm as objects to be abandoned. 
 
(f)  Discrimination of nothingness  is discrimination in the continuum of 
beings at the level of nothingness in the Formless Realm. Beings at this 
level constantly think that there is no object to be apprehended, and this 
goes on and on. Such beings have suppressed manifest afflictions related to 
the Desire and Form Realms.  
 
(iii)  INTENTION   
 
Intention is  a mental factor that moves its accompanying primary mind 
towards an object ; it makes the main mind and the mental factors accompany 
itself. 
  Among the fifty-one mental factors, intention is the most important 
because it activates all the mental factors as well as the main minds to engage in their objects. Main minds and mental factors engage in their 
objects because of intention - which acts like a magnet moving a piece of 
iron, the iron moves without any choice. 
 
 Six types of intention according to the basis  refers to the six types of 
intention associated with contact arising from the coming together of the 
six types of main mind with their respective six sense bases and six types 
of object.   
 
Intention is mental action (yid.kyi.las) that gives rise to physical and 
verbal actions - intentional action that gives rise to intended actions. 
Intended actions (of body and speech) can be explained in great detail, in brief however, there are seven: three of body and four of speech. Among the 
ten non-virtuous actions, the three actions of mind are intentional 
actions.    The elaborations of karmic actions into meritorious, non-meritorious and 
unwavering; into virtuous, non-virtuous, and neutral; into throwing karma 
and completing karma; and into karma definite to be experienced and karma not definite to be experienced can all be condensed into intentional and 
intended actions. 
 
 
(iv)  CONTACT    
Contact is a mental factor that arises upon the coming together of the 
sense base, the main mind, and the object.  
  When contact experiences a pleasant object, it experiences pleasure and there is a feeling of happiness. When contact experiences an unpleasant 
object, it experiences displeasure and there is a feeling of unhappiness. When contact experiences an object that is neither pleasant nor unpleasant, 
it has an indifferent experience and there is a neutral feeling. Thus 
contact acts as a basis for feeling.    According to the Sautrantikas, form is a cause for the visual 
consciousness that apprehends blue, and so when a visual consciousness 
apprehending blue arises, the object, form, should cease because a cause ceases when its result arises. Similarly, the eye sense base that is a 
cause for visual consciousness should cease when that consciousness arises. 
Only the Vaibhasikas assert that a cause and its effect can exist at the same time. And so the doubt arises: do the three factors gather 
simultaneously or at different times?   
  
 
 43 
(v)  ENGAGEMENT    
 
Engagement is a mental factor that focuses the mind upon a particular 
object. 
  Both intention and engagement are the same in that they lead their accompanying main minds and mental factors to engage in an object. The 
difference is that intention leads the mind to a general object and engagement leads the mind to a specific object. 
 
The five omnipresent mental factors accompany every main mind. If any are missing from the retinue of a main mind, the person with that mind does not 
have complete enjoyment of the object. Without feeling, the object cannot 
be experienced; without contact, there is no basis for feeling; without discrimination, there is no power to identify the object; without 
intention, the mind is unable to move towards the object; without 
engagement, the mind is unable to engage in the specific object.  
 
 
2  THE FIVE OBJECT-ASCERTAINING MENTAL FACTORS  
 
  (i)  Aspiration  ('dun.pa)  (ii)  Conviction  (mos.pa) 
(iii)  Mindfulness  (dran.pa) 
 (iv)  Concentration  (ting.nge.dzin)   (v)  Knowledge  (shes.rab) 
 
These are called "object-ascertaining" because each is certain with respect to its object.   
(i) ASPIRATION 
 
Aspiration is a mental factor that seeks and possesses a desired object.  
  Aspiration is a foundation for the effort made to attain the goal that it desires. It has two aspects - seeking and faith. The aspect of seeking can 
be to either reject or to obtain something. The aspect of faith is in relation to obtaining something that is positive. 
  Aspiration arises after we see the advantages of the object of 
contemplation. It is followed by effort to attain that object without caring about the physical hardship involved. For example, the aspiration to 
gain knowledge is based on faith, this gives the energy to overcome 
difficulties, and this leads to the next step of effort which, in turn, leads to mental and physical suppleness. 
  In another context, seeing the advantages of realizing impermanence, 
misery, selflessness, and emptiness leads to the aspiration to realize them. This leads to effort to attain that realization, this gives patience 
to forbear hardships, this leads to mental and physical suppleness, and 
this leads to success in meditation and the attainment of the desired realizations. 
 
Aspiration is a mental factor that seeks an object that has been thought about. There are three types of aspiration: 
 
(a)  Aspiration wishing to meet  can refer to wishing to  
       encounter love and compassion, the causes for bodhicitta,  
       or it can mean to meet the triple gem, bodhisattvas, etc. 
 
(b)  Aspiration wishing to not separate from an object  can be 
       wishing to not be separate from one's internal positive  
       qualities, knowledge, and so on.  (c)  Aspiration that seeks  can be aspiring to attain some  
       realization or Dharma understanding in the future.  
 
 (ii)  CONVICTION    
 
Conviction is a mental factor that functions to maintain the object that 
has already been found by aspiration.  
 
 44 
  Once conviction has arisen the mind is stable, it is certain that the 
ascertained object is that which one has been seeking and it does not move away from that object. The mind does not change and go off seeking some 
other object. For example, we can seek the ultimate refuge object for a 
long time and finally we come to the point of strong determination: "Yes, this is it." We realize that the Buddha is the perfect guide, the Dharma is 
infallible, and the Sangha are valid followers, and our mind does not go 
away from these refuge objects.   In this context, the five object-ascertaining mental factors are 
virtuous, they observe virtuous objects, and aspiration and conviction are 
the roots of all virtue, they arise together - first aspiration and then conviction. 
 
 
(iii)  MINDFULNESS  
 
Mindfulness is a mental factor that clearly and without distraction holds 
the memory of a previously familiarized object.  
  Mindfulness has three features: it is well acquainted with the object, it 
does not forget the object, and it remains undistracted from the object. If 
one of these three is missing it is not mindfulness.   
  A virtuous action that is sustained by mindfulness will bring a powerful concentration, for example, first we think over and over about 
impermanence, then the memory of this aids mindfulness during profound 
meditation on the four attributes of true suffering, and after meditating again and again on these four attributes we attain single-pointed 
concentration on them. 
  Mindfulness is essential for the meditational practices of both Sutra and Tantra. Nagarjuna said that it is important to keep mindfulness active - if 
one loses it there is the risk of producing many afflictions and negative 
actions. Shantideva said that it is a great pity if somebody has heard many teachings and has faith in the triple gem, in cause and effect, and in 
other virtues, but is lacking in mindfulness. Such a person has little 
hope, he can easily lose his foundation of virtue and without this he cannot attain desired higher rebirths or avoid rebirth in the lower realms. 
This is because without mindfulness the afflictions increase and virtue 
decreases; there is no hope of attaining higher rebirth, liberation, or omniscience. 
 
Mindfulness and introspection (shes.bzhin) with respect to vows is most important. It is necessary to remember the Pratimoksha, Bodhicitta, and 
Tantric vows by reciting them three times by day and three times by night. 
If mindfulness degenerates, the afflictions increase and the mind gathers faults from every side. Through the lack of mindfulness, we transgress our 
vows and receive a shower of downfalls and negative karmas. This prevents 
the creation of new virtue and destroys virtue that has already been accumulated. Lack of mindfulness destroys accumulated virtue because, by 
forgetting the disadvantages of afflictions such as anger, as soon as an 
emotional situation arises we become angry.  Anger then destroys our accumulated virtue and increases our ignorance - which prevents us from 
accumulating more virtue. Thus our perfect human rebirth is wasted. 
  When the previous collection of virtue is destroyed and present and future virtues are blocked, there is no hope for happiness in future lives 
because the cause has degenerated. Without virtue or positive karma we 
cannot attain higher rebirth, and without a human rebirth there is no chance for us to create the cause for liberation, we are cut off from 
liberation. Thus we can see the importance of cultivating mindfulness. 
  Even in everyday life, mindfulness is necessary in all that we do, not to mention the mindfulness and introspection that are necessary to attain the 
powerful concentration that cuts the root of cyclic existence. Since 
mindfulness is so important in both Sutra and Tantra, it has been advised that those who seriously wish to follow the spiritual path must cultivate 
mindfulness. Shantideva said that it is sad to lose material things, but 
this is not as sad as losing mindfulness.    Not accumulating virtues such as physical prostrations and verbal 
recitation of mantra is a minor problem because we can always do these the 
next day. On the other hand, if we lose our mindfulness, it is difficult to bring back. It is said that if one wants to complete successfully all 
practices, the mind must be kept clear, straight, and fresh. This requires 
strong mindfulness and introspection, and so we should be aware of the 
 
 45 
importance of mindfulness. Emphasizing the importance of mindfulness, 
Shantideva said:  
           With my hands together, I request that you  
           always keep this advice in mind.  
There can be a mindfulness on the side of non-virtue, such as remembering 
objects of the afflictions and the afflictions themselves, but this is not the mindfulness under discussion.  
 
We know that mindfulness is a mental event that retains a past-realized object, so the question arises: "Is there a mindfulness that ascertains an 
object that has been realized in the immediately preceding moment?"  
  Also we can ask: "Is mindfulness functioning during the first moment of ascertaining an object?" It seems that if an object has not been 
familiarized within the mind, the mind would not relate to it through 
mindfulness.    The question can be asked in another way: "Does mindfulness have to be a 
memory of an object of the past, or can it operate with an object of the 
present as well?" If we say both, this implies that when one ascertains a present object, memory is about to arise in the next moment. 
 
Student  Does Buddha have memory of past events? Geshe  Buddha does have a type of memory of past events, but this is not a 
conceptual mind or a subsequent cognizer. Buddha can remember the entire 
past.  
 
(iv)  CONCENTRATION  
 
Concentration is a mental factor that can focus uninterruptedly upon an 
analysed (imputed) object for a long time.  
  There can be many objects for concentration, but four important objects 
are mentioned in the section on calm abiding in the "Lam Rim." These are:  
(a)  Object for analysis 
(b)  Object for eliminating afflictions (c)  Object of pervasion 
(d)  Object for the wise 
 These four objects of calm abiding (zhi.gnas) are also objects of 
concentration. "Objects for the wise" are the objects of wise meditators - 
the aggregates, sources, elements, and twelve links of dependent origination. Concentration is cultivated by taking an object belonging to 
one of these four categories. 
  An "analysed object" in the definition refers to an object that has been thought over and then the mind is fixed upon it. Concentration focuses 
single-pointedly upon a mental object, it is not acquired by focusing upon 
an object of sense consciousness. Some debaters say that when you look at an object with your eyes for a long time you have the mental factor of 
concentration, but this is not so. The five object-ascertaining mental 
factors are called "earth-level minds," which means that, in this context, concentration is only that which attends a virtuous mind, and it is only 
actualised through mental consciousness. 
 The mind is made to abide single-pointedly by reflecting on the object and 
bringing the mind back to it again and again after it has wandered off. The 
purpose of developing single-pointed concentration is to establish the basis for superior wisdom - by  maintaining the mind continuously upon a 
mental object one can attain higher seeing. On the basis of concentration, 
one passes through the nine mental levels to attain calm-abiding, then one develops higher-seeing that cognizes objects clearly and in an individual 
way. On the basis of the unification of calm abiding and higher seeing, one 
can overcome all the afflictions.   Concentration occurring as the step before wisdom is the same as in the 
three higher trainings: wishing to attain liberation, one must first train 
in morality, then in concentration, and then in wisdom. The three higher trainings are given in this order because when one has taken any of the 
three groups of vows to cultivate morality, one has to keep them as well as 
possible and purify any transgressions. If the vows are kept well, 
 
 46 
concentration can easily be attained, but if the basis of morality is not 
kept well, it will be difficult to create a stable basis of concentration.   Training in morality is an essential foundation for concentration, and 
concentration must be strong, otherwise we will not be able to properly 
engage in virtuous practice. If there is a lack of mindfulness and concentration, and we try to concentrate on bodhicitta or some other 
virtue, our mind will be continually distracted by external objects and it 
will be unable to focus on the virtuous object. If the mind moves continuously from one object of concentration to another, no result will be 
obtained from the meditation - just as an axe man cannot cut down a tree if 
he always strikes at different places.    After cultivating morality and concentration, we must then cultivate 
wisdom, without which we cannot remove the self-grasping that is the root 
of cyclic existence and there would be no hope of gaining liberation. To abandon the conception of a permanent self, we need the wisdom realizing 
impermanent self. To abandon the conception of a pure body, we need wisdom 
realizing the impure nature of our body; and to abandon the conception grasping at true existence, we need the wisdom realizing non-true 
existence. 
    (v)  KNOWLEDGE  
 
Knowledge is a mental factor which, through its own power, distinguishes 
the mentally taken object.  
  Knowledge has the function of removing doubt. "Distinguishing the mentally taken object" means that there is an object to be understood and 
cultivated and another object that is to be understood and abandoned, and these two are well distinguished by knowledge. The objects analysed by 
knowledge can be virtuous, non-virtuous, or neutral.  
 Knowledge distinguishes four things about its object: 
 
(a)  Function   All objects have a particular function, and there is a 
mental attitude that apprehends that function. Similarly, there is an 
incorrect mental conception that apprehends objects to function in the opposite way. For example, fire produces smoke. Recognizing this is 
concordant with the actual function of fire, but the conception of the 
opposite is the idea that smoke produces fire.  (b)  Dependence   Every phenomenon depends upon some other phenomenon 
because everything is a dependent-arising.  
 
(c)  Being correctly established   Every cause producing every result is 
correctly established by a prime cognition. All objects are correctly 
established because all objects have a particular function, and this is 
established by its respective prime cognition. 
 
(d)  Nature   The nature of phenomena can be known at several levels. At the 
ordinary level, water has the nature to flow downwards and fire has the 
nature to blaze upwards. At the supra-mundane level, the nature of 
phenomena is emptiness. These natures are strong and cannot be altered. If 
we light the end of a stick and hold it downwards the flames will still burn upwards.  A third nature is the inconceivable nature - the final state 
of a phenomenon that is related to circumstances.  For example, we are here 
today listening to teachings, the subtle past causes that brought about this situation are inconceivable for our minds, they can only be known by 
Buddha's omniscient mind. 
 These four factors being involved with knowledge means that when knowledge 
distinguishes objects, it does so through these four ways of discovering 
exactly how an object exists. Lama Tsong Khapa said that when one has heard many teachings, if one wants to attain liberation one must analyse the 
teachings day and night with the help of these four factors.   
 Student  How do you apply the four factors to meditation on death and 
impermanence? 
Geshe  The natural factor is contemplated when we think: "I am born and it 
is natural that I will die." Function  is contemplated when we think: "The 
function of birth is to lead to death; every moment that passes brings me 
 
 47 
closer to death, to the open jaws of Yama." Just like a sheep being taken 
step by step to the slaughterhouse, the natural action of life is to bring us moment by moment to death. Dependence  is contemplated by thinking that 
death depends on conditions, and there are many things that can lead to 
death - more than can lead to life. Even the things that we use to survive can bring about our death. Correct establishment  means that the way in 
which death happens, the fact that life leads to death, its inevitability, 
and so on, are all established by prime cognition.  
All five object-determining mental factors are associated with the 
aspiration seeking a desired object, and they attend virtuous minds. For example, the main mind that wishes to realize impermanence is accompanied 
by the mental factor of aspiration that wishes to realize impermanence. 
Conviction then maintains the object, impermanence, as something valid and it does not deviate. It is an affirming conviction - as when you say to 
someone, "I appreciate what you said," you confirm that what he said is 
true. Conviction simply confirms through its own power; then mindfulness 
retains that confirmed object without forgetting it.  Concentration now 
arises, this is the mind focused on the previously held object - 
impermanence. Finally, knowledge distinguishes the object through its own 
power and ascertains impermanence correctly. The five are called "object-
determining" because each establishes its own particular aspect upon the 
main object.    
  These five mental factors are virtuous, but there can be similar mental 
factors which attend non-virtuous minds. For example, the intention to 
kill. Five object-determining mental factors can attend this mind, but they do not belong to the mental factors under discussion. These non-virtuous 
object-determining mental factors can be said to be the same in the sense 
that there is a wish to obtain the object, but instead of rendering the mind peaceful, they bring about anger, agitation, and suffering results. 
The virtuous object-determining mental factors bring peace and happy 
results.    Aspiration is an important first step towards virtue. For example, to 
perform a meditation retreat you need to recognize and admire such a 
virtuous activity, to have faith in it. Any aspiration for a virtuous thing should have a virtuous cause, such as faith. 
 
Student  The object distinguished by knowledge can be virtuous, non-virtuous, or neutral. How does this work? 
Geshe  Knowledge distinguishes these three aspects on its object.  
Virtuous, non-virtuous, and neutral objects have different entities, levels, and situations that can all be distinguished by knowledge.   
 
  
 
3  THE ELEVEN VIRTUOUS MENTAL FACTORS  
 Every main mind has the five omnipresent mental factors, but the five 
object-ascertaining mental factors only occur in the retinue of a virtuous mind - they are not virtuous from their own side. The eleven virtuous 
mental factors are virtuous from their own side, they are: 
    (i)  Faith  (dad.pa) 
  (ii)  Moral shame  (ngo.tsha.shes.pa) 
 (iii)  Consideration  (khrel.yod.pa)   (iv)  Non-attachment  (ma.chags.pa) 
   (v)  Non-hatred  (zhe.sdang.me.pa) 
  (vi)  Non-confusion  (gti.mug.med.pa)  (vii)  Effort  (brtson.'grus) 
(viii)  Suppleness  (shin.tu.sbyangs.pa) 
  (ix)  Conscientiousness  (bag.yod.pa)    (x)  Equanimity  (btang.snyoms) 
  (xi)  Non-harmfulness  (rnam.par.mi.'tshe.ba) 
 
 48 
  (i)  FAITH  
 
Faith is a mental factor that appreciates and admires virtuous qualities, 
and beings who possess such qualities, and wishes to attain them.  
  Faith serves as a basis for aspiration to arise. At the same time, faith is an opponent to the non-virtuous mental factor of non-faith. According to 
its nature, faith can be divided into three:  (a)  Admiring faith  is the faith which, through seeing the good qualities 
of the triple gem, releases the mind from jealousy and other negative attitudes and makes the mind smooth and positive. A "smooth" mind means 
that when we see others who have equal or even greater qualities than ourselves, we do not feel negative or jealous towards them but we feel 
happy and full of admiration for their achievements. With admiring faith, 
we rejoice at all good qualities; it is like a jewel that transforms muddy water into clear water - and is sometimes called "clarifying faith."   
  Admiring faith is a foundation for all positive qualities; it decreases 
afflictions and increases positive minds. Simply admiring the virtue of others accumulates great merit.  
 
(b)  Believing faith  is faith arising through gaining conviction in the 
teachings of a valid being such as Buddha, and which can carry out their 
advice unassailed by doubt. For example, listening to the teaching on 
dependent-arising or on cause and effect, we believe that it is correct 
because the teaching was given by a valid being. We cannot understand these things directly but we are convinced of their reality. If we have sharp 
intelligence, our convictional faith is enhanced by checking the teachings 
through our own logical reasoning.   (c)  Aspiring faith  is the wish to attain a particular virtuous goal. For 
example, by studying the four noble truths, we can see that there is a goal of true cessation to be attained, and just as all the previous Buddhas and 
Arhats attained true cessation by following the path, we aspire to achieve the same goal by following the same path.   
 
The difference between faith and liking   Each of the three types of faith 
has a particular goal that is virtuous. In everyday life we sometimes 
confuse faith with liking (dga.'ba). Liking and enjoying alcohol seems to be faith in alcohol, but they are not the same thing. Faith is a mental 
factor that always takes the entity of virtue, whereas liking can have 
virtuous or non-virtuous aspects. 
  Examples of liking that is not faith  are the enjoyment of your family, of 
food and drink. It is usually related to an object that is a source of 
mistake. For example, ordained people like gossip, alcohol, and eating in 
the evening. These likings are avenues for committing faults, and are not 
faith.   
  An example of faith that is not liking  is the overwhelmingly frightened 
feeling experienced when meditating on true suffering and true origins. 
This is faith but not liking because knowing that we can experience 
suffering through the afflictions is not a source of happiness itself, even 
though it is the way to overcome the afflictions. On the other hand, contemplating virtuous actions and their happy results is an object of both 
faith and liking. 
  An example of something that is both faith and liking  is the joy one 
experiences when contemplating the positive qualities of one's spiritual 
master or the attributes of the triple gem.   Something that is neither faith nor liking  is a mind of anger. 
 
The difference between faith and respect   In everyday life people may also 
confuse faith and respect (gus.pa). For example, liking a holy being is 
liking as well as faith; but respect for a holy being is something that is acquired after listening to his teachings, meditating on them, and 
experiencing their validity oneself. Thus there is a subtle difference 
between faith and respect.    
The Buddha taught frequently that one should seek a knowledgeable spiritual 
guide and through devotion and respect for him one can experience the validity of the teachings. It is said that when people do not have right 
wisdom they lose interest in finding out information by searching through 
 
 49 
the texts of previous pundits. They are afraid of those huge texts like 
snakes are afraid of the musk deer, or children are afraid of ocean waves. Being content with a small amount of learning does not give us a strong 
enough foundation to advance. If a small amount of learning is enough, 
there would have been no reason for the Buddhas and Bodhisattvas to have given such extensive teachings. 
  Since faith is so necessary it is admired in many texts - which point out 
that faith is a beginning, like a mother who gives birth to children. Some texts praise faith as the foundation of all virtue; others say that it must 
be cultivated like tending a growing plant. If faith is not present there 
can be no growth of knowledge, just as a sprout cannot grow from a burnt seed.  
  The "Graduated Path" says that the fundamental practice is faith and 
devotion to ones guru. Faith is emphasized because it is necessary for all steps on the path. Faith gives rise to aspiration which gives rise to 
effort through which we easily engage in virtuous practice. Effort 
generates suppleness of body and mind and this leads to single-pointed concentration, which leads to higher seeing. Through the unification of 
calm abiding and higher seeing we are able to eliminate all afflictions. 
   (ii)  MORAL SHAME  
 
Moral shame is a mental factor that, through self-restraint, avoids 
committing a non-virtuous action.  
  For example, one may have taken Pratimoksha vows and when an occasion arises where a negative action can occur one restrains oneself, remembering 
that this is an action one has vowed to avoid. Similarly, for somebody who has taken Bodhicitta or Tantric vows, moral shame is using one's personal 
code of conduct as a reason to avoid a negative action. Non-virtue can be 
committed through any of the three doors, but as long as one has moral shame, there is always the possibility to avoid non-virtue. 
 
 
(iii)  CONSIDERATION  
 
Consideration is a mental factor that is restraint from committing a non-
virtuous action through consideration for the feelings of others.    
  We can train ourselves to always have this mental factor because there 
are countless Buddhas with clairvoyance and whenever there is an 
opportunity for us to create negative karma, even if other people are not 
in the vicinity, there are all those Buddhas witnessing our behaviour and they can be the reason for us to not transgress our vows or commit some 
other negativity. 
  Moral shame and consideration are similar in that they are both restraint from committing non-virtue. Their function is similar, but their source - 
the reasoning behind them - is different. These two mental factors are 
essential for stopping non-virtuous actions of body, speech, and mind. Without them we could not abstain from non-virtue because to keep ourselves 
away from non-virtue we need to be afraid of rebirth in the lower realms as 
a result of negative actions, and we also need to respect others, such as by thinking: "I should not do this action because it will embarrass them."    (iv)  NON-ATTACHMENT  
  
Non-attachment is a mental factor that is non-attachment to the pleasures 
of cyclic existence.  
  Attachment leads to trouble because our minds become pre-occupied with seeking the objects of attachment. This puts our body and speech into 
action to acquire pleasure, and many negativities ensue. Seeing the faults of attachment, we should remember the importance of non-attachment, and 
then the faults of being pre-occupied with the pursuit of pleasure will 
cease.   To generate non-attachment, we can use the "Graduated Path" meditations 
on impermanence and the sufferings of cyclic existence. Renunciation can 
have two levels - complete and approximate. Approximate renunciation is non-attachment to some object. For example, if we have renounced the 
pleasure of food, this is a non-attachment. 
  Beings of the lowest capacity have non-attachment in the sense of not 
 
 50 
being attached to the pleasures of the present life. They look to the 
future existences and leave behind the temporary pleasures of food, clothes, and so on. Beings of middling capacity have non-attachment that is 
the lack of attachment to all the pleasures of cyclic existence, and the 
mind seeking liberation. Beings of greatest capacity have non-attachment that is the thought of leaving behind even the nirvana of the Solitary 
Realizer. The simple word "non-attachment" thus includes all the teachings 
given for the beings of low, middle, and great capacity.    When those of sharp intelligence hear the words, "This is how it is," 
they can immediately realize the non-attachment of the three beings. To be 
non-attached to the pleasures of this life, we must reflect for a long time on the perfect human rebirth and the disadvantages of cyclic existence. To 
generate non-attachment to all of cyclic existence we must contemplate the 
suffering of all six realms and the disadvantages of cyclic existence. We must know that there is suffering everywhere, from the peak of cyclic 
existence to the lowest hell. By abandoning cyclic existence we attain 
solitary peace, but all good qualities are not yet complete. The Arhat simply has freedom, but he needs to leave that level and aspire to attain 
Buddhahood - there must be non-attachment to the bliss of solitary peace 
and he must meditate on great compassion to accomplish the supreme purposes of self and others. 
  Non-attachment is a virtue without attachment; it is a remedy for 
attachment and desire. The different levels of desire and attachment cause us to create non-virtue; without desire it is easy for us to create virtue 
such as making charity. 
    (v)  NON-HATRED  
 
Non-hatred is a mental factor that is the lack of intention to cause harm 
to others.  
  Non-hatred is the opposite of hatred - a disturbed mind that arises when we see others with repulsion. Non-hatred is sometimes called virtue without 
hatred; it helps us to overcome the disturbing, uncomfortable feeling of hatred which causes anger and unhappiness deep in our hearts. Hatred can be 
directed towards ordinary objects such as doors, thorns, and rocks, as well 
as towards other persons.    There are many conditions leading to hatred, such as seeing as enemies 
those who have harmed us in the past, who are harming us now, or who will 
harm us in the future. Or we can see someone as an enemy because he has harmed, is harming, or will harm our friend. Or we can see someone as an 
enemy because he has helped, is helping, or will help my enemy. Thus if we 
do not have non-hatred, there are these nine ways in which we can develop anger against someone. 
   
  There are four virtuous methods by which we can train our minds in non-hatred: 
 
(a)  To not blame others when they blame us. (b)  To not strike others when they strike us. 
(c)  To not become angry with someone who is angry with us. 
(d)  To not criticize another who criticizes us.  
These four methods of training are ways in which others can harm us by 
causing us to become angry. When we receive harm in these ways, if we do not fight back but volunteer to simply experience the harm, this is 
wonderful, it is developing the patience of voluntarily enduring suffering. 
   (vi)  NON-CONFUSION  
 
Non-confusion is a type of knowledge that arises either spontaneously at birth or through effort. It is a mental factor that has no confusion when 
engaging in a virtuous object,  it leads to the avoidance of unwholesome 
actions.   
  There is a difference between knowledge (she.rab) and the knowledge 
associated with non-confusion. This is because the virtuous mental factor of non-confusion simply has the ability to not become confused with respect 
to a particular object and to not engage in an unwholesome action, whereas 
knowledge, through its own power, is able to distinguish between correct 
 
 51 
and incorrect; it knows what is to be practiced and what is to be 
abandoned, and it eliminates doubt. Non-confusion has no power to distinguish between correct and incorrect objects; it is a type of 
knowledge but does not function as fully as the usual knowledge.  
  It does not feel comfortable to say that non-confusion is not knowledge. The function of non-confusion exists within the function of knowledge, but 
the function of knowledge does not exist within the function of non-
confusion. It is better to say that non-confusion is a type of knowledge. The main mind that accompanies the virtuous mental factor of non-confusion 
can also have the mental factor of knowledge, so there can be the two types 
of knowledge within the one retinue. Non-confusion is a type of knowledge and the mental factor of knowledge attending this virtuous mind is 
knowledge, so the two things are one substance in terms of knowledge 
because all the consciousnesses within one retinue are necessarily one substance. 
  All physical, verbal, and mental negative actions come from the three 
opposites to non-attachment, non-hatred, and non-confusion. Therefore these three roots of virtue are the main means by which we can stop creating 
negative karma; they are the essence of the higher levels of the path. All 
subjects of the five paths and the ten grounds are taught so that sentient beings can free themselves from attachment, hatred, and confusion. 
  The virtuous mental factor of non-confusion has two types: 
 
(a)  Spontaneously acquired non-confusion   Some people have spontaneous 
qualities at birth, such as skill in painting, music, and so on. These 
spontaneous knowledges may be due to the specific place of rebirth or to 
the karmic result of skills acquired in previous lives. 
(b)  Non-confusion acquired through effort   Three types of non-confusion 
arise as the results of listening, thinking, and meditating. These three 
activities refer to receiving teachings on important scriptures, such as the twelve branches, their condensation into nine branches, or into the 
three baskets. The three baskets contain the three higher trainings as 
their main subject. After listening to instruction on these main scriptures, we then think about the subject in three ways: first we listen 
and gain ascertainment of the subject, then we reflect on the subject 
matter, and then we meditate upon it with single-pointed concentration.    It is said that if we wish to make our lives meaningful, we should 
listen, think, and meditate on the instructions that the two great 
champions have given in their elucidations of the sutras. We must know the three baskets, at least have some understanding, otherwise we would have 
nothing to think about. Without learning, we can have no understanding and 
nothing to meditate upon. We can meditate properly only if we listen well and analyse properly through reflection.  
  A clear mind of knowledge is important. Buddha said that wisdom is 
required in every situation, even to enter a city we need good eyes, otherwise we would become lost. A thousand blind people cannot find their 
way to a city, but one person with eyes can lead them all to their goal. 
Knowledge is essential for eliminating subtle obscurations such as the conception of true existence, and gross obscurations such as attachment, 
hatred, and confusion.  
  Acharya Vira said that one needs a wide experience of listening to the teachings in order to have extensive reflection and then extensive 
meditation, otherwise there is nothing to meditate upon. 
  Lama Tsongkhapa said that first one must seek many teachings, listen well, reflect on the meaning, and then practice them day and night. 
 
 
(vii)  EFFORT  
 
Effort is a mental factor that delights in performing virtue.  
  It functions to increase the entity of virtue within oneself, to initiate 
the creation of new virtue, and to overcome laziness. Effort related to 
non-virtuous or neutral objects is not the effort under discussion. There 
are five types of effort:  (a)  Armour-like effort   Before engaging in a virtuous action, armour-like 
effort is used to set the mind to ensure that there is no hesitation while doing the action. For example, the great mind of one who decides to undergo 
the suffering of the hell of increasing torment for the sake of just one other being.  
 
 52 
 
(b)  Effort of application  is to engage in an action with delight, to take 
on sufferings with enthusiasm and pleasure in being able to help others.  
 
(c)  Effort of non-discouragement  is to delight in doing virtuous actions 
without being discouraged. With this type of effort we are able to pursue a 
virtuous activity to its completion without giving up. Buddha said that we 
should not give in to discouragement because discouragement only brings 
unhappiness and destroys us. It is better to continue on with the virtuous activity we have chosen and not be discouraged. This mental factor 
encourages us to practice virtue and enables us to succeed without 
difficulty.    Effort of non-discouragement can be developed by thinking about previous 
holy beings - the Buddhas and Bodhisattvas who gained realizations by 
maintaining effort during extremely difficult times. Instead of thinking: "I cannot do this," we think: "If the Buddhas and Bodhisattvas were able to 
do this, so can I."   
  Familiarity with the practice is also useful - the more we are accustomed to virtue, the less we are harmed by discouragement. A difference between 
virtue and non-virtue is that virtue has the nature to increase limitlessly 
and never become exhausted, whereas non-virtue can be destroyed and abandoned by the power of virtue. Although we know that virtue can increase 
forever, and non-virtue can be stopped immediately, we still need the right 
methods to increase virtue and to stop non-virtue.  (d)  Irreversible effort  is such that when we are performing a virtuous 
action our mind cannot change and there are no external circumstances that 
can hinder the completion of our action. Lama Tsongkhapa said that wearing the good clothes of effort enables one to always increase understanding of 
the verbal doctrine and the doctrine of realization. 
  The result of effort is that our body and speech become peaceful, this pacifies others, and we are able to pursue all virtuous actions to their 
completion. We should know how to eliminate all laziness, and we should 
think: "Just as others have done, I too shall completely overcome laziness through effort." 
  Wearing the clothes of effort, our actions of body and speech are 
positive and we have great mental and physical energy to complete virtuous actions. Effort is not only important in respect to Dharma; success in 
worldly activities also depends upon effort. Bodhisattvas know this 
importance, and by cultivating effort as the antidote to laziness, they attain liberation and enlightenment. Lama Tsongkhapa followed the way of 
great effort, and exhorted his followers to do likewise if they wished to 
attain the same goals.  (e)  Effort of not being satisfied   Being content with a small amount of 
virtue is a great hindrance to following the spiritual path, we should always try to increase our virtue. There are many levels of knowledge and 
realizations to attain and these require great effort; we should not be satisfied with small achievements. Such contentment is also an obstacle to 
completing an educational course that we may follow. If there is not a 
complete set of causes and imprints, there is no hope to attain a complete set of results. If virtuous actions are vast, the knowledges and 
realizations resulting from them will be vast. 
  Understanding the importance of having a complete set of causes, Arya Asanga repeatedly taught the graded path to enlightenment. When we realize 
that we have to acquire the entire set of imprints to attain the complete 
path, we may feel discouraged, but such discouragement should be immediately dispelled. To ignore and overcome that discouragement is the 
effort of not being satisfied. This effort can be intensified by taking the 
one thousand and two Buddhas of this fortunate aeon as an example for encouraging our mind. Each of these Buddhas was an ordinary being who 
strove with great effort to attain enlightenment, and we should think: 
"Just as they strove so hard, so shall I."  
Chandrakirti said: "All knowledge is due to effort; effort is the cause for 
completing the accumulations of wisdom and merit."  
We should know well the chapter in the "Graduated Path" on the importance 
of effort and the disadvantages of laziness. The biggest obstacle to any   
 
 53 
path of virtue is laziness, especially the laziness of procrastination 
because it occurs in virtuous situations when we become complacent, not in non-virtuous situations where the opportunity to act non-virtuously is seen 
and avoided without hesitation. The laziness of procrastination can be 
overcome by meditating on the preciousness of the perfect human rebirth and the imminence of death. Through the force of familiarity, we have the 
tendency to immediately engage in unwholesome actions, so whenever the 
opportunity for an unwholesome action arises, we should remember the disadvantages of engaging in such actions. 
 
 
(viii)  SUPPLENESS  
 
Suppleness is a mental factor that has abandoned inflexibility of body and 
mind and has the ability to put the body and mind into a virtuous activity 
for as long as one wishes.  
  Suppleness is of two types:  
(a)  Physical suppleness  overcomes physical inflexibility - a stiff and 
awkward body that is not inclined to engage in virtue. Physical suppleness 
gained through meditation makes the body feel fit and light, able to be used as long as one wishes. 
 
(b)  Mental suppleness  is a pacification of mental inflexibility, arrived 
at through extensive training in meditation. The mind is able to maintain 
stable concentration on a virtuous object without tiring for as long as one 
wishes. Mental suppleness is the actual mental factor of suppleness, not 
physical suppleness.  
The benefit of attaining suppleness is that we have a strong internal 
condition for easily developing concentration. Once we have attained suppleness, our concentration becomes better and better, this increases our 
mental and physical suppleness and our concentration is intensified even 
more. Thus suppleness and concentration mutually assist each other. When concentration is fully developed, the mental and physical suppleness are 
also fully developed and we have perfect conditions to destroy the mental 
afflictions.    The function of suppleness is to develop concentration and also to avoid 
distraction - as long as there is concentration there is no distraction. 
   (ix)  CONSCIENTIOUSNESS  
 
Conscientiousness is a mental factor that keeps the mind from engaging in 
non-virtuous activities; it holds the mind straight and prevents it from 
being controlled by the afflictions; it maintains the mind within the three 
roots of virtue (non-attachment, non-hatred, and non-confusion).  
Conscientiousness may be practiced in five ways: 
 (a)  Conscientiousness related to previous activity  is awareness of past 
non-virtuous actions and acting to confess and purify them. Physical non-virtues are purified by physical activities of prostration, 
circumambulation, and so on; verbal non-virtues are purified by reciting prayers and mantras; and mental non-virtues are purified by determining to 
not repeat such thoughts in the future.   
  It is necessary to confess and purify particular negative karmas according to their type - such as the three specific ways of purifying the 
negative karmas of body, speech, and mind. If we have negative karma 
related to tantric practice, we must purify that by taking a new initiation or self-initiation. If we have negative karma associated with Bodhisattva 
vows, we should recite the general confession to the thirty-five Buddhas, 
and if ordained sangha have broken Pratimoksha vows, we should purify them 
at the fortnightly purification ceremony ( so.jong). 
 
(b)  Conscientiousness related to future activity  is awareness to not 
commit unwholesome actions in the future, and the intention to purify any 
that we may commit. 
 
 
 
 54 
 
(c)  Conscientiousness related to the present activity  is to be alert to 
avoid present unwholesome activities and to immediately purify any that are 
committed.  (d)  Conscientiousness of concordant behaviour  is to maintain the mind on a 
virtuous activity that you have been doing for some time so that unwholesome actions do not arise. 
 
(e)  Conscientiousness of prior behaviour  is the mind that wishes to engage 
in the best way of abiding on the virtuous object and purifying 
negativities, thinking: "How wonderful if, in the past, I had always abided 
in virtue and purification of non-virtue."  The four gateways for non-virtue  
(a)  Lack of conscientiousness.  
(b)  Not knowing one's vows.  
(c)  Excessive afflictions.  
(d)  Lacking respect for one's vows.  (a)  Lack of conscientiousness   In brief, conscientiousness is the wish to 
remain in the present way of virtue and to never be separated from virtue in the future. If we are not conscientious in all activities, there will be 
a gap through which we can receive faults and commit negative karmas, which will fall like rain. A lack of conscientiousness is the first of the four 
gateways through which negativities are received.   
  When discussing the danger of a lack of conscientiousness, the question arises: "How does one cultivate the conscientiousness that avoids engaging 
in negative actions and helps to engage in positive actions?" The answer is 
to meditate upon the speed with which ones next rebirth is coming. Death can cause this life to finish at any time, just like a water bubble. Also, 
we should remember that we are obliged to follow the paths already 
determined by positive and negative karmas and this will help us to be conscientious in all our actions. Meditating in this way, we will be most 
careful to avoid the smallest non-virtue and to accumulate every possible 
virtue. Nagarjuna pointed out that to be conscientious is to be a source of nectar, and to lack conscientiousness is to be a source of all 
disadvantages and faults. 
 
(b)  Not knowing our vows,  or how to practice them, causes floods of 
defeats and negative karmas. Lack of knowledge does not excuse us from 
accumulating negative karma.  
 
(c)  Having excessive afflictions  forces us into unwholesome behavior; we 
must be conscientious of our worst afflictions. 
 
(d)  Lacking respect for our vows  is to have wrong information about karma 
and vows, to think that small vows do not matter and can be broken. 
Neglecting the small vows through contempt opens the gateway to breaking 
the bigger vows.   
 Lacking conscientiousness and not being careful leads to many negative 
actions of our body, speech, and mind. Small negativities become bigger, 
and bad habits develop. The Kadampa lamas used to pray: "May the triple gem make me attentive with respect to all actions of my body, speech, and 
mind." 
    (x)  EQUANIMITY  
 
Equanimity in this context is the equanimity of non-application that is 
attained in samatha meditation, it is not the equanimity of the four 
immeasurable thoughts, and it is not the equanimity of abiding free from 
anger and attachment.  It is a mental factor that holds the mind within the 
three virtuous roots (non-attachment, non-hatred, and non-confusion) with 
great strength and counteracts any mental factor influenced by mental 
affliction.  
  Equanimity occurs within calm-abiding meditation, among the nine mental 
states. The two obstacles - laxity and excitement - are overcome by their 
 
 55 
antidotes and eventually they no longer occur, there is no need to apply 
any more remedies. Applying the remedies - introspection and mindfulness - at this point now becomes a fault, and the equanimity of non-application is 
the mind that avoids that fault. It is a state when there are no more 
obstacles arising and there is effortless stabilization.  
 
 (xi)  NON-HARMFULNESS  
 
Non-harmfulness is a mental factor acquired through removing hatred - one 
of the roots of non-virtue.  
  The entity of non-harmfulness is compassion, its function is to not have 
the wish to inflict harm upon others, and it enables us to tolerate pain caused by others. It is not simply tolerance of harm, but also a wish for 
all sentient beings to be free from suffering.  
  Compassion is simply wishing all beings to be free from suffering; non-harmfulness also has the ability to tolerate the burden of that compassion. 
Buddha said that if one has a harmful attitude towards others, one is not a 
disciple of his. Becoming a monk, one changes ones inner and outer aspects (becomes an "inner being"), but if one then develops aggression towards 
another, one ceases to be a follower of Buddha. 
  Buddha meant that all people should abstain from acting out of hatred. In particular, ordained people, who have made special promises, should avoid 
unwholesome activities motivated by the intention to harm others. To ensure 
that nobody has the harmful attitude towards others, Buddha began the custom of giving newly ordained getsuls a strainer to use when taking water 
in order to filter out the living animals to avoid harming them. Also, when 
giving vows Buddha mentioned the four types of virtuous cultivations that should be followed by all ordained people: 
 
(a)  To not blame others when oneself is blamed. (b)  To not criticize others when oneself is criticized. 
(c)  To not strike others when oneself is struck. 
(d)  To not be angry with others when others are angry with us.  
Buddha taught this because he wanted his disciples to practice patience and 
to not harm others even when they themselves were harmed. This is the most heroic practice that we can do. 
 
 
Other types of virtue  
 
There are four main types of virtue:  (a)  Virtue by nature  is the eleven virtuous mental factors which are 
virtuous by nature; they need nothing else in order to be virtuous, whereas some other virtues need virtuous conditions in order to be virtuous. 
Natural virtue is like a medicine that has natural healing power.  (b)  Virtue by association  refers to the main minds and mental factors that 
are virtuous by existing together with any of the eleven virtuous mental 
factors. Associational virtue is like a proper diet that complements natural medicine.  
 
(c)  Virtue by motivation  refers to actions of body and speech, that are 
virtuous because they are motivated by a virtuous mind, a good heart. 
Motivational virtue is like the milk given by cows when they have good feed and water. 
 
(d)  Ultimate virtue  is nirvana, the liberation from cyclic existence. 
Specifically, it is true cessation, the permanent cessation of some or all 
of the afflictions. This is not the usual virtue that we talk about because virtue is generally seen to be an impermanent phenomenon, a cause that 
produces a positive result and non-virtue is seen to be a cause that 
produces a negative result. Nirvana is called ultimate virtue because, from one point of view, cyclic existence is ultimate non-virtue and so the 
opposite of that is ultimate virtue. These descriptions are logical because 
when non-virtuous acts are created they lead to the destination of cyclic existence and when virtuous acts are created they lead to the destination 
of nirvana. Ultimate virtue can also refer to emptiness because when one 
 
 56 
takes emptiness as an object of meditation the afflictions diminished. 
Ultimate virtue is like the happiness that exists when we are free from sickness. 
 
 
Another type of virtue not mentioned above is subsequently related virtue.  
This refers to virtuous imprints established on the mind by virtuous 
actions.   Each of the natural virtues  (the eleven virtuous mental factors) has 
associated virtues  - the accompanying main minds and mental factors. When 
we engage in actions of body, speech, and mind motivated by any of the 
natural virtues, this motivational virtue  causes us to receive virtuous 
imprints - subsequently related virtue  - which then lead to the ultimate 
virtue of true cessations and nirvana.  
  Ultimate virtue can refer to either emptiness or nirvana, but this does 
not mean that emptiness and nirvana are the same in every context. The Cittamatrins and the Prasangikas say that emptiness is nirvana and nirvana 
is emptiness, but according to the Madhyamika Svatantrikas, nirvana cannot 
be emptiness. Both emptiness and nirvana have their own reasons for being called ultimate virtue. 
 
 
Eight-fold classification of virtue  
According to the situation, virtue can also be divided into eight types: 
 
(a)  Innate virtue   Beings born in the Desire and Form Realms can have 
virtue arising in their minds spontaneously, without effort in this life. 
This virtue arises due to the effort of previous lives, which left mental 
imprints of familiarity with virtue. 
 
(b)  Virtue through effort  is the realizations attained through the effort 
of having met a spiritual master, listened to his teachings, contemplated 
them, and meditated upon them. 
 
(c)  Virtue performed in front  is, for example, visualizing the merit field 
of Buddhas in front of you and accumulating merit by prostrating, making 
offerings, and so on.  (d)  Virtue by helping  actions such as ripening the minds of others by 
engaging in the four ways of gathering disciples (giving material help, speaking pleasantly to turn their minds towards Dharma, explaining clearly 
what is to be practiced and what is to be abandoned, and setting a good personal example).   
 
(e)  Holding virtue  is virtue that holds you and others from falling into 
the lower realms. In a wider sense, it can refer to virtue that holds one 
from being reborn in the lower or the upper realms, a virtue that takes one towards liberation - it can refer to any virtue that is similar in aspect 
to liberation. 
 
(f)  Virtue that is an antidote   At a general level this can refer to any 
virtue that superficially counteracts hatred and attachment, such as 
meditation on ugliness to overcome attachment and meditating on loving 
kindness to overcome hatred - these are virtuous meditations that suppress 
the afflictions. At a higher level, it refers to meditation on the sixteen levels of the path of seeing and the nine levels of the path of meditation; 
these meditations are virtuous antidotes that actually eliminate the 
afflictions.  (g)  Pacifying virtue  refers to any level of true cessation. True cessation 
is the cessation of some or all of the afflictions. To bring about the cessation of an affliction a path of meditation must be applied and true 
cessation is the "pacification" of the affliction, intellectual or innate.  (h)  Virtue corresponding to the cause , such as the ten powers and the four 
fearlessnesses of a Buddha, which are virtues corresponding to the causes Buddha made to achieve them. 
 
 57 
Non-virtue  
 
There are similar divisions of non-virtue: 
 
(a)  Natural non-virtue  hatred, desire, and ignorance, non-shame, non-
consideration, and so on that are non-virtuous by their own entity. 
 
(b)  Non-virtue by association   Main minds and other mental factors 
occurring at the same time as natural non-virtues.  
 (c)  Non-virtue by motivation   Unwholesome actions of body and speech 
motivated by natural and associated non-virtues. 
 
(e)  Ultimate non-virtue   The state of cyclic existence itself. Cyclic 
existence is ultimate non-virtue because it is a state where the sufferings 
of birth, sickness, old age, and death occur continuously. Although we call 
cyclic existence ultimate non-virtue, the usual meaning of non-virtue is a 
mental event, but cyclic existence is not a mental factor, so it is a nominal non-virtue, just as nirvana is a nominal virtue. 
 
 
Seven-fold classification of non-virtue  
 
(a)  Innate non-virtue   Non-virtuous minds that arise from birth and which 
are the result of predispositions from former lives. 
 
(b)  Non-virtue through effort   For example, we may meet a wrong spiritual 
guide who leads us to create non-virtuous actions. 
 (c)  Non-virtue performed in front   For example, to sacrifice an animal in 
front of a visualized god.  
(d)  Non-virtue of harming others   Unwholesome actions of body, speech, and 
mind that cause harm to others. 
 
(e)  Holding non-virtue   Throwing and completing karmas that lead to 
rebirth in any of the three lower realms. These are "holding non-virtue" 
because they oblige one to suffer in the lower realms unless they are 
pacified or destroyed by the proper antidotes. 
 
(f)  Oppositional non-virtue   Any hindrance that blocks the attainment of 
wisdom realizing selflessness or any other virtuous mind.  
 (g)  Interrupting non-virtue   Wrong views and so on that arise and cut the 
foundation of virtue that we have acquired. 
 
 
4  THE  SIX ROOT  AFFLICTIONS  
 
In general, an affliction is a mental factor that causes the mind to be 
unpeaceful and difficult to subdue. The one root affliction is ignorance; 
the three root afflictions are ignorance, hatred, and attachment; and the six root afflictions are: 
 
  (i)  Attachment  ('dod.chags)  (ii)  Hatred  (khong.khro) 
(iii)  Pride  (nga.rgyal) 
 (iv)  Ignorance  (ma.rig.pa)   (v)  Doubt  (the.tshom) 
 (vi)  Afflicted views  (lta.ba nyon.mongs.can) 
 
 58 
  (i)  ATTACHMENT  
 
Attachment is a mental factor that sees a contaminated object as attractive 
and wishes to acquire it.  
  Among all the afflictions, attachment is the most difficult to separate from because it becomes involved in the object, not wishing to separate 
from it - like oil on cloth, which is difficult to remove. Other afflictions are like dirt on cloth, they are more easily removed.   
  Attachment is of three types according to the realm: attachment of the 
Desire Realm is attachment that seeks the five objects of desire existing within the Desire Realm, attachment of the Form Realm is attachment to the 
happiness of the four concentrations, and attachment of the Formless Realm 
is attachment to the experience of the four Formless levels.   Attachment is a non-aversion to cyclic existence. It is a mind that seeks 
the comfort of all three realms of cyclic existence. Some people have the 
misconception that only the Desire Realm is cyclic existence and the Form and Formless Realms are liberation, and by meditating on the cause for 
rebirth in the Form and Formless Realms one can gain liberation from cyclic 
existence.  Seeking and desiring virtue is not attachment   Attachment functions to 
increase desire, but seeking and desiring in a virtuous context is not attachment. Virtuous aspiration and faith can seem to be attachment, but we 
can distinguish them according to whether the mind is rendered peaceful or un-peaceful by that wish. For example, the wish for good health can disturb 
the mind, this is attachment, but the wish to learn does not disturb the 
mind and is not attachment. Also, the mind seeking bodhicitta or enlightenment is an aspiring mind that is not attachment. 
  Attachment also functions to generate suffering - immediately or in a 
future rebirth - because rebirth within cyclic existence requires a cause, and the cause is always attachment. The throwing karma for rebirth can be 
created by attachment or another affliction, but for this karma to ripen at 
death it requires the nourishing conditions of craving, grasping, and existence. As these are derived from attachment, attachment is the 
principal cause for rebirth. It is said that to become an Arya one must be 
free from attachment to food, clothing, and the environment, and one must wish to meditate on the path and abandon the objects to be abandoned. 
 
 
 (ii)  HATRED  
 
Hatred is a harmful attitude directed towards one of three objects: a 
sentient being, suffering in one's own continuum, or a phenomenon that is a 
source of suffering.  
  Hatred easily arises against those sentient beings who we perceive as 
enemies. Hatred also can arise against personal suffering, such as ill health, or any disturbance of our body and mind. Hatred against a source of 
suffering is the anger we develop at a thorn and so on. 
 
Nine divisions of hatred   Hatred can be directed towards: 
An enemy that has harmed, is harming, or will harm me.  
An enemy that has harmed, is harming, or will harm my friends.  
Something that has helped, is helping, or will help my enemy. 
 The special function of hatred is to make us not abide in happiness and to 
meet suffering in the future. Hatred serves as a basis for accumulating 
mistakes, it has many disadvantages. According to Shantideva, anger prevents the experiences of peace, joy, and happiness. When we have hatred, 
even if we wear special clothes to appear happy and be attractive, our face 
will be ugly and our mind will be unhappy. Instead of pleasing others, our appearance will frighten them and make them sad. Hatred prevents sleep and 
it causes us to harm those who have helped us in the past. When hatred has  
 arisen, we are unhappy, and even if we try to help our friends, we only 
make them more unhappy.   
 
Hatred is our worst enemy   Our own hatred causes us most harm. Our enemies, 
at most, can separate us from this body - even if all the world were our 
enemy, the worst they could do would be to kill us. Hatred, on the other 
hand, causes unhappiness not only in this life but also in countless future 
 
 59 
lives. We may superficially blame our troubles on "karma," but if we 
examine the karmic cause of unhappiness we will discover that most of it came from the affliction of hatred in previous lives. For this reason, the 
Kadampa lamas said that ordinary people seek shelter from their enemies to 
avoid suffering but they do not recognize the inner enemy that is the cause of suffering and from which they cannot seek shelter. They said it is 
amazing that we avoid and kill our external enemies but we make no attempt 
to remove our worst enemy, instead, we allow it to always abide within.     The afflictions of hatred, attachment, and so on have the nature to 
slowly decrease and wear out, whether we apply a remedy or not, because 
they do not have the background to increase more and more. When we have hatred, if we are holy beings we will destroy ourselves, if we are 
beautiful we will become ugly, and if we are intelligent we will become 
stupid. There are many reasons why we should cultivate patience and abandon hatred, but according to Chandrakirti, the main reason is that hatred has 
no purpose and it produces the most intense suffering.  
  It is clear that nobody wishes to suffer at any time, yet we continue to generate hatred. These two facts are contradictory.  If we remain within 
the confines of anger and hatred, we will continue to create the cause of 
suffering even though we do not wish to suffer. Not only does anger produce future sufferings, it also destroys accumulated merit, so we should try at 
all times to avoid these afflictions. 
  If a non-Bodhisattva becomes angry with a Bodhisattva, the merit he has accumulated over a thousand aeons is instantly destroyed because the object 
- the Bodhisattva - is a person with powerful dedication for the benefit of 
others, and anger towards him is equally heavy on the negative side. Shantideva said that the merits of generosity can be destroyed by one 
moment of anger. 
  On the other hand, Chandrakirti said that if a Bodhisattva has one moment of anger towards a non-Bodhisattva, he will destroy the accumulated merit 
of practicing the six perfections over a hundred aeons. Hatred harms others 
and destroys virtue, just as a hailstorm destroys new crops.    We may ask: "If hatred destroys virtue, what about the explanation in the 
"Graduated Path" that karma lasts aeons and aeons and can ripen at distant 
times in the future?" This means that any karma, virtuous or non-virtuous, 
will eventually give a result unless it is destroyed by anger (virtue) or 
purified by a virtuous action (non-virtue). For example, when a seed with 
the energy to give a sprout remains undamaged, it can give rise to a sprout 
even after a very long time, but if its ability to produce a sprout is 
damaged, it cannot give rise to its result.    
Student  The teachings also say that even if we cause harm to a Bodhisattva 
this will bring us benefit. Geshe  This is so, but it means that the Bodhisattva makes the wish that we 
meet happiness as soon as possible. We can never create the cause for 
happiness by harming a Bodhisattva.  
If a Bodhisattva destroys a hundred aeons of merit by becoming angry with a 
non-Bodhisattva, what about the teaching that merit dedicated with bodhicitta remains until enlightenment? That which actually preserves merit 
is dedication combined with the realization of emptiness. Merely an 
intellectual understanding of emptiness is sufficient to make merit invulnerable until enlightenment. Virtue arising from the first five 
perfections that is not sustained by wisdom can be destroyed, but virtue 
sustained by wisdom cannot be destroyed.   Virtue can be destroyed by anger or by wrong views. Anger alone cannot 
cut the root of virtue; it only limits the results of virtue, or reduces a 
powerful virtue to a weak virtue. On the other hand, wrong views can destroy virtue from the root. Small wrong views completely destroy small 
virtues and as wrong views gain in strength they destroy bigger virtues, 
like a waning moon where the brightness is occluded by increasing darkness.  Methods to overcome anger   In the sixth chapter of the 
"Bodhisattvacharyavatara" Shantideva explains how to recognize the nature of the enemy - without whom there is no way that we can cultivate patience.   
  The "Abhidharmakosa" says that to avoid anger, we should think that the enemy is suffering from anger and its imprints, that we are the condition 
that causes his anger, that he has distorted thoughts, and we should not be 
angry at him because just as he has these three conditions, so do we. The enemy is exhibiting aggression towards us because the three causes are 
 
 60 
there, so why should we be angry with him in return? 
  The "Pramanavarttika" says that when the causes and conditions are complete, the result cannot be reversed. The effect of becoming angry will 
arise, so it should be avoided by practicing patience. If the causes are 
present the results will come. This is no surprise, just as it is not surprising that flames burn upwards and water flows downwards. In addition, 
to strengthen the practice of patience, we should think that those who are 
angry towards us are in this situation without control, they are moved by their inner afflictions to act in the way that they do. 
 
 
(iii)  PRIDE  
 
Pride is a mental factor that arises from the view of the transitory 
collection as a real I and mine ('jig.lta), and has the aspect of feeling 
higher than others.    
  The particular function of pride is to be disrespectful to others because one considers oneself superior, and it brings unhappiness to oneself. Pride 
can arise through a feeling of superiority for any reason - one's voice, possessions, knowledge, and so on. 
  Pride arises in dependence upon the transitory view because it is based 
upon grasping at a concrete self - "I am" - and this is how the transitory view functions. There are seven divisions: 
 
1  Pride   A mental factor thinking "I am superior to others." 
2  Superiority  ("extra pride").  A mental factor that observes  
   one's peers and thinks, "among them all, I am special."  
3  Extreme pride  ("pride beyond pride"). Considering oneself to  
   be superior even to those who are clearly wiser than oneself. 
4  Egotism  ("pride of I"). Observes one's own aggregates and  
   thinks, "I am." In reality, the aggregates are empty of true  
   existence but, not knowing that, one thinks they exist as the     true self and one grasps at that conception. 5  Pretension  ("full-blown pride"). An inflated mind thinking  
   that one has gained high realizations such as stream-enterer,     once-returner, never-returner, or Arhat. 
6  Pride of slight inferiority   An inflated mind that observes a  
   superior and thinks "I am lower but almost as good as him." 
7  Wrong pride   An inflated mind thinking that one is above  
   ordinary morality - that one has special qualities enabling  
   one to kill, steal, lie, and so on with impunity.  
 
Nine types of pride according to the situation    
 
Comparing self to others  
 
1  "I am superior to others."   Buddha can say this; it is true  
   and is not pride. Also, if we say we are superior to animals,  
   this is true and is not pride. If, however, our attitude of  
   superiority is an inflated mind that renders non-peacefulness  
   to our mind and causes later disturbance, it is pride. 
2  "I am equal to others."   "Others" are those higher than us,  
   and saying that we are equal implies an inflated mind. 
3  "I am inferior to others."   Verbally we say we are inferior,  
   mentally we have the inflated attitude that we are better. 
 (Comparing others to oneself)  
 
4  "Others are superior to me."   This inflated mind accepts the  
   superiority of others but thinks that oneself is also good. 
5  "Others are equal to me."   This attitude sees equality with  
   others but it has an inflated idea of ones own goodness. 
6  "Others are inferior  to me."   Is an inflated attitude of  
   superiority that is clearly pride. 
 Rejecting certain qualities of others in comparison to oneself  
 
7  "There is nobody greater than me."   This is clearly pride. 
 
 61 
8  "There is nobody equal to me."   Is an inflated idea that one  
   is so perfect that nobody can compare with oneself. 
9  "There is nobody lower than me."   Is an idea that, although  
   one is the lowest, one will come out on top.  
A function of pride is to have no respect for those with high attainments, to never show humility, to always remain stiff and straight. This is a 
great obstacle to acquiring new knowledge from those who know more than us. 
The Kadampa lamas said that just as high mountains bear no grass, those who are high with pride can bear no knowledge. Besides the present 
disadvantages, the future disadvantages of pride are that one is reborn in 
the three lower realms and even when reborn as a human, we are born in the lowest ranks of society. Some humans are so low that they cannot even speak 
to others. A stalk of barley with a load of ripe grain bends gracefully, 
but when there is no grain the stem remains straight and stiff - this is like the person with pride who remains unbending and has no load of 
knowledge. 
   (iv)  IGNORANCE  
 
Ignorance is a mental factor that is unaware of the nature (reality) of 
phenomena.   
  Ignorance functions to ascertain objects in the wrong way, to serve as 
the basis for doubt, and to serve as the basis for the remaining afflictions. 
  According to the "Abhidharmakosa" and "Abhidharmasamuchchaya", ignorance 
is a mental factor that is the mere ignorance of the final state of phenomena; these texts do not add that ignorance apprehends its object in 
the wrong way.   
  The "Madhyamakavatara" and the "Pramanavarttika" however, say that ignorance is not just the mere ignorance with respect to the reality of 
phenomena; it is also a mental factor that apprehends its object in the 
wrong way. For all these texts, ignorance is still asserted to be a mental factor not knowing the reality of an object. 
  The first two texts describe the obscuration of ignorance to be like the 
time of day, at dawn or dusk, when the light is dull and objects cannot be clearly seen. They say that due to this condition one can mistake a rope 
for a snake, and this mistaken apprehension is like the transitory view. 
The latter two texts do not differentiate, they say that the transitory view is ignorance and they do not talk about ignorance simply being 
obscurity. They say that the transitory view is a mental factor that does 
not know the object well and grasps it in the wrong way.  
Student  How can transitory view be both ignorance and the first of the 
wrong views among the six root afflictions? Geshe  The transitory view is both. It is ignorance because it is obscured 
with respect to its object, and it is the first of the five wrong views 
because it grasps its object wrongly.  
The two Abhidharmas point out that ignorance and the transitory view are 
contradictory - the latter holds the object in the wrong way whereas the former simply does not know the object. They say that ignorance is a 
darkness that prevents seeing the object, while the transitory view is an 
actual misapprehension, like mistaking a rope for a snake.    The Madhyamikas say that the transitory view is ignorance, it is a 
darkness and a lack of clarity with respect to the object but is also a 
misapprehension. For them, view and non-view are not contradictory because they say that transitory view is a view and ignorance is not a view. The 
authors of all the above texts agree that the wisdom realizing selflessness 
is the remedy to ignorance.   Nagarjuna said that an action that is produced by attachment, hatred, or 
ignorance is a non-virtuous action; and so it seems that the action of 
ignorance producing hatred and attachment is non-virtuous. But on the other hand, we agree that actions giving rise to rebirth in the three upper 
realms are virtuous, and these actions are certainly derived from ignorance 
and afflictions such as desire - because all rebirths arise as a result of the three throwing causes: ignorance, karmic formation, and causal 
consciousness. Such karmas are produced by ignorance, and therefore, how 
can we discriminate between virtuous and non-virtuous actions if we say 
 
 62 
that actions produced by the three poisons are non-virtuous? We simply need 
to know the limits - actions done by particular mental factors are virtuous and actions done by other particular mental factors are non-virtuous. 
 
Ignorance is of two types:   1  Confusion with respect to reality  apprehends the aggregates as a self 
and thinks that this self is "I." This ignorance is the first of the twelve links of dependent-origination. 
 
2  Confusion with respect to cause and effect  is not knowing the 
relationship between actions and their effects. For example, not knowing 
that sacrificing animals is creating a negative karma; the idea held by 
some Brahmins that it is not negative for them to take from others; and 
thinking that it is not negative to have sexual relations with a married woman because she is "like a common path upon which all men may travel." 
This ignorance does not see the future result of negative karmic actions. 
 Karmas created through the ignorance of reality are not necessarily non-
virtuous, whereas karmas created through the ignorance of cause and effect 
are necessarily non-virtuous, and so Nagarjuna's quotation refers to the ignorance of cause and effect.  
  This leads us to a consideration of the two types of motivation possessed 
by every karmic action. The causal motivation  is the motivation that arises 
before engaging in an action, whereas the operational motivation  is the 
motivation that exists at the same time as the action is being performed. 
  The ignorance of cause and effect is non-virtuous, whereas the ignorance of reality can be either neutral or non-virtuous. In a virtuous action, the 
ignorance of reality only occurs within the causal motivation, and the 
ignorance of cause and effect does not occur with either motivation, if it did occur the action would be non-virtuous. The ignorance of reality occurs 
with the causal motivation of all karmic actions - virtuous, non-virtuous, 
and neutral - but it does not occur in the same retinue as the operational motivation for a virtuous action. The way in which the ignorance of reality 
comes with the causal motivation of a virtuous action is that one grasps at 
one's aggregates as a concrete self, and together with this self-grasping attitude one has the intention to perform a virtuous action, such as making 
prostrations.  
 Student  Isn't the ignorance of reality also in the operational motivation 
because we always have self-grasping? 
Geshe  It is true that there is always self-grasping but this does not mean that we necessarily have the ignorance of reality manifesting within the 
operational motivation of a virtuous action. If it did, it should have five 
things in common with a virtuous mental factor, but it does not have the similar entity of virtue. This ignorance has only a neutral or a non-
virtuous entity. While we are doing the virtuous action of prostration 
there is ignorance and self-grasping, but this does not mean that the self-grasping ignorance is acting as the operational motivation for that action, 
if it were it would have to share five things in common with a virtuous 
mind, and it doesn't.  
The causal motivation acts as a condition for the virtuous action, and the 
operational motivation attends the virtuous mind and shares five things in common with it. When an action is created through either desire or hatred, 
it has both types of motivation, and the causal motivation necessarily has 
ignorance of reality within its retinue. This first link ignorance is the primary condition that leads to rebirth within cyclic existence  because we 
grasp at our aggregates as a self-entity and with that self-grasping mind 
we develop desire and hatred which cause non-virtuous actions and these bind us to cyclic existence. 
 
Student  What is the difference between the ignorance that is one of the three poisons and the ignorance that gives rise to the three poisons? 
Geshe  The ignorance that is a root affliction gives rise to the three 
poisons, it has both ignorance of reality and ignorance of cause and effect, but there is no pervasion that the ignorance of the three poisons 
is ignorance of cause and effect. If we say an action produced by the three 
poisons is non-virtuous, then the ignorance must be ignorance of cause and effect, but if we are talking about the three poisons in general, the 
 
 63 
ignorance can be either the ignorance of reality or the ignorance of cause 
and effect.  
The "Pramanavarttika" says that all faults result from the view holding the 
transitory collection as a real self, and this transitory view is ignorance - on the basis of which we generate hatred and desire and accumulate karmic 
actions. This ignorance is the same as that described in the dependent-
arising text, which says: "The root of all faults in the world is ignorance; this root can be removed by the wisdom that is its antidote."   
 
The basis of all karmas is ignorance   Negative throwing karmas are based 
upon the ignorance of cause and effect, and positive throwing karmas are 
based upon the ignorance of reality. "Contaminated virtuous karma" refers to any karma that leads to rebirth within the three upper realms. The 
ignorance of reality is the root of karmas for rebirth in all six realms. 
  There are many temporary methods to diminish the power of ignorance, but to sever the root of ignorance we must meditate upon emptiness and attain 
the direct realization of reality. Temporary methods are meditation on 
love, compassion, and so on. These harm ignorance, but they do not destroy it from the root because their way of taking the object is not the exact 
opposite to the way ignorance takes its object. The only exact opposite is 
the way in which the wisdom realizing emptiness takes its object. Since the wisdom realizing emptiness is so important, meditation on emptiness is 
always emphasized - because with effort we can actually cut the root of 
cyclic existence.  
 
A review of ignorance  (ma.rig.pa) 
 
There is ignorance in general, and ignorance that is the first of the twelve links. Ignorance is explained differently within the four schools: 
 
Ignorance according to the Vaibhasikas   
The Vaibhasikas say that ignorance is not just the lack of wisdom that perceives reality, it is not just the opposite of the wisdom that cognizes 
reality, it is not simply a question of inferior cognition, nor is it a weak cognition. Ignorance is defined as belonging to a class of 
consciousness that is dissimilar to cognizing wisdom. This means that it is 
on the opposite side to the wisdom realizing selflessness, the opposite side to the virtuous mental factor of "non-ignorance." 
  The transitory view and ignorance are contradictory because ignorance is 
simply that which observes or engages in an object in the wrong way, it does not arrive at its object through analysis, whereas the transitory view 
engages in its object through analysis - it is an "incorrect wisdom."   
  The sutras say that the transitory view and ignorance (ma.rig.pa) attend each other, so we cannot say that they are so contradictory that they do 
not have a common locus. If the transitory view were ignorance it would 
follow that there would be two types of ignorance, two substances, within the entourage of one main mind, and so there would not be five things in 
common because the Vaibhasikas say that a substance should be of one type. 
There are six "earth-level" mental factors that occur in the retinues of the afflictions, including the transitory view:  confusion, carelessness, 
laziness, faithlessness, dullness, and excitement. 
  "Falsity" is not just the opposite of the truth, it is not just the lack of truth, it has to be contradictory to truth. Also, "non-sympathy" is not 
just the lack of sympathy; it is a mental factor that is contradictory to 
sympathy. Ignorance, on the other hand, has been defined as the opposite 
class to cognizing wisdom (cognizing wisdom refers to the wisdom cognizing 
selflessness). To be of "opposite class" is not to be contradictory as in 
these examples.    The wisdom realizing selflessness and the self-grasping conception 
(transitory view) have opposite ways of apprehending the object, so is the 
ignorance that is abiding on the opposite class of cognizing wisdom different to this or not?" The answer is that ignorance is simply non-
realization, it is not wrong realization. When in the darkness one mistakes 
a rope for a snake, not seeing the rope clearly is equivalent to ignorance, and mistaking it for a snake is equivalent to the transitory view. Thus the 
Vaibhasikas say that ignorance is just the veil that prevents seeing 
reality. 
 
 
 64 
Ignorance according to the Sautrantikas   
The Sautrantikas agree that ignorance abides in a dissimilar class to wisdom, but they say that the transitory view is ignorance. They assert 
that ignorance is a wrong realization - it takes its object in an incorrect 
way - and this is why ignorance abides in a dissimilar class to wisdom.    If it is asked: "Why do the sutras mention ignorance and transitory view 
separately?" The Sautrantikas reply that the transitory view is simply a 
type of ignorance - if it is ignorance in general it is not necessarily transitory view. Also, if it is self-grasping of person it is ignorance but 
it is not necessarily transitory view because transitory view must be a 
self-grasping that views one's own I and mine, whereas simple ignorance can take another person's I as an object.   
  Both the Vaibhasikas and the Sautrantikas assert innate and intellectual 
ignorance. The Vaibhasikas say that transitory view is only an intellectual obscuration, it is never innate. 
 
Ignorance according to the Madhyamika Svatantrikas   
In the "Abhidharmasamuchchaya" it says that ignorance is a mental factor that engages in its object with an aspect of confusion.   
  If it is a mental factor that engages in its object with an aspect of confusion, it is not necessarily a mental factor abiding in a dissimilar 
class, contradictory to cognizing wisdom, because the Svatantrikas say that 
such a mental factor is either self-grasping of person or self-grasping of phenomenon. 
  We can ask: "Is the mental consciousness that is the self-grasping of 
person - a cognition abiding in a dissimilar class to cognizing wisdom - ignorance?" It is opposite to the wisdom realizing selflessness, but it is 
not ignorance because it is a main mind and not a mental factor. 
  We can now ask: "Is a mental factor that abides in a dissimilar class that is contradictory to cognizing wisdom necessarily ignorance?" If the 
mental factor were ignorance it would have to be either that which 
contradicts selflessness of person or selflessness of phenomenon - it has to be a self-grasping - but if it is either of the self-graspings it must 
be a mental consciousness.  
 This school says that there can be no appearance of true existence to sense 
consciousness, the other schools agree. Within the Desire Realm, ignorance 
can attend any of the six main consciousnesses and so there is an ignorance within the retinue of eye consciousness that works together with the eye 
consciousness, and the question arises: "Is that mental factor of ignorance 
within the retinue of eye consciousness a mental factor that is of dissimilar class and contradictory to cognizing wisdom?"  
  If it abides in a dissimilar class to cognizing wisdom it has to be a 
mental consciousness - self-grasping of person has to be a mental consciousness - and the ignorance attending eye consciousness is not a 
mental consciousness. So, if the mental factor that is of dissimilar class 
contradictory to wisdom must be either of the self-graspings, that is, it must be a mental consciousness, then a mental factor that is of dissimilar 
class to cognizing wisdom cannot be the definition of ignorance. The 
ignorance that exists in the retinue of eye consciousness is a mental factor that engages in its object with the aspect of confusion. 
  The question thus arises: "Does ignorance have to be a wrong 
consciousness or not?" It does not, for example, the ignorance attending eye consciousness simply engages in its object with the aspect of 
confusion. It does not engage in the wrong way because the ignorance 
attending eye consciousness does not grasp its object in the wrong way, whereas a wrong consciousness necessarily grasps its object in a wrong way. 
  Therefore, according to the Svatantrikas, ignorance simply refers to the 
mental factor that is unable to see and is confused with respect to its object; there is no necessity for it to be an apprehender that is opposite 
to cognizing wisdom. It seems that, for the Svatantrikas, self-grasping of 
person is not confused with respect to its object through its own power, it has a confused aspect but it does not engage in its object with confusion 
through its own power.  
 
Geshe  Is the mental factor of feeling that is in the retinue of self-grasping of person a self-grasping or not? 
Student  No, because it is a mental factor and you said that self-grasping is a main mental consciousness. 
Geshe  When we said that the self-grasping of person must be a mental 
 
 65 
consciousness we were not referring to main mental consciousness. Feeling 
and all the mental factors attending the self-grasping of person are self-grasping of person - because they share five things in common. So, is that 
feeling an ignorance? 
Student  No because it does not have the aspect of confusion by its own power. 
Geshe  This is the point of the discussion, ignorance does not need to 
engage in its object through its own power, it is enough to engage in its object with confusion, and so the feeling attending the self-grasping of 
person is an ignorance because it engages in its object with the aspect of 
confusion.   Student  What about the mental factor of hatred?  
Geshe  The five omnipresent mental factors always attend the self-grasping 
of person, whereas hatred has its precise function of causing harm.  
According to the "Abhidharmasamuchchaya," ignorance does not have to be a 
mental factor that is confused with respect to its object through its own power, it is simply a mental factor that engages in its object with the 
aspect of confusion, for example, the feeling attending the self-grasping 
of person - this fits the definition and it is also a mental factor that abides in the contradictory class to cognizing wisdom. 
 
Student  So the anger that comes with ignorance does not engage in its object with confusion? 
Geshe  The difference is that anger is not an earth-level mental factor 
whereas feeling is. Student  Do you mean that there is no self-grasping of person that comes 
together with anger? 
Geshe  Hatred and attachment have a grasping type of apprehension but ignorance does not have this, it is simply confusion, it has no 
apprehension. 
Ignorance is explained in detail because it is the root of all afflictions. The second to ignorance is attachment - which includes desire, wanting, and 
seeking. Many activities are based on desire to fulfill wishes. Attachment 
exists as a cause for living within cyclic existence; at death, attachment assists the throwing karmas through craving and grasping. All desires, 
wishes, and seeking for objects of the impure class are attachment, but if 
a desire is turned towards objects of the pure class - wanting to attain enlightenment and so on - it is not attachment. When desire for objects of 
the impure class functions, one is disturbed, there is no peace, and one 
engages in many negative actions. Ignorance can give rise to different afflictions and it can cause particular actions through them, but ignorance 
alone does not make one engage in a particular action.  
  The only method to overcome all afflictions is by taking refuge in Dharma. Ignorance gives rise to attachment and this is the principal way we 
become involved in various activities, and since attachment is the basis of 
so many things, when we take refuge in Dharma we say: "I take refuge in the state that is totally free from attachment." It seems that we should 
include freedom from ignorance and hatred but it is only necessary to 
mention attachment. To be separated from attachment we need the true path - the means by which freedom is attained. The true path of an Arya comes only 
after a long time; to attain it we need to follow the preliminary paths, 
and to attain those we need to listen to and contemplate the Dharma. There is that which separates a person from attachment and there is that which is 
already separated from attachment - the freedom. We take refuge in both.   
  Since attachment is a principal affliction, it is emphasized in the context of taking refuge, and it is said that attachment is difficult to be 
free from - like removing oil from a cloth - whereas hatred, pride, and so 
on are easier to overcome.     (v)  DOUBT  
Doubt is qualified here as deluded doubt, it is not the doubt of everyday 
life but particular doubts that waver between the correct and incorrect understanding of selflessness, of cause and effect, of refuge, the four 
noble truths, the twelve links, and so on, thinking "maybe it is true, 
maybe it isn't." While this doubt is present it interferes with engaging in virtuous actions. For example, our wish to perceive the real nature of 
phenomena is blocked by doubt. 
 
 66 
 
If we decide to perform a virtuous action somewhere, three types of interference may arise - we may not like to go to that place, we may not 
take the right road, or we may have doubt about the correct road.   
  Just as these three interferences can prevent a good purpose, there are three interferences within ourselves - the transitory view interferes with 
the attainment of liberation by not wanting to go to liberation, which is 
like not wanting to take the road; the view of wrong morality as supreme is like taking the wrong road, and doubt about liberation is like doubting the 
correct road. Transitory view, wrong morality, and doubt are the three 
particular afflictions that are abandoned by the path of seeing. 
  In general, doubt is a mental factor that has the nature of wavering 
between two points . Deluded doubt could be equal doubt, but mostly it is 
the doubt that tends towards the wrong conclusion. Deluded doubt and the 
first four root afflictions are called "non-views," whereas the sixth root affliction is a "view" and has five divisions.    (vi)  AFFLICTED VIEWS 
 
There are five afflicted views:  
1  View of the transitory collection (as real I and mine)  
2  View holding to extremes   
3  View of a (bad) view as supreme  
4  View of wrong morality as supreme  
5  Wrong view  
 
1  View of the transitory collection as real I and mine  The transitory 
view observes either the I or the mine of one's own continuum and holds it to be self-existent. "Transitory view" means that the I and the mine are 
transient but this view regards them to be self-existent. "I" refers to the person oneself, "mine" refers to the different objects of enjoyment - one's 
own aggregates. "View of the transitory" means the objects of that view are 
transient, not indivisible or permanent.   According to the "Abhidharmasamuchchaya" the transitory view is known as 
endurance because it endures the transitory objects being self-existent; it 
is desire in the sense that it desires the I and mine to exist autonomously; it is intelligence because it is a type of wisdom, a wrong 
wisdom; it is conception because it conceives objects and does not directly 
perceive them; and it is view because it views at the transitory collection, the I, and the mine. The function of the transitory view is to 
serve as a foundation that bears all bad views - it is known as the "mother 
of bad views."   According to sutra, there are twenty divisions of transitory view: 
 
(1)  Viewing the form aggregate of one's own continuum as self. (2)  Viewing the self as possessing the form aggregate. 
(3)  Viewing the form aggregate as the support for the self. 
(4)  Viewing the self as supported by the form aggregate. (5 - 20)  The same combinations of self with the remaining four aggregates 
- feelings, discriminations, volitional factors, and consciousness. 
 These twenty are also explained in Nagarjuna's "Letter to a Friend," and in 
Chandrakirti's "Madhyamakavatara." All twenty can be condensed into two - 
the transitory view viewing at I and the transitory view viewing at mine. The "Madhyamakavatara" says that one can only destroy these twenty 
transitory views by using the sharp axe of the wisdom realizing 
selflessness. 
 
2  View holding to extremes observes  the same objects as the transitory 
view - the I and mine - and conceives them to be either eternal or totally annihilated at death, ceasing without continuing into a future life. These 
extreme views present great obstacles to finding the view of the middle way. As above, extreme views are endurance, desire, intelligence, 
conception, and view. 
 
3  View of a (bad) view as supreme  observes the two above views, and the 
bases (the aggregates) upon which those views are generated, as supreme and 
 
 67 
the highest views needed for attaining realizations. It receives its name 
because it regards no other view to be superior to these.   The four misconceptions regarding true sufferings can be condensed into 
the first three afflicted views - viewing the selfless as a self is 
transitory view; viewing the impermanent as permanent is eternalistic extreme view; viewing the impure body as pure and viewing misery as 
pleasure are views of the bad as supreme. 
  This third afflicted view does not only observe the first two afflicted views as supreme, it also views the aggregates of one's own continuum as 
supreme objects - there is no better body, no better feelings, no better 
mind, and so on. The fifth afflicted view - wrong view - can also be an object of this view. It thus functions to always hold on to wrong views and 
serves as the basis for generating wrong views in this life and in future 
lives. By simply regarding a bad view as supreme, the imprints of that bad view become heavier and last a long time. There is a great difference 
between this third afflicted view and the fifth - wrong view. Wrong views 
can easily be abandoned, but if they are associated with holding bad view as supreme the imprint is powerful and very difficult to remove. This view 
also has endurance, desire, intelligence, and so on. 
 
4  View of wrong morality and conduct as supreme   One thinks that certain 
wrong behaviors are virtuous, good, or acceptable; it is the conception 
that following wrong conduct is a supreme method of purification through 
which liberation can be attained.  
  Wrong morality is like copying the behavior of dogs - only having sexual intercourse when dogs are on heat. In the past, there were some who thought 
that proper moral behavior was to follow the example of their pets.  
  Examples of wrong conduct are performing sacrifices and bathing in the Ganges in order to attain liberation. 
  This fourth afflicted view takes physical, verbal, and mental bad actions 
as ways to attain liberation. It regards wrong views as good and actions performed through those wrong views as supreme methods to attain higher 
levels of realization. Its function is to gain no results and to make much 
effort in achieving nothing. It is a type of wisdom and also bears the same names of endurance, desire, and so on. 
 
5  Wrong view is a mental factor that denies a cause, a result, or an 
agent. It views the nature of things in the wrong way - that which exists 
it views as non-existent. Wrong view can also have the names of endurance, desire, and so on. It functions to cut the root of virtue and to hold 
tightly to the root of non-virtue. 
  Wrong view denies karmic cause and effect and future existences, and so sees no need to abstain from non-virtuous actions or to cultivate virtue. 
Instead, one engages in non-virtue with enthusiasm. Essentially, wrong view 
is a view that cause and effect do not exist, that the triple gem do not exist, and that the four noble truths do not exist. It has four types: 
 
  (i)  Wrong view viewing at cause is not accepting any difference between a virtuous action and a non-virtuous action; it sees no non-virtue of body, 
speech, or mind and no virtue of body, speech, or mind. 
 (ii)  Wrong view viewing at result is seeing no difference between good results and bad results. 
(iii)  Wrong view viewing at agent is seeing no previous world or agent 
giving rise to the present world, and no future world arising from this present world. 
 (iv)  Wrong view viewing at existing object sees no attainment of 
Arhatship.  
The first three afflicted views are wrong views in that they view their 
objects in the wrong way, but they are not the fifth afflicted view because they do not cut the root of virtue, whereas wrong view does. Thus if a view 
is a wrong view it does not necessarily cut the root of virtue, for 
example, transitory view. A wrong view that cuts the root of virtue is a wrong view that denies cause and effect; this is an event that can only 
occur in a human being and in a human whose sexuality is clear - neuters or 
hermaphrodites cannot sever the root of virtue. When a human cuts the root of virtue, only the root of virtue related to the human realm is severed - 
not the root of virtue belonging to a higher realm. 
  Wrong view cuts the root of virtue in a gradual way, not all at once. First, virtues acquired from birth are progressively eliminated then, after 
 
 68 
some time, virtues acquired since birth are eliminated. The virtues 
disappear from big to small while the wrong view grows from small to big. In the beginning, one may become disillusioned and think that there is no 
need to cultivate virtue because one sees people who try to create virtue 
having miserable experiences and others not cultivating virtue having a good time. This wrong view will increase and the root of virtue will 
decrease like a waning moon - bright at first but progressively becoming 
darker.     We may try to perform positive spiritual activities but our business or 
our education fail, while at the same time others who are not involved in 
spiritual matters succeed in everything. The idea grows in our mind that they are right and we are wrong. This idea grows stronger over a period of 
time until we reach the point where if someone explains that failures are 
due to previous negative actions and that the results of present actions will be experienced in future lives we will not accept it, the wrong view 
will be too consolidated in our minds. There is a chance, however, that we 
can meet fortunate conditions in the future and regain our root of virtue.   When hatred destroys virtue it cancels the future results of virtue, but 
when wrong view cuts the root of virtue it totally eliminates the root of 
virtue from the causal side. Thus, among the ten non-virtues, this is the worst. 
  Three-and-a-half of the first four afflicted views are not wrong view 
because wrong view must have an aspect of denial. These have an aspect of exaggeration; they all superimpose something that does not exist on the 
object. For example, transitory view superimposes self-existence on the I 
and mine. The half refers to the eternalistic extreme view which superimposes permanent, eternal existence on the I and mine. The view 
holding bad views as supreme superimposes supremacy on bad views. The view 
of wrong morality and conduct superimposes supreme morality and conduct upon activities that do not possess them.  
  Simply not knowing about karma is not necessarily wrong view, there has 
to be a reasoned denial of cause and effect. The extreme view of nihilism and wrong view are views that are denial. Thus denial and exaggeration 
include all five wrong views. Wrong view can have sixty-two divisions. 
 
The fourteen unanswered questions: 
 
Four based upon origins  Is the origin of the self and the world permanent; impermanent; both permanent and impermanent; or neither permanent nor 
impermanent? 
Four based upon the future  Do the self and the world have future limits; no limits; limits and no limits; neither limits nor no limits? 
Four based upon the Tathagatha  Does the Tathagatha return after leaving 
the world; not return; return and not return; neither return nor not return? 
Two based upon the body and life  Are the body and life force one substance 
or are they different?  
These questions are related to views held by people, and Buddha's refusal 
to give direct answers is in itself an answer. If he answered in a certain way, this could have harmed the minds of those who clung to bad views, such 
as grasping at the self to exist truly.  
  The way in which a question can be answered depends upon the way in which the question is put, for example: 
Direct answer  To the question "Do those who are born die?" The answer is 
yes, because death follows birth. Qualified answer  To the question "Do all those who die take rebirth 
through karma and affliction?" The answer is "Those who have not abandoned 
karma and affliction do, those who have abandoned karma and affliction do not." 
Answer with a question  To the question "Is this man a supreme being?" The 
answer is "Do you mean supreme compared to a god or to an animal?" The answer is implied within that reply. 
Answer by not speaking - the way in which Buddha answered the above 
fourteen questions.   
When people asked Buddha if the self and the world have future limits he 
did not give an answer. This is a logical step to show that he knows everything clearly - if he said yes, it would have harmed them; if he said 
no it would have harmed them. If Buddha had begun his teaching by saying 
 
 69 
that people must abandon their idea of self-existence, they would not have 
accepted it, they were not ready, but if he had said there were limits, they would have believed in self-existence, and so Buddha kept quiet. 
  If somebody has the idea that a rabbit's horn exists and asks:  "Is a 
rabbit's horn long or short?" The direct answer can be given: "Forget about it being long or short, it does not exist at all." There is no problem in 
saying this. But if Buddha had said:  "Forget about your ideas of self-
existence," this would have been too great a shock for their strong belief in self-existence.  
 
 
5  THE TWENTY  SECONDARY  AFFLICTIONS  
 
These are secondary afflictions because they are branches of the six root 
afflictions. Some are related to hatred, some to attachment, some to ignorance, and some to all three. 
 
 
1  BELIGERENCY (khro.ba) is  a mental factor that renders the mind 
unpeaceful when close to a harmful object. It is derived from hatred 
towards a harmful condition, such as an enemy or a weapon.  
  Belligerency and hatred (khong.khro) belong to the one family, but there is a difference. Hatred disturbs the mind simply by thinking about the 
three causes of harm - sentient beings, suffering, and inanimate causes of 
suffering. On the other hand, belligerency is an intense attitude wanting to inflict harm, which arises when the object of hatred is close by. Both 
hatred and belligerency render the mind unpeaceful, but hatred is more 
extensive and belligerency is directed towards a specific target that is close by, for example, it can be the intention to physically strike 
someone.  
 
 
2  RESENTMENT  ('khon.'dzin) is a continuation of anger, the holding of a 
grudge, a lasting belligerency with hatred as its source .  
  For example, we become belligerent when we are close to the person who is 
the object of our hatred and we may strike him. The anger can then remain 
in our mind for months or years and if we meet the person again we will 
strike him again - this maintenance of an angry mind is due to the mental factor of resentment.  
  Hatred, belligerency, and resentment all have the same function of 
harming self and others.  
Student  Is the thought to harm oneself through suicide a type of hatred? 
Geshe  It depends upon the way in which that thought arose. In general it belongs to ignorance, but suicide can be a result of excessive hatred or 
attachment. 
Student  Can hatred continue into the next life and the object of hatred be remembered? 
Geshe  Anger creates heavy imprints and in the next life there is much 
hatred, but the continuity from life to life is not like a person going and coming in this life, it is just an imprint.  
  Similarly with attachment, when we die the absorptions of the eighty 
natural indicative conceptions occur and at that time hatred, attachment, and so on are absorbed, they are no longer manifest and only subtle 
imprints remain. 
  3  CONCEALMENT ('chab.pa) in this text is a branch of ignorance, but some 
other texts say it is also related to hatred and attachment. It is a mental 
factor that seeks to hide one's faults.   
  In general, we should try to avoid negative actions, but if they are made we should declare them to others and not conceal them. The opposite of 
concealment is confession - which can be a general confession to the assembled sangha at the monks' twice-monthly confession ceremony (so.jong), 
or a private confession to the visualized Buddhas and Bodhisattvas. 
  Concealment can also refer to not accepting the fact of previous faults. For example, we can have previous negative actions pointed out but we deny 
having done them. Concealment can also mean the generation of a mind that 
wishes to keep the fault a secret; if this mind is not generated the fault 
 
 70 
can be purified through confession, but if the fault is concealed there is 
almost no chance to regret it and purify the negative karma.   If we do not confess negative karma we will create even more negative 
karma. This is because, having created a negative karma, if we do not 
immediately confess it the karma becomes twice as heavy, if we do not confess it the next day the karma is four times as heavy, on the third day 
it is eight times as heavy, and so on. Thus we quickly eliminate any 
opportunity for rebirth in the happy realms, our negative karmas are enhanced with time and we drift away from the opportunity to abide in 
happiness. 
 
 
4  SPITE  ('tshig.pa) is a mental factor wanting to abuse others; it arises 
from hatred and resentment .   
  Following upon hatred and resentment, spite arises in situations such as 
when someone points out our faults and we react by not admitting our 
offence, then we start to scold and abuse that person. Such an event is 
precipitated by anger and resentment, instead of accepting our faults we criticize those who point them out. When we have faults to which we are 
strongly habituated, we refuse to listen to any criticism of them and we 
strongly react with spite if they are exposed. Other texts include spite within the category of holding bad views as supreme views.  
 
A progression can be seen from the impulsive arising of anger (hatred), to the urge to immediately inflict harm (belligerency), to holding anger over 
a period of time (resentment), to angrily abusing someone who exposes our 
faults (spite). All four are disturbed states of mind that have the wish to inflict harm; the difference seems to be merely a matter of time. 
 
 
5  JEALOUSY (phrag.dog) is a mental factor that is disturbed by seeing the 
good qualities of others .   
  The entity of this disturbed mind is hatred, but there is also desire for 
the good things possessed by others. The Kadampa lamas said that when a 
person is jealous he can never remain happy because simply by seeing the 
qualities of others he becomes disturbed and wants to possess them. His mind is unhappy now and in the future because he creates causes for rebirth 
in the lower realms. 
 
 
6  MISERLINESS (ser.sna) is a  mental factor that holds on to objects of 
attachment with intensity, unable to give them away to others . It is a 
branch of attachment and can be overcome by cultivating generosity, the 
best of which is the generosity of giving Dharma. Dharma generosity should 
be given without being contaminated by the eight worldly dharmas. 
  7  PRETENSION (sgyu) is a mental factor that, in order to deceive others, 
claims qualities that one does not possess . It is a branch of attachment.  
  For example, we may claim to have clairvoyance or some other spiritual 
attainment even though we do not, and when we convince others, this is 
pretension. Pretension is the basis of wrong livelihoods, which are 
described variously in different texts but their meaning is essentially the same.     The five wrong livelihoods  
 
  (i)  Contrived behavior  Motivated by the desire to receive offerings, 
respect, and honor from others we exhibit a contrived humility or a subdued 
mind. If, however, we think, "I am a Buddhist monk and I should be humble, it is not appropriate to act wildly," this contrived humility is not an 
affliction.  
 
 (ii)  Flattery is speaking soft and pleasing words to another with desire 
to receive presents or honor from them. If there is no desire for material 
gain or honor, speaking pleasing things to others is not an affliction; one's words can be a comfort for their minds . 
 
 
 71 
(iii)  Hinting is saying something like "I wish I had a watch just like 
yours," with the hope that it will be given to you.  
  (iv)  Concealed threat is like saying "You have so much wealth, it is good 
to be generous and there are many faults of miserliness, so you should make 
offerings to me."     It can also refer to threatening others by saying "If you do not give you 
will be reborn as a hungry ghost, you should be generous." 
 
  (v)  Making a small offering with the hope of a large return such as 
saying, "The offering you gave me last year was most useful but now it has 
run out," with the wish that you will receive the same again.  
 All five are wrong livelihoods because they are ways of living in the wrong 
way. Instead of living in these ways we should be honest and speak 
directly, for example, "If you give me this I can use it." The person has a choice to give or not to give.  Buddha allowed his monks to beg openly; if 
we clearly describe what we need, without implication, there is no wrong 
livelihood. The five wrong livelihoods each have a hidden message that obliges someone to give.   8  DISHONESTY  (gyo) is a branch of attachment and ignorance. It is a mental 
factor that, through desire to receive offerings from others, hides one's 
faults from others.   
  We try to cover up our faults by pretending to be clever and intelligent, 
but from the point of view of Dharma, this is stupid. It is a bad action because no matter how much we pretend to be clever we cannot hide our 
faults - there are countless Buddhas and Bodhisattvas able to perceive all 
things. To stop this action of hiding faults we should think that we are always in the presence of the Buddhas of the three times; think that they 
can see our faults as clearly as they can see the palms of their hands and 
it would be shameful to be dishonest before them.   Awareness of the wisdom of all Buddhas and Bodhisattvas helps us to not 
engage in unwholesome actions because we know they can see everything that 
we do. We can think that if we cheat others the Buddhas and Bodhisattvas will be upset. Pretension and dishonesty are great obstacles to receiving 
correct instruction and to developing spiritual realizations because we are 
hypocritical, pretending to have qualities that we do not possess and hiding faults that we do possess. 
  In the "Sutra Arising From Kasyapa's Question," Buddha taught that the 
mental factors of pretension and dishonesty are thoroughly unwholesome because, not only do they deceive ourselves, they deceive others who trust 
us but we control them by trickery and lying. 
  9  HAUGHTINESS (rgyags.pa) is a puffed-up mind that delights in the vigor 
of one's life, one's body, one's friends, or one's possessions, feeling 
that one has great attributes that are not actually possessed.   
  Haughtiness is a branch of attachment and it can serve as the basis for 
many afflictions such as non-conscientiousness. Its disadvantage is that it 
prevents us from engaging in Dharma practice and from advancing towards 
liberation. Because we are fully satisfied with our present attainments, there is no inclination to change things, we do not bother to think about 
the sadness and misery experienced by others. 
 
 
10  HARMFULNESS  (rnam.par.'tshe.ba) is a lack of compassion that wishes to 
cause disturbance or harm to the minds or bodies of others .  
  This intention to harm has no love for others; it can be the attitude of 
wanting to cause harm oneself, of ordering others to inflict harm, or of 
rejoicing at the news or sounds of others being hurt. Buddha strongly 
condemned harmfulness, saying that anybody who indulged in harmfulness in any of these three ways was not a disciple of his.   
  It is difficult to be always free from harmfulness. If it does arise, we 
should try to remove it as soon as possible and pray to never have this mind in the future. The negative karma of nursing a harmful attitude over a 
long period of time is much greater than a short moment of harmfulness.  
 
 
 72 
Student  Did Buddha justify causing harm to protect our village, monastery, 
or country? Geshe  Buddha said that he who possesses a harmful mind is not one of his 
disciples. Such activities are not justified. We should treat all sentient 
beings - enemies and friends - as if they are our mother. Buddha taught that with regard to our personal practice, in deciding what to do in 
difficult situations we should weigh up and compare the risk of creating 
negative karma together with the potential for benefit of our actions. If the risk is small and the benefit is big, we can do it - we can defend the 
village or monastery. If, on the other hand, the benefit is small and the 
risk big, we should not. Buddha said that if we die from the actions of others, only this life is lost, it is not a big problem, but if we violate 
our morality of not causing harm we will receive negativities that will 
influence hundreds of future lives." 
 
 
11  SHAMELESSNESS (ngo.tsha.med.pa) is a mental factor that can arise from 
ignorance, attachment, or hatred.  It is an attitude of not restraining 
oneself from committing a negative action by not caring about any personal code of conduct; it is the root of much unwholesome behavior.  
  Shamelessness is the attitude of a monk who drinks alcohol without thinking about it, the opposite of shamelessness is to think, "I am a monk 
and taking alcohol is forbidden, therefore I shall not drink." To avoid an 
action because it contravenes one of our personal vows of behavior is the opposite of shamelessness.    12  INCONSIDERATION (khrel.med.pa) or non-embarrassment  can also be a 
branch of ignorance, attachment, or hatred. It is a mental factor of not 
abstaining from unwholesome activity by not caring about the opinion of 
others, or the effect upon them.   
  Inconsideration is the opposite of the virtuous mental factor of 
consideration. For example, it is the opposite of the thought:  "I will not do this because it will make others unhappy." If a monk acts as he likes in 
the presence of lay people they will think that all monks behave in this 
way and they will have a bad opinion about monasticism. It is bad to engage in actions that harm the faith of others; inconsideration does not care 
about the effect of one's actions on others. 
  Shamelessness and inconsideration assist many other afflictions to arise because when they are manifest we have no power to abstain from non-virtue, 
we engage in it without hesitation.  Both Abhidharma texts say that 
whenever non-virtuous minds arise these two mental factors are functioning.   
 
13  LETHARGY (rmugs.pa)  A branch of ignorance, lethargy renders the mind 
inflexible and unwilling to work.    
  Through lethargy, the body and mind are incapable of engaging in virtuous 
actions. When lethargy persists, laziness increases and sicknesses due to 
wind, bile, and phlegm arise. It is said that much lethargy and sleep block 
energy for engaging in virtuous actions; when there is no energy for virtue, no effort arises and one attains no realizations. Lethargy acts as 
a cause for laxity, a major obstacle to gaining concentration. 
 
 
14  EXCITEMENT  (rgod.pa) is a branch of attachment; it renders the mind 
unpeaceful because it leaps towards contaminated objects instead of 
remaining on a virtuous object.   
  Excitement considers contaminated objects to be important and wishes to 
experience them again and again, so it cannot remain concentrated on the 
object of virtue. It is an obstacle that prevents the mind remaining on its 
object during meditation.   In general, a mind jumping away from a virtuous object is not necessarily 
excitement. For example, anger and ignorance can distract our mind from 
concentrating on a virtuous object, but this does not imply that excitement is present. Excitement only arises as a result of desire for a contaminated 
object. Also, when we meditate on impermanence, the mind may jump to 
another virtuous object, and this is not due to excitement.   
 
 
 73 
15  NON-FAITH (ma.dad.pa) is the opposite of admiring, believing, and 
aspirational faith. It is a branch of ignorance and, by not believing true 
statements such as Buddha's explanation of cause and effect; it functions 
as a basis for the generation of laziness and to distance oneself from 
liberation.  It thinks such ideas are nonsense, has no wish to listen, no 
appreciation of the meaning of the words. 
  A person with non-faith has no joy in listening to an explanation of cause and effect; he does not like to listen to teachings on karma or past 
and future lives. He does not believe in the qualities of Buddha - the ten 
powers, four fearlessnesses, six clairvoyances, magical powers, and so on. He does not believe in the qualities of Dharma - that there are remedies 
for the various levels of obscurations. Finally, he does not believe in the 
qualities of the sangha - that the Arya sangha are holy beings or that they exist as protectors for sentient beings.   
  Non-belief in refuge is the opposite to admiring faith, non-belief in the 
triple gem is the opposite to believing faith, and non-belief in liberation and enlightenment is the opposite to aspirational faith.   16  LAZINESS  (le.lo) is a branch of ignorance, a mental factor that does 
not delight in virtuous activity but is distracted by the wish to sleep or 
simply amuse oneself, idling ones time away .   
  A lazy mind is pre-occupied with current pleasure and takes no interest 
in virtuous activities performed to attain pleasure in the future, thus it 
acts as an obstacle to future happiness. It is a mental factor that 
prevents virtuous activity such as listening, thinking, and meditating, so it distances oneself from the results of those activities - liberation and 
enlightenment. 
  The disadvantages of laziness are not so visible because, indulging on pleasure, we do not notice the time and energy that we waste. If it were 
more obvious, like anger, we could recognize its bad effects and be 
motivated to repair the damage. Buddha emphasized that laziness is the principal foundation of all afflictions and whoever has intense laziness 
will never have strong virtue. 
  17  NON-CONSCIENTIOUSNESS (bag.med.pa) is  a mental factor that arises from 
any of the three root afflictions and is associated with not abstaining 
from bad actions but continuing on with them .   
  Non-conscientiousness allows the mind to be taken over by root and secondary afflictions, one naturally increases non-virtue and at the same 
time previously accumulated virtue is lost. 
 
 
18  FORGETFULNESS  (brjed.nges.pa) is a mental factor that lacks memory of 
virtue.   For example, a mind accompanied by afflictions that forgets virtuous 
objects with which one has previously been acquainted. It is sometimes 
called "afflicted memory," that is, it is in the class of memory but is 
afflicted. Forgetfulness is always a consciousness that, through accompanying afflictions, lacks memory of previously known virtuous 
objects, whereas simply forgetting afflicted objects or some conditions 
associated with affliction is not forgetfulness. It serves as a basis for generating distraction and other afflictions. 19  NON-ALERTNESS (shes.bzhin.ma.yin.pa) is an afflicted discriminating 
awareness, or a deluded wisdom . It is the opposite to the mental factor of 
discriminating alertness.   
  Non-alertness causes one to engage in physical, verbal, and mental 
actions of non-virtue. Its opposite is very important, and it is explained 
elaborately by Shantideva that even if one has faith and experience of listening to many teachings, one can lose everything if one does not have 
discriminating alertness.  
 
 
20  DISTRACTION  (rnam.par.gyeng.ba) can be a branch of ignorance, 
attachment, or hatred. The mind leaps away from meditation on a virtuous 
object and follows any object of these three afflictions; the mind is thus 
unable to abide in virtue .   
  Distraction is a major obstacle to the attainment of freedom from 
 
 74 
attachment because we need strong concentration to be able to overcome the 
afflictions.   What is the difference between distraction and excitement? Excitement is 
only conditioned by attachment; it goes towards an object of pleasure. 
There is also the mental factor leaving that leaves the virtuous object of 
meditation in one of three ways - through a virtuous distraction, through a 
non-virtuous distraction, or through a neutral distraction. Leaving, 
excitement, and distraction are all the same in that they interrupt meditation on a virtuous object, but they differ in other ways. 
 
There are six types of distraction:    (i)  Distraction by entity  refers to the five sensory consciousnesses 
which, if they arise while concentrating single-pointedly on an object, cause immediate disturbance and the mind leaves the object. 
 (ii)  External distraction  is simply an event where the consciousness goes 
out towards any of the five objects of sense pleasure while one is trying 
to listen, think, or meditate. 
(iii)  Internal distraction  is laxity or excitement, which are are the 
principal obstacles to concentration. 
 (iv)  Distraction of purpose   One hopes for a special sign of recognition 
by others that one is a great meditator. The reason for meditating is incorrect because it is a thought that others will give praise and make 
offerings. 
  (v)  Distraction of pride   One has a feeling of being special - that one 
is engaging in virtue and this enhances the transitory view and pride. 
There is an egocentric mind while engaging in virtue, a puffed-up attitude 
of self-importance in doing virtue. 
 (vi)  Distraction through mental activity   One wishes to leave a high 
state of attainment and abide at a lower level. For example, someone at the 
fourth trance wishing to abandon that and abide in a lower trance, or a Mahayanist wishing to abide on the Hinayana path.  
 
We may ask: "How is wishing to abide on the Hinayana path a distraction and an affliction?" Wishing to follow the Hinayana path is virtuous and so it 
is not a real secondary affliction.  
  The first type of distraction is also questionable. While meditating single-pointedly there can be disturbance from eye consciousness looking at 
a statue of Buddha, or from ear consciousness listening to Dharma sounds. 
These distractions do not necessarily belong to the group of twenty secondary afflictions; nevertheless, both function to distract the mind 
from single-pointed concentration. "Distraction" means disturbance of the 
mind in single-pointed concentration or to distract the mind away from higher levels. The actual secondary affliction of distraction refers to 
external distractions and the internal distractions of laxity and 
excitement.  
The twenty afflictions, from belligerency to distraction, are called 
"secondary afflictions" because they are all close to the six root afflictions, but this does not mean that each of the twenty is close to all 
six. Some are related to attachment, some to hatred, some to ignorance, and 
some to all three. One explanation (I am not sure of its accuracy) of this relationship is: 
 
Afflictions related to hatred : belligerency, resentment, spite, jealousy, 
and harmfulness. 
To attachment : miserliness, haughtiness, and excitement. 
To ignorance : concealment, shamelessness, inconsideration, non-faith, 
laziness, and lethargy. 
To attachment and ignorance : dishonesty and pretension. 
To all three : non-alertness, distraction, non-conscientiousness, and 
forgetfulness.  
 
 75 
5    THE FOUR  CHANGEABLE  MENTAL  FACTORS  
 
The four changeable mental factors are so called because they are not 
virtuous or non-virtuous from their own sides but become virtuous, non-virtuous, or neutral according to the motivation in their accompanying 
mental factors. They are: 
   (i)  Sleep  (gnyid) 
 (ii)  Regret  ('gyod.pa) 
(iii)  Investigation  (rtog.pa)  (iv)  Analysis (dpyod.pa) 
 
 
  (i)  SLEEP is a mental factor that functions to withdraw the 
consciousness that independently engages in external objects.   
  The body feels heavy, weak, and fatigued, and the mind becomes dark. Sleep can be virtuous if the motivation when going to sleep is virtuous, or 
it can be non-virtuous if the motivation is non-virtuous. The proper time to sleep is during the middle third of the night; it is  not proper to 
sleep during the day. Improper sleep, during either the day or the night 
with a non-virtuous mind, will decrease one's virtue. 
 
 
 (ii)  REGRET is concern about past actions that one has performed, has 
been unable to perform, or has ordered others to perform . Regret is 
virtuous if we regret a non-virtuous action of body, speech, or mind; non-virtuous if we regret a virtuous action; or neutral if we regret a neutral 
action.   If we regret a non-virtuous karma before the principal karmic result 
occurs we can purify it, but regret while experiencing a result cannot 
purify the cause. For example, one who has been reborn in hell cannot change that situation by regretting the non-virtuous action that caused it. 
A blind man cannot reverse his condition by regretting the karmic cause for 
his blindness.  Buddha said that a principal karmic result that has ripened cannot be altered, there are no exceptions. This may confuse those who 
think that any heavy negative karma can be purified, but such purification 
can only occur if it is before the principal karmic result has arisen. All negative karmas can be purified before they ripen. 
 
 
(iii) & (iv)  INVESTIGATION AND ANALYSIS 
Investigation is an inquiry into the rough or general aspects of an object , 
while analysis is a discriminating analysis of the fine aspects of an 
object.   
  Analysis occurs at the end of investigation; after the general qualities 
have been thought about, the mind settles on the best or specific qualities and is peaceful, no longer roughly investigating the major qualities of 
good, bad, and so on. Analysis is a consciousness that finds and clearly 
holds on to the object.  
Student  What is the difference between analysis, discrimination 
('du.shes), and knowledge (shes.rab)? Geshe  Knowledge has some similarities to analysis but knowledge only 
attends a virtuous mind. Knowledge functions to analyse objects 
individually and separately, whereas analysis is a mental factor that holds onto a fixed, investigated object. For example, analysis holds the object 
"the best table" only after much work by investigation. Also, analysis can 
occur in the retinue of a virtuous, a non-virtuous, or a neutral mind. Discrimination is different. It is simply knowing the different objects 
through the object itself: "this yellow is yellow," or through the label: 
"this is blue." The discrimination attending mental consciousness apprehends objects through a label - such as male and female - whereas 
discrimination attending a sensory consciousness does not apprehend through 
the label but simply through the object itself - it sees the single object blue as blue. 
  According to the "Abhidharmakosa," knowledge and the other four object-
determining mental factors attend every main mind, whereas the "Abhidharmasamuchchaya" says that only the first five mental factors are 
omnipresent. Thus the "Abhidharmakosa" says that the five object-
 
 76 
ascertaining mental factors accompany virtuous, non-virtuous, and neutral 
minds whereas the "Abhidharmasamuchchaya" says that they only accompany virtuous minds, it does not include deluded aspiration for a non-virtuous 
object among the object-ascertaining mental factors. 
   Investigation being a consciousness with a "rough aspect" means that it is 
always actively involved in work, whereas analysis has a fine or clear 
aspect because it holds and remains upon a specific object that has been already thought about and well ascertained. Some texts say that 
investigation is a way of ascertaining objects in a gross manner and 
analysis is a way of ascertaining objects through precise checking. Both mental factors are derived from knowledge (shes.rab). Their function is to 
act as a proper basis for remaining ; for example, in a virtuous situation 
they eventually bring proper results. An example of how they do this is when one meditates on selflessness in order to free oneself from cyclic 
existence; investigation and analysis abide on a proper basis, and serving 
as a proper basis for abiding is knowledge. Thus in this context, investigation and analysis are like divisions of intention (sems.pa), or 
divisions of knowledge.   
  A second function of investigation and analysis is to serve as an improper basis  for abiding, for example, when one engages in investigation 
and analysis of a non-virtuous object, which eventually brings bad results. 
A third context is acting as a neutral basis  when investigating and 
analysing a neutral object.   The five veils  
Nagarjuna said that in the Sutras five types of obscuration are mentioned: 
 (a)  Excitement and regret 
(b)  Sleep and lethargy 
(c)  Aspiration for objects of attachment (d)  Harmful intent 
(e)  Deluded doubt 
 These five are like thieves because they steal away our virtuous qualities 
and behavior. They are called veils and robbers of virtue because they 
prevent us from creating new virtue, from increasing virtue already engaged upon, and they decrease past virtue.  
  Aspiration for objects of attachment  and harmful intent  are principal 
hindrances to keeping morality because when they arise in our minds we easily engage in the seven non-virtuous actions of body and speech.  
  Excitement, regret, sleep and lethargy are the principal veils to 
training in concentration. It is easy to see how excitement, lethargy, and sleep prevent single-pointed concentration, and regret is also a hindrance 
to concentration because it can have the aspect of being a depressed mind - 
which harms good concentration. Some other texts say that sleep and regret are major veils to concentration while excitement and regret harm wisdom.  
In fact, all four harm the development of concentration. 
  Deluded doubt is a major veil in the training of wisdom because when the consciousness is shared between two meanings there can be no knowledge or 
clarity of one object.  In a similar way to deluded doubt, investigation 
and analysis also obscure the training of wisdom.   Lethargy is a secondary affliction and sleep is a changeable mental 
factor. Sleep can be virtuous, but lethargy is a non-virtuous branch of 
ignorance. Nevertheless, when discussing the five veils, they come together because non-virtuous sleep and lethargy have a similar function; they arise 
from similar causes and are abandoned by a single remedy.   
  Similar causes for lethargy and non-virtuous sleep are eating too much or over-indulging in sexual intercourse. When we try to meditate our mind is 
depressed and heavy, we feel discouraged and sleepy. This can be remedied 
by the single method of meditating on a bright light. Their similar function is that the mind becomes unclear with respect to its object. 
  Excitement is also a secondary affliction, while regret is a changeable 
mental factor. Excitement is a non-virtuous branch of attachment and regret can be virtuous. They are included together within the five veils because 
they have a similar cause - they arise through remembering previous 
enjoyment of sense pleasure, laughing, playing, and so on. One regrets not doing this anymore and the mind wanders off from the object of meditation. 
They also have a single remedy - to bring the mind back to the object of 
 
 77 
meditation. And they have a similar function - to hinder concentration 
through a lack of forcefulness.  
 
How the four tenets assert consciousness 
The Vaibhasikas, Sautrantika-Madhyamika-Svatantrikas, and Prasangikas 
assert that direct prime cognition is of three types - mental, sensory, and yogic. They do not accept direct self-cognizers, otherwise they would have 
to accept self-cognition, which they do not because they see no valid basis 
for self-cognition. The Sautrantikas, Cittamatrins, and Yogachara-Madhyamika-Svatantrikas assert all four types of direct prime cognition - 
they include direct prime self-cognition.  
 According to the Sautrantikas, direct cognition is necessarily a non-
mistaken consciousness, but the Cittamatrins say that it is not necessarily 
non-mistaken because a form-apprehending visual consciousness can be a direct cognition but is mistaken because it is a consciousness to which a 
non-existing object clearly appears - phenomena appear to the visual 
consciousness of an ordinary being to exist externally and although there is this clear appearance, it is not true. In a similar way, all sense 
objects mistakenly appear to the sense consciousnesses of ordinary beings 
to exist externally.   The question arises: "If, according to the Sautrantikas, form-
apprehending eye consciousness is non-mistaken with respect to form, do not 
objects such as form appear to exist externally to the eye consciousness?" They reply that there is this appearance but it is not mistaken, it is true 
because such objects do exist externally. The Sautrantikas accept both 
external existence and self-cognizers, whereas the Cittamatrins accept self-cognizers to truly exist but do not accept external existence. The 
Yogachara-Madhyamika-Svatantrikas are similar to the Cittamatrins in that 
they accept self-cognizers and external existence, but they do not accept truly existent self-cognizers.  
  The Sautrantikas, Cittamatrins, and Yogachara-Madhyamika-Svatantrikas 
assert that the four direct cognizers are separate from conception.   The Prasangikas accept direct cognition but refer to it in a different 
way - they drop "cognition" and simply talk about "direct," which indicates 
the object rather than the subject.     Self-cognition is emphasized by dividing the mind into two groups - self-
cognizers and other-cognizers. The latter are explained in detail but not 
the former.   
All schools from the Svatantrikas down say that if it is a prime cognizer 
it is necessarily a fresh realization and an incontrovertible cognition. The Prasangikas have a different definition. They say that a prime cognizer 
is a non-deceptive cognizer, thus they accept subsequent cognizers to be 
just as valid as fresh cognizers. The lower schools say that the second moment of the visual consciousness apprehending blue is a subsequent 
cognizer and is non-prime because it realizes the blue that is realized by 
the previous moment of visual consciousness - so it is not a fresh cognition. The Prasangikas say that the second moment of realization is 
just as valid (prime) with respect to the perceived object as the first 
moment.   There are different understandings of prime cognition because the 
Sautrantikas interpret the word pramana by saying that the first syllable, 
pra, means first and mana means perceiving.  Thus they interpret pramana to 
mean first perceiver.    
  The Prasangikas, however, understand pramana to simply refer to a 
consciousness that perceives an object that exists in reality. Thus they take pramana to mean "valid," which can refer to something that is true in 
reality - even in the everyday world when someone speaks truthfully he is 
considered to be a valid person on whom one can rely.  
The four direct cognizers are mentioned in the order sensory, mental, self-
cognizing, and yogic because the first three exist at the ordinary level while only Aryas possess yogic direct cognition. Self-cognition comes third 
because it comes after sensory and mental cognition, that is, these two 
appear as objects apprehended by self-cognition. Sense consciousness comes first because it is usually followed by a mental consciousness.   
 
 
 78 
 
   PART SIX         EXPRESSIVE  SOUNDS  
 
Definition and divisions  An expressive sound is an object of hearing that enables the understanding 
of its own object expressed through a label . 
  When divided by way of entity , there are three types: names, phrases, and 
letters.   Letters are put together to compose a name, and words are gathered 
together to compose phrases and then sentences. A letter is defined as 
being a basis for composing names and phrases. For example, "ka" is a 
letter, "kawa" is a word (name), "mi.tag.pa" (impermanent) is a compounded name, and "impermanent pillar" is a phrase. 
  The Sanskrit alphabet has thirty-six consonants and sixteen vowels which 
are combined to create names and the names are combined to create phrases.    The definition  of name is an object of hearing that enables one to 
understand its meaning . There are two types  of name: actual and imputed . 
  An actual name  is a label initially applied to an object by someone with 
the power to give the right name and which is the principal name for that 
object. Such a person is the one who chose the actual name for the object that then became the main name accepted for the object.   An imputed name  is a label applied to an object after it has already been 
given an actual name; it is a secondary name for the object. For example, "lion" is the actual name for a being with the aggregates of a lion, but 
the name "Lion" given to a dog with a shaggy coat is an imputed name. The reason for giving an imputed name can be due to a similarity, as in the 
above example, or due to a relationship. 
  There are two ways to impute a name by relationship - causal and natural. Imputing a name through a causal relationship  can be to label the name of 
the cause upon the result or to label the name of the result upon the 
cause. Giving the name of the cause to the result is like when the sun is rising and we say, "look at the sunrise." The name "sunrise" is given to 
the light that is an effect of the sun. 
  A disputant says: "Are you sure that the sunrays are a result of the sun? Is there a difference in time between the appearance of the sunrays and the 
appearance of the sun?  
  Giving the name of the result to the cause is like when we name the four types of wisdom perfection: natural wisdom perfection, scriptural wisdom 
perfection, path wisdom perfection, and resultant wisdom perfection. The 
first two are not wisdom perfection but are called "wisdom perfection" because meditating upon them leads to path wisdom perfection and eventually 
to resultant wisdom perfection.  
  Imputing a name through a natural relationship  has nothing to do with 
cause and effect. It is like when incense burns our robes and we say, "my 
robes are burning." In fact, only a few threads are burning but they are 
called "my robes" because of their natural relationship with the robes.  
The definition of phrase is an object of hearing that indicates its own 
object by conjoining an attribute with its basis.     For example, the phrase "all compounded phenomena are impermanent." How 
does this conjoin an attribute with its basis? The basis is compounded 
phenomena, the attribute is impermanence. The phrase "impermanent sound" has sound as the basis and impermanent as the attribute, whereas "the 
impermanence of sound" has impermanence as the basis and sound as the 
attribute.  
The definition of letter is a vocalization that is the basis for composing 
names and phrases, for example, the vowels and consonants of the alphabet.     The object possessed by the articulate sound "vase" is a vase. It is 
possessed  in that the sound expresses its meaning. Articulate sounds that 
correspond to a meaning have objects, while articulate sounds that do not correspond to a meaning do not have objects, for example, the articulate 
sound "permanent sound." This has no corresponding meaning and has no 
object.   
 
 79 
  Just as the direct object of conception is a meaning generality, the 
direct object of sound - the thing directly expressed by articulate sound - is a sound generality. A sound generality is a non-functional phenomenon.  
  A disputant says: "If a sound generality is a non-functional phenomenon, 
you should say that all three - names, phrases, and letters - are non-functional phenomena." 
  We respond to this by saying: "That which is actually expressed by those 
three is a non-functional phenomenon, but they themselves are functional phenomena because they are the result of the volitional intention to 
express something." 
 
Terminologically, expressive sound  can also be divided into two : sounds 
that express classes and sounds that express collections. 
 
(i)  Sounds that express a class are sounds that express a particular type 
of phenomenon, for example, the sound that expresses "selfless." The class of "selfless" is a generality that includes all objects, existent or non-
existent.   
  The sound "existence" includes all objects within the class of existent phenomena - permanent and impermanent, but does not express the different 
types of existence.   
  The sound "permanence" is a class-expressing sound that refers to all those existent phenomena that are permanent - uncompounded space, true 
cessation, emptiness, and so on - but not to each particular type. 
  The sound "functional phenomenon" is a class-expressing sound that refers to the remaining existent phenomena - those that are able to perform a 
function - but not to the particular types within that class.   
  The sound "consciousness" refers to all levels of consciousness - those that engage in the levels of the path and those that do not - but not to 
any particular type of consciousness. 
  Whenever a generality is expressed, even though it includes all of its particularities, the particularities themselves are not necessarily 
expressed. The sound "vase" is a sound that expresses class because it 
includes all types of vase.     A non-generality is an impossible phenomenon, such as a vase-pillar, an 
existent-non-existent, and a functional-permanent-thing. 
 (ii)  Sounds that express a collection are sounds that express a phenomenon 
that is a composite of physical parts, for example, the sound "vase" which 
expresses an object that is a conglomeration of the eight types of atom. Thus the expressed object in this case must be gross form, neither 
consciousness nor a non-associated compositional factor. The sound "vase" 
can be a sound expressing a class and a sound expressing a collection.   To know whether it is a sound expressing a collection or not, we simply 
have to see if the object is composed of eight atoms or not. For example, 
the sound expressing "impermanence" cannot be a sound expressing a collection because impermanence is not a phenomenon that is composed of the 
eight atoms. Also, the sound "consciousness" cannot be a sound expressing a 
collection because the object, consciousness, is not a composition of the eight atoms. 
  An example of a collection-expressing sound that is not a class-
expressing sound is the sound "pillar-vase." It is a collection-expressing sound because both pillar and vase are composed of the eight atoms, but it 
is not a class-expressing sound because it is not a generality - it has no 
types.   It can be asked:  "Isn't a pillar-vase in the east a type?" The answer is 
no, because there is nothing that is both a pillar and a vase, a pillar-
vase is an impossible phenomenon.   
There are four possible relationships between a collection-expressing sound 
and a class-expressing sound:  
  (i)  Sound that expresses both is the sound "vase." 
 (ii)  Sound that expresses neither is the sound "permanent         functioning thing." 
(iii)  Class-expressing sound but not collection-expressing sound  
       is the sound "impermanence."  (iv)  Collection-expressing sound but not class-expressing sound  
       is the sound "pillar-vase." 
 
 
 80 
It may be asked: "If it is a class-expressing sound, does it necessarily 
express each of its types?" The answer is no, for example, the sound "functioning thing." This sound refers to all objects that are functioning 
things, but it does not express all objects that are functioning things. 
 
 
Engaging by elimination of the non-object  
Both sound and conception engage in their objects by way of elimination of 
the non-object. This means that they engage in their object only by 
eliminating that which is not the object, for example, the sound "vase" 
engages in the object, vase, only through the elimination of non-vase. Similarly, the conception of a vase engages in the object, vase, on the 
basis of eliminating non-vase. 
  For example, someone sees a microphone for the first time and is told, "this is a microphone." He conceives the object to be a microphone by 
eliminating everything other than microphone, and when he sees a microphone 
in the future he conceives that it is a microphone by eliminating non-microphone. If the person is not told, "this is a microphone," he will not 
eliminate non-microphone, and later, when he sees a piece of wood he may 
think it is a microphone.    The only reason for saying that sound and conception engage in objects in 
a similar way is that sound engages in its object by eliminating the non-
object and conception engages in its object by eliminating the opposite to that which is conceived.   
  Just as we engage in objects by elimination, things that are one 
substance with the object are also only realized through elimination. For example, the conception "blue" and the sound "blue" both realize attributes 
in the following way. The object blue has many things that are one 
substance with it: the growth of blue, production of blue, impermanence of blue, and so on, each of which is to be realized by eliminating its 
respective non-object. Thus, upon the object blue, we first realize "blue" 
by eliminating non-blue. Then we realize it is a product by eliminating non-product, then we realize blue's growth by eliminating non-growth of 
blue, and then blue's impermanence by eliminating blue's permanence. All 
the things that are one substance with an object cannot be realized at one time, they are only realized in sequence.  
 
 
Engaging
 by way of establishment  
This refers to the way in which the sensory consciousnesses engage in their 
objects. Sensory consciousnesses engage by way of establishment because when they see an object, all the attributes that are one substance with 
that object appear to them simultaneously. When blue appears to the visual 
consciousness, all of its substantial attributes appear at the same time. Blue appears to the visual consciousness because it is enabled to do so by 
all the attributes that are one substance with blue. Whatever actually 
exists as one substance with blue is thus enabled to appear to the visual consciousness apprehending blue. 
  The substantial phenomena related to blue appear at the same time as blue 
itself, but there are things that exist at the same time, such as the selflessness of blue, which do not appear to the visual consciousness - 
because the selflessness of blue is not a substantial attribute of blue, it 
is another type of attribute.    The substantial attributes of a particular object appear to the visual 
consciousness as being inseparable. For example, the visual consciousness 
apprehending blue can perceive product, impermanent, growth, and so on of blue all as one object. Thus blue appears to the visual consciousness and 
at the same time these attributes appear, but they appear as if they are 
one with blue, not separate.    All the substantial attributes of blue appear to the visual consciousness 
at the same time as blue, but it does not mean that the visual 
consciousness perceives and realizes all these attributes. These are only realized in sequence, for example, by the mental consciousness of a yogi 
who first meditates on his body as being miserable, then impermanent, and 
then selfless.  
 
 
 
 
 
 81 
 
PART SEVEN          CONCLUSION  
 Each of us has existed within cyclic existence since beginningless time, 
trapped within suffering because of the internal afflictions that act like a binding rope and which bring all suffering. The afflictions themselves 
must be recognized to be our real enemies because they steal our temporal 
happiness, they do not allow us the shortest moment of happiness, and they prevent our attainment of liberation.   
  Keeping our worst enemy within our hearts, we regard the six types of 
being as our "real" enemies. This is the most foolish behavior. From now on we must open our wisdom eye - the eye of intelligence - and remove the 
worst enemy from our hearts. Instead, we must keep all sentient beings in 
our hearts, like holding on to a precious gem, because they have been as kind to us as our own mother.  
 
Putting the above information into practice 
After studying well this entire explanation of minds and mental factors, we should use this knowledge to tame our mind. We should use this 
understanding to prevent negative minds arising and to increase our positive minds. If, on the other hand, we want to use this understanding as 
a means of livelihood and to become famous scholars, it will simply be 
mundane knowledge.   From my side I have had a proper motivation to give a good explanation of 
the positive and negative minds. Buddha said that if one does not try to 
apply the knowledge and tame one's mind, it is like a sick person hoarding medicine and not taking it. He said that simply listening to the 
explanation of what is to be abandoned and what is to be acquired is good, 
but it is not enough. Having heard the teachings, we should try to practice, to use this knowledge to tame our mind. If we simply want to give 
this teaching to others and become famous, this is not the best way, our 
mind will remain unsubdued.   If we have a stick of sugar cane we should try to experience the taste, 
the essence, which is in the pulp not in the bark. If we simply lick the 
outside of the stick we will not experience the essence. This is like having the intention to learn this subject to teach it to others, not to 
apply it to one's own behavior. To gain the essence of this teaching we 
must use it to understand and subdue our own mind.     While holding this knowledge as a means to subdue our mind, we must 
always be mindful, and if we are influenced by non-virtue we should try to 
make this as light as possible. Also it is important to keep discriminating alertness functioning and to be aware of any afflictions that may arise, as 
it has been emphasized by Shantideva. 
  The Kadampa Lamas said that in order to abandon the afflictions we should know clearly what they are and how they function. If we cannot recognize 
the afflictions and if we do not see their disadvantages, we are like 
soldiers who cannot recognize their enemy. If attachment arises we should spot it with mindfulness and alertness and then use the appropriate remedy. 
  A Kadampa Lama said that most of the time he is beaten by the 
afflictions, nevertheless, every time they arise he always attempts to tackle and defeat them. 
  When we abandon our afflictions from their root they cannot return. Lama 
Tsongkhapa said that we can expel an enemy from the country but he can always return with his friends. The afflictions, however, can be banished 
forever. The reason why we have always been controlled by our afflictions 
is because we have lacked effort and discriminating alertness. To the pillar of mindfulness and alertness we can definitely bind the afflictions. 
  If there is any sign of an affliction arising, we should try to keep it 
down by using the appropriate remedy. If attachment arises, think of its disadvantages and apply the correct antidote, otherwise it will bring 
problems. When the object of attachment appears to the mind attachment 
arises and we engage in the improper mental activity of imposing many things upon the object, finally the affliction will overwhelm us, instead 
of us overwhelming the affliction. 
  The Kadampa Lamas stressed the importance of always checking to see if our minds are following virtue or non-virtue. If we are following the side 
of virtue, we should increase this action, if we are following the side of 
non-virtue, we should stop.   It is said that the most essential practice is to try to abstain from 
unwholesome activities and to try to purify negativities that have 
 
 82 
occurred. Overcoming the afflictions, decreasing ignorance, and increasing 
knowledge is the measure of gaining siddhis. It is said that flying through the sky, swimming beneath the water, and tunneling through the ground can 
be done by birds, fish, and mice. Even ordinary humans can do such things 
these days, so they are not such impressive achievements. If, on the other hand, our mind follows the spiritual path from guru devotion to the unified 
stage of no more learning, this is praise-worthy. In the jor.cho practice 
we request the merit field to stop all negative thoughts related to the path from guru devotion to the unified stage, and to generate all correct 
thoughts on all levels between guru devotion and the unified stage of no-
more-learning. 