Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Lorig/Reference material/LORIG_CH01-12.pdf
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:53:24.441619
================================================================================

Basic Program: Mind and Cognition – Chart 1 MIND AND COGNITION 1 Division of Objects of Knowledge into Objects and Object-Possessors  Definition Divisions Definitions Notes and divisions 1. Objects That which is known by an awareness. 1. appearing objects  2. determined objects  3. objects of engagement  1. The appearing object of a particular awareness and apprehended object of that awareness are synonymous. Whatever is an established base is necessarily an appearing object. This is because whatever is a thing is necessarily the appearing object of a direct perceiver, and whatever is a permanent phenomenon is necessarily the appearing object of a conceptual consciousness. 2. Determined object of a conceptual consciousness, object of engagement of a conceptual consciousness, and object of the mode of apprehension of a conceptual consciousness are synonymous. 3. Also object of engagement of a direct perceiver and object of the mode of apprehension of a direct perceiver are synonymous. 1. persons A being imputed in dependence upon any of its five aggregates. 1. Self, I, person, and being are synonymous. 2. awarenesses  That which is clear and knowing.  2. Awareness, knower, and consciousness are synonymous. 2. Object-possessors  A thing that possesses its respective object.  3. expressive sounds An object of hearing that causes the understanding of its own object of expression through the force of nomenclature. Divisions: 1. names 2. phrases 3. letters  
Basic Program: Mind and Cognition – Chart 2 MIND AND COGNITION 2 1) Division of Awarenesses into Valid Cognizers and Non-Valid Cognizers  Definition Division Definition Divisions and definitions of the specific types  Further divisions 1. direct valid cognizers  A new incontrovertible knower that is free from conceptuality and non-mistaken.  1. Sense direct valid perceivers 1) That which is produced in dependence on its own uncommon empowering condition, a physical sense power, and 2) is a new incontrovertible knower that is free from conceptuality and non-mistaken. 2. Mental direct valid perceivers 1) That which is generated in dependence on a mental sense power which is its own uncommon empowering condition and 2) is a consciousness that is a new incontrovertible other-knower that is free from conceptuality and non-mistaken. 3. Self-knowing direct valid perceivers That which is a new and  incontrovertible knower having the aspect of an apprehender, is free from conceptuality, and is non-mistaken 4. Yogic direct valid perceivers 1) That which is generated in dependence on its own uncommon empowering condition, a meditative stabilization that is a union of calm abiding and special insight, and 2) is a new incontrovertible other-knowing exalted knower in the continuum of a Superior that is free from conceptuality and non-mistaken.  1. five types, eye and so forth     2. 1. induced by sense direct perceivers 2.2. clairvoyance        4. 1. of hearers 4.2. of solitary realizers 4.3. of Mahayanists 1. Valid cognizers  A new incontrovertible knower.  
2. inferential valid cognizers A new incontrovertible determinative knower that is directly produced in dependence on a correct sign which is its basis. 1. Inferential cognizers by power of the fact  2. Inferential cognizers through renown 3. Inferential cognizers through belief Terminological division: 1. Inference for oneself Inference for oneself and inferential cognizer are synonyms. 2. Inference for another Inference for another and correct proof statement are synonyms. Note: Direct and inferential cognizers are necessarily incontrovertible. However, they are valid cognizers only if they are also new.  All other types of awarenesses including direct cognizers that are not new, are not valid. 
Basic Program: Mind and Cognition – Chart 3 MIND AND COGNITION 3 1) Division of Awarenesses into Valid Cognizers and Non-Valid Cognizers  Definition  Divisions Definitions Divisions 1. subsequent cognizers  A knower that realizes what has already been realized.  1. directly perceiving subsequent cognizers (5) 2. conceptual subsequent cognizers (2) 3. subsequent cognizers that are neither of those two 2. correctly assuming consciousnesses      A factually concordant determinative knower that is controvertible with regard to determining its object.   1. correctly assuming consciousnesses that do not have a reason 2. that have a contradictory reason 3. for which the reason is indefinite [or lacks pervasion], 4. for which the reason is not established 5. for which a reason exists but is not settled 3. awarenesses to which an object appears but is not ascertained  An awarenesses to which the object appears without being ascertained (it is unable to induce ascertainment later). 1. sense direct perceivers 2. mental direct perceivers 3. self-knowing direct perceivers  4. doubting consciousnesses A knower that has qualms two-pointedly by its own power.  1. doubt tending toward the factual 2. doubt tending toward the non-factual 3. equal doubt 2. Non-valid consciousnesses  A knower that is not new and incontrovertible.   
5. wrong consciousnesses A knower that engages its object erroneously. 1. conceptual 1.1. innate 1.2. intellectually formed 2. non-conceptual  2.1. sense 2.2. mental   
Basic Program: Mind and Cognition – Chart 4 MIND AND COGNITION 4 2) Division of Awarenesses into Seven Types of Mind – Direct Perceivers  Definition Divisions  Definitions  Divisions 1. sense direct perceivers 1) That which is generated in dependence on its own uncommon empowering condition, a sense power, and its observed object condition, form and so forth, and 2) is a knower that is free from conceptuality and non-mistaken. 1. prime cognizers 2. subsequent cognizers  3. awarenesses to which an object appears but is not ascertained  and 1. apprehending forms 2. apprehending sounds 3. apprehending odors 4. apprehending tastes 5. apprehending tangible objects 2. mental direct perceivers  1) That which is generated in dependence on a mental sense power which is its own uncommon empowering condition and  2) is a consciousness that is an other knower that is free from conceptuality and non-mistaken 1. prime cognizers 2. subsequent cognizers  3. awarenesses to which an object appears but is not ascertained 3. self-knowing direct perceivers That which has the aspect of an apprehender, is free from conceptuality, and is non-mistaken. 1. prime cognizers 2. subsequent cognizers  3. awarenesses to which an object appears but is not ascertained 1. Direct perceivers A knower that is free from conceptuality and non-mistaken.  
4. yogic direct perceivers      1) That which is generated in dependence on its own uncommon empowering condition, a meditative stabilization that is a union of calm abiding and special insight, and 2) is an other-knowing exalted knower in the continuum of a Superior that is free from conceptuality and non-mistaken. 1. prime cognizers 2. subsequent cognizers   Note: There is no yogic direct perceiver that is an awareness to which an object appears but is not ascertained, since yogic direct perceivers necessarily realize their objects.  
Basic Program: Mind and Cognition – Chart 5 MIND AND COGNITION 5 2) Division of Awarenesses into Seven Types of Mind – Inferential Cognizers  Definition Divisions  Definitions Examples 1. inferential cognizers through the power of the fact A determinative knower that is directly produced in dependence on a correct sign by the power of the fact, which is its basis, and is incontrovertible with respect to its object of comprehension, a slightly hidden phenomenon. Eg.: An inferential consciousness that realizes that sound is impermanent. 2. inferential cognizers through the power of belief A determinative knower that is directly produced in dependence on a correct sign of belief, which is its basis, and is incontrovertible with respect to its object of comprehension, a very hidden phenomenon. Eg.: An inferential consciousness that realizes that the scripture, “From giving, resources; from ethics, happy migrations,” is incontrovertible with respect to the meaning indicated by it. 3. inferential cognizers through the power of renown A determinative knower that is directly produced in dependence on a correct sign of renown, which is its basis, and is incontrovertible with respect to its object of comprehension, a terminological suitability. Eg.: The inferential consciousness that realizes that it is suitable to express an assemblage of green leaves, stem, and petals by the term “flower.”  2. Inferential cognizers A determinative knower that is directly produced in dependence on a correct sign that is its basis and is incontrovertible with respect to its object of comprehension, a hidden phenomenon. from the point of view of their production 1. prime 2. subsequent*   *Note: Purbujog asserts that all inferential cognizers are valid, i.e. there is no common locus between subsequent cognizer and inferential cognizer. A second moment of an inferential cognizer is not an inferential cognizer, but a subsequent cognizer. It is a conceptual remembering consciousness. This accords also with Jetsunpa, whereas according to Panchen Sonam Dragba an inferential cognizer is not necessarily a valid cognizer.   
Basic Program: Mind and Cognition – Chart 6 MIND AND COGNITION 6 2) Division of Awarenesses into Seven Types of Mind – Subsequent Cognizers  Definition Divisions Further divisions  Examples  1. direct subsequent cognizers  1. sense direct perceivers 2. mental direct perceivers 3. self-knowing direct perceivers  4. yogic direct perceivers  5. none of the four*  1. The second moment of a sense direct perceiver apprehending blue. 2. The second moment of a clairvoyance knowing another’s mind. 3. The second moment of a self-knowing direct perceiver experiencing an eye consciousness. 4. The fourth is, for example, the second moment of an uninterrupted path of a path of seeing. 5. The second moment of a direct perceiver (*Note: This division occurs only in Purbujog). 2. conceptual subsequent cognizers   1. induced by direct perceivers  2. induced by inferential cognizers 1. A factually concordant ascertaining consciousness ascertaining blue that is induced by a sense direct perceiver apprehending blue. 2. The second moment of an inferential cognizer realizing sound to be impermanent. 3. subsequent cognizers that are neither of the two*   * Note: This division occurs only in Purbujog, but no definition and no example are given.  3. Subsequent cognizers A knower that is not a valid cognizer and that realizes what has already been realized by the former valid cognizer inducing it. 
  Note: There are no subsequent cognizers in an omniscient consciousness, although the first moment of any cognition realizes its object perfectly and exhaustively and therefore the second moment can only know what has been realized before. However, it does not realize by the power of the first moment, but by its own power, therefore it is a new valid cognizer or pramana and not a subsequent cognizer.    
Basic Program: Mind and Cognition – Chart 7 MIND AND COGNITION 7 2) Division of Awarenesses into Seven Types of Mind – Correctly Assuming Consciousnesses  Definition Divisions Examples General notes 1. with a reason   An awareness that apprehends sound to be impermanent in dependence upon the mere words, “Sound is impermanent.”  This is a suitable example because the words, “Sound is impermanent,” express a thesis that sound is impermanent, but not a reason. Note: Any wisdom arisen from hearing is a correctly assuming consciousness. 2. with a contradictory reason  An awareness that apprehends sound to be impermanent from the sign of being empty of being able to perform a function.  This is a suitable example because empty of being able to perform a function is contradictory with impermanence.  Note: Other than doubt a correctly assuming consciousness determines its object of engagement decisively. 3. for which the reason is indefinite An awareness that apprehends sound to be impermanent from the sign of being an object of comprehension.  This is a suitable example because object of comprehension is a reason that is indefinite in the proof of that [i.e., whatever is an object of comprehension is not necessarily impermanent.] Note: Other than inference a correctly assuming consciousnesses is not stable and not incontrovertible, since it does not arise in dependence on a correct sign which is its basis. 4. for which the reason is not established  An awareness that apprehends sound to be impermanent from the sign of being an object of apprehension of an eye consciousness.  This is a suitable example because object of apprehension of an eye consciousness is a reason that is not established in the proof of that. Note: A correctly assuming consciousness apprehends, ascertains, and is mindful of its object, but it does not realize it, i.e., it is not able to eliminate false superimpositions with respect to it. 4. Correctly assuming consciousnesses A factually concordant determinative knower that does not realize its object with respect to which superimpositions have been eliminated and thus is controvertible with regard to determining its object. 5. for which the reason exists but is not settled An awareness that apprehends sound to be impermanent from the sign of being a product, without its having been ascertained by a valid cognizer that sound is a product and whatever is a product must be impermanent.  This is a suitable example because although product is a correct sign in the proof of sound as impermanent, that person has not settled it.   
Basic Program: Mind and Cognition – Chart 8 MIND AND COGNITION 8 2) Division of Awarenesses into Seven Types of Mind – Non-ascertaining Consciousnesses  Definition Divisions Examples Notes 1. sense direct perceivers  A sense direct perceiver apprehending blue that induces the doubt that wonders, “Did I see blue or not?”   2. mental direct perceivers  Mental direct perceivers in the continua of ordinary beings apprehending the five objects, forms and so forth.    5. Awarenesses to which an object appears but is not ascertained  A knower that is a common locus of (1) having clear appearance of the specifically characterized phenomenon that is its object of operation and (2) being unable to induce ascertainment with respect to the specifically characterized phenomenon that is its object of operation. 3. self-knowing direct perceivers Self-knowers experiencing mental direct perceivers.  Note: There is no yogic direct perceiver to which an object appears but is not ascertained, since yogic direct perceivers necessarily ascertain their objects, because they realize them.    
Basic Program: Mind and Cognition – Chart 9 MIND AND COGNITION 9 2) Division of Awarenesses into Seven Types of Mind – Doubt and Wrong Consciousnesses  Definitions Divisions  Examples  Notes and examples 1. doubt tending toward the factual   Doubt that thinks that sound is probably impermanent.   Note: Doubt is a mental factor. “By its own power” is stated in the definition in order to exclude the main mind and other mental factors that have similarity with it from the definition. 2. doubt tending toward the non-factual Doubt that thinks that sound is probably permanent.  Note: Doubt that i s  a  r o o t  a f f l i c t i o n  a n d  doubt in this context are not mutually inclusive. While the first is necessarily afflicted doubt, the latter could be: 1. non-virtuous, 2. neutral, or 3. virtuous. 6. Doubting consciousnesses          A knower that has qualms two-pointedly by its own power. 3. equal doubt Doubt that wonders whether sound is permanent or impermanent.   1. conceptual   A conceptual consciousness apprehending sound as permanent 1. innate conceptual wrong consciousness  2. intellectually acquired conceptual wrong consciousness Note: All conceptual consciousnesses are mistaken with respect to their appearing object, since they take a meaning generality as the actual object. Wrong consciousnesses are mistaken with respect to the object of engagement, the actual thing that is to be understood. 7. Wrong consciousnesses  A knower that is mistaken with respect to its object of engagement. 2. non-conceptual  A conceptual consciousness apprehending the horns of a rabbit  1. mental non-conceptual wrong consciousness  2. sense non-conceptual wrong consciousness 1. A dream consciousness that clearly sees as blue the blue of a dream.  This subject is a mental consciousness, a non-conceptual consciousness, and a wrong consciousness. 2. A sense consciousness that sees snow mountains as blue and a sense consciousness that sees a white conch as yellow.   
Basic Program: Mind and Cognition – Chart 10 MIND AND COGNITION 10 3) Division of Awarenesses into Conceptual Consciousnesses and Non-conceptual Consciousnesses   Definition  Divisions  Examples etc. 1. conceptual consciousnesses that apprehend only a sound generality Eg.: A conceptual consciousness in the continuum of a person who does not know that a bulbous flat-based thing that is able to perform the function of holding water is a pot which, generated in dependence on merely the sound “pot,” apprehends pot.  2. conceptual consciousnesses that apprehend only a meaning generality  Eg.: A conceptual consciousness in the continuum of a person who does not know that a bulbous flat-based thing able to perform the function of holding water is a pot which, generated in dependence on merely seeing a bulbous thing, apprehends a bulbous thing. 3. conceptual consciousnesses that apprehend both a sound and a meaning generality Eg.: A conceptual consciousness that apprehends both a sound and a meaning generality is a conceptual consciousness – in the continuum of a person who knows pot – apprehending a pot. 1. conceptual consciousnesses that affix names  2. conceptual consciousness that affix meanings 1. A thought consciousness that associates the meaning, an object, and its verbal convention. Eg.: A conceptual consciousness thinking “This is a pot” upon seeing a flat bottomed water holder. 2. A consciousness associating the meaning of substratum and the meaning of attributes. Eg.: The conceptual consciousness that thinks “This person has a stick”. The stick is the basis and the person is the attribute. 1. Conceptual consciousnesses A determinative knower that apprehends a sound generality and a meaning generality as suitable to be mixed.  
1. factually concordant   2. factually discordant Def.: A factually concordant determinative knower that apprehends a sound generality and a meaning generality as suitable to be mixed.  Def.: A factually discordant determinative knower that apprehends a sound generality and a meaning generality as suitable to be mixed.     
Basic Program: Mind and Cognition – Chart 11 MIND AND COGNITION 11 3) Division of Awarenesses into Conceptual Consciousnesses and Non-conceptual Consciousnesses   Definition Divisions Definitions Divisions and Notes 1. non-conceptual non-mistaken consciousness  A knower having clear appearance that is non-mistaken with regard to its appearing object, a specifically characterized phenomenon. 1. sense 2. mental 3. self-knowing  4. yogic 1. sense 2. mental  2. Non-conceptual consciousnesses A knower that is free from being a determinative knower that apprehends a sound generality and a meaning generality as suitable to be mixed. 2. non-conceptual mistaken consciousness  A knower having clear appearance that is mistaken with regard to its appearing object, a non-existent. Note: Non-conceptual c o n s c i o u s n e s s  a n d  collective engager are synonyms. Also non-conceptual consciousness and  - a knower that engages its object by the power of the thing,  - a knower that engages its object in a non-partial manner,  - a  k n o w e r  t h a t  e n g a g e s  i ts object by the power of the object casting its aspect to the mind  are synonyms.  Conceptual consciousness a n d  eliminative engager a r e  synonyms. Also conceptual consciousness and  - a knower that engages its object in a partial manner,  - a knower that engages its object by way of its own wish,  - a knower that engages its object by the power of terminology (meaning generality) are synonyms  
Basic Program: Mind and Cognition – Chart 12 MIND AND COGNITION 12 4) Division of Awarenesses into Self-knowers and Other-knowers   Definition Divisions   Definition Further divisions and notes 1. Self-knowers    That which has the aspect of an apprehender.  1. self-knowing direct perceivers That which is non-conceptual, non-mistaken, and has the aspect of an apprehender. 1. direct prime cognizers 2. subsequent cognizers 3. cognizers to which an object appears but is not ascertained  Note:  - self-knowing consciousnesses are accepted only by Sautrantika, Yogachara Svatantrika Madhyamika, and Chittamatra, they are not accepted by Vaibhashika, Sautrantika Svatantrika Madhyamika, and Prasangika - their sole function is to make memory possible, not introspection, as the name might suggest  - a self-knower must be a mental consciousness, since it does not depend on a sense power as an uncommon empowering condition, but on the mental power - self-knowers are always non-conceptual - self-knower and consciousness which is directed only inwards are synonyms 2. Other-knowers A consciousness that is directed outward.     1. sense direct perceivers 2. mental direct perceivers 3. yogic direct perceivers 4. conceptual consciousnesses are necessarily other-knowers, as well as all other consciousnesses that are directed outward     