Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Lorig/Mental factor.pdf
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:53:23.717190
================================================================================

Lorig   Revision   1 / 24 
 
What is the difference between studying Awareness and Knowledge  & Minds and Mental Factors ?  
-Both study the mind and its functions . 
-Awarenesses and Knowers  focused  primarily on the study of knowledge, what are  valid ways of 
knowing and what are invalid . 
-Minds and mental factors  is a more psychological study of mind, examining the mind in terms of its 
wholesome and unwholesome aspects, etc .  
Why study minds and mental factor?  
The extensive presentation of Mind and Mental factors are given  to the intellige nt beings who have in 
mind their welfare in future lives ; not me rely concerned about this life alone . Such  intelligent ones  who 
are looking beyond this life should investigate what is the cause of oneself circling endlessly in the three 
realms of cyclic ex istence.  Having contemplated on the root cause of cyclic existence , he must  come to 
understand that these sufferings of cyclic existence neither arise without cause,  nor arise from a 
discordant cause; rather, they arise from their own causes – actions  and afflictions . 
 
Protector Nagarjuna says in his Precious Garland : 
As long as the aggregates are misconceived,  
There will be the conception of an I.  
When there is conception of an I, there is also action.  
Due to that there is rebirth.  
In dependence upon an ap prehension of a self of phenomenon, there comes to be an apprehension of a 
self of person, which is posited to be ignorance. Due to ignorance, one accumulates karma. This is how 
the twelve links of dependent origination is set forth.  
 
Nagarjuna says in hi s Treatise on the Middle Way says:  
The root of cyclic existence is compositional actions.  
Therefore, the wise do not create compositional actions.  
Hence, the unwise are creators;  
The wise are not, because of seeing thusness  
The root of cyclic existence is  compositional activity which is second link of the twelve links of 
dependent arising.  
-It is the unwise  ones who create compositional actions.  
-The wise do not accumulate projecting karma for cyclic existence because they have seen the truth 
directly. Th ose who have yet to see the truth directly continues to accumulate projecting karma.  
-So the difference between a Superior and an ordinary being is that Superiors do not accumulate new 
projecting karma while ordinary beings do so because the Superior do no t have the category of 
ignorance from the ignorance of the twelve links of dependent arising. Therefore, they do not 
accumulate compositional activity, the second link.  
-It is not the case that once a Superior sees the truth directly, all ignorance in his continuum will be 
removed immediately. Nevertheless, from the moment when that Superior sees the truth directly, he will 
not accumulate new projecting karma because the category of ignorance from the twelve links of 
dependent origination no longer function s and ignorance is not powerful enough to lead to the 
accumulation of new projecting karma.  
The twelve links: (1) ignorance (2) action (3) consciousness (4) name and form (5) sources, (6) contact (7) 
feeling (8) attachment (9) grasping (10) existe nce (11) birth (12) aging and death.  
 
Aryadeva says in his Treatise of Four Hundred Stanzas  
The consciousness that is the seed of cyclic existence  
Has objects as its objects of activity  
The “ seed of cyclic existence ” is consciousness. Here, consciousne ss refers to the apprehension of true 
existence, which is an affliction.  
“Objects ” refer to forms which becomes the objects of observation of ignorance, the apprehension of 
true existence. This ignorance focuses on these objects and apprehends them to be t ruly existent.  
Through this, karma is accumulated.  
 
Acharya Chandrakirti says in his Supplement to the Middle Way   
The very diverse worlds of sentient beings and  
Lorig   Revision   2 / 24 
 
Their environments are established by the mind itself.  
It is taught that all migrating being s without exception are born from actions . 
Chandrakirti is saying the same thing: the environment, the world itself, and its inhabitants, sentient 
beings, are the results of actions.  
 
Acharya Vasubandhu says in his Treasury of Knowledge   
The various worl ds are produced from actions.  
The root of [cyclic] existence is the six subtle -increasers [afflictions].  
 
Shantideva's Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds  says:  
The Propounder of the Truth has taught  
That in this way, all fears and  
The immeasurable sufferin gs 
Arise from the mind.  
Those who do not understand this secret of the mind,  
The great objective of the Dharma,  
Wander aimlessly,  
Even though they wish to attain happiness and destroy suffering.  
Therefore, I should hold well and guard well  
This mind of min e  
-The reason for citing quotations from authoritative texts of Nagarjuna, his spiritual son and other great 
Indian masters, is to show what they themselves have already ascertained: all the suffering of cyclic 
existence is the result of karma and afflict ions.  
-Likewise, it has been taught that all the excellent qualities of the paths and grounds of the three 
vehicles, as well as all the exalted inconceivable qualities of the buddhas, in the final analysis, have to 
come from a concordant cause . The concord ant cause is not external. It has to come from a virtuous and 
wholesome state of mind.  
-In essence, all the problems and sufferings that one experiences in cyclic existence have its origin in 
one's mind. Likewise, all the happiness, up to the state of one' s ultimate happiness, full enlightenment, 
has to come from the mind itself.  
 
Factor of appearance  
Whatever appears to the mind, there is the factor of appearance . The object a ppears in a particular way 
but we believe in that appearance. We believe that th e object exists in the way that it appears to us. Due 
to this belief and because we hold on to this appearance to be real, we accumulate karma:  
 Even though the object appears to the mind, without the mind, one would not have such an 
appearance.  
 Without suc h an appearance, one would cease to grasp at the appearance.  
 Without grasping at such an appearance, one would cease to accumulate actions/ karma.  
 Without the mind, that factor of appearance cannot appear to the mind.  
 Therefore, in dependence on this facto r of appearance to the mind, one apprehends that factor to be 
utterly real, to exist in the way it appears, one then accumulates  actions.  
When we believe in whatever is appearing to our mind to exist in the way it appears, that is when we get 
emotionally i nvolved with that appearance. We then accumulate actions that lead to the result, suffering. 
So we have to understand and experience how all these different appearances to the mind arise from the 
mind itself. Ultimately everything is created by the mind, i ncluding the suffering that we do not want. 
We have to understand how suffering arises from our mistaken belief in these appearances to the mind . 
Minds and mental factors  
Maitreya's Discrimination of the Middle and the Extremes  says:  
 That which sees an obj ect is a primary consciousness  (mind).  
 That which sees its attribute  is a mental factor . 
What is the difference between a main mind and a mental factor?  
A main mind  engages merely in the entity of the object by its own power . 
A mental factor  engages in th e specific  features/characteristics of an object by its own power .   
Example: Eye primary consciousness apprehends the mere entity of blue.  
Lorig   Revision   3 / 24 
 
Main mind : Eye primary consciousness apprehending the mere object blue  
Mental factor of mindfulness  (in the retinue of this eye primary consciousness ) induces a memory 
holding on to this blue.  This mindfulness performs the function of holding on  to an object without 
forgetting  it. Because it engages the object by way of its attributes, it is a mental factor.  
The eye pr imary consciousness  apprehending blue and the mental factor of mindfulness  in its retinue are 
different (i.e. not one) because:  
- mind is not its mental factor  
- its mental factor is not mind  
These two are not mutually inclusive.  They are not one but never theless one entity  i.e. one entity but 
different isolates . 
What does it mean to be one entity ?  
Example: Vase and the vase’s impermanence, these two are one entity  but different isolates .   
The vase’s impermanence is one entity with vase. This doesn’t mean  that vase’s impermanence is vase.  
Does vase’s impermanence exists on a non -vase?  
Vase’s impermanence is only found on vase. You cannot posit vase’s impermanence on a non -vase.  
Vase’s impermanence cannot be posited as separate from vase.  
You will not be able to find a vase’s impermanence that is of a different entity from the vase itself.  
Abhidharmakosa  says: “ A mind and its mental factor are definitely simultaneous ”, so the main mind and 
its mental factor are one entity.  
One will not be able to posit me ntal factor that is of a separate entity from the main mind; and just as 
one cannot posit a main mind that is of a separate entity from its mental factor.  
What are Minds ? 
They are the six primary consciousnesses:  
1. eye primary consciousness  
2. ear primar y consciousness  
3. nose primary consciousness  
4. tongue primary consciousness  
5. body primary consciousness  
6. mental primary consciousness  
What are Mental Factors ? 
-A primary mind  and its attendant mental factors  always operate in conjunction with one ano ther.  
-An object is never cognized by a primary mind devoid of any mental factors nor by a mental factor 
unaccompanied by a primary mind.  
Main mind  Mind, sentience and primary consciousness are mutually inclusive  
Main mind & Mental factor  Awareness, kn ower and consciousness are mutually inclusive  
Definition of awareness : a knower.  
Definition of consciousness : that which is clear and knowing.  
Main minds  is a main knower that is posited by way of apprehending the entity of its object  
Mental factor  is a k nower that apprehends any of the features of its object and accompanies whatever 
main mind has similarity with it  
In the Heart Sutra , five aggregates  are mentioned:  
1. Aggregate of form  
2. Aggregate of feeling  
3. Aggregate of discrimination  
4. Aggregate of compositio nal factors  
5. Aggregate of consciousness  
All impermanent phenomena  can be subsumed under  these five aggregates. If it is an impermanent 
phenomenon, it is one of these aggregates.  
Five Aggregates    Functioning Thing  
Aggregate of Form    Form / Matter  
Aggre gate of Feeling  Mental 
Factors  Mental factor of Feeling   
Aggregate of Mental factor of Discrimination   
Lorig   Revision   4 / 24 
 
Discrimination  
Aggregate of 
Compositional Factor  The remaining 49 m ental factors  
(excluding feeling  & discrimination ) Non-associated 
compositional f actor  
Aggregate of 
Consciousness  Main mind  Main mind  Consciousness  
Functioning thing can be divided into:  
1. Matter  
2. Consciousness  
3. Non-associated compositional factor (NACF)  
All phenomena that are in the category of matter  can be put under the category of aggregate of form . 
All form  is subsumed by the aggregate of form . 
Consciousness  can be looked in term of:  
1. Main minds   
2. Mental factors  
-All the main minds  are classified under the aggregate of consciousness . 
-In general, there are 51 mental factors.  
- The mental factor of feeling  comes under the aggregate of feeling  
- The mental factor of discrimination  comes under the aggregate of discrimination . 
- The remaining 49 mental factors  come under the aggregate of compositional factors . The third 
division of func tioning thing – the non-associated compositional factor - comes under the 
aggregate of compositional factors . 
Why are the mental factor of feeling  and the mental factor of discrimination  highlighted separately?  
The two reasons why these two mental factors are listed separately because they are:  
(1) the bases for conflict and  
(2) the primary causes for the perpetuation of cyclic existence.  
As in the Treasury of 
Knowledge : Mental factor of feeling  Mental factor of discrimination  
Bases for conflict  because the pleasant feelings that arise 
due to attachment for the object of desire 
becomes the basis for conflict  because discriminating that which is 
Dharma to be non -Dharma and 
discriminating that which is non -Dharma to 
be Dharma becomes a basis for conflict  
Causes for the 
perpetuation of cyclic 
existence  Due to being emotionally involved with 
feelings, one generates a very strong 
desire and attachment for feelings that 
then perpetuates cyclic existence.  Due to such erroneous discrimination with 
reference to a n object, one accumulates the 
projecting karma for rebirth and cyclic 
existence.  
Four possibilities between sentience  and mental consciousness  
1) Something which is a sentience but not a mental consciousness: Eye primary consciousness. It is a 
sentience b ut not a mental consciousness  
2) Something which is mental consciousness but not a sentience: Mental factor of feeling that is 
concomitant with a mental primary  consciousness. It is a mental consciousness and not a sentience 
because it is a mental factor.  
3) Something which is both sentience and mental consciousness: mental primary consciousness. It is a 
sentience and also a mental consciousness.  
4) Something which is neither sentience nor mental consciousness: mental factor of feeling that is 
concomitant w ith an eye primary  consciousness: It is not a sentience because it is a mental factor. It is 
also not a mental consciousness because it is a sense consciousness.  
Three possibilities between a sense consciousness  and sense primary consciousness : 
1) Somethin g which is a sense consciousness but not a sense primary consciousness: mental factor of 
feeling in the retinue of  an eye consciousness apprehending blue. It is a sense consciousness as it is in 
the retinue of a sense consciousness but not a primary sense  consciousness as it is a mental factor.  
2) Something which is both a sense consciousness and a sense primary consciousness: an eye primary 
consciousness apprehending blue.  
3) Something which is neither: mental factor of feeling in the retinue of conceptual  consciousness 
apprehending blue.  
 
Lorig   Revision   5 / 24 
 
Divisions of minds  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Six primary 
consciousness  Physical sense 
power  Observed 
object  
Eye primary consciousness  eye form  
Ear primary consciousness  ear sound  
Nose primary 
consciousness  nose odor 
Tongue prim ary 
consciousness  tongue  taste 
Body primary 
consciousness  body  tactile object  
Mental primary 
consciousness  mind  phenomena  
Example: Eye primary consciousness –an individual knower that is supported by the eye and observes form . 
Five Similarities  
Ornament  of Reasoning, the Great Treatise on Valid Cognition  by Gedun Drub states the definitions:  
 A main mind  is that which is concomitant by way of the five similarities  with the mental factors in 
its retinue   
 A mental factor  is that which is concomitant by way of the five similarities with its main mind .  
Example: An eye consciousness apprehending blue  and the mental factor of feeling  in its retinue.  
These two are concomitant by way of the five similarities.  
Regarding the modes of these five similarities, there  are two explanations with slight different 
presentations:  
– one from the Vasubandhu’s  Treasury of Knowledge  
- one from Asanga's Compendium of Knowledge   
Five similarities according to Vasubandhu’s  Treasury of Knowledge  (Abhidharmakosha)  
 Main mind  Mental  factor  
Similar support  Eye primary consciousness apprehending 
blue is generated in dependence upon eye 
sense power  Similarly the mental factor of feeling  in the 
retinue of this eye primary consciousness 
apprehending blue is also generated in 
dependence u pon the eye sense power.  
Similar object of 
observation  Eye consciousness apprehending blue is 
generated in dependence on the object of 
observation blue.  Similarly the mental factor of feeling  in the 
retinue of this eye primary consciousness 
apprehending blue is also observing blue.  
Similar aspect  Eye primary consciousness apprehending 
blue is in the aspect of blue.  
 Similarly the mental factor of feeling  in the 
retinue of this eye primary consciousness 
apprehending blue is also in the aspect of blue  
Similar time  A mind and its mental factor are simultaneous with respect to their production, abiding and When minds are condensed into two:  
1. Sense consciousness  
2. Mental consciousness  When minds are divided by way of 
entity  there are six:  
1. eye consciousnes s 
2. ear consciousness  
3. nose consciousness  
4. tongue consciousness  
5. body consciousness  
6. mental consciousness  
Lorig   Revision   6 / 24 
 
cessation.  
Similar substance  Just as there is only one main mind, there can only be one mental factor of feeling.  
 
 
Five similarities according to As anga’s Compendium of Knowledge (Abhidharmasamuchchaya)  
1. Similar substance  In the retinue of a single main mind, there can arise only one mental factor, for 
instance, feeling, of a similar type. Two [mental factors] of a similar type but of 
different sub stances cannot occur.  
2-3 Similar object of 
observation and 
[subjective] aspect and 
same entity  -A mind and th e mental factors in its retinue  are: 
 similar in observing one object –the object of observation  
 similar in being afflicted or non -afflicted  in terms o f the object of observation and 
the subjective aspect.  
–If a main mind:  
 has become afflicted, then the mental factors in its retinue also become afflicted  
 has become uncontaminated, the mental factors in its retinue also become 
uncontaminate d. 
4. Similar time  A mind and its mental factor are simultaneous with respect to their production, 
abiding and cessation.  
5. Similar realm and level   If the main mind is a mind of the desire realm , the mental factors in its retinues 
are mental factors of  the desire realm . 
 If the main mind is a mind of the form realm , the mental factors in its retinue are 
mental factors of the form realm .  
 If a main mind is a mind of the desire realm, then it is impossible for a mental 
factor of the form or formless realms to arise in its retinue.  
 It is impossible for a mental factor of the desire realm to arise in the retinue of a 
mind of the form realm . 
 That realm in which the main mind is included is also necessarily the realm in 
which mental factor in its retinue is included  
 
Five similarities according to Vasubandhu’s 
Treasury of Knowledge  (Abidharmakosha):  Five similarities  according to Asanga’ s Compendium 
of Knowledge (Abhidharmasamuchchaya):  
1. Similar support  1. Similar substance  
2. Similar object of observation  2. Similar object of observation and [subjective] aspect  
3. Similar [subjective] aspect  3. Similar entity  
4. Similar time  4. Similar time  
5. Similar substance  5. Similar realm and level  
 
 
Lorig   Revision   7 / 24 
 
 
Five Omnipresent Mental Factors  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The five omnipresent mental factors  accompany all minds ; thus are explained as “ omnipresent ”. 
Whenever any one among these five is not complete, enjoyment of the obje ct is not complete:  
–without feeling , the experiencing of pleasure, pain, and so forth, does not arise;  
–without discrimination , designation of verbal conventions does not occur;  
–without intention , engagement of the object does not occur;  
–without mental engagement , directing the mind to the object of observation does not occur;  
–without contact , feeling –pleasure, pain, and so forth –is not generated  
Feelings are the cause of the afflictions  
-pleasant feelings  attachment  
-unpleasant feelings  aversion / hatred  
-neutral feelings  ignorance  
Five 
Omnipresent 
Mental Factors   
Entity   
Function   
Remarks  
Feeling   Has the characteristic  of 
experience . 
 Through the entity  of 
experience, it experiences 
individually the fruitional 
results of virtuous and non -
virtuous actions  To enable the mind to 
experience the object.  Two divisions:  
1. Bodily feelings  
2. Mental feelings  
Bodily feelings  refer to the mental 
factor of feeling accompanying a sense 
primary consciousness.  
Mental feelings  accompany a mental 
primary conscious ness.  
Two divisions:  
1. Materialistic feeling  
2. Non- materialistic feeling  
Three divisions:  
1. Pleasant feelings  
Lorig   Revision   8 / 24 
 
2. Suffering feelings  
3. Neutral feelings  
Five divisions:  
1. Pleasant feelings  
2. Suffering feelings  
3. Neutral feelings  
4. Feelings of mental happiness  
5. Feelings of ment al unhappiness  
 
Discrimination   It has the characteristic of 
knowing upon aggregation.  
 It has the entity of 
apprehending the sign and 
apprehending the mark, through 
which one designates an 
expression to objects of 
perceptions, hearing, 
differentiation and  knowledge.  
 To enable the mind to 
distinguish the 
uncommon sign of the 
object.  Discrimination is a knower that, upon 
the aggregation of the three – object, 
sense power, and primary 
consciousness – apprehends the 
uncommon sign of an object.  
 
Two divisions:  
1. The apprehension of a sign is related 
to the sense consciousness.  
2. The apprehension of a mark  is 
related to the mental consciousness.  
Two divisions:  
1. The apprehension of a sign with 
regard to an object   
2. The apprehension of a sign with 
regard to a conventio n. 
 
Intention  The entity is it is a compositional 
mental action of the mind  To move  the mind 
towards an object.  Two types of actions:  
1. Actions that are intentions  
2. Intended actions  
Two types of intended actions :  
1. Physical actions  
2. Verbal actions  
Six divisions:  Arising from contact 
upon the aggregation of:  
(1) a visible form, an eye sense power, 
and an eye consciousness  
(2) a sound, an ear sense power, and an 
ear consciousness  
(3) an odor, a nose sense power, and a 
nose consciousness  
(4) a taste, a  tongue sense power, and a 
tongue consciousness  
(5) a tactile object, a body sense power, 
and a body consciousness  
(6) a phenomenon, a mental sense 
power, and a mental consciousness  
 
 
Contact  
 It distinguishes the transformation 
of the sense power upon th e 
aggregation of the three - object, 
sense power and primary 
consciousness  To enable the mind to 
meet with the object.  
. Contact is the knower that moves the 
mind to come into contact or to meet 
with the object.  
Six divisions  
Contact upon the aggregation of :  
(1) a visible form, an eye [sense power], 
and an eye consciousness;  
(2) a sound, an ear [sense power], and 
an ear consciousness;  
(3) an odor, a nose [sense power], and a 
nose consciousness;  
(4) a taste, a tongue [sense power], and 
a tongue consciousness ; 
(5) a tactile object, a body [sense 
power], and a body consciousness  
(6) a phenomenon, a mental [sense 
Lorig   Revision   9 / 24 
 
power], and a mental consciousness.  
Attention  It is an engagement of the mind  
 To direct the mind 
towards the object  Attention is a knower that focus es the 
mind which is concomitant with it on a 
particular object of observation . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The five object -ascertaining mental factors  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The reasons for calling these five mental factors as object ascertaining  mental f actors be cause these 
mental factors hold an object through apprehending the individual features of the object.  
Object 
ascertaining 
mental 
factors  Entity   Objective 
feature  Subjective aspect 
feature  Functional 
feature  Remarks  
Aspiration  Is a knower that 
focuses on the desire 
and wishes to be The attribute 
of a desired It is the very wish 
to be endowed 
with the desired It is the support 
for making Three  types - 
1. aspiration wishing to meet  
2. aspiration wishing not to 
Lorig   Revision   10 / 24 
 
endowed with it  thing object.  
 effort.  be se parated  
aspiration that seeks  
Belief  Is a k nower which 
apprehends an object 
that has been 
ascertained by its valid 
cognition and hold on 
to this object by 
thinking; “It is ju st like 
this and not otherwise”  Object that 
has been 
ascertained by 
the valid 
cognition  It holds an 
ascertained thing 
to be just the way 
it has been 
ascertained.  Non-captivation  
 Two types:  
1. correct belief  
2. incorrect belief  
Mindfulness  Is a non -forgetfulness 
of the mind with 
respect to a familiar 
object  A familiar 
object  Not forgetfuln ess 
upon having 
observed that 
object  Non-distraction   
Meditative 
Stabilization  Is a one -pointedness of 
the mind with respect 
to an imputed thing  Is specified to 
be an imputed 
thing.  It is a one -
pointedness of 
mind that, within 
observing an 
imputed thing, is 
continuously set 
upon it.  Acting as a 
support for 
knowledge  Four types of object of 
observation that are used for 
developing meditative 
stabilization:  
1.objects of observation for 
purifying behavior  
2.objects of observation for 
purifying afflictions  
3.pervasive objects of 
observation  
4.objects of observation for 
developing skill  
 
Wisdom  
(Knowledge)  A knower that 
individually 
differentiates the  faults 
and good qualities of 
things that are to be 
examined  Three types: 
1.virtuous  
2.non-virtuous  
3.unspec ified It distinguishes 
what need to 
abandon and what 
need to cultivate  Overcom ing 
doubts  Four ways of reasoning for 
differentiating faults and good 
qualities:  
1. functional reasoning  
2. reasoning of dependence  
3. logical reasoning  
4. reasoning of nature  
 
 
 
Lorig   Revision   11 / 24 
 
THE ELEVEN VIRTUOUS MENTAL FACTORS  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DEFINITION  OBJECT OF 
OBSERVATION  SUBJECTIVE ASPECT  FUNCTION  REMARKS  
 (1) FAITH  
 A knower that has the aspect of conviction, clarity or wishing, and 
it serves as the direct antidote for non -faith.  
 It is a conviction, clarity, and wishing with respect to an existent 
that is endowed with excellent qualities and power. It has the 
function of acting as a support for aspiration.   For clarifying or clear faith, it 
is excellent qualities such as 
those of the Th ree Jewels.   
 For faith of conviction, it is 
modes of dependent -arising, 
workings of karma, and so 
forth.  
 For wishing faith, it is the 
four noble truths.   clarity for clarifying 
faith   
 conviction for faith of 
conviction  
 aspirational for wishing 
or aspiri ng faith   
Support for aspiration   
Three types:  
(1) clarifying or clear faith  
(2) faith of conviction  
(3) wishing or aspiring 
faith 
 
( 2 )  S H A M E  
An avoidance of misdeeds on account of oneself  Misdeeds that one should avoid  Avoidance on account of 
oneself  Support for effective 
restraint from 
misconduct   
( 3 )  E M B A R R A S S M E N T   
An avoidance of misdeeds on account of others  Misdeeds that one should avoid  
 Avoidance on account of 
others  Support for effective 
restraint from 
misconduct   
( 4 )  N O N -A T T A C H M E N T  
 A knower that is di senchanted and lacks attachment.  
 It is a lack of attachment to cyclic existence and the articles of 
cyclic existence.  
  
Object of desire   
Non-attachment when 
focussed on the object   
Support for non -
engagement in 
misconduct  Antidote to attachment, 
miser -liness, excitement, 
distraction, and haughtiness.  
( 5 )  N O N -H A T R E D  
Lorig   Revision   12 / 24 
 
DEFINITION  OBJECT OF 
OBSERVATION  SUBJECTIVE ASPECT  FUNCTION  REMARKS  
 A knower that conquers the generation of hatred within observation 
of any of the three objects that generate hatred, i.e., sentient beings, 
suffering, and the sources of suffering,  
    and is a lack of malice.  1. sentient beings  
2. suffering   
3. sources of suffering  
  
Lack of malice   
Support for non -
engagement in  
misconduct  Antidote for belligerence, 
resentment, spite,  
jealousy, and harmfulness.  
( 6 )  N O N - I G N O R A N C E  
 It is a wisdom of individual inves tigation that is able to serve as an 
antidote to ignorance arising from its cause —being either acquired 
through birth or arisen through application.  
 It is knowledge arisen from fruition, scripture, contemplation or 
realisation and is a wisdom of individual  investigation.  
  
All phenomena   
Non-confusion   
Support for non -
engagement in 
misconduct  Two types:  
o non-ignorance that is 
acquired through birth  
o non-ignorance arisen 
through application  
To be differentiated from the 
object -ascertaining mental 
factor of wis dom 
 
 
( 7 )  E F F O R T  ( O R  J O Y O U S  P E R S E R V E R A N C E )  
 
 The mind that is enthusiastic about virtue is effort.  
 The mind is enthusiastic in regard to armouring, application, non -
inferiority, irreversibility, and non -complacency.   
Virtuous activity  
 
 
 
 
  
Enthusiasm   
Fulfilling and 
accomplishing the class 
of  virtues  Five types: effort of  
(1) armouring  
(2) application  
(3) non -inferiority  
(4) irreversibility  
(5) non -compla -cency  
( 8 )  P L I A N C Y  
 A knower that deposits an imprint so that the mind can be applied, 
however one wishes, to a virtuous object of observation and that 
severs the continuum of unfavourable states of body and mind.  
 It is the serviceability of body and mind due to severing the 
continuum of unfavourable states of body and mind.   
Virtuous object   
Serviceabi lity of body and 
mind, i.e., one is able to 
use one’s body and mind 
in whatever way one 
wishes  
  
Eliminating all 
obscurations   
Two  types: - 
(1) physical  
(2) mental  
In this context, pliancy 
refers to mental pliancy  
( 9 )  C O N S C I E N T I O U S N E S S   
 An awareness that accomp lishes virtue within abiding in effort 
without coming under the influence of afflictions. It guards the 
mind against contaminations.  
 It is a cultivation of virtuous qualities within abiding in non -
attachment, non -hatred, non -ignorance, as well as effort, a nd 
guards the mind against contaminations.   
Virtuous object   
Guards the mind against 
the discordant class or 
incompatible factors with 
virtue   
Causes the mind to abide 
in virtue and for  virtue 
to increase  Five types: 
conscientiousness  
(1) with respect t o the 
former  
(2) with respect to the latter  
(3) with respect to the 
middle  
(4) prior to activity  
(5) of concordant application  
Lorig   Revision   13 / 24 
 
DEFINITION  OBJECT OF 
OBSERVATION  SUBJECTIVE ASPECT  FUNCTION  REMARKS  
( 1 0 )  E Q U A N I M I T Y   
 It is a discordance with afflictive states, an evenness of mind, a 
dwelling in a natural state, and a spontane ous abiding, within 
abiding in non -attachment, non -hatred, non -ignorance, as well as 
effort.  
 In dependence on the techniques for internally setting the mind 
single -pointedly on an object of observation, the nine mental 
abidings are gradually accomplished. When the ninth is achieved, 
one no longer needs to strive to use the antidotes to laxity and 
excitement and one attains a spontaneous abiding of the mind.   
An imputed thing, i.e, same 
object as the object for 
meditative stabilisation   
Engaging in discrimin ative 
equanimity   
It does not give the 
afflictions of the desire 
realm a chance to 
manifest.  Three types:  
(1) compositional 
equanimity or 
equanimity of 
application  
(2) equanimity which is 
feeling  
(3) immeasurable 
equanimity  
In this context, this mental 
factor is the e quanimity of 
application.  
( 1 1 )  N O N -H A R M F U L N E S S   
It is a mind of compassion and is involved with non -hatred.  Sentient beings  Compassion  Not inflicting harm   
Comparison between mental factor of non-ignorance  and the mental factor of wisdom .  
 Mental fa ctor of wisdom  Mental factor of non -ignorance   
Aspect of the knower  Distinguishing what is to be abandoned 
and what is to be adopted  Non-confusion  
Function  Overcoming doubt  Support for non -engagement in misconduct  
 In order to develop non -ignorance, we need wisdom.  
 In order to develop wisdom, we need to engage in the three -fold activities of hearing, reflection, and meditation.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Lorig   Revision   14 / 24 
 
 
THE SIX ROOT AFFLICTIONS  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
An affliction is a phenomenon such that when it arises, the character istic of being very unpeaceful arises, and due to its arising, the mental continuum arises 
as being very unpeaceful.  
 
ENTITY  OBJECT OF 
OBSERVATION  SUBJECTIVE  
ASPECT  FUNCTION  REMARKS  
( 1 )  A T T A C H M E N T  
 A mental factor that perceives a contaminated 
thing to b e attractive by way of its own entity 
and thereupon seeks it.  
 It is clinging of the three realms.  Beautiful and 
attractive internal or 
external object  Difficulty of separating 
from the object  Produces sufferings  Three types:  
(1) attachment of the desire r ealm  
(2) attachment of the form realm  
(3) attachment of the formless realm  
( 2 )  A N G E R  
 It is a malice that, upon observing the three 
objects of observation of anger, cannot 
tolerate them and wishes to harm them.  
 It is a malice towards sentient beings, 
suffering, and phenomena that are the sources 
of suffering.  (1) sentient beings  
(2) one's own 
sufferings  
(3) the sources from 
which these sufferings 
arise  
 Malice  Support for not abiding in 
contact with happiness  
and for misconduct  Nine causes of malice with regard to oneself, one’s 
friend, and one’s enemy in terms of the past, present, and 
future.  
Regarding oneself  
1. I was harmed (in the past)  
2. I am being harmed (in the present)  
3. I will be harmed (in the future)  
Regarding one’s friend :  
1. They were harmed.  
2. They  are being harmed.  
3. They will be harmed.  
Regarding one’s enemy  :  
1. They had benefited.  
Lorig   Revision   15 / 24 
 
ENTITY  OBJECT OF 
OBSERVATION  SUBJECTIVE  
ASPECT  FUNCTION  REMARKS  
2. Someone is helping and benefiting them now.  
3. In future, they will benefit and be helped.  
( 3 )  P R I D E  
 A mental factor that has the aspect of a 
puffing up of the mind up on observing the 
basis for puffing up – one's own wealth, 
qualities, and so forth.  
 It is a puffing up of the mind in dependence 
on the view of the transitory collection.  One’s own wealth, 
possessions, and 
qualities  Puffing up of the mind  Acting as a suppor t for 
disrespecting others and 
support for suffering in 
future lives.  
 Seven types:   
1. pride  
2. exceeding pride  
3. pride beyond pride  
4. pride of thinking "I"  
5. pride of vanity  
6. pride of slight inferiority  
7. wrongful pride  
 
( 4 )  I G N O R A N C E  
 A mental factor of unkn owing that is 
obscured regarding the mode of abiding of all 
phenomena.  
 It is unknowing of the three realms.  All phenomena  Unknowing  Acts as a support for the 
arising of wrong 
ascertainment, doubt, and 
afflictions with respect to 
phenomena.  Two types:  
1. Obscuration with respect to actions and their results  
2. Obscuration with respect to the meaning of suchness  
( 5 )  D O U B T      
 A mental factor that wavers between two 
points within observation of the four truths, 
cause and result, and so forth.  
 This is being two-minded with regard to the 
truths.  Four noble truths & 
the presentation of 
karma and their effects  Two-pointed mind   Acts as a support for not 
engaging in the class of 
virtue.  
 
 Doubt here is the afflicted doubt  that  is abandoned on the 
path of seeing , 
( 6 )  A F F L I C T E D  V I E W S   
(6.1) V I E W  O F  T H E  T R A N S I T O R Y  C O L L E C T I O N  
 It is an afflicted wisdom that observes the 
appropriated aggregates and apprehends them 
to be a real “I” and mine.  
 It is any endurance, desire, intelligence, 
conception, or view  
    which vi ews the five appropriated aggregates 
as a real “I” and mine.  One’s own aggregates  Self-sufficient 
substantially existent “I”  Acts as a support for all 
views  Two types of the view of the transitory collection: (1) 
conception of “I” and (2) conception of ‘ ‘mine”  
When divided, there are twenty types:   
(1) view of forms as a self  
(2) view of the self as possessing forms  
(3) view of forms as mine  
(4) view of the self as abiding in forms  
Similar division into four each with respect to (1) 
feelings, (2) discrim ination, (3) compositional factors, 
and (4) consciousness (the remaining four of the five 
aggregates)  
( 6 . 2 )  V I E W  H O L D I N G  T O  A N  E X T R E M E   
 An afflicted wisdom that observes the self Self that is held by the Apprehending  permanence Hindering definite  
Lorig   Revision   16 / 24 
 
ENTITY  OBJECT OF 
OBSERVATION  SUBJECTIVE  
ASPECT  FUNCTION  REMARKS  
that is held by the view of the transitory 
collection and apprehends it to be either 
permanent or annihilated.  
 It is any endurance, desire, intelligence, 
conception, or view that views the five 
appropriated aggregates as being either 
permanent or annihilated.  view of the transitory 
collection  or annihilation  emergence by means of the 
middle path  
( 6 . 3 )  C O N C E P T I O N  O F  A  [ B A D ]  V I E W  A S  S U P R E M E  
 An afflicted wisdom that observes other bad 
views and the aggregates, the locus in 
dependence on which they arise, and hold s 
them to be supreme  
 It is any endurance, desire, intelligence, 
conception, or view which views:  
o views and  
o the locus of the views, that is, the five 
appropriated aggregates,  
to be supreme, to be chief, to be superior, 
and to be excellent.  (1) Any of the th ree 
views holding them to 
be supreme —- the 
view of the transitory 
collection, the view 
holding to an extreme, 
or  
wrong view and 
holding them to be 
supreme  
(2) The aggregates of 
the viewer in 
dependence on which 
the above three view 
arise  
 Holding the thre e views 
and the aggregates of the 
person holding these views 
to be supreme  Acting as a support for 
strongly adhering to bad 
views.  
  
( 6 . 4 )  C O N C E P T I O N  O F  [ B A D ]  E T H I C S  A N D  M O D E S  O F  C O N D U C T  A S  S U P R E M E  
 An afflicted wisdom that observes:  
o [bad] ethics motivate d by bad views  
o [bad] modes of conduct that prescribe 
physical and mental activities such as 
wearing animal skins, and  
o the abode of [bad] ethics and modes of 
conduct – the five appropriated 
aggregates –to be purifying and 
liberating.  
 It is any endurance, de sire, intelligence, 
conception, or view, which views:  
o [bad] ethics and modes of conduct and  
o the locus of the [bad] ethics and modes 
of conduct, that is, the five appropriated 
aggregates, to be purifying, liberating, 
and delivering  (1) Bad ethics and 
modes of conduct to 
be purifying, 
liberating, and 
delivering  
(2) The locus of the 
[bad] ethics and 
modes of conduct, i.e.,  
the five  
appropriated 
aggregates,  
to be purifying, 
liberating, and 
delivering  This is a mind that 
believes that something 
that is not the  cause of 
liberation to be the cause 
of liberation. It is a mind 
that believes that 
something that is not a 
path leading to liberation 
to be a path leading to 
liberation.  
 Acting as a support for 
fruitless fatigue.  
  
Lorig   Revision   17 / 24 
 
ENTITY  OBJECT OF 
OBSERVATION  SUBJECTIVE  
ASPECT  FUNCTION  REMARKS  
( 6 . 5 )  W R O N G  V I E W   
 An afflicted wisdo m that views the cause and 
result of actions, past and future lives, and so 
forth as non -existent.  
 It is any endurance, desire, intelligence, 
conception, or view that deprecates cause, 
result or functionality, and wrongly conceives 
existent disintegrating things.  Past and future lives, 
workings of cause and 
effect, four noble 
truths  
 Mind that deprecates 
stating that past and future 
lives, karma, and so forth 
do not exist   Acting as a support for 
engaging in non -virtue 
and not engaging in 
virtue.  
 Four  types:  
(1) wrong view that deprecates causes,  
(2) wrong view that deprecates results,  
(3) wrong view that deprecates functionality, and  
(4) wrong view that deprecates existent things.  
The wrong view that deprecates actions and their results, 
past and future  rebirths, and so forth severs all roots of 
virtue and is taught to be the most serious among all 
wrong views.  
 
What then is the view of the transitory collection?  
 The view of the transitory collection observes the aggregates, the body and mind.  
 Based on observing the body and mind, the sense of “I” arises.  
 The view of the transitory collection apprehends this “I” and conceives this “I” to be self -sufficient substantially existent.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Lorig   Revision   18 / 24 
 
 
THE TWENTY SECONDARY AFFLICTIONS  
 
1. belligerence  
2. resentment  
3. concealment  
4. spite  
5. jealousy  
6. miserliness  
7. deceit  
 8. dissimulation  
9. haughtiness  
10. harmfulness  
11. non -shame  
12. non -embarrassment  
13. lethargy  
14. excitement  15. non -faith  
16. laziness  
17. non -
conscientiousness  
18. forgetfulness  
19. non -introspection  
20. distraction  
The reasons for calling these 20 mental factors as "secondary afflictions"  because they are near to or involved with the root afflictions.  
DEFINITION  OBJECT OF 
OBSERVATION  SUBJECTIVE ASPECT  FUNCTION  REMARKS  
( 1 )  B E L L I G E R E N C E  
 A malice that wishes to harm, by striking and so forth, when 
any of the nine bases of malice abides nearby.  
 It is a malice when the cause of harm abides nearby, and is 
involved with anger.  Same as anger, i.e., sentient 
beings, one’s own 
sufferin gs, and sources of 
suffering  Malice  Acting as a support for taking 
up weapons, punishing, and 
so forth, and preparing to 
injure others.  Derivative of anger  
Nine bases of malice:  
(1-3) the thoughts that this person 
has harmed me, is harming me, 
and will harm me;  
(4-6) the thoughts that this person 
has harmed my friend, is harming 
my friend, and will harm my 
friend;  
(7-9) the thoughts that this person 
has benefited my enemy, is 
benefiting my enemy, and will 
benefit my enemy.  
( 2 )  R E S E N T M E N T  
 A mind that, r efusing to let go of a continuum of anger, 
wishes to harm or retaliate.  
 Is a refusal to let go of thoughts of harm following that [i.e. 
belligerence] and is involved with anger.  Same as anger, i.e., sentient 
beings, one’s own 
sufferings, and sources of 
suffering  Angry mind that would not 
let go  Acting as a support for 
intolerance  Derivative of anger  
( 3 )  C O N C E A L M E N T  
 An awareness that wishes to hide faults through the force of 
ignorance when another person, such as a spiritual guide, 
benignly points out one 's faults.  
 It is a hiding of misdeeds when one is justly accused and is 
involved with ignorance  One’s faults and the faults 
of others  Concealing misdeeds   Acting as a support for not 
abiding in contact with 
regret  
 Impelling one into lower 
rebirths in futur e lives  Derivative of ignorance  
( 4 )  S P I T E  
Lorig   Revision   19 / 24 
 
DEFINITION  OBJECT OF 
OBSERVATION  SUBJECTIVE ASPECT  FUNCTION  REMARKS  
 An awareness that, for instance, lacking thoughts of regret 
and admission when another points out one’s faults, wishes 
to utter harsh speech out of hateful thoughts driven by 
belligerence and resentment.  
 It is a malicious mind that is preceded by belligerence and 
resentment, and is involved with anger.  
 Same as anger, i.e., sentient 
beings, one’s own 
sufferings, and sources of 
suffering  Malicious mind preceded 
by belligerence and 
resentment  
 Acting as a support fo r rough 
violent speech, to increase 
that which is non -meritorious, 
and not abiding in contact 
[with happiness].  Derivative of anger  
( 5 )  J E A L O U S Y   
 It is a deep disturbance of mind that cannot bear another's 
success due to attachment to gain and honour. I t produces 
serious undesirable [consequences] in both this and future 
worlds [i.e., rebirths]; in this life there will be mental 
unhappiness, and in future lives, one will be impelled into 
bad migrations.  
 It is a deep disturbance of mind that cannot tolera te 
another's marvellous attributes due to excessive attachment 
to gain and honour, and is involved with hatred.   
Good qualities of others   
Deeply disturbed mind   
Causing mental unhappiness 
and not abiding in contact 
[with happiness].  
  
Derivative of hatre d (or anger)  
( 6 )  M I S E R L I N E S S  
 A tight holding that is unable to let go of possessions 
through the force of attachment to gain and honour. It 
produces serious undesirable [consequences] in both this 
life and future lives.  
 It is a thorough holding of the m ind to possessions due to 
excessive attachment to gain and honour, and is involved 
with attachment.  One’s possessions and 
wealth  Thorough holding of the 
mind that is unable to let go 
of possessions   Acting as a support for 
non-diminishment of 
possessions  
 Causes attachment to 
increase  Derivative of attachment  
( 7 )  D E C E I T  
It is a display of good qualities that one does not actually 
possess, due to excessive attachment to gain and honour, as in 
the case of pretending to be peaceful and subdued with the 
thought  to deceive others, even though one’s own mind is far 
from being subdued.   
Any good qualities that one 
does not possess   
Mind of pretense   
Acting as a support for wrong 
livelihood  Derivative of attachment  
Five types of wrong livelihood :  
(1) pretension  
(2) flatte ry 
(3) hinting  
(4) extortion  
(5) seeking gain from gain  
( 8 )  D I S S I M U L A T I O N  
 It is an awareness that wishes to hide one’s faults, not 
revealing them to others through the force of attachment to 
gain and honour.  
 It commits faults due to excessive attachment to gain and  
honour, and is involved with attachment and ignorance.   
One’s faults that one wishes 
to conceal from others   
Striving to do whatever is 
necessary to conceal one’s 
faults and misdeeds   
Hindering the acquisition of 
perfect instructions   
Involved with atta chment and 
ignorance  
Also translated as guile  
Lorig   Revision   20 / 24 
 
DEFINITION  OBJECT OF 
OBSERVATION  SUBJECTIVE ASPECT  FUNCTION  REMARKS  
( 9 )  H A U G H T I N E S S  
 It is a puffing up of the mind due to joy and mental 
happiness upon observing one's own good health, 
prosperity, and so forth.  
 It is a joy and mental happiness upon seeing one's own good 
healt h, youth, signs of long life, or contaminated success, 
and is involved with attachment.   
One’s own good health, 
youth, signs of long life, or 
contaminated success   
 Puffing up of the mind  
 Joy and mental happiness   
Acting as a support for all 
[root] afflicti ons and 
secondary afflictions.  
  
Derivative of attachment  
 
( 1 0 )  H A R M F U L N E S S  
 It is a wish, bereft of benevolence, to harm sentient beings.  
 It is non -benevolence, non -compassion, and non -mercy.   
Sentient beings   
Wish to harm   
Harming others   
Derivative of anger  
 non-benevolence   is a wish to 
harm by oneself  
 non-compassion  is a wish to 
engage others in harming  
non-mercy  is a rejoicing upon 
seeing or hearing others acting to 
harm  
( 1 1 )  N O N - S H A M E  
It is an awareness that does not avoid misdeed on account of 
either oneself or the Dharma.   
Misdeeds  Non-avoidance of misdeeds  Assisting all root afflictions 
and secondary afflictions  Derivative of attachment  
E.g.if a fully -ordained monk 
encounters an intoxicant and 
avoids a misdeed on account of 
himself, thinking, " Drinking this 
intoxicant is not something I 
should do," then this is shame. 
The opposite of this is non-shame . 
( 1 2 )  N O N - E M B A R R A S S M E N T  
It is an awareness that does not avoid faults on account of 
others  Misdeeds  Non-avoidance of misdeeds  Assisting all roo t afflictions 
and secondary afflictions  Involved with  attachment, hatred, 
and ignorance  
E.g. If one, when about to engage 
in a misdeed, avoids the misdeed 
on account of others thinking, "If 
the Teacher and the clairvoyant 
gods were to become displeased 
and I were to be despised by 
others, this would be unfitting," 
then this is embarrassment. The 
opposite of this is non-
embarrassment . 
( 1 3 )  L E T H A R G Y  
Lorig   Revision   21 / 24 
 
DEFINITION  OBJECT OF 
OBSERVATION  SUBJECTIVE ASPECT  FUNCTION  REMARKS  
It is a heaviness and unserviceability of the body and mind.  Many different objects  Unserviceable and heavy  
mind  Assisting all root & secondary 
afflictions  Derivative of ignorance  
( 1 4 )  E X C I T E M E N T  
 It is an awareness that, upon observing the attributes of the 
desire realms previously experienced, mentally scatters 
outwards to them and engages with craving.  
 It is an unpeacefulness of mind that subsequently engages 
an attractive cause.   
Attractive object  
 
 
 
  
Unpeaceful and scattered 
outwards  
 
 
  
Hindering calm -abiding  
 
 
 
  
Derivative of attachment  
 
 
 
( 1 5 )  N O N -F A I T H  
 It is the discordant class of faith.  
 It is a  non-conviction, non -clarity, and non -wishing of the 
mind with respect of virtuous phenomena.  Same objects as faith:  
 For non -clarity, excellent 
qualities such as those of 
the Three Jewels.   
 For non - conviction, it is 
modes of dependent -
arising, workings  of 
karma, and so forth.  
 For non -wishing, it is the 
four noble truths.   
 Non-clarity  
 Non-conviction  
 Non-wishing   
Acting as a support for 
laziness   
Derivative of ignorance  
Antidote of non -faith is faith  
Three types:  
(1) non -faith of non -conviction in 
actions  and their results and so 
forth – the discordant class of the 
faith of conviction;  
(2) non -faith of non -clarity and a 
mental dislike with respect to the 
possessors of excellent qualities, 
such as the three jewels – the 
discordant class of the faith of 
clarity 
(3) non-faith of non -wishing and 
non-seeking of liberation  and so 
forth – the discordant class of 
wishing faith.  
( 1 6 )  L A Z I N E S S  
It is a non -enthusiasm of the mind for virtue due to a habit of 
lying down, and so forth.  Virtues  Non-enthusiasm  Hindering  application to the 
class of virtue  Derivative of ignorance  
Joyous perseverance is the 
antidote to laziness. Faith is 
needed to develop joyous 
perseverance  
( 1 7 )  N O N -C O N S C I E N T I O U S N E S S   
 It is an awareness that, not guarding the mind against the 
hosts of af flictions and misdeeds, gives in to relaxation.  
 It is a non -cultivation of virtuous qualities and non -guarding 
of the mind against contaminated phenomena.  Virtues  Non-guarding of the mind  Acting as a support for the 
increase of non -virtue and the 
decrease  of virtue  Involved with attachment, anger, 
and ignorance as well as laziness  
( 1 8 )  F O R G E T F U L N E S S  
Lorig   Revision   22 / 24 
 
DEFINITION  OBJECT OF 
OBSERVATION  SUBJECTIVE ASPECT  FUNCTION  REMARKS  
 It is a knower that is an unclear mind and forgetful with 
respect to virtue on account of mindfulness of an object of 
observation of afflictions.  
 It is a m indfulness that is concomitant with afflictions  Basis for developing 
afflictions  Unclear about virtue  Acting as a support for 
distraction  Involved with attachment, anger,  
and ignorance  
( 1 9 )  N O N -I N T R O S P E C T I O N  
It is an afflicted wisdom that engages unkno wingly in 
activities of the three doors.  Activities of one’s body, 
speech, and mind  Lacking vigilance  
Unknowing  
 Acting as a support for 
infractions or downfalls  Involved with attachment, anger, 
and ignorance  
( 2 0 )  D I S T R A C T I O N  
 It causes the mind to be d istracted from its object of 
observation through the force of the afflictions.  
 It is a scattering of the mind and is involved with 
attachment, anger, and ignorance.   
Any object   
Distracted  
  
Hindering separation from 
attachment   
Involved with attachment,  hatred, 
and ignorance  
Six types:  
(1) Distraction by way of its 
very entity  
(2) External distraction,  
(3) Internal distraction,  
(4) Distraction by way of signs,  
(5) Distraction by way of 
unfavorable states,  
(6) Distraction by way of 
attention.  
 
What is the difference betwee n Haughtiness and Rejoicing  
Haughtiness  Rejoicing  
 Similar to pride [which is puffing up of the mind].  
 It is an obstacle to developing good qualities.  
 Don’t have that function of developing respect 
because the mind is puffed up  
 Is the derivative of attach ment   A mind of liking which arises when one focuses on 
virtues in one’s mental continuum  
 Is a basis for acquiring or increasing one’s qualities  
 Can act as a support for developing respect  
 Is not involved with attachment, but it is possible 
that rejoicing  can lead to attachment  
 What is the difference between Excitement and Mental Scattering?  
Excitement  is classified as a secondary affliction therefore it is either non -virtuous or neutral.  
For mental scattering , it can be non -virtuous, neutral, or it can also be virtuous.  
There can be a virtuous mental scattering  but you will not be able to find a virtuous excitement .  
Excitement  is a scattering of the mind due to attachment, whereas mental scattering  does not necessarily occur due to attachment.  
Therefo re excitement  is necessarily mental scattering, whereas if it is mental scattering , it is not necessarily excitement.  
Lorig   Revision   23 / 24 
 
 
Changeable Mental F actor  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
They are called "changeable" they become virtuous, non -virtuous, or unspecified through the force of b eing concomitant with the motivating thought.  
Changeable 
mental 
factors  Entity   Object of observation  Subjective aspect  Functional feature  Remarks  
Sleep  It is an awareness that causes the engagement 
in objects of the sense consciousness to 
powerlessly withdraw inwards in dependence 
upon its causes, such as heaviness of body, 
weakness, fatigue, and attention to signs of 
darkness.  
It is a withdrawal of the mind in dependence 
upon sleep, its cause, with respect to:  
 virtue, non -virtue and the unspecified,  
 the timely and the untimely,  
and the appropriate and the inappropriate,  Either virtue, non -virtue or 
unspecified.  Withdrawal of the mind 
inwards and it is the 
withdrawal that happens  
powerlessly.  
 Acting as a support for failing 
to perform actions  It is in volved with ignorance  
 
Regret  In dependence on:  
 oneself having performed an appropriate 
or inappropriate activity deliberately or  
 having been made to do so under duress,  
being remorseful about that activity which one 
subsequently comes to dislike is calle d 
"generating regret."  
It is a remorseful mind dependent on any 
[proper] activity or improper activity, intended 
or unintended, with respect to:  
 virtue, non -virtue and the unspecified,  Either the activities that 
you perform yourself or 
something that you were 
made to do by somebody 
else. 
Some texts: either be the 
activities that performed 
by yourself or somebody 
else’s activities  Dislike  Hindering the stability of the 
mind  It is involv ed with ignorance  
Three types:  
(1) virtuous  
(2) non -virtuous  
(3) unspecified  
 
Lorig   Revision   24 / 24 
 
 the timely and the untimely, and  
 the appropriate and the inappropriate,  
 
Investigation  Investigation is an inquiry into the rough 
entities of  
objects as well as their names  
It is a mental expression of inquiry depending 
on either intention or wisdom;  it is a coarse 
mind.  
 Either virtue, non -virtue or 
unspecified.  Coarseness  Act as a support for abiding in 
contact and not abiding in 
contact  Two types:  
1. virtuous (acting as a support for 
abiding in contact" with 
happiness)  
2. non-virtuous (acting as a 
support for not abiding in 
contact)  
Analysis  Analysis analyzes with fine discrimination  
It is a mental expression of individual 
examination depending on either intention or 
wisdom; it is a fine mind.  
 Either virtue, non -virtue or  
unspecified.  Analyzing with fine 
discrimination  Act as a support for abiding in 
contact and not abiding in 
contact  Two types:  
1. virtuous (acting as a support for 
abiding in contact" with 
happiness)  
2. non-virtuous (acting as a 
support for not abiding in 
contac t) 
 
Five obscurations  …obscure the three higher trainings  
aspiration for the attributes of the desire realm, harmful intent  higher training in ethics  
sleep, lethargy, excitement, regret  higher training in concentration  
doubt, investigation, analysis  higher training in  wisdom  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 