Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Lorig/Revision for Awareness.pdf
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:53:22.938926
================================================================================

Lorig   Revision Note - Awareness  1 / 39  
 
What is Awareness and Knowledge ? This subject is the study of mind. 
Why study this subject?  As Lati Rinpoche says:  
“Understanding mind is essential to understanding B uddhism in both its theoretical and 
practical aspects, for the process of achieving enl ightenment is one of systematically purifying 
and enhancing the mind”. 
There are four Buddhist tenet  systems in ascending order: 
1.  The Great Exposition School / Vaibhashika 
2.  The Sutra School / Sauntrantika (divided into those  following scripture and those following 
reasoning) 
3.  The Mind-only School / Cittamatra 
4.  The Middle Way School / Madhyamika (divided into th e Autonomy Middle Way School and the 
Consequence Middle Way School) 
 
The study of Lorig is from the viewpoint of Proponents of Sutra Following Reasoning . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
All Buddhist tenet systems assert selflessness  as the main principle of their philosophies. 
What is selfless ? Selfless  means is empty of or lacks a certain type of self.  
A fundamental assertion in Buddhism is that only th rough understanding selflessness, or emptiness, can  
one gain liberation and thereby be relieved of powe rless rebirth. 
In the broadest possible category, selfless may be divided into the existent and non-existent.   
So what is Existent and Non-existent?   
-Non-existent :  Phenomenon that does not exist at all. It cannot  be realized by any valid cognizer. E.g. 
horns of a rabbit  
-Existent : All existents are existent bases  or established base  (EB) because they are established as 
existing by valid cognizers. So whatever exists is realized as existing by a valid cognizer.  E.g. a t able 
So the difference between existent and non-existent  is that an existent  can be realized by a valid 
cognizer. 
Can uncompounded space be an object of the mode of apprehension of a non-conceptual 
consciousness? 
Since a valid cognizer can directly realize uncompo sed space, then an uncomposed space would be the 
object of the mode of apprehension of a non-concept ual consciousness. Selfless 
Non-existent  Existent 
Lorig   Revision Note - Awareness  2 / 39  
 
So, with no choice , you have to memorize those phenomena that are mutually inclusive with EB . 
Established Base and the Phenomena Mutually Inclusi ve With It 
Definienda Definition 
Established base  Established by a valid cognizer  
Object of knowledge  Suitable as an object of an awareness 
Existent Observed by a valid cognizer  
Phenomenon That which holds its own entity  
Object of comprehension  Object realize by a valid cognizer  
Object  Object known by an awareness 
Object of comprehension of 
an omniscient consciousness Object realized by omniscient consciousness 
Hidden phenomenon Object realized in a hidden manner by a thought 
consciousness apprehending it 
Note: Mutually inclusive  means they have different names but are referring to the same thing and same 
meaning. 
What is a hidden phenomenon ? An inferential valid cognizer  cannot realizes hidden phenomenon 
directly but can only realizes hidden phenomenon by  depending on the medium of a mental image or 
generic image, therefore it is hidden.  
Division of Existent : Within EB there are Functioning thing  and Permanent phenomena . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
EB can be divided into permanent  & impermanent phenomena . 
What is  impermanent phenomenon ?  It is called impermanent phenomenon  because it undergoes 
momentary change i.e. it undergoes change in each a nd every single moment. E.g. Table 
What is permanent phenomenon ? It is a permanent phenomenon because it does not undergo 
momentary change. E.g. uncomposed space - a mere ab sence of obstructive contact 
The best way to understand the concept is to rememb er the definitions, so again with no choice, memori ze them! 
 Functioning Thing and the Phenomena Mutually Inclus ive With It 
Definienda Definition 
Functioning thing  That which is able to perform a function  
Impermanent phenomenon Momentary phenomenon 
Product Created phenomenon 
Composed phenomena  Disintegrating phenomenon 
Ultimate truth  Phenomenon which is ultimately able to perform a fu nction  
Cause  Producer 
Effect Object produced 
Specifically characterized 
phenomenon  A phenomenon which is established exist by way of i ts own character without being 
merely imputed by a term or thought consciousness  
Manifest phenomenon Object explicitly realized by a direct valid cogniz er 
Permanent Phenomenon and the Phenomena Mutually Inc lusive With It Established 
Base 
 Functioning thing (mutually inclusive with)  
Impermanent phenomenon  
Product 
Composed phenomenon 
Ultimate truth 
Cause  
Effect 
Specifically characterized phenomenon 
Manifest phenomenon 
Permanent phenomenon (mutually inclusive with)  
Non-produced phenomena  
Uncomposed phenomenon 
Conventional truth 
Phenomenon which is a non-thing 
Generally characterized phenomenon 
Lorig   Revision Note - Awareness  3 / 39  
 
Definienda Definition 
Permanent phenomenon Common locus of a phenomenon and the non-momentary  
Non-produced phenomenon Non-created phenomenon 
Uncomposed phenomena Non-disintegrating phenomenon 
Conventional truth  Phenomenon which is ultimately unable to perform a function  
Phenomenon which is a non-
thing Phenomenon which is empty of the ability to perform  a function 
Generally characterized 
phenomenon  A phenomenon which is merely imputed by a term or t hought consciousness and is not 
established as a specifically characterized phenome non  
Division of Object of Knowledge 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Object of knowledge may be divided exhaustively int o two: 
1.  Singular phenomenon   
2.  Different Phenomenon  
Same meaning and same name  - The only thing that is one with sound is sound. All other existents are 
different from sound. 
Same meaning  but different name  - product and impermanent phenomena are mutually i nclusive have 
same meaning but different name  
Different names  or different meanings  - a gold pot and a copper pot which are separate a nd distinct 
phenomena. 
Impermanent phenomenon has three divisions : 
1.  Matter 
2.  Consciousness  
3.  Non-associated compositional factor (NACF) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
These three – matter, consciousness & NACF are mutu ally exclusive. 
Note: Mutually exclusive  means that you will not be able to point to any ob ject that is all three of these divisions. 
Matter 
What is matter ? Matter is that which is atomically established.  
Matter and form are mutually inclusive. 
Matter or form comes into existence by depending on  concordant cause . It is established by former 
moment of form or matter 
Matter is divided into: 
A.  External Matter 
B.  Internal Matter 
On what basis they are different?  The difference depends on whether that matter is included within the 
continuum of the person  or not. 
 The Divisions of 
Functioning Thing   
Matter  Consciousness  Non-associated 
compositional factors  Object of 
knowledge  
Different phenomena  are phenomena which are diverse .  
Different phenomena may be different in terms of  name, 
meaning or both name and meaning . E.g. pot and pillar 
 Singular phenomenon  is a phenomenon which is not diverse . 
Whatever is one with something must be one with tha t thing in 
both name and meaning . E.g. One with Pot - a phenomenon 
which is not diverse from pot 
 
Lorig   Revision Note - Awareness  4 / 39  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Consciousness  
What is consciousness ? Consciousness is that: 
- which is clear and knowing 
- is non-obstructive, i.e., it does not have color an d shape  
- is an impermanent phenomenon and is not matter  
- is established in dependence on concordant cause  
What does “clear and knowing” means? 
The factor of 'clarity' can be explained in several  ways: 
1) It has the entity of clarity, being clear, in th e sense of not being atomically established. 
2) Any objects, when being focused upon, can appear  clearly to it. 
3) It has the nature of clear light, in the sense t hat afflictions have not entered into its deepest r ecess. 
Therefore, it is by nature, not afflictive. 
Its factor of 'knowing' - realizing its object or t hat objects can appear to it. 
Consciousness, awareness, and  knower  are mutually inclusive  
Consciousness has two divisions:  
A.  Sense consciousnesses 
B.  Mental consciousness 
 
 
Consciousness can also be divided into 
A.  Mind   
B.  Mental Factor  
 
How a consciousness is generated?   
A consciousness is generated  with the presence of  three conditions: 
1.  the observed object condition 
2.  the uncommon empowering condition 
3.  the immediately preceding condition 
Example: For an eye consciousness apprehending form  to be generated, 
1.  the observed object condition           - form 
2.  the uncommon empowering condition   - eye sense pow er 
3.  the immediately preceding condition     - any of th e six consciousnesses in the  immediately 
preceding moment 
Consciousness Observed object 
condition Uncommon empowering condition Immediately 
preceding condition      
Eye consciousness  Form Eye sense power any of the six 
consciousnesses in 
the  immediately 
preceding moment Ear consciousness  Sound Ear sense power  
Nose consciousness  Odor Nose sense power 
Tongue consciousness  Taste Tongue sense power 
Body consciousness  Tangible object Body sense powe r 
Mental consciousness  Physical form, subtle 
objects Mental sense power 
(=immediate preceding conditions Consciousness  Mental consciousness : a knower 
that is produced in dependence on 
its own uncommon empowering 
condition, a mental sense power  
Sense consciousness : a knower that 
is produced in dependence on its 
own uncommon empowering 
condition, a physical sense power.  
 Matter  
External Matter  is that which: 
/head2right is atomically establish matter and 
/head2right is not included  within the 
continuum of a person.  
E.g. earth, water, fire, form source, 
sound source etc.  Internal matter  is matter that is 
included within the continuum of a 
person.  
E.g. person contaminated 
aggregates and the physical sense 
powers 
 
Lorig   Revision Note - Awareness  5 / 39  
 
Example: For a mental direct perceiver apprehending  form 
1.  the observed object condition      - form 
2.  the uncommon empowering condition   - mental sense power  
3.  the immediately preceding condition     - the  imme diately preceding moment is also mental  
           sense power   
Non-associated compositional factors 
What is non-associated compositional factor?   
It is a composed phenomenon which is neither matter  nor consciousness 
Non-associated compositional factor has two divisio ns: 
A. Non-associated compositional factors which are pers ons  (or more exactly, all living beings) 
B. Non-associated compositional factors which are not persons  (e.g. time) 
A person is a NACF because of being designated in d ependence upon a collection of form and 
consciousness  
Object and object possessor  
Object-possessor  (or subject): a thing that possesses its respectiv e object 
Object : that which is known by an awareness. Generally, i f it is a phenomenon or an existent, it is 
necessarily an object .  
1.  All consciousnesses are object possessor  e.g. eye consciousness  
2.  All other phenomena that are not consciousnesses ar e object  e.g. book 
There are three main types of object  posited for consciousness  
1.  Object of engagement (jug.yul) 
2.  Determined object  (zhen.yul) 
3.  Appearing object (nang.yul)  
Division of Objects of Knowledge into Objects and O bject-Possessors 
 Division of object 
of knowledge  Divisions Notes Objects of Knowledge   
1. Objects  
  
Definition :  
That which 
is known by 
an awareness 1. Objects of 
Engagement 
(jug yul) 
 
 Object of engagement  is the object that the awareness is acting or oper ating 
upon & is used for both conceptual consciousness an d non-conceptual 
consciousnesses 
E.g. the object of engagement of an eye consciousne ss apprehending book is 
book. 
2. Determined 
objects   
(zhen yul) 
 Determined object  is used only for conceptual consciousness. 
Note: Determined object  & object of engagement  refer to the object that a 
consciousness is actually getting at and understand ing. 
 
3. Appearing 
Objects   
(nang yül) 
 
 Appearing object  refers to the object which is actually appearing t o the 
consciousness (both conceptual and non-conceptual) and not necessarily to 
what it is comprehending. 
E.g. eye consciousness is apprehending a book, appe aring object is book 
E.g. conceptual consciousness apprehending book, ap pearing object is the 
meaning generality of book. 
 
 
2. Object 
possessors   
 
Definition :  
A thing that 
possesses its 
respective object 1. persons  A being imputed in dependence upon any  of its five aggregates. 
Self, I, person, and being are synonymous 
2. awarenesses A knower. 
Consciousness: that which is clear and knowing. 
Awareness, knower, and consciousness are synonymous . 
3. expressive 
sounds An object of hearing that causes the understanding of its own object of 
expression through the force of nomenclature. 
Divisions : 1. Names    2. Phrases    3. Letters  
Terminologies for other object  
Apprehended object  (zung.yul) is what is actually apprehended by the consciousness. It is mutually 
inclusive with appearing object  
E.g. An eye consciousness is perceiving a book , th e book is the apprehended object. 
Object of the mode of apprehension  (dzin.tang.kyi.yul): the object that is understood by the cognition 
Lorig   Revision Note - Awareness  6 / 39  
 
Object of observation  (migs.yul): the object that is observed. 
Example of conceptual consciousness: Thought thinki ng about rose 
Object of engagement    = rose 
Determined object     = rose 
Object of the mode of apprehension = rose 
Appearing object   = mental image of rose 
Apprehended object  = mental image of rose 
Mental image of rose  is also called meaning generality  and is a 
permanent phenomenon that does not disintegrate mom ent by 
moment. It is a negative phenomenon. 
Object of engagement  & determined object  of thought are the 
actual object  the consciousness understand  = rose 
 
Example of direct perceiver: Eye consciousness appr ehending 
rose:  
Object of engagement   = rose 
Object of the mode of apprehension  = rose 
Appearing object    = rose 
Apprehended object    = rose 
The object ‘rose’ appears to the direct perceiver a nd is 
what it realizes. 
 
From the above example, you can see that: 
For direct perceivers : 
– appearing object, apprehended object, and 
functioning thing are mutually inclusive  
– object of engagement and object of the mode of 
apprehension are mutually inclusive  
For conceptual consciousnesses : 
– appearing object, apprehended object, and 
permanent phenomenon are mutually inclusive  
– determined object, object of engagement, and the object of the mode of apprehension are mutually 
inclusive  
For the eye consciousness apprehending rose is a direct perceiver  
- Rose is the object of observation   
- Appearing object & apprehended object (that are mut ually inclusive) is rose which is a functioning 
thing  
- Object of engagement & object of the mode of appreh ension (which are mutually inclusive) is rose 
For thought thinking about rose is a conceptual consciousness : 
- Rose is the object of observation 
- Appearing object & apprehended object (that are mut ually inclusive) is mental image of rose  which 
is permanent  
- Determined object, object of engagement, & the obje ct of the mode of apprehension (that are 
mutually inclusive) is rose  
So you can see that once you understand the concept , you just need to remember few things. 
 Object possessor  Object of engagement  Appearing object  Determined object  
Eye consciousness apprehending blue Blue Blue None 
Conception of pen Pen Mental image of pen Pen  
Thought consciousness remembering a movie Movie Men tal image of movie movie 
Conception apprehending ‘permanent’ sound Permanent  sound Mental image of 
permanent sound Permanent sound 
 
 
Lorig   Revision Note - Awareness  7 / 39  
 
Twofold divisions of Awareness 
One can look at consciousness in term of: 
1.  Conceptual consciousness  
2.  Non-conceptual consciousness  
 Conceptual consciousness Non-conceptual consciousness 
 Definition: A determinative knower  that 
apprehends a sound generality and a 
meaning generality as suitable to be mixed.  Definition: A knower which is free from 
being a determinative knower  that 
apprehends a sound generality and a meaning 
generality as suitable to be mixed. *1  
 Also known as: 
- a conventional mind  
- a mistaken consciousness 
- an obscuring consciousness    
- a false consciousness Non-conceptual consciousness has two 
divisions: 
1. Non-conceptual non-mistaken 
consciousness  which take a specifically 
characterized phenomenon as their 
apprehended object. E.g. direct perceiver 
2. Non-conceptual mistaken consciousness  
which takes a clearly appearing non-existent  as 
its apprehended object. It has clear appearance 
because it perceives its object without relying 
on an image but what appears is a non-existent 
rather than a SCP.  
E.g. an eye consciousness see blue snow 
mountain but blue snow mountains as its 
appearing object which is non-existent. 
How the 
consciousness sees 
the object? Mental image  of the object 
Conceptual consciousnesses get at their 
objects by means of a mental image Actual object  
Non-conceptual consciousnesses realizes its 
object nakedly and directly 
The way the 
consciousness 
apprehends its 
object As eliminative engager  
Eliminative engager  engages its object in 
an eliminative way  i.e. it eliminates 
whatever is not the object in order to arrive 
at the object itself. 
Example : Conceptual consciousness 
apprehending blue sees a mental image of 
blue, which is the opposite from non-blue.  
 As collective engager  
Collective engager  engages its object in a 
collective manner  i.e. engages all the 
characteristics of the object without 
eliminating anything. Its object appears to it 
with all of its uncommon characteristics. 
Example : Eye consciousness apprehending 
blue, blue appear with all of its uncommon 
characteristics such as its impermanence and 
so forth. (An ordinary being is unable to 
realize everything about blue that is appearing 
to it. Only yogic direct perceiver can ascertain 
all the characteristics of blue) 
 A conceptual consciousness:  
-is not a conventional truth  because a 
conventional truth is mutually inclusive 
with a permanent phenomenon.   
- is necessarily mistaken consciousness  
because it is mistaken with the appearing 
object  
- is obscured from seeing the actual object 
directly and it can only see the object 
through a meaning generality (mental 
image)  of the object. The mental image of 
the object is mixed with the actual object  
and appears as one, the actual object but it 
is not the actual object 
-appearing object is generally 
characterized phenomenon A Direct perceiver: 
- is a non-conceptual non-mistaken  
consciousness  
- is an ultimate mind 
-is non-mistaken consciousness because it is 
not mistaken with the appearing object  
- realizes its object nakedly and directly  i.e. 
sees phenomena the way they appear accords 
with the way they exist without a mental image 
- appearing object is necessarily a specifically 
characterized phenomenon  
 
Lorig   Revision Note - Awareness  8 / 39  
 
*1: The sound and meaning generalities  which a determinative knower apprehends as suitabl e to be mixed can 
be explained in two ways.  
1st  explanation :  
/head2right Sound generality  – if someone describes an object that you have nev er seen, such as an ocean, the image that 
appears to your mind based on the description is a sound generality . 
/head2right Meaning generality  - When you see an ocean for the first time, withou t having been told beforehand what it 
is, the image appearing to your mind is just a meaning generality . 
/head2right Later when someone tells you, ‘This is an ocean’, t he sound and meaning generalities then appear to yo ur 
mind as if associated – that is to say mixed. 
2nd explanation 
/head2right Sound generality  – if someone says the word ‘ ocean ’ to you without your knowing its meaning , the image 
generated at that time is a sound generality , a mere reverberation of the sound ‘ ocean ’.” 
/head2right Meaning generality  –“when someone says the word ‘ ocean ’ and you know its meaning , the image that 
appears to your mind is a meaning generality . Although not the actual object, the image appears  to be that 
object. 
The reason that the definition specifies that sound  and meaning generalities are apprehended as suitab le to be 
mixed is that it is possible to have a thought cons ciousness apprehending only a sound generality, one  
apprehending only a meaning generality, or one appr ehending the two as if mixed 
Example: Conceptual consciousness apprehending blue  
-Does blue appear to the conceptual consciousness a pprehending blue? Yes it appears but blue is not it s appearing 
object.  
-Why is blue not the appearing object  of a conceptual consciousness apprehending blue al though blue appears to 
it? To a conceptual consciousness apprehending blue , the actual object blue does not appear with all i ts complete 
characteristics to the conceptual consciousness app rehending blue. This is because SCP can only cast a n aspect of 
itself fully with all its characteristics only to a  direct perceiver, not to a conceptual consciousnes s.  
-Why do we say blue appears  to that conceptual consciousness apprehending blue ? Because the conceptual 
consciousness apprehending blue explicitly realizes  blue. The conceptual consciousness apprehending bl ue can 
only explicitly realize blue through blue appearing  to it 
Generally Characterized Phenomenon and Specifically  Characterized Phenomenon 
What is their distinction? It depends on whether or  not the phenomena must be understood by a thought 
consciousness. 
Generally characterized phenomena  (GCP) Specifically characterized phenomena (SCP) 
Definition : - are phenomena which are merely 
imputed by a term or thought consciousness  
and are not established as a SCP.  Definition  -are phenomena that are established by way of 
its own character without being merely imputed by a 
term or thought consciousness. 
- must be realized by thought consciousness by 
depending on a mental image .  
GCP characters are known only in a general 
way by an imputing thought consciousness . 
Since they depend on such imputation, they are 
not established from their own side.   
- are mutually inclusive with permanent 
phenomena  
 - are phenomena that are established exist by way o f their 
own character  without  depending on the appearance of a 
meaning generality  (i.e. a mental image as the medium)  
-mutually inclusive with impermanent phenomena   
-must be realized by direct perceiver .  
When SCP appears to the direct perceiver, everythin g 
about that object, all its characteristics appears to the 
direct perceiver apprehending it; a thing with resp ect to 
which place, time and nature are not mixed. 
E.g. The image of pot  that appears to thought 
consciousness is general in that it serves to repre sent 
all pots at different times in different places 
 E.g. A specifically characterized pot  is unique - of a 
certain size, shape, color, in a certain place, at a certain 
time. Furthermore, all the uncommon characteristics  such 
as shape, color, impermanence, etc. of a pot appear  to the 
direct perceiver that apprehends it. An ordinary di rect 
perceiver is unable to notice all of these, but yog ic direct 
perceiver can see and ascertain them. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Lorig   Revision Note - Awareness  9 / 39  
 
Threefold divisions of Awareness 
1.  Person 
2.  Awareness  
3.  Expressive sound 
A person  is a being imputed in dependence 
upon any of its five aggregates. 
Self , I, person , being  are mutually inclusive  
Illustration: A being who possesses a basis of 
one of the three realms.  
Why is a person not a being imputed in dependence u pon the five aggregates? 
For beings of the formless realm, you cannot posit a form aggregate because in the formless realms, th ere is no 
form. Therefore a person of a formless realm can on ly be a being that is imputed in dependence upon th e 
remaining four aggregates. 
To understand the concept well, you have to memoriz e the divisions and its definition!!!  
 Division of awareness Divisions  Definitions Awareness 1. Valid Cognizers   
Definition :  
A new incontrovertible 
knower 1. Direct valid cognizers   A new incontrovertible knower that is free of conce ptuality 
2. Inferential valid 
cognizers A new incontrovertible determinative knower  that is 
directly produced in dependence on a correct sign w hich is 
its basis. 
2. Non-valid  
Consciousnesses  
Definition :  
A knower that is not new 
and incontrovertible 1. Subsequent cognizers A knower that realizes what has already been realiz ed. 
2. Correctly assuming 
consciousnesses A factually concordant determinative  knower  that is 
controvertible with regard to determining its objec t. 
3. Awarenesses to which an 
object appears but is not 
ascertained A knower that is a common locus of: 
1.having clear appearance of the specifically chara cterized 
phenomenon that is its object of engagement and 
2.being unable to induce ascertainment with respect  to the 
specifically characterized phenomenon that is its o bject of 
engagement. 
4. Doubting 
consciousnesses A knower that has qualms two-pointedly by its own p ower. 
5. Wrong consciousnesses A knower that engages its object erroneously. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Awareness can be divided into  
1)  Valid cognizer 
2)  Non-valid awareness .  
A valid cognizer  is a new incontrovertible knower  
New refers to only the first moment  of a continuum of consciousness apprehending an ob ject.  
Eliminates that subsequent cognizers are valid cogn izers. 
Incontrovertible  means knows the object as it is. 
Eliminates that correctly assuming consciousnesses are valid cognizers. 
Knower eliminates that physical sense powers are valid cog nizers 
 
Lorig   Revision Note - Awareness  10 / 39  
 
There are two valid cognizer: 
1.  Direct valid cognizer  
2.  Inferential valid cognizer  
Free of conceptuality means it is necessarily a non -conceptual consciousness. Such consciousness deals  
with its object directly without making use of an i nternal image. 
Determinative knower means a cognition that is conc eptual in nature 
Non-mistaken means that there is no erroneous eleme nt involved in that which is appearing to the 
consciousness. 
We need to know the consciousnesses whether they ar e: 
- valid cognizers or non-valid awarenesses, 
- knowers who realize their object or knowers that do  not realize their objects 
- factually concordant consciousnesses or factually d iscordant consciousnesses 
- conceptual or non-conceptual consciousnesses  
- mistaken or non-mistaken consciousness  
Valid cognizer is a new incontrovertible knower  
Non-valid awareness  is a not  new and incontrovertible knower 
Knower that realizes  its object  is necessarily an awareness that knows and understands  its object 
Knower that do not realizes  its object  is an awareness that do not knows and understands  its object 
Factually concordant consciousnesses  is a knower that accords with the fact  (a consciousness that 
apprehends the object in the way the object exists in reality)  
Factually discordant consciousness  is a knower that does not accord with the fact  such as 
apprehending non-existent phenomena.  (a consciousness that apprehends the object in the  way the object does 
not exists in reality)  
Conceptual consciousnesses  get at their objects by means of a mental image  
Non-conceptual consciousnesses  get at their objects directly . 
Mistaken consciousness  is necessarily mistaken  with regard to its appearing object  
Non -mistaken consciousness  is necessarily not-mistaken  with regard to its appearing object  
You must memorize the definitions of the sevenfold consciousness before you can classify them.  
Sevenfold 
division of 
consciousness  Valid cognizer 
(VC) / Not 
valid cognizer 
(NVC) Knower that realizes 
its object (RZ )  / 
Knower that do not 
realizes its object 
(NRZ) Factually concordant 
consciousness (FC) / 
Factually discordant 
consciousness (FD) Conceptual 
consciousness 
(CC) / Non-
conceptual 
consciousness  
(NC) Mistaken 
consciousness (M) / 
Non-mistaken 
(NM) 
Direct valid 
cognizer  VC RZ 
 FC NC NM 
Inferential valid 
cognizer  VC RZ  FC  CC M 
Subsequent 
cognizer  NVC RZ  FC  CC / NC  NM / M 
Correctly 
assuming 
consciousness  NVC  NRZ FC  CC  M 
Awareness to 
which an object 
appears and is 
not ascertained  
 NVC  NRZ  ? NC  NM 
Doubting 
consciousness  NVC  NRZ  FD CC  M 
Wrong 
consciousness NVC  NRZ  FD CC / NC  M 
A.  How many possibilities are there between an infere ntial valid cognizer and a mistaken consciousness? 
1. A mind that is both an inferential valid cognizer and a mistaken c onsciousness  because an inferential valid 
cognizer is necessarily a mistaken consciousness.  
Illustration:  Eye consciousness that sees smoke an d the thought arises thinking that there is a fire.   
2. A mind that is a mistaken consciousness but is not an inferential co gnizer .  
Illustration: a doubting consciousness.  
3. A mind that is not an inferential valid cognizer  and is a non-mistaken consciousness.  
Illustration: a direct perceiver, eye consciousness , apprehending form.  
 
Lorig   Revision Note - Awareness  11 / 39  
 
B. How many possibilities are there between a correc tly assuming consciousness and a conceptual 
consciousness? 
1. There is a mind that is both a correctly assumin g consciousness and a conceptual consciousness beca use a 
correctly assuming consciousness is necessarily a c onceptual consciousness.   
2. There is a conceptual consciousness that is not necessarily a correctly assuming consciousness. 
Illustration: a doubting consciousness.   
3. There is a mind that is neither a conceptual con sciousness nor a correctly assuming consciousness.  
Illustration: a direct perceiver, an eye consciousn ess apprehending vase. 
 
Thought consciousness (conceptual thought) 
How does a conceptual consciousness and term (or ex pressive sound) engage their objects ?  
A conceptual consciousness and term engage their ob jects through the process of elimination  whereas a 
direct perceiver engages its object in a collective manner .   
Isolates 
• A functioning thing is mutually inclusive  with impermanent phenomena, product, composed 
phenomenon, ultimate truth, and so forth.  
• All these terms are of one  entity but of different isolates . 
• Isolates are permanent  and generally characterized phenomena  appear to thought consciousness 
in a general way and that appearance is imputed  by the thought 
consciousness. 
E.g. Product and impermanent phenomenon  
They are mutually inclusive  and thus are the same entity . 
They are same entity because they are different phe nomena such that: 
• whatever is product  is necessarily impermanent phenomenon  
• whatever is impermanent phenomenon   is necessarily product  
• one cannot find an impermanent phenomenon  which is not a 
product  
• one also cannot find a product  which is not an impermanent 
phenomenon  
However they are different isolates .  
Product is the isolate of product  
Impermanent phenomenon is the isolate of impermanent phenomenon . 
That product and impermanent phenomenon are differe nt isolates means that they are different for 
thought consciousness.  
A meaning generality of product  appears to the thought consciousness understanding  product  
A meaning generality of impermanent phenomenon  appears to the thought consciousness understanding  
impermanent phenomenon . 
Although product and impermanent phenomenon are mutually inclusive  and same entity , they are 
different isolates  and different for the thought consciousness . 
One basis with many isolates  
A product is mutually inclusive  with an impermanent phenomenon, a composed phenome non, an 
ultimate truth, and so forth.  
On the one  basis  of “product”, there can be many  isolates  such as: 
 -“opposite from non-impermanent phenomenon”, “oppo site from non-composed phenomenon”, 
“opposite from non-ultimate truth”, and so forth. 
The term “ opposite of non-product ” cannot express “ the opposite from non-impermanent phenomenon ”, 
therefore these two isolates that exist on the one basis are different. 
The isolate 'opposite from non-impermanent phenomenon ' is impermanent phenomenon.  
The isolate is 'opposite from non-composed phenomenon’ is  composed phenomenon.  
This shows that the isolates are different. 
What is the purpose of identifying isolates? 
The purpose is to indicate their distinctive ways o f realizing their respective objects. 
 
Lorig   Revision Note - Awareness  12 / 39  
 
How expressive sound/term engages its object? 
How does the term “product” engage in its object “p roduct”?  
The term “ product ” engages in its object “product” through eliminating everything else  that is “non-
product”.  
What is the opposite from non-product?  
The opposite from “ non-product ” is a product itself.  
E.g. whatever is opposite from non-pot  is pervaded by being pot 
So how thought consciousness engages its object? 
To the conceptual thought apprehending “product” th at is induced by the term “product”: 
1.  It engages “product” by eliminating everything else  that is “non-product”. What this conceptual 
thought realizes is “product”. 
2.  The opposite from “non-product ” also appears to it due to the term “product” appe ars as “product” 
So we can see that a conceptual thought  and term/expressive sound  engage its object in the same way.  
The term (expressive sound) expressing “product” ex presses 
(1) “product”  
(2)  that which is “opposite from non-product”,  
But it does not express that which is “ opposite from non-impermanent phenomenon .”  
Why?  
Even though product  and an impermanent phenomenon  are mutually inclusive, the term “ product ” can 
only express “ product ”. It does not express “ impermanent phenomenon ”. 
Since the term “ product ” does not express “ impermanent phenomenon ”, therefore it also cannot express 
the term “ opposite from non-impermanent phenomenon ”. 
Term “vase” and opposite from non-vase 
The term “vase” expresses: 
1.  vase  
2.  the opposite from non-vase 
Essentially the term ‘vase’ express vase through el iminating non-vase 
The basis of imputation of ‘vase’ is a flat-based b ulbous thing.  
What is the process of imputing the term ‘vase’ to the flat-based bulbous 
thing?  
The process of imputation of the term ' vase ' to the flat-based bulbous is through the appearance as 
‘opposite from non-vase” . 
The reasons why the convention “vase” is used is du e to the two appearances:  
(1) the appearance as a vase   
(2) the appearance as ‘opposite from non-vase’  
The appearance as “opposite from non-vase” to the c onceptual consciousness apprehending a vase has 
two parts:  
1.  A specifically characterized vase , which is an impermanent phenomenon 
2.  A meaning generality of vase ; which is a permanent phenomenon 
To the conceptual consciousness apprehending a vase , the appearance as “opposite from non-vase”  is 
the generality of vase .  
What is the relationship between the implicit reali zation of the opposite of non-vase  and the appearing 
object  of the conceptual consciousness apprehending vase that is a meaning generality? 
Example: The conceptual consciousness apprehending vase: 
• Explicitly realizes vase  
• Implicitly realizes opposite from non-vase .  
-All that appears to a conceptual consciousness app rehending vase is not its appearing object. 
• The appearing object  is posited to be the meaning generality of vase.  
• The vase appears to the conceptual consciousness ap prehending vase, but the vase is not its 
appearing object. Whatever appears to a conceptual consciousness apprehending vase is not 
necessarily its appearing object.  
The appearance of opposite from non-vase is an impu ted factor; it is imputed by thought.  
But whatever is an appearance that is opposite from  non-vase is not necessarily an imputed factor.   
Lorig   Revision Note - Awareness  13 / 39  
 
Generalities and Instances 
When we say ‘vase’, ‘vase’ is a generality . 
When we say ‘golden vase’, a golden vase is an instance  of a vase as it refers to a specific  vase. 
Since ‘vase’ is a generality, ‘ the opposite from non-vase ’ is also a generality. Even though it is a 
generality, it is necessarily a functioning thing . 
(Remember the definition of functioning thing?  That which is able to perform a function) 
“Vase ” expresses ‘ the opposite from non-vase’  is a generality. They pervade golden vase, copper vase, 
diamond vase and so forth.  
Likewise, on every single instance of vase, the generality of vase , the appearance as ‘ opposite from non-
vas e' and the 'opposite from non-vase'  pervade the vase. 
• When you first see a golden flat-based bulbous thing , you may not have any idea what it is. 
• Then someone tells you, “ This is a vase .”  
• At that moment when you hear the term “vase,” it in duces in you a thought apprehending that golden 
flat-based bulbous thing  as a vase.  
How did that imputation of a vase arise in relation  to that golden flat-based bulbous thing?   
With that vase generality  as the object, the imputation of ‘vase’ to that golden flat- based bulbous thing  
is through the appearance as ‘opposite from non-vase’ .  
• Later on when you see a copper flat-based bulbous t hing, immediately the thought thinking, “This is 
a vase” arises automatically without the need to be  told by someone again that this is a vase. 
Why you are able to do so without being told again that is a vase? 
The innate ability to label the term 'vase' to the second vase, even though it is made of copper inste ad of 
gold, is due to recognizing the 'generality of vase' . 
Conclusion: The term “vase” expresses vase. It also  expresses “the opposite from non-vase”, which is 
the generality of vase . This vase generality  exists on the copper vase. That is the reason why when you 
see the copper flat-based bulbous thing , you will be able to immediately conceive of it as  a vase. 
Is opposite from non-vase a vase generality?  
Yes, opposite from non-vase is a vase generality.  
Vase generality is different from the meaning gener ality of vase. The meaning generality of vase has t o 
be an appearance of opposite from non-vase and also  has to be a imputed factor, i.e., a factor imputed  by 
thought. 
Is vase generality permanent or impermanent? 
A vase generality is permanent because it is also a n imputation by thought.  
In general, generalities and instances are imputed by thought. But whatever is a vase generality is no t 
necessarily permanent. For example, something that is a vase generality but is not permanent is 
“opposite from non-vase,” i.e., vase, which is impe rmanent. So whatever is a vase generality is not 
permanent, but a vase generality itself is permanen t. 
Generalities Instances 
Generality : a phenomenon that encompasses its 
manifestation 
A generality  must be an existent, and it may be 
either a permanent or an impermanent 
phenomenon. 
Example: A pot is a generality of clay pot, golden 
pot, etc. 
Illustration : Object of knowledge, which pervades 
horse  
However, horse itself can also be a generality, as 
there can be instances of white horse, black horse 
etc. 
Note:  Generality and meaning generality are 
different. 
 
 Instance : a phenomenon which has a type 
engaging it as a pervade 
 
Example: Functioning thing is an instance of 
object of knowledge. Object of knowledge 
pervades functioning thing 
 
Illustration : Horse is an instance of object of 
knowledge 
The three necessary criteria of something being an 
instance of a generality: 
1)  Horse has to be an instance of an object of 
knowledge (an instance of its generality) 
2)  Horse has to be one entity with object of 
knowledge (one nature with its generality) 
3)  Able to posit another phenomenon which is 
Lorig   Revision Note - Awareness  14 / 39  
 
 
 non-horse but is an object of knowledge 
(another type of instance belonging to the 
same generality) 
 
Difference between Buddhist and non-Buddhist  on term and conceptual consciousness   
The term (or expressive sound) and conceptual consc iousnesses are: 
- eliminative engagers  for Buddhist 
- collective engagers for some non-Buddhist 
Accordingly to Buddhist epistemology and the texts on valid cognition, what allows you to understand 
something that is similar to what you have seen or known earlier is due to the generality existing on all 
instances of that object;  such as innately understand the copper flat-based bulbous thing  as vase after 
having seen a golden vase. 
Appearance of opposite from non-vase appear to a co nceptual consciousness apprehending a vase  
The two factors appear to a conceptual consciousnes s:  
1.  the factor of 'opposite from non-vase'  existing on a golden vase 
2.  the factor of 'opposite from non-vase'  existing on a copper vase 
Both appear as if they were the same and you see th em as vase. 
• To a conceptual consciousness apprehending a vase, there is the appearance of ‘opposite from non-
vase ’. This appearance of ‘opposite from non-vase’  appears as if it is the actual vase but it is not a 
vase.  
• This is because, to a conceptual consciousness appr ehending vase, the appearance as 'opposite from 
non-vase'  is necessarily a permanent phenomenon . It is permanent because it is an imputed factor . 
• However, to a conceptual consciousness apprehending  vase, whatever is an appearance as ‘opposite 
from non-vase'  is not necessarily permanent. Why? 
• To the conceptual consciousness apprehending vase, there is the appearance of ‘ opposite from non-
vase ’ which has two parts: 
1.  An appearance as  ‘opposite from non-vase'  that is a SCP, which is the vase itself  
2.  An appearance as  ‘opposite from non-vase ' that is a GCP that is an imputed factor , which is the 
meaning generality of vase . 
How does a vase appear to a conceptual consciousnes s apprehending a vase? 
The way ‘vase’ appears to a conceptual consciousnes s apprehending vase is that: 
The meaning generality of vase  [which is the appearance as  ‘opposite from non-vase ' that is 
GCP and is necessarily permanent] to be one mixed with 'vase'  [which is an appearance as 
‘opposite from non-vase ' that is a SCP]. 
A conceptual consciousness is a mistaken consciousn ess. Why? 
The conceptual consciousness apprehending 'vase' is  a mistaken consciousness  because the appearance 
of ‘opposite from non-vase ’ appears as the actual vase but it is NOT the actu al vase. 
That is to say that conceptual consciousness is mis taken with respect to: 
The appearance as ‘opposite from non-vase’  that is a meaning generality of vase  from the 
appearance as ‘opposite from non-vase’  that is a specifically characterized vase . 
To this conception, although the appearance as ‘opposite from non-vase'  [that is a meaning generality] 
appears as the actual vase, but it does not believe  in this appearance of ‘opposite from non-vase’  as the 
actual vase. It knows that this is not the actual v ase. 
Object of engagement, the object of mode of apprehe nsion, and the determined object for the 
conceptual consciousness  
What does the conceptual consciousness apprehending  'vase' realizes ? 
It realizes 'vase', it does not realize 'vase gener ality'. 
This is because, what this 'conceptual consciousnes s apprehending vase' is getting at is 'vase' itself . 
Therefore, the object of engagement , the object of mode of apprehension , and the determined object  
is vase .   
How does a conceptual consciousness apprehending a vase?   
Conceptual consciousness can only apprehend vase by  way of the appearance of ‘opposite from non-
vase’ . This is because to a conceptual consciousness app rehending a vase: 
Lorig   Revision Note - Awareness  15 / 39  
 
1.  the 'actual vase' appears as one mixed with the appearance as ‘opposite from non-vase' . 
2.  the appearance as ‘opposite from non-vase'  appears as if it was the actual vase 
Therefore, the appearing object  (apprehended object ) of this conceptual consciousness apprehending 
'vase' is the meaning generality of vase , the appearance as ‘opposite from non-vase’  to be the actual 
vase. 
A conceptual consciousness apprehending vase is a mistaken consciousness , because the appearance 
as ‘opposite from non-vase ' appears as 'vase' 
Likewise, for an eye consciousness apprehending a reflection of your face in the mirror , this reflection 
of your face appears to this eye consciousness as i f it is 'your actual face'  but it is not your face. 
Even though this reflection of your face in the mirror  is not 'your actual face', nevertheless it appears  as 
if it is your actual face, and you would not normal ly believe that reflection of your face in the mirror is 
your actual face. 
Every thought consciousness is mistaken  with respect to its appearing object. 
What is the appearing object of a conceptual consci ousness apprehending vase?  
The appearing object  is the appearance ‘appearing as vase’ . While the appearance ‘appearing as vase’ 
is not the actual vase, it appears as the actual va se.  
The conceptual consciousness apprehending vase is not able to realize  its appearing object (the 
appearance ‘appearing as vase’) is not the actual v ase.  
Therefore the conceptual consciousness is mistaken with regards to its appearing object. 
What is the appearing object of a conceptual consci ousness apprehending vase?  
The appearing object is the meaning generality (or mental image) of vase.  
While the meaning generality of vase is not vase, i t appears as vase.  
That being the case, it is mistaken with regard to its appearing object 
A meaning generality: 
- is necessarily a permanent phenomenon  in that it does not disintegrate moment by moment  
- is an image which, although it appears to be the actual object being understood, merely serves as 
an elimination of what is not that object . 
Generally characterized phenomenon  are phenomena which are merely imputed by a term or thought 
consciousness  and are not established as a SCP.  
Permanent phenomenon  is necessarily GCP because their characters are kn own only in a general 
way by an imputing thought consciousness. Since the y depend on such imputation, they are not 
established from their own side. There is no way to  realize a permanent or GCP by way of its own 
specific entity. 
 
Sevenfold Consciousness on Eye Consciousness Appreh ending a Shadow  
For an eye consciousness apprehending a shadow, it is valid with respect to its appearing object , the 
shadow. This is because shadow exists in the way it  appears. This eye consciousness apprehending 
shadow realizes and knows that it is a shadow and i s a direct valid cognizer .  
At this time the eye consciousness only understand it is a shadow but does not understand it is the 
shadow of a bird.   
It is valid  with respect to the shadow that is appearing  to it but this consciousness is not a valid cognizer  
with respect to the, for example, the shadow of the bird . 
At the same time, while the eye consciousness appre hending the shadow is operating, a thought 
wondering about the nature of the shadow; “Is it a shadow of a leaf or of a bird?”  
This is two-pointed doubting consciousness  that is unsure of exactly what kind of shadow it i s. At this 
moment it has not realized the shadow is the shadow  of the bird; or else the consciousness would not 
have any doubt.  
There are two different consciousnesses operating a t the same time when the eye consciousness sees the 
shadow  and also wondering the kind of shadow : 
/head2right Valid mind - eye consciousness apprehending the sha dow as it is 
/head2right Non-valid mind - doubt wondering what kind of shado w it is 
After some thinking, you arrived at the conclusion;  “That is definitely the shadow of a bird because i ts 
shape looks like a shadow of a bird. Therefore it m ust be the shadow of a bird.”   
The doubt you had earlier is now transformed into a  correct assumption  (correctly assuming 
consciousness ). In reality it is true that it is a shadow of a b ird and you have concluded correctly that it 
is a shadow of a bird. Nevertheless this conclusion  is a mere assumption as it has not yet realized it  is a 
Lorig   Revision Note - Awareness  16 / 39  
 
shadow of the bird. So it is not a valid cognition  of this object being the shadow of a bird.  
You can make a correct assumption that accords with  reality and you can also make assumptions with 
various incorrect reasons. A correctly assuming consciousness  is a mind that arrives at a decisive 
conclusion that accords with the reality of that ob ject but that conclusion may not necessarily reache d 
with a correct reason. Therefore, a correctly assum ing consciousness is a factually concordant 
determinative knower  that is controvertible with regard to determining its object.  
It is possible for the correctly assuming conscious ness to be transformed into a valid cognizer . 
Subsequently when you look up, you can see a bird a nd there is the shadow of that bird on the ground. 
Based on this, you are now very sure that the shado w is the shadow of the bird. Your eye consciousness  
is apprehending the shadow of a bird and, in your m ind you know that it is the shadow of a bird. 
After you have generated the valid cognition  realizing that the shadow is the shadow of a bird,  from the 
second moment of that valid cognition  onwards, when you remember the shadow of the bird,  the second 
moment of that valid cognition is a subsequent cognizer - a knower that realizes what has already been 
realized. 
Another scenario is that, while it is a shadow of a  bird, you apprehend it to be a shadow of a leaf. T he 
mind that apprehends the shadow of a leaf is a wrong consciousness  because the principal object of that 
mind is the shadow of a leaf, which makes this cons ciousness engage its object erroneously . 
The sequence of an eye consciousness apprehending b lue 
An eye consciousness apprehending blue is: 
/head2right a direct perceiver;  
/head2right a sense consciousness 
/head2right a valid cognizer 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
[The shortest moment of time: the duration of a fing er snap is divided into 65 parts, 1/65 of a finger snap ] 
1.  An eye consciousness, sense direct perceiver,  apprehending blue is generated and then cease.  
2.  Immediately in the next moment, a mental direct perceiver  apprehending blue is generated in 
dependence upon its uncommon empowering condition mental sense power  (which is the last 
moment  of the SDP apprehending blue that is immediately p recede the generation of the MDP) 
In the continuum of ordinary beings, this MDP lasts  only for the shortest moment of time, which is 
too brief for ordinary beings to realize blue. So f or ordinary beings this MDP is AAA  because this 
MDP apprehends blue but does not realize blue. 
3.  Upon ceasing of MDP, a conceptual consciousness  apprehending blue is generated. This 
conceptual consciousness apprehending blue that ind uces an ascertainment of blue and realize blue.  
This thought thinking of blue realizes blue but it can only realize blue through the medium of the 
meaning generality (or mental image) of blue .  
• Due to the prior realization of form by the sense d irect perceiver apprehending form, the conceptual 
consciousness apprehending form is able to induce the ascertainment  of form.  
• Because the mental direct perceiver apprehending fo rm in the continua of ordinary beings lasts for 
only the shortest moment of time, that mental direc t perceiver apprehending form does not realize 
form, i.e., it is unable to induce an ascertainment  of form.  
• Here it is essentially the eye consciousness appreh ending blue which is that which induces the 
conceptual subsequent cognizer to apprehend blue. N ote: that which induces the conceptual 
subsequent cognizer need not be the mental direct p erceiver apprehending blue.  
• A subsequent cognizer is a knower that realizes wha t has been realized. Therefore, it has to be 
induced by a valid cognizer. Sense direct 
perceiver 
apprehending 
blue realizes 
blue Mental direct perceiver 
apprehending blue arises. Blue is 
not realized in the continuum of 
ordinary beings because the MDP 
apprehending blue lasts for the 
shortest moment of time in the 
continuum of ordinary beings. Too 
brief to realize blue 
  Conceptual 
consciousness 
apprehending 
blue realizes 
blue 
 
Lorig   Revision Note - Awareness  17 / 39  
 
Why a dream consciousness that clearly sees elephan t in the dream is a mental non-conceptual 
wrong consciousness?  
To a dream consciousness to which a dream elephant appears:-  
- it is a mental consciousness  
- it is a non-conceptual consciousness     
- it apprehends dream elephant, which is a phenomenon form source  
(Note that: phenomenon form source is a subtle form  and an object of mental consciousness. Form is the  
object of eye consciousness) 
- it is a wrong consciousness  because is a knower that engages its object errone ously. It is engaging a 
dream elephant and takes the dream elephant to be a  real elephant, but a dream elephant is not an 
elephant.  
The reason why a dream consciousness is non-concept ual is that, when one falls asleep, all the coarse 
sense consciousnesses are withdrawn and only a subt le consciousness remains, and there are no 
conceptual subtle consciousnesses.  
Why an inferential valid cognizer is a mistaken con sciousness and not a wrong consciousness? 
• A wrong consciousness is a knower that engages its object erroneously. 
• A mistaken consciousness is a knower that is mistak en with regard to its appearing object. 
• A mistaken consciousness is not necessarily a wrong  consciousness, but a wrong consciousness is 
necessarily a mistaken consciousness.  
An inferential valid cognizer realizing  vase is:  
−− −− a newly incontrovertible determinative knower  that is directly produced in dependence on a 
correct sign  that is its basis.  
−− −− incontrovertible  with respect to its principal object which is vase  (because it realizes vase).  
−− −− a valid cognizer and it is newly incontrovertible  with respect to vase  
−− −− necessarily  not a wrong consciousness  because a valid cognizer never engages its object 
erroneously. Also a valid cognizer and a wrong cons ciousness are mutually exclusive  
−− −− a mistaken consciousness  because is a knower that is mistaken with regard to its appearing object .  
The appearing object of a conceptual consciousness is the meaning generality of vase and not the actua l 
vase. This meaning generality is a factor that is i mputed by thought, therefore it is necessarily perm anent 
Presentation of Mind and the Twelve Links of Depend ent Arising  
In the twelve links of dependent-arising , the four projected results  are the following four links: 
1.  name and form 
2.  six sources 
3.  contact  
4.  feeling 
-The link of name and form  refer to the five contaminated aggregates  that are projected by karma and 
the afflictions.  
The five contaminated appropriated aggregates are: 
1.  Aggregate of form 
2.  Aggregate of feeling 
3.  Aggregate of discrimination 
4.  Aggregate of compositional factor 
5.  Aggregate of consciousness 
-The link of the six sources  refer to the time when the six sense powers  are established up to but before 
the generation of the respective consciousnesses th at depend on them. 
-The link of contact  refers to the moment when the following  three conditions meet : 
1.  The object 
2.  The sense power 
3.  The consciousness 
-The link of feeling  arise upon the meeting of the three conditions.  
Feeling is the result that arises from contact, wit hout which, the link of feeling cannot arise. 
-Just as how the link of contact  is posited to come about, example, to generate an eye consciousness 
apprehending vase, the three conditions must come t ogether: 
1.  The vase 
Lorig   Revision Note - Awareness  18 / 39  
 
2.  The eye sense power 
3.  The consciousness 
-Earlier, we have studied that the production of a sense consciousness  is due to the three conditions. 
Example: An eye consciousness apprehending vase is produced in dependence on the  three conditions : 
1.  The observed object condition:   the vase 
2.  The uncommon empowering condition:  the eye sense p ower 
3.  The immediately preceding condition:  a consciousne ss 
-You can posit a cause and effect relationship here . In dependence on the causes , the three conditions, 
leads to the effect, an eye consciousness apprehend ing vase is produced.   
- the vase  can be posited as a cause  of the eye consciousness apprehending vase 
- the consciousness  apprehending vase is the result  of its observed object condition, the vase 
-With the exception of the Vaibhashika (GES), Sutra  School and the tenets above it accept that cause 
and effect are sequential , i.e. cause and effect cannot occur simultaneously .  
-As cause and effect are  sequential , so cause has to precede  effect. The vase is the cause  of the eye 
consciousness apprehending vase, so the vase has to precede  the eye consciousness apprehending vase. 
- So in dependence on the vase as its observed obje ct condition, the eye consciousness apprehending 
vase is generated into the aspect of vase . 
-The GES actually assert that the eye consciousness  apprehending vase functions as if like a hand 
holding the vase. For them, both physical sense pow er (the eye sense power) and consciousness (eye 
consciousness) do know its object and realize its o bject. But these are not the assertions of the Sutr a 
School and the tenets above it.  
-Based on our ordinary experience, when we see some thing, we don’t feel that there is sequence of 
events. When we look at a vase, we feel that the ey e consciousness apprehending vase and the vase 
seem to exist simultaneously, but in reality, this is not the case.   
-This is not what the Sutra School and the tenets a bove it assert because there has to be a sequence t o 
cause and effect.  This being the case, cause and e ffect cannot be simultaneous.   
Khen Rinpoche positing a thesis 
-Positing a thesis that relates  the generation of the eye consciousness apprehendi ng vase to the link 
of contact in the twelve links of dependent-arising 
-An eye consciousness apprehending vase is generate d when the three conditions meet : 
1.  The object  - vase 
2.  The sense power - eye sense power 
3.  The consciousness - consciousness  
-The eye consciousness apprehending vase is produce d after the gathering  of the three conditions. 
-But there is a problem of saying that only after the gathering of the three conditions then there is the 
production of the eye consciousness apprehending va se.  
-When this eye consciousness apprehending vase is p roduced, the vase that existed earlier through 
meeting with the eye sense power and consciousness,  would have ceased to exist at this moment, since 
the vase is a momentary phenomenon. 
-How then are you going to explain the production of  an eye consciousness apprehending vase when the 
vase has already ceased to exist?  
-Sutra School and the tenets above it assert that consciousnesses are  aspected , but the GES asserts that 
consciousnesses are  non-aspected . 
• At the moment when the three conditions (vase, eye sense power, and consciousness) meet, the 
consciousness that is in the entity of clear and kn owing is generated into the aspect of vase . This 
consciousness has the aspect of the apprehended . 
• At this time, there is no eye consciousness apprehe nding vase because cause has to precede effect. 
• In the next moment, this consciousness then transfo rms into the entity of the eye consciousness 
apprehending vase. Only then does the eye conscious ness realize vase.  
Analogy: Is like placing a vase in front of a mirro r. The vase is reflected in the mirror. Likewise, w hen 
you bring the vase to the attention of the mind, th e vase is reflected on the mind; that means the 
consciousness is generated into the aspect of the vase .  
-By explaining in this way, then there is no proble m in saying that when the eye consciousness 
apprehending vase is generated, the vase (the obser ved object condition) has already ceased to exist 
because cause precedes effect.  
Lorig   Revision Note - Awareness  19 / 39  
 
-At the time when the three things come together, t he consciousness is generated into the aspect of vase . 
In the next moment, this then transforms into the e ntity of the eye consciousness apprehending vase. 
- So using the example of a vase and the eye consci ousness apprehending vase, it is asserted that 
something comes between these two things.  That som ething is asserted to be the aspect. 
-The link of contact  is posited to be the moment of the gathering of th e three things. 
-Only after that comes the link of feeling .  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Direct perceiver 
Definition of a direct perceiver : is a knower that is free from conceptuality  and is non-mistaken .  
(Knower that is free from conceptuality  means a non-conceptual consciousness) 
Comparison between Direct perceiver & Direct valid cognizer  
Definition of a direct valid cognizer : a new incontrovertible knower that is free from con ceptuality. 
From the definition,  
-Both direct perceiver and direct valid cognizer ar e similar  for: 
- being a non-conceptual consciousness  and non-mistaken . 
-Direct perceiver  need not necessarily be new and incontrovertible k nower 
-Direct valid cognizer  is necessarily to be new and incontrovertible know er 
/head2right If it is a direct valid cognizer, it is necessarily  a direct perceiver 
/head2right If it is a direct perceiver, it is not necessarily a direct valid cognizer. 
Direct perceiver  has four divisions: 
1.  Sense direct perceiver 
2.  Mental direct perceiver 
3.  Self-knowing direct perceiver 
4.  Yogic direct perceiver  
Sense direct perceiver 
Definition of a sense direct perceiver  is: 
1) that which is produced in dependence on its own uncommon empowering condition, a physical sense 
power, and 
2) a knower that is free from conceptuality  and non-mistaken . 
What determines whether a mind is a sense direct perceiver ?  
Its uncommon empowering condition  is the determining factors that make a consciousne ss a sense direct 
perceiver; which is the physical sense power .  
Likewise, it is the uncommon empowering condition t hat determines whether a consciousness is a 
mental direct perceiver or the yogic direct perceiv er.  
 
 
Lorig   Revision Note - Awareness  20 / 39  
 
Types of direct perceiver Uncommon empowering condition Definition 
Sense direct perceiver  Physical sense power is a k nower that is free from conceptuality and is 
non-mistaken 
Mental direct perceiver Mental sense power is a con sciousness that is an other-knower that is 
free from conceptuality and is non-mistaken 
Yogic direct perceiver Meditative stabilization tha t is a union 
of calm- abiding and special insight is an other-knowing exalted knower in the 
continuum of a Superior that is free from 
conceptuality and is non-mistaken. 
 
Three divisions of sense direct perceiver : 
1. Valid cognizers that are sense direct perceivers  
    Illustration: the first moment of a sense direc t perceiver apprehending a form. 
2. Subsequent cognizers that are sense direct perceive rs  
    Illustration:  the second moment of a sense dir ect perceiver apprehending a form. 
3. Awarenesses to which an object appears but is no t ascertained (AAA) that are sense direct 
perceivers  
Illustration: a sense direct perceiver apprehending  a form in the continuum of a person whose mind is 
especially attracted to a pleasant sound. 
Five divisions of sense direct perceivers 
Sense direct perceivers apprehending: 
1. forms 
2. sounds 
3. odors 
4. tastes 
5. tangible objects 
Sense consciousness Observed object 
condition Uncommon empowering condition Immediately 
preceding condition      
Eye consciousness  Visual Form Eye sense power any of the six 
consciousnesses in 
the  immediately 
preceding moment Ear consciousness  Sound Ear sense power  
Nose consciousness  Odor Nose sense power 
Tongue consciousness  Taste Tongue sense power 
Body consciousness  Tangible object Body sense powe r 
Mental consciousness  Physical form, subtle 
objects Mental sense power 
(=immediate preceding conditions) 
How are these five sense direct perceivers differen tiated?   
All five are produced in dependence upon a physical  sense power that is their uncommon empowering 
condition but the specific physical sense powers fo r these five types of direct perceivers are differe nt.  
• Example, a sense direct perceiver apprehending form  is a sense direct perceiver and its uncommon 
empowering condition is necessarily a physical sens e power which is the eye sense power .  
• The observed object condition is a visible form. 
• Sense direct perceiver has to be a knower that is f ree from conceptuality and is non-mistaken. 
Lorig   Revision Note - Awareness  21 / 39  
 
When a consciousness has all these characteristics,  it is called a sense direct perceiver apprehending  
form. 
Why are there five sense direct perceivers?  
(1) They have different observed object conditions.   
(2) Although all their uncommon empowering conditio ns are physical sense powers, but are different for  
the respective sense consciousness. 
-When a direct perceiver engages its object, e.g., an eye consciousness apprehending vase, it engages the 
object in its totality. When we say that a collecti ve engager engages its object collectively or in to tality, 
it means everything about the vase appears to the e ye consciousness apprehending it which includes the  
impermanence of the vase. 
Mental Direct Perceiver 
Definition of a mental direct perceiver  is: 
1) that which is generated in dependence on a menta l sense power which is its own uncommon 
empowering condition and 
2) a consciousness that is an other-knower  which is free from conceptuality  and non-mistaken . 
-The sense power of the mental consciousness is not  physical and thus has no shape. 
-A former moment of any of the six consciousnesses acts as the sense power of a mental consciousness. 
Example: when one pays attention to a color, an eye  consciousness acts like a sense power in that it 
gives the mental consciousness the ability to perce ive a visible object. 
What determines a mental direct perceiver?  
A mental direct perceiver possesses the following f our characteristics: 
• It is produced in dependence on its own uncommon em powering condition, a mental sense power . 
• It is free from conceptuality , i.e., it is non-conceptual. 
• It is non-mistaken . 
• It is a consciousness that is an other-knower .  
Why ‘other-knower’ is specified in the definition o f a mental direct perceiver? 
In order to show that the self-knower experiencing a mental consciousness is a self-knower and not the  
mental consciousness, “other-knower” is included in  the definition of a mental direct perceiver. 
An other-knower is a consciousness that engages an object other than an internal consciousness. It is a 
consciousness directed outward. 
-Mental direct perceiver  has 
three divisions: 
1.  Valid cognizers  that are 
mental direct perceivers 
2.  Subsequent cognizers  that 
are mental direct perceivers 
3.  AAAs  that are mental direct 
perceivers 
Therefore, there are no mental 
direct perceivers that are: 
inferential valid cognizers, 
correctly assuming consciousnesses, doubting consci ousnesses & wrong consciousnesses. 
Self-knowing direct perceiver  
Definition of self-knower is: that which has the aspect of an apprehender , is free from conceptuality, 
and is non-mistaken. 
The Buddhist tenets that assert self-knowers 
-Tenet schools that assert self-knower: SS, MOS, AM WS 
-Tenet schools that do not assert self-knower: GES,  CMWS 
Lorig   Revision Note - Awareness  22 / 39  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-Why do some tenets assert self-knowers?   
-The reason for those who assert self-knowers is to  account for memory. Memory explains why we can 
remember things.  
-Example: An eye consciousness apprehending the obj ect blue. Later one is able to remember, “I saw 
blue.” The reason why one is able to remember havin g seen blue in the past is because there was a vali d 
cognizer that realized blue. One also remembers the  mind that saw blue.  
That memory conception consists of the memory of re membering: 
(1) the object, blue, and  
(2) the subject, the consciousness that experienced  blue.  
Therefore, when one thinks, “I remember seeing blue ,” one remembers both the object and the subject. 
-All the tenets including CMWS assert a memory.   
-The proponents of SS, MOS, and AMWS assert that there must be a self-knower , an experiencer of the 
eye consciousness apprehending blue at the time whe n the eye consciousness was apprehending blue.  
-Without this self-knower that experienced the eye consciousness apprehending blue at that time, you 
would not be able to remember the eye consciousness  that saw blue earlier. 
-The self-knower experiencing the eye consciousness  apprehending blue is of one collection with the 
eye consciousness apprehending blue.  
-The self-knower that experiences the eye conscious ness apprehending blue has the factor of clarity an d 
knowing.  
A self-knower  is: 
• that which has the aspect of an apprehender  
• is an experiencer of a consciousness   
• is of one collection with the consciousness that it  experiences   
• is a consciousness that is directed inwards  and not directed outwards 
• is neither a main mind nor a mental factor 
-How does a self-knower experience the consciousness  that comes along with it? 
Self-knower experiences that consciousness non-dual istically, i.e., through the subsidence of duality.   
When a self-knower experiences the consciousness th at is of one collection with it, it does not 
experience the consciousness with any sense of dual ity such as the experiencer is here and the 
experience is there. So there is no duality. 
-What verifies the existence of a valid cognizer? 
• What verifies an existent? A valid cognizer  verifies an existent. So a valid cognizer has to e xist. 
• Then what verifies the existence of a valid cognize r? It is the self-knower , the mind that exists in 
one collection  with the valid cognizer that it is experiencing. 
• The self-knower that verifies the existence of a va lid cognizer cannot be another valid cognizer that 
is of a different collection from the valid cognize r that it is verifying.  
• It would be a problem if you were to posit a separa te valid cognizer verifying the existence of a 
valid cognizer. This is because, if the 'verifying'  self-knower is of a separate collection from the 
valid cognizer it is experiencing and verifying, th en you would need another self-knower to verify 
this valid cognizer that verifies the self-knower t hat verifying the first valid cognizer. One would 
then incur the fallacy of infinite regression. 
Lorig   Revision Note - Awareness  23 / 39  
 
 
 
 
 
 
-Although self-knowers do not exist in reality, nev ertheless, those asserting self-knowers maintain th at 
one of the essential reasons to assert self-knowers  is to verify that valid cognizers  do exist ; which 
verifies the existence of phenomenon. 
Aspect of an apprehender & aspect of the apprehende d  
-A consciousness also has these two factors:  
• The factor of a consciousness that is just mere experience of itself  is having the  aspect of an 
apprehender .  
• The factor of a consciousness that experiences something other than consciousness itse lf  is the aspect 
of the apprehended  
-In the two-fold divisions of object and object pos sessor:  
-The apprehended  refers to the object. If it is an established base , it is necessarily an object.  
-The apprehender  refers to the subject, consciousness and is also t he apprehended 
Example: Eye consciousness apprehending blue 
• The object blue - the apprehended  
• The eye consciousness - the apprehender   
• The eye consciousness apprehending blue sees the as pect of blue - is called which has the aspect of 
the apprehended   
• Self-knower (the consciousness which experiences th at eye consciousness apprehending blue) sees 
the apprehender itself has the aspect of an apprehender  
-An analogy to understand a self-knower  and an other-knower  is the illumination of a flame.  
  -The illumination of a flame is by nature that wh ich is clear, bright and illuminating itself.  
  -This flame can also illuminate other objects as well.  
-Likewise, the consciousness is by nature which is  clear and knowing  is likened to the self-knower , 
having the aspect of an apprehender  
--The other-knower  is like the flame able to illuminates or clarify o bject other than itself is having the 
aspect of the apprehended . 
-Why a self-knower is neither a main mind nor a ment al factor? 
• The presentation of the main mind and the mental fa ctor is from the perspective of the aspect of the 
apprehended .   
• The main mind realizes the entity of the object  it is apprehending. 
• The mental factor realizes the characteristics of the object .  
• Through the sense direct perceiver, mental direct p erceiver, and yogic direct perceiver, one explains 
the mind and mental factors.  
• A self-knower is just a mere experiencer of the entity of the consciousness , therefore has the aspect 
of an apprehender . So self-knower is neither a main mind nor a menta l factor. 
Twofold division of Consciousness :  Self-knowers & Other-knowers 
Self-knowers Other-knower 
Definition: that which has the aspect of an 
apprehender  Definition: that which has the aspect of the 
apprehended . 
Illustration: Self-knowing direct perceiver Illustr ation: Sense direct perceiver, mental direct 
perceiver and yogic direct perceiver, as well as al l 
conceptual consciousnesses 
Self -knower  is a consciousness that: 
- engages an internal consciousnesses  
- directed inwards 
- experiences the consciousness non-dualistically Other -knower  is a consciousness that: 
- engages external objects 
- directed outwards 
- realize something other than itself 
Example: Eye consciousness apprehending blue 
Other-knower  is the eye consciousness itself Existent  Verifying Verifying  
  Self-
knower   
  Valid 
cognizer  Self-knower is one 
collection with the 
valid cognizer that it 
is experiencing  
Lorig   Revision Note - Awareness  24 / 39  
 
Self -knower  is the consciousness which experienced that eye consciousness  
.A self-knowing direct perceiver  has three divisions: 
1.  Valid cognizers that are self-knowing direct percei vers 
2.  Subsequent cognizers that are self-knowing direct p erceivers  
3.  AAAs that are self-knowing direct perceivers 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-The self-knowing direct perceiver  is a division of direct perceivers.  
• A direct perceiver is necessarily a knower.  
• So, self-knowing direct perceivers will necessarily  be consciousnesses.  
-The aspect of an apprehender and aspect of the app rehended are necessarily consciousnesses:  
• A self-knower has the aspect of an apprehender.  
• The sense direct perceiver, mental direct perceiver , and yogic direct perceiver are other-knowers 
and they have the aspects of the apprehended.  
-Illustrations of a self-knowing direct perceiver t hat is an AAA are: 
• a self-knowing direct perceiver in the continuum of  a Samkhya that experiences bliss as being a 
consciousness 
• a self-knowing direct perceiver in the continuum of  a Vaisheshika that experiences bliss as being a 
consciousness 
• a self-knower in the continuum of a Nihilist that e xperiences an inferential cognizer as being a direc t 
valid cognizer  
The proponents of non-Buddhist Indian philosophical  systems, such as the Samkhyas and Vaisheshikas, 
assert that bliss is matter and not consciousness , whereas for Buddhists, bliss is necessarily a 
consciousness.  
-But according to proponents of self-knowers, since  bliss is a consciousness, there is a self-knower t hat 
is the experiencer of this bliss.  
-In the continuum of a Samkhya  & Vaisheshika  who experiences bliss does not realize that bliss is a 
consciousness. Therefore the self-knower that exper iences the bliss but does not realize the bliss is a 
self-knower that is an AAA. 
-The Nihilists  only assert direct valid cognizer . They do not assert inferential valid cognizers. I n the 
continuum of the Nihilist who does not believe in a n inferential valid cognizer. Nevertheless in his m ind 
there is an inferential valid cognizer whether he b elieves it or not. There must be a self-knower 
experiencing this inferential valid cognizer. So, s elf-knower does not realize the inferential valid 
cognizers even though is nevertheless experiencing it, is a self-knower that is an AAA.  
-Can any self-knower that experiences an AAA be cite d as an example of a self-knower that is an AAA? 
Not necessarily so as it is possible to have a self -knower experiencing an AAA to realize the AAA.  
The ear consciousness to which sound appears in the  continuum of someone whose mind is very 
engrossed with a form is an AAA. The self-knower ex periencing this ear consciousness can realize that 
mind that is an AAA. This is because later on you r emember “Did I hear that sound or not?”  That is 
why we can say the self-knower that experiences the  AAA can realize the AAA. 
Lorig   Revision Note - Awareness  25 / 39  
 
Direct Perceivers according to different tenet syst ems 
Direct Perceivers according to 
different tenet systems  Direct perceiver (DP) Conceptual 
consciousness  Sense DP Mental DP Self-knowing DP Yogic DP 
Sutra School  Necessarily non-mistaken Necessarily 
mistaken 
 Mind 
Only 
School  True Aspectarians In the continuum 
of ordinary beings 
necessarily 
mistaken Necessarily non-mistaken 
 
False Aspectarians Necessarily mistaken Necessarily non-mistaken 
Consequence Middle Way School With the exception of the wisdom directly perceivin g wisdom, 
all minds in the continua of sentient beings are ne cessarily mistaken 
 
Yogic direct perceivers  have two divisions:  
1.  valid cognizer 
2.  subsequent cognizer 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A yogic direct perceiver  is: 
1.  that which is generated in dependence on its own un common empowering condition, a 
meditative stabilization that is a union of calm ab iding and special insight , and 
2.  is an other-knowing exalted knower in the continuum  of a Superior that is free from 
conceptuality and non-mistaken. 
-A yogic direct perceiver has to be an other-knower . 
-There is no AAA that are yogic direct perceivers b ecause whatever is a yogic direct perceiver 
necessarily ascertains its object of comprehension.  
-A self-knower experiencing a YDP is not itself a Y DP because it is not an other-knower; although it i s: 
1) Generated in dependence upon a meditative stabil ization that is a union of calm abiding and special  
insight  
2) Non-mistaken  
3) Non-conceptual  
4) Included in the continuum of a Superior. 
Therefore the fallacy with regard to that self-know er experiencing a yogic direct perceiver being a yo gic 
direct perceiver cannot arise. 
Facsimile of a Direct Perceiver  
A facsimile  of a direct perceiver  is: a knower that is mistaken with regard to its a ppearing object.  
-Facsimile of a direct perceiver and mistaken consc iousness are synonyms.  
-There are facsimiles of a direct perceiver that ar e conceptual  or non-conceptual .  
-There are facsimiles of a direct perceiver that ar e sense consciousnesses  or mental consciousnesses  
 Conceptual facsimiles of a direct perceiver 
• A mistaken conception, a thought apprehending sound  as 
permanent, is a wrong consciousness .   
• A conventional conception, an inferential cognizer that 
realizes sound to be impermanent, is a valid cogniz er.   
These two consciousnesses are the same in that both  are 
mistaken consciousnesses . 
-If a mistaken consciousness is a knower that is mistaken with 
regard to its appearing object , an inferential cognizer that realizes sound to be  impermanent is a 
mistaken consciousness because this inferential cog nizer is mistaken with regard to its appearing object .  
-The appearing object of this inferential cognizer that realizes sound to be impermanent is the 
appearance of impermanent sound  or the appearance of opposite from non-impermanent sou nd.  
Lorig   Revision Note - Awareness  26 / 39  
 
-These two appearances, while they are not imperman ent sound, appear as impermanent sound. For this 
reason, it is mistaken. 
Using iPhone as an example  
An inferential cognizer realizing an iPhone is a va lid cognizer. It is a mistaken consciousness.  
This inferential cognizer realizing an iPhone is mi staken with regard to its appearing object. 
The appearing object of the inferential cognizer re alizing an iPhone is: 
/head2right the appearance of an iPhone 
/head2right appearance of opposite of non-iPhone 
The inferential cognizer realizing an iPhone is mis taken with regard to its appearing object because t he 
appearance of opposite of non-iPhone appears to be the actual iPhone although it is not the actual 
iPhone. Therefore it is mistaken.  
Non-conceptual facsimiles of a direct perceiver 
There are many non-conceptual facsimiles of a direc t 
perceiver. 
From among the two, 
(1) Non-conceptual facsimiles of a direct perceiver  
that are mental consciousnesses   
(2) Non-conceptual facsimiles of a direct perceiver  
that are sense consciousnesses   
According to the Sutra School, a non-conceptual 
facsimile of a direct perceiver  is a mistaken 
consciousness but it is mistaken due to temporary c onditions, i.e., it is a temporary error and not a long-
lasting or permanent error.  
Non-conceptual facsimiles of a direct perceiver tha t are sense consciousnesses 
There are two types of causes of errors: 
• causes of error that are internal  
• causes of error that are external  
Causes of error which exists internally Causes of error which exists externally 
Cause of error existing in the basis  - An eye 
impaired by an obscuring disease is a cause of 
error for a sense consciousness that is a non-
conceptual facsimile of a direct perceiver. 
-In dependence on internal causes and conditions, 
one has an eye impaired by an obscuring disease.  
Due to that, one sees one moon as two moons. The 
appearance of one moon as two moons is not due 
to there being two moons but is due to this 
impaired eye condition.  
 Cause of error existing in the object : A quickly 
whirling firebrand that appears to be a wheel of 
fire.  
Cause of error existing in the immediately 
preceding condition - Eye consciousness sees the 
ground as red due to a very strong anger arising in  
the mind.   Cause of error existing in the abode : Seeing trees 
moving while you are travelling in a car.  
Non-conceptual facsimiles of a direct perceiver tha t are mental consciousnesses 
Illustration: A dream elephant appearing as an elep hant. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 /head2right Non-conceptual wrong consciousness 
/head2right Non-conceptual facsimile of a direct perceiver  
/head2right Consciousness that has a clear appearance of a non-
existent  Synonymous  
Lorig   Revision Note - Awareness  27 / 39  
 
-The consciousness to which there is the appearance  of a fire-wheel due to a whirling firebrand is: 
• a non-conceptual wrong consciousness 
• a non-conceptual facsimile of a direct perceiver 
• a consciousness that has a clear appearance of a no n-existent.  
In reality there is no fire-wheel but you have a cl ear appearance of a non-existent fire-wheel. Theref ore 
the eye consciousness that sees the fire-wheel due to a quickly whirling firebrand is a consciousness that 
has a clear appearance of a non-existent.  
Subsequent Cognizers 
-A subsequent cognizer  is a knower that realizes what has already been re alized.  
-The main point of knowing subsequent cognizer is t o know that one has to repeatedly familiarize with 
what one has already realized and repeat such famil iarization continuously until one’s mind is 
transformed into a mind that has a very clear appea rance of the object that it has already realized. I n 
some cases, the mind is transformed into the entity  of direct perception. 
Correctly assuming consciousness 
A correctly assuming consciousness  is a factually concordant determinative knower tha t is convertible 
with regard to determining its object 
Is it sufficient just to have a correct belief or a  correct assumption? 
No, because whatever imprints that is planted in th e mind with mere correct belief, although factually  
concordant, will not be stable, until one has ascer tained the object by completely removing every 
superimpositions or misconceptions with regards to the object. One will not realize what needs to be 
realized. Therefore, one needs to work towards a va lid cognition of the object. Once this is achieved,  the 
imprints left in one's continuum will be very stabl e and decisive. Having a correctly assuming 
consciousness  alone is also not enough even though it is better than doubt. 
Doubting consciousness 
A doubting consciousness is a knower that has qualm s two-pointedly by its own power.   
- A doubting consciousness has two divisions:  
(1)  Doubts that are beneficial 
(2)  Doubts that are not beneficial.  
-If you do your practice with doubts in your mind, it would be an obstacle that 
prevents you from engaging the path.  
Wrong consciousness  
A wrong consciousness  is a knower that engages its object erroneously . 
 (Note: Other texts define a wrong consciousness to  be a knower that is mistaken 
with regard to its object of engagement ) 
Why there is no object of engagement for wrong cons ciousness ? 
An object of engagement  refers to the principal object that is engaged or realized 
by a valid cognizer.  
A wrong consciousness  is the opposite of a valid cognizer because a wron g 
consciousness does not realize its principal object . For this reason, we do not posit an object of 
engagement  for a wrong consciousness.   
 
. 
Lorig   Revision Note - Awareness  28 / 39  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Inferential valid cognizer  
An inferential valid cognizer  is a new incontrovertible determinative knower tha t is directly produced 
in dependence on a correct sign  that is its basis.  
 
Inferential valid cognizer  has three divisions: Illustration 
1.  Inferential cognizer by power of the fact 
 An inferential cognizer that realizes that sound is  
impermanent through the sign of being a product. 
2.  Inferential cognizer through renown 
 An inferential cognizer that realizes that it is 
suitable to express the rabbit-possessor by the ter m 
moon from the sign of its existing among objects 
of thought. 
3.  Inferential cognizer through belief 
 An inferential cognizer that realizes that the 
scripture, “From giving, resources, from ethics, a 
happy migration,” is incontrovertible with respect 
to the meaning indicated by it by the sign of its 
being a scripture free from the three contradiction  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-An inferential valid cognizer is generated in depe ndence upon a correct sign that is its basis . Therefore, 
it is very important to understand what a correct s ign is. 
What is syllogism ? 
• Syllogism  is used to defeat wrong conceptions and generate c lear understanding. 
• Syllogism consisting of a thesis and a reason state d together in a single sentence. 
• The Proponents of Sutra Following Reasoning say tha t an inferential cognizer must be generated in 
dependence on a syllogism. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Lorig   Revision Note - Awareness  29 / 39  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Structure of syllogism  Subject Predicate to be proven Sign/ Reason / Proof 
Sound is an impermanent phenomenon  Because of being a product  
Subje ct  is the basis with respect to which one is seek to 
learn something. What one is seeking to know is whether or 
not sound is an impermanent phenomenon. 
Predicate to be proven  with respect to the subject (basis 
of inference). Anything may be stated as a predicat e to be 
proven The predicate to be proven is impermanent 
phenomenon. 
Thesis  is that which is to be proven.  The thesis is that  sound is an impermanent 
phenomenon. 
Sign / Reason / Proof : anything may be put forward as a 
sign, although it may or may not be a valid reason.    The sign is product. 
Elements of a Syllogism 
-When stating a correct sign : 
/head2right First there must first be a subject that  you are trying to analyze 
/head2right There must be a predicate  to be proven  
/head2right Then comes the correct sign.  
-When stating a reason for proving something, that sign/ reason could be correct or incorrect, so it i s 
important to identify what constitutes a correct si gn for the inferential valid cognizer to be generat ed.  
 
 
-Here product  is stated as the  sign/reason  to prove that sound is an impermanent phenomena . 
When you put forth a syllogism, you can either try to prove that: 
- the subject is something  or  
- the subject has something  (such as some properties or characteristics) 
Example: The subject, sound, is an impermanent phen omenon, because of being a product.  
In this case, you are trying to prove that the  subject is something  i.e. an impermanent phenomenon  
Example: There is a fire in the mountain pass becau se there is smoke.  
Here you are trying to establish the subject is something ; there is fire in the mountain pass because of 
the sign/reason, smoke. 
Likewise, you can also try to establish that the subject is not something  or the subject does not have 
something .  
Example: Someone sees a cow with horns but does not  know that it is a cow, then wonders: “Is that a 
horse?” 
You then advices him: “That is not a horse, because  it has horns”. [A horse does not have horns] 
Example: The subject, the consciousness to which on e moon appears as two moons, is a wrong 
consciousness because it is a knower that engages i ts object erroneously.  
Here we are trying to establish that the sense cons ciousness to which one moon appears as two moons is  
a wrong consciousness by the reason  that of that consciousness being a knower that eng ages its object 
erroneously. 
Correct signs Thesis (subject + predicate) 
(that which is to be proven) 
Lorig   Revision Note - Awareness  30 / 39  
 
A correct sign is that which is the three modes  
1.  The property of the subject 
2.  The forward pervasion 
3.  The counter pervasion 
/head2right The three modes are three criteria that a correct s ign must satisfy. (Note: A correct sign is not 
something that has the three modes but it is the th ree modes) 
1. The property of the subject  
The property of the subject  is reckoned between the sign and its basis of rela tion, the subject.  
In order for the property of the 
subject to be established, the 
three conditions must be 
satisfied… The subject , sound, is an impermanent phenomenon because of be ing a 
product . 
Subject - sound 
Sign/ reason: product 
1.  The sign necessarily 
exists on the subject.  
The subject is the sign 
(when proving the subject 
is something ) When proving that subject is something , then the subject is the sign . 
Here the subject  [sound] is the sign  [product] i.e. sound is a product. 
Therefore the sign fulfilled the criteria of being a property of the subject . 
 
Note: If sound happens to be not a product, then th e property of the subject does 
not exist. If that is case, then it does not fulfill the crite ria of being a correct sign. 
 
2.  The subject is faultless  i)  Someone has realized through valid cognition, that sound is a product  
(subject is sign) 
ii)  This person has yet to realize that sound is imperm anent (yet to realize the 
thesis). 
iii)  You then trying to prove to this person that sound is impermanent (subject is 
the predicate), and he has the wish to know whether  this is the case.  
Therefore, for such a person, sound becomes a fault less subject. 
3.  Subject and sign must be 
different   1.  The subject [sound] and sign [product] are different . 
Example of subject and sign that are not different  
The subject, sound is an impermanent phenomenon bec ause of being a sound. 
The subject [sound] and the sign [sound] are not di fferent.  
Example of not being a faultless subject:  
The subject, sound, is an impermanent phenomenon, b ecause it is impermanent.  
If one has already realized that the subject (sound ) is the sign (impermanent phenomenon), then one 
would have no more doubts as to whether sound is im permanent or not. The property of subject is thus 
not established, as it is not a faultless subject w hich is an object that one wishes to realize 
Example: The subject, sound, is an impermanent phen omenon because it is an object apprehended by 
the eye consciousness.  
Subject: sound 
Sign: An object apprehended by the eye consciousnes s 
The subject is not the sign, the property of the su bject is not established 
2. Forward pervasion 
The forward pervasion  is a 
relationship between the sign  and 
the similar class . The similar class 
is the basis of relation of the 
forward pervasion.  • The sign  must exist exclusively in 
the similar class .  
• The similar class  is the predicate 
to be proven . 
 The fo rward pervasion  is 
established because sign, product , 
exists necessary only in the class of 
similar class, impermanent 
phenomenon .  
Example: The subject, sound, is an impermanent phenomenon be cause of being a product.   
• Subject - sound 
• Sign/ reason - product  
• Predicate to be proven - impermanent phenomenon. 
• The sign is the predicate to be proven - product is  an impermanent phenomenon.  
• The forward pervasion is established because whatev er is a product is necessarily impermanent 
phenomenon.  
Lorig   Revision Note - Awareness  31 / 39  
 
• Here, similar class is impermanent phenomenon.  
• In order for it to be the forward pervasion the sig n must exist exclusively in this similar class; tha t 
means the product [sign] must exist exclusively wit h impermanent phenomenon [similar class].  
Example: The sense consciousness to which one moon appears as two moons is a direct perceiver 
because of being a sense consciousness .  
• Subject: Sense consciousness to which one moon appe ars as two moons 
• Sign: A sense consciousness  
• Predicate to be proven: a direct perceiver 
• Is the property of the subject  is established?   
1.  The subject is sign: the subject [sense consciousness to which one moon appears as two moons] 
is sign [a sense consciousness].  
2.  There is faultless subject: There is someone who ha s realized the sense consciousness to which 
one moon appears as two moons is a sense consciousn ess  but not sure whether it is a direct 
perceiver or not. 
3.  Subject [sense consciousness to which one moon appe ars as two moons] and sign [a sense 
consciousness] are different. 
Since the three conditions are satisfied, therefore , the property of the subject is established. 
• Is there a forward pervasion ? 
/head2right The sign [a sense consciousness] is NOT the predica te to be proven [a direct perceiver] because 
whatever is a sense consciousness is not necessaril y a direct perceiver.   
/head2right This shows that although the property of the subjec t is established, it does not necessarily mean 
that it is a correct sign. In order for it to be a correct sign, it must also satisfy the criterion of  
being a forward pervasion but for this case, there is NO forward pervasion. 
3. Counter Pervasion 
The main requirement of 
the counter-pervasion  is 
that the sign  must be 
universally absent in the 
dissimilar class . 
 • If a sign  is the counter-
pervasion in the proof of 
something, it is ascertained as 
a non-existent in the 
dissimilar class . 
• The opposite of the predicate  
to be proven is the opposite of 
the sign. 
• Whatever is not that predicate 
to be proven is necessarily not 
that sign.   
 • The sign, product, does not exist within 
the category of non-impermanent 
phenomena, the dissimilar class. 
• The opposite of the predicate to be 
proven, impermanent phenomenon is 
non-impermanent phenomenon.  The 
opposite of the sign, product, is non-
product. If it is a non-impermanent 
phenomenon, it is also a non-product.  
• Whatever is not an impermanent 
phenomenon is necessarily not a product.   
 
Example: The subject, sound, is an impermanent phenomenon be cause of being a product.  
• Subject - sound 
• Sign/ reason - product  
• Predicate to be proven - impermanent phenomenon. 
• The dissimilar class: 
• The opposite of [predicate to be proven] impermanen t phenomena is non-impermanent 
phenomenon (i.e. not impermanent phenomenon) 
• The opposite of [sign] product is non-product.  
• If it is a non-impermanent phenomenon, it is also a  non-product.  
• Since the opposite of the predicate to be proven  [non-impermanent phenomenon] is the opposite of 
the sign  [non-product] that is the counter pervasion .  
• If the similar class is impermanent phenomenon, the  dissimilar class is non-impermanent 
phenomenon.  
• In order for the counter pervasion to be establishe d, the sign must not exist in the dissimilar class.  
• That means product  [sign] cannot be a non-impermanent phenomenon  [dissimilar class]. 
In the syllogism, the subject, sound, is an imperma nent phenomenon because of being a product:  
• The forward pervasion is established because product  exists necessarily only in the class of 
impermanent phenomena .  
Lorig   Revision Note - Awareness  32 / 39  
 
• The counter pervasion is also established because product  does not exist whatsoever in the class of 
non-impermanent phenomena . Product is a non-existent in the dissimilar class .  
The extent of the pervasion between the sign and it s similar class 
Extent of the pervasion of the 
sign EQUAL to  the predicate to 
be proven Correct 
sign For a sign that is stated in a syllogism, even thou gh the extent of 
the pervasion [of the sign] may be the same [as the  predicate], 
nevertheless, it is not necessarily so. 
Extent of the pervasion of the 
sign LESS than  the predicate to 
be proven Correct 
sign The subject, sound, is impermanent, because of bein g an 
instance of product. [Sign, instance of product, is  lesser in extent 
than impermanent] 
Extent of the pervasion of the 
sign GREATER than  the 
predicate to be proven Incorrect 
sign, as 
forward 
pervasion is 
not 
established The subject, the sound of a conch, is impermanent, because it 
arises through human effort. [This is an indefinite  sign], 
because, whatever is the result of human effort is necessarily 
impermanent, but whatever is impermanent is not nec essarily a 
result of human effort. [The sign has a larger perv asion than the 
predicate, forward pervasion cannot be established] . 
Non-Valid Consciousness  
Among the sevenfold divisions of consciousnesses, t he following five are  non-valid consciousnesses: 
1.  Subsequent cognizer 
2.  Correctly assuming consciousness 
3.  Awareness to which an object appears and is not asc ertained (AAA) 
4.  Doubting consciousness 
5.  Wrong consciousness. 
 
Subsequent cognizer is a knower that realizes what has already been rea lized 
Whatever a subsequent cognizer is realizing is indu ced through the force of an earlier realization of an 
object by a valid cognizer . Therefore, a subsequent cognizer is a knower that  realizes what has already 
been realized by a valid cognizer .  
Three divisions of subsequent cognizers:  
1.  directly perceiving  subsequent cognizer 
2.  conceptual  subsequent cognizer 
3.  subsequent cognizer that is neither of those two 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Lorig   Revision Note - Awareness  33 / 39  
 
 
Directly perceiving subsequent cognizer   
that is Illustration 
1.  Sense direct perceiver  Second moment of a sense direct perceiver apprehend ing blue. 
2.  Mental direct perceiver Second moment of a clairvoyance knowing another's m ind. 
3.  Self-knowing direct perceiver Second moment of a self-knowing direct perceiver ex periencing an 
eye consciousness. 
4.  Yogic direct perceiver  Second moment of an uninterrupted path of a path of  seeing. 
5.  None of the above four  Second moment of a direct perceiver.  
The second moment of a direct perceiver cannot be a ny of the 
above four. If it is, for example, a directly perce iving subsequent 
cognizer that is a sense direct perceiver, then it follows that the 
second moment of a direct perceiver can also the re maining three. 
This is a fallacy. 
  
 
Conceptual subsequent cognizer 
that is induced by:  Illustration  
1.  Direct perceiver  A factually concordant ascertaining consciousness a scertaining blue that is 
induced by a sense direct perceiver apprehending bl ue. 
A sense direct valid cognizer ascertains blue, subs equently, a remembering 
consciousness is then able think of blue.  
2.  Inferential cognizer  The second moment of an inferential cognizer realiz ing sound to be 
impermanent. 
In the first moment, by depending on a sign, produc t, an inferential valid 
cognizer realizing sound to be impermanent is gener ated.  
Subsequently in the second moment, a conceptual sub sequent cognizer that 
is induced by this inferential cognizer is produced .  
3.  None of the above two A subsequent cognizer that is induced by a conceptu al subsequent cognizer. 
 
A correctly assuming consciousness is either generated upon a reason or no reason at a ll   
Correctly assuming consciousness  Illustration  
1.  Which does not have a reason In dependence on someo ne saying: “Sound is impermanent”, 
without providing any reasons and one then believes  that it is so. 
2.  Which  has a contradictory reason One thinks that ' sound is impermanent, because it is unable to 
perform a function'. Reason is contradictory, becau se whatever is 
empty of being able to perform a function is necess arily permanent, 
and not impermanent. 
3.  For which the reason is indefinite [or 
lacks pervasion] 
 One concludes that 'sound is impermanent, because i t is an object 
of comprehension'. The reason is indefinite, becaus e whatever is an 
object of comprehension is not necessarily imperman ent. 
4.  For which the reason is not established. 
 One concludes that 'sound is impermanent, because i t is an object 
of apprehension of an eye consciousness'. The reaso n is not 
established, because the sign is not established on  the subject/ 
Lorig   Revision Note - Awareness  34 / 39  
 
Doubting 
consciousness   
Doubt 
tending 
toward the 
factual  Equal doubt Doubt 
tending 
toward the 
non-factual 
subject is not the sign. 
5.  For which a reason exists but is not 
settled 
 In general, 'product' is a correct sign (reason exi sts) in the proof that 
'sound is an impermanent phenomenon.’ However, for it to be a 
correct sign, it is necessarily to establish the th ree modes. It is only 
after the three modes have been established, would an inferential 
valid cognizer be generated. If a person has not re alized the three 
modes of this correct sign, then it is still not a correct sign for him. 
Therefore, the reason exists but is not settled by this person. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Awareness to which an object appears and is not asc ertained  is a knower that is a common locus of : 
(1) having clear appearance of the specifically cha racterized phenomenon which is its object of engage ment and 
(2) being unable to induce ascertainment with respe ct to the specifically characterized phenomenon whi ch is its 
object of operation  
However, one should not define this awareness as a knower that is a common locus of : 
1) Having a clear appearance of the specifically ch aracterized phenomenon, which is its object, and 
2) Being unable to induce ascertainment with respec t to this specifically characterized phenomenon 
which is its object. 
-This is because the clear appearance of the SCP to  this knower, is its object of engagement  and not 
merely an object. 
-If the clear appearance of the SCP to the knower i s merely an object (not its object of engagement), 
then it would incur the fallacy that an eye conscio usness apprehending a blue snow mountain (which is a 
wrong consciousness) would fulfill this definition and therefore would be an AAA. 
-Since the clear appearance to the knower: 
 - is its object of engagement , this effectively eliminates any wrong consciousne sses to be this knower. 
 - is a SCP, this effectively eliminates any non-ex istents as the apprehended object. 
Doubting consciousness/ Doubt: A knower which has q ualms two-pointedly by its own power  
Why 'by its own power ' is inserted in the definition? 
There is a main mind that is concomitant with the mental factor of doubt . In the retinue of this main 
mind, there are also other mental factors like feel ing, discrimination and so on. This main mind and i ts 
mental factors in its retinue are also knowers that  have qualms two pointedly. Although doubt is 
concomitant with them, they do not have qualms two pointedly by their own power, but arise through 
the power of doubt (which does so by its own power) . 
Doubting consciousness  has three divisions: 
1.  Doubt tending toward the factual 
2.  Doubt tending toward the non-factual 
3.  Equal doubt  
Illustrations: 
Doubt tending toward the factual  is doubt which 
thinks that sound is probably impermanent . In 
reality, sound is impermanent. This mind has doubt 
think: “Sound is probably impermanent.” Although, 
a doubt, it is factual as it concordant with how th e 
object sound exist.  
Lorig   Revision Note - Awareness  35 / 39  
 
Doubt tending toward the non-factual  is doubt which thinks that sound is probably permanent . In 
reality sound is not permanent.  
Is there a common locus between doubt and wrong con sciousness? 
According to Sera-Je's position, there is a common locus between doubt and wrong consciousness such 
as a mind thinking: “reincarnation probably does no t exist.” 
Such a mind is doubt tending toward the non-factual , and is also a wrong consciousness. This knower 
engages in its object 'reincarnation'  erroneously.  
Some assert that wrong consciousness and doubt are mutually exclusive  because, a wrong consciousness 
is decisive about its object, whereas doubt is two- pointed about its object. 
Wrong consciousness  
Wrong consciousness is: a knower which engages its object erroneously.  
• The position of Sera Jhe is that there are no objects of engagement  for wrong consciousnesses.  
• Other colleges assert that wrong consciousnesses do  have objects of engagement.  
• The definition of wrong consciousnesses in some oth er texts states that: wrong consciousness is a 
knower that is mistaken with regards to its object of engagement.  
• Our position: wrong consciousness is a knower 
that engages its object erroneously. 
Wrong consciousness  has two divisions: 
• Conceptual 
e.g. a thought apprehending sound as permanent and 
a thought apprehending the horns of a 
rabbit. 
• Non-conceptual ones that is  mental  
e.g. a dream consciousness which clearly sees as bl ue 
the blue of a dream. This subject is a mental 
consciousness, a non-conceptual consciousness, and 
a wrong consciousness.  
-It is a mental consciousness because of being a dr eam consciousness 
-A non-conceptual consciousness because of being a consciousness which is free from being a 
determinative knower which apprehends a sound gener ality and a meaning generality as suitable to be 
mixed 
-A wrong consciousness because of being a conscious ness which apprehends its object, a form which is 
a phenomenon-source, as blue, whereas it does not e xist as blue. 
-However, we say that for the person who is dreamin g that dream consciousness which clearly sees the 
blue of a dream as blue] is a factually concordant sense consciousness. 
• Non-conceptual ones that is sense consciousnesses  
e.g a sense consciousness which sees snow mountains  as blue and a sense consciousness which sees a 
white conch as yellow. 
Is the appearing object of an eye consciousness app rehending blue snow mountain a white snow 
mountain or a blue snow mountain? 
It is mentioned in some texts that 'whatever appears to a specific non-conceptual cons ciousness is its 
appearing object' . Since that is the case, blue snow mountain has to  be posited to be the appearing 
object of the consciousness. Even though blue snow mountain is the appearing object of the 
consciousness to which blue snow mountain appears, however, blue snow mountain is not an appearing 
object in general. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Lorig   Revision Note - Awareness  36 / 39  
 
Reasons to show why a self-knower does not exist in  reality 
-The factor that enables a remembering consciousnes s to think of blue, for example, is due to having 
realized blue in the past by a valid cognizer. Ther efore, the valid cognizer that realized blue is the  
condition that induces the remembering consciousnes s thinking 'blue'. 
-For those systems that propounds self-knowers, fro m the Sutra School up to the AMWS, the main 
reason for asserting self-knowers is to account for  memory conception, in particular, the memory of th e 
experience that apprehended the object and not abou t remembering the object itself. Therefore, for the m, 
if there is no realization of an object earlier, it  is not possible to have a remembering consciousnes s of 
that object later. 
-Likewise, the reason that there can be a memory of  an eye consciousness apprehending blue at an 
earlier time is due to a self-knower experiencing t hat eye consciousness apprehending blue at that tim e. 
-It is possible to remember the appearance of two m oons at a later time if one has had an experience o f 
seeing two moons earlier. Likewise, one can remembe r one's dream such as one can remember at a later 
time of having dreamt of an elephant earlier. Even though a dream consciousness is not a valid cognize r, 
nevertheless, at a later time, it is possible to re member one's dreams. This shows that, for a remembe ring 
consciousness to arise, it is not necessarily prece ded by a valid cognizer. If that is the case, then it 
follows that [the notion that self-knowers are need ed to remember a consciousness apprehending an 
object] is not necessary. 
-In general, one would not be able to remember some thing one did not realize in the past. E.g., it is not 
possible to remember blue for someone who has never  experienced blue before. This shows that it is 
very difficult to posit a memory consciousness with out having realized the object earlier. 
-A dream consciousness that apprehending a dream el ephant is a wrong consciousness [non-valid 
cognizer], nevertheless, this consciousness is vali d with respect to the appearance of a dream elephan t. 
Therefore, the dream consciousness does realize the  dream elephant. 
-According to the CMWS, it is possible to remember at a later time the appearance of dream elephant 
that was experienced earlier without the need for a  self-knower to experience that dream consciousness . 
Therefore, what the AMWS, MOS and the Sutra School assert the same needs to be analyzed. 
 
How ordinary beings cannot directly realize subtle impermanence or the coarse or subtle selflessness o f 
persons, while yogic direct perceivers can do so? 
According to Sutra School, the mind that directly r ealizes impermanence would be a yogic direct 
perceiver, which exists only in the continuum of a Superior [therefore, not in an ordinary being]. 
In the context of realizing impermanence, it is ref erring to subtle impermanence. 
The characteristics of a yogic direct perceiver is:  in dependence upon its uncommon empowering 
condition, a meditative stabilization that is a uni on of calm abiding and special insight and is an ot her-
knowing exalted knower in the continuum of a Superi or which is free from conceptuality and non-
mistaken, newly and directly realizes either subtle  impermanence or the coarse or subtle selflessness of 
persons. Since that is the case, an ordinary being cannot realize subtle impermanence directly. 
Also, a mental direct perceiver in the continuum of  an ordinary being is an AAA because it exist for t he 
shortest moment of a time. Also, if this direct per ceiver realizes its object, then it fallaciously fo llows 
that ordinary beings can realize subtle impermanenc e, which fallaciously follows that ordinary beings 
are Superiors. 
 
How a yogic direct perceiver directly realizes impe rmanent phenomena explicitly and also directly 
realizes permanent phenomena implicitly? 
In the system of the Proponents of Sutra, whatever appears to a direct perceiver is necessarily a 
functioning thing; it cannot be a permanent phenome non. Since selflessness is a permanent 
phenomenon, it can appear only to a thought conscio usness and not to a direct perceiver. Still, a yogi c 
direct perceiver realizing selflessness does know i ts object. The selflessness of the person does not 
appear to and is not perceived by a yogic direct pe rceiver realizing selflessness. Therefore the selflessness 
of persons is not directly realized by a yogic dire ct perceiver  
The yogic direct perceiver: 
- explicitly realizes the body and mind as devoid o f a self of persons (this is the subtle impermanenc e of 
the person which disintegrates moment by moment) an d  
- implicitly realizes the selflessness of persons. 
Even though selflessness does not appear and is not  perceived by a yogic direct perceiver realizing 
selflessness, it knows selflessness. 
“What directly realizes the selflessness of the person ?”   
Sautrantika would say: “It is a yogic direct percei ver. A yogic direct perceiver directly realizes the  
selflessness of the person, but the selflessness of  the person is not directly realized by a yogic dir ect 
Lorig   Revision Note - Awareness  37 / 39  
 
perceiver in terms of being its appearing object. 
The selflessness of the person is realized in the m anner of having isolated the self, that is, by real izing 
the compositional factors free from the self that i s to be refuted.  
A yogic direct perceiver directly realizes the no-s elf of persons because it perceives the selflessnes s of 
the person free from a meaning generality or mental  image. However, the selflessness of the person doe s 
not directly appear to a yogic direct perceiver bec ause the selflessness of the person is not the appe aring 
object of a direct perceiver. For something to be t he appearing object of a direct perceiver it must b e a 
manifest phenomenon. However, permanent phenomena s uch as the selflessness of the person are not 
manifest phenomenon.  
Therefore a yogic direct perceiver directly realize s the selflessness of the person but the selflessne ss of 
the person is not the appearing object of a yogic d irect perceiver? 
This is to explain the fault of saying: A knower of an object is that which, when an object  appears, perceives it. 
Summarized from Debate in Tibetan Buddhism 
The boundaries of pervasion or extension of a pheno menon is its range – what it pervades, what it incl udes, and 
what it excludes. By understanding clearly a phenom enon’s boundaries of pervasion one is able to ascer tain the 
scope of that phenomenon. The essential tool in thi s investigation is the analytical comparison of phe nomenon. 
By comparing two phenomena and establishing their r elative boundaries of pervasion, the limits of each  
phenomenon in relation to the other, one comes to u nderstand the points of similarity and dissimilarit y between 
them. The comparison of phenomenon presupposes that  those phenomena are different in the sense that th ey 
are not exactly the same from the point of view of name  and meaning .  
Phenomena which are not different are one. A pot is  the only thing which is ONE with the pot in name a nd 
meaning. 
The investigation of differences does not address t he cases of phenomena which are exactly the same. T here is 
no difference between a pot and a pot. Every existe nt other than a pot is different from it, e.g. a pe rson, a gold 
pot. 
Any two different phenomena must compare in one of the five ways; there is no sixth possible way. 
 
1st case (represented by two circles combined into one –one is superimposed over the 
other)  
The relative boundaries of pervasion or extensions of the two phenomena are 
absolutely concomitant . They pervade exactly the same things.  
Whatever is a p is necessarily a q. 
Whatever is a q is necessarily a p. 
 
2nd  and 3 rd  cases (represented by a smaller circle wholly incl uded within the perimeter of a larger one) 
There is something (inside the smaller circle) whic h is both a p and a q. 
There is something (inside the larger circle but ou tside the smaller circle) which is one but not the other. The 
larger circle includes at least one phenomenon the smaller does not) 
There is a uni-directional pervasion between these two:  
Case 2: Whatever is a p is necessarily a q, but whatever is a q is not necessarily a p 
Case 3: Whatever is a q is necessarily a p, but whatever is a p is not necessarily a q 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4th  case (represented by two overlapping circles)  
There is an intersection of the relative extensions  of the two phenomena, 
but there is no pervasion between the two.  
1.  There is something which is both a p and a q (in the overlapping 
area). 
2.  There is something which is a p but not a q. 
3.  There is something which is a q but not a p. 
 
5th  case (represented by two separate circles)  
Lorig   Revision Note - Awareness  38 / 39  
 
The relative extensions of the two phenomena do not  correlate at all. There is neither any pervasion b etween the 
two nor is there any overlapping at all.  
There is nothing  which is both a p and a q. 
Whatever is a p is necessarily not a q. 
Whatever is a q is necessarily not a p 
Mutually Inclusive Phenomena  
Mutually inclusive phenomena are represented by Cas e 1.  
Things which are mutually inclusive are: 
- Being different phenomena and 
- Have all the 8 approaches of pervasion. (see note  below) 
Mutually inclusive phenomena are different only in the sense of not having exactly the same name, for their 
meanings –the objects which are included within the  extension of each- are exactly the same. 
E.g. Product and impermanent phenomenon are mutuall y inclusive, and there is a common locus of these t wo. 
For example, a pot is such a common locus. A pot is  a product  and it is also an impermanent phenomenon . 
Three Possibilities 
If there are three possibilities between two phenom ena, 
- There must be a common locus of the two and  
- There are two points of difference, at least one of which is something which is one of the two pheno mena but 
not the other.  
Phenomena having three possibilities compare in two  ways: 
The first way represents the three possibilities (C ase 2 & case 3) 
1. something which is both,  
2. something which is one but not the other, and  
3. something which is neither 
Example: Color and Red 
1. Something which is both color  and red  color of a ruby 
2. Something which is one but not the other (Whatev er is red  is 
necessarily  color. Whatever is a color is not necessarily red) white conch 
3. There is something which is neither red nor colo r a round form (round form is not a color) 
The second way represents the three possibilities ( Case 4) 
1. There is something which is both a p and a q. 
2. There is something which is a p but not a q 
3. There is something which is a q but not a p. 
(Note: In this case, there is nothing one can posit  which is neither a p nor a q. Such comparisons necessarily 
involve two phenomena that together include all exi stents and non-existents as well) 
Example: Object of knowledge & Non-impermanent phen omena  
1. Something which is both object of knowledge  
and a non-impermanent phenomenon  Permanent phenomena  
(Permanent phenomena is an object of knowledge 
[because of being an existent] and a non-impermanen t 
phenomenon [because not being produced from causes 
and conditions])  
2. Something which is object of knowledge  but not 
a non-impermanent phenomenon  A pot 
(Pot is an object of knowledge because being a 
impermanent phenomenon)  
3. Something which is a non-impermanent 
phenomenon but not object of knowledge Horn of a rabbit  
(Horn of rabbit is a non-impermanent phenomenon 
because of being a non-existent. Horn of rabbit is not an 
object of knowledge because of not being an existen t) 
(Note: Something which is neither non-impermanent p henomenon nor object of knowledge cannot be posited  
because something which is not an object of knowled ge but is an impermanent phenomenon cannot be posit ed) 
Four Possibilities (Case 4) 
If there are four possibilities between two phenome na, all the points of similarity and difference are  exemplified. 
The four possibilities are such that: 
1. There is something which is both a p and a q. 
2. There is something which is a p but not a q. 
3. There is something which is a q but not a p.  
4. There is something which is neither a p nor a q 
Example: Blue and color of cloth 
1. Something which is both blue and color of cloth  Color of blue cotton cloth 
2. Something which is blue but not color of cloth  Color of blue sky 
3. Something which is color of cloth  but not blue .  Color of yellow cotton cloth 
4. Something which is neither blue nor color of cloth  Color of ruby (being red in color) 
Lorig   Revision Note - Awareness  39 / 39  
 
Mutually Exclusive Phenomena (Case 5) 
Mutually exclusive phenomena are those which are di fferent and a common locus of them is not possible.   
There is nothing that is both a p and a q. 
Example: Definition and definiendum 
There is nothing that is both definition  and definiendum. 
Whatever is a definition  is necessarily not a definiendum  
Whatever is a definiendum  is necessarily not a definition 
 
The 8 Approaches of Pervasion that exist between P & Q are: 
1. Whatever is P is necessarily Q 
2. Whatever is Q is necessarily P 
3. Whatever is not P is necessarily not Q 
4. Whatever is not Q is necessarily not P 
5. If P exists, then Q necessarily exists 
6. If Q exists, then P necessarily exists 
7. If P does not exist, then Q necessarily does not  exist  
8. If Q does not exist, then P necessarily does not  exist. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 