Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/SixPerfections/A_GUIDE_TO_THE_BODHISATTVA_Ch_9_formatted_A4 (by Geshe Dorji Damdul).doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:02.600760
================================================================================


Transcript of teachings by Khen Rinpoche Geshe Chonyi  on  the  Heart  Sutra
and Stages of the Path (the Six Perfections)

The root text, Middle Length Lam-Rim,  by  Lama  Tsongkhapa,  translated  by
Philip Quarcoo,. © FPMT, Inc., May 2012, is indented.  All  page  references
refer to the root text, unless otherwise stated.

Where applicable, page numbers of corresponding  sections  in  the  Lam  Rim
Chen Mo (LRCM) are indicated in footnotes; they refer to The Great  Treatise
on the Stages of the Path  to  Enlightenment,  Volume  2,  by  Tsong-kha-pa,
translated  by  The  Lamrim  Chenmo   Translation   Committee,   Snow   Lion
Publications, 2004.

Lesson 13                                                   13 August 2013


Why  practise  the  six  perfections?  The  practice  of  generosity  &  its
completion.  The  faults  of  attachment.  Qualms  about  the  practice   of
generosity. (From root text, pages 174 – 177).



PURPOSE OF PRACTISING THE SIX PERFECTIONS

It  is  said  that  our  attachment  to  our  resources  and  to   our   the
householder’s   way  of  life  obstructs  us  from   achieving   liberation.
Therefore, in the context of the practice of the six perfections, to  remove
these unfavourable factors that  stop  us  from  achieving  liberation,  the
teachings states that we should engage in the practices  of  generosity  and
ethics. Therefore, to remove or to turn away these unfavorable factors  that
stop us from achieving liberation, namely attachment  to  the  resources  of
enjoyment and attachment to the household, then there are the  practices  of
generosity and ethics.


When Whether we are working to achieving our own goals or trying to  fulfill
the aims and welfare of others, sometimes we may not  be  are  not  able  to
complete thoose objectivesworks. For example, when if we are  engageding  in
something that is beneficial activities for others in order to help  others,
we may meet with difficulties or others may  give  us  problems  in  return.
them but in the process when we meet with difficulties, or when others  give
us  problems  in  the  process  of  helping  them,  Then  we  may  feel  get
discouraged, or  and  we  may  not  be  are  unable  to  put  up  with  such
problemstolerate and put up with it. Likewise, when  we  are  achieving  our
own purposes, because of various difficulties, sometimes we also are  unable
to complete the tasks at hand.
The antidotes that prevents us from turning away from  achieving  our  goals
and fulfilling the welfare of others  are  the  practices  of  patience  and
joyous perseverance.

When Even if we are engaged in a bbeneficial activities action or works  for
ourselves or others, sometimes we are unable to continue  with  or  increase
maintain the continuity of those activities. , or unable to  increase  those
works. One of the  reasons  why  we  are  unable  to  do  so   maintain  the
continuity or  unable  to  increase  those  activities  is  because  of  our
attraction  distractions  to  various  kinds  of  worldly   activities   and
distractions. Another reason is having lack of the correct wisdom. In  order
to be able to sustain and further improve our practice and have it  increase
more and more, we must have the ability to place the  mind  single-pointedly
on a virtuous object. We also need the correct kind of wisdom.  When  If  we
have concentration and  wisdom,  then  we  will  be  able  to  maintain  the
continuity of and improve our the practice and increase the practice.

Basically what I have just said This is an explanation  of  the  purpose  of
practiscing the six perfections since w. We have started talking  about  the
six perfections. You must understand why these practices are necessary:
• eded. As I said earlier,  our  attachment  to  our  the  enjoyments,   and
  resources and attachment to the householder’s way of life are obstacles to
  virtue. They obstruct the practices of that which what is  beneficial.  So
  Aas an antidotes to that, there are the practices of  generosity  and  the
  practice of ethicsal discipline.
• Even at those times when we  do  engage  in  the  beneficial  practice  of
  virtue, something that is beneficial and engage in the practice of virtue,
  however we are unable to continue  these  practices.  When  we  meet  with
  certain conditions, we stop such this practices of virtue, even though  we
  know that it is something that we we should do them , and that they are it
  is good for us. But when we meet with certain conditions, we give up.  For
  example, when the going gets rough, and tough, we lose our patience and we
  give up. WOr in the process we become may get dispirited or ,  discouraged
  and we lose heart. Again, we get discouraged and we give up. Therefore  in
  the cultivation of virtue, the practices of patience and the  practice  of
  joyous perseverance are also important.
• In order for us to be able to sustain and increase for our one’s  practice
  of virtue over time, that which is beneficial to sustain over time and for
  it  to  increase  in  strength  to  strength,  then   the   practices   of
  concentration and wisdom are very important as well.

                                ~~~~~~~~~~~~

      2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C1     How to train in the conduct in general
      This has two points:

          A    Extensive explanation of how to train in the conduct in
            general
          B    The summarized meaning

      2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C1A    Extensive explanation of how to train in the
          conduct in general
      This has two points:

          1    Training in the perfections that ripen one’s own buddha
            qualities
          2    Training in the four means of gathering disciples that ripen
            the continua of others


      2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C1A-1  Training in the perfections that ripen one’s
          own buddha qualities
      This has six points:

          A   How to train in generosity
          B   How to train in ethics
          C How to train in patience
          D How to train in joyous effort
          E  How to train in concentration
          F   How to train in wisdom

    THE PRACTICE OF GENEROSITY

c” The process of learning the perfections
1" How to train in the bodhisattva deeds in general
2” In particular, how to train in the last two perfections
1" How to train in the bodhisattva deeds in general
(a) Training in the perfections that mature  the  qualities  you  will  have
when you become a buddha
(b) Training in the four ways  to  gather  disciples  that  help  others  to
mature
(a) Training in the perfections that mature  the  qualities  you  will  have
when you become a buddha:
(i).  How to train in the perfection of generosity
(ii). How to train in the perfection of ethical discipline
    (iii). How to train in the perfection of patience
    (iv). How to train in the perfection of joyous perseverance
(v). How to train in the perfection of meditative stabilization
    (vi). How to train in the perfection of wisdom
(i). How to train in the perfection of generosity
(a’) What generosity is
(b’) The divisions of generosity
(c’) The way to generate this generosity in one’s mind
(a’) What generosity is

       2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C1A-1A      How to train in generosity
       This has three points:

           1     The entity of generosity
           2     Subdivisions
           3     How to generate generosity in one’s mental continuum


       2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C1A-1A1     The entity of generosity
       This has two points:

           A     Entity
       The entity of generosity is a virtuous  intention  to  give  and  the
       actions of body and speech motivated by it. [213] It is the intention
       at the time the body and speech engage  in  generosity.  (Pages  174-
       175)[1]

What is generosity? What is its entity? What exactly is generosity?
The text says that it is, “a: virtuous intention to give and the actions  of
body and speech motivated by it.”
It is the virtue of  a  generous  attitude,  and  the  physical  and  verbal
actions which are motivated by this.
The last part refers to the mind during  the  time  when  in  which  one  is
engageding in giving with one’s body and speech.

Usually when we talk of generosity, we always think about  the  physical  or
verbal acts of giving. What you have to understand is that generosity  is  a
consciousness (or mind).  It does not refer to the physical  or  the  verbal
acts of giving. Usually when we talk of generosity, we  always  think  about
the actions - the bodily or verbal action. It is not that. Generosity  is  a
consciousness.   Generosity   is   the   generous   attitude.   It   is    a
consciousness/mind. It is not the physical or verbal of giving.
Therefore,  in order to highlight what generosity is, ,  the  Middle  Length
Lam-Rrim (not in the Lamrim Chenmo) says, “It is  the  :  intention  at  the
time the body and speech engage  in  gGenerosity.”   It  is  is  essentially
theat intention while one is giving either material objects or  giving  with
one’s speech:, for example,  giving  the  Dharma,  i.e.,  when   as  one  is
sharing the  Dharma  with  others.  There  is  this  generous  attitude  and
intention of giving, the intention of giving. That is generosity. It is  the
intention that is present when one is giving with one’s body and/or speech.
[MLLR text page 175: The entity of generosity is  a  virtuous  intention  to
give and the actions  of  body  and  speech  motivated  by  it.  It  is  the
intention at the time the body and speech engage in generosity.]

The sentence in the Middle Length Lamrim which says “The  intention  at  the
time when you are engaged in giving with your  body  and  speech”.  That  is
what posited to be generosity.
Assuming the intention is  the  correct  translation  of  the  Tibetan  word
“sempa”, it could also be translated as an attitude.  Literally  “Ssems  pa”
in Tibetan is the mental factor of intention. If it  is  translated  as  the
mental factor of intention,  then that would make generosity karma. Then t
Now the question is, “Is generosity karma or not?”

The root text Middle Length Lamrim statesd very clearly  that  the  generous
attitude, the intention that  is  present  during  the  time  when  you  are
engaged in giving,  either with your body or speech, is generosity.


Just before you carry out as you are  about  the  act  of  giving,  to  give
something, during the causal  motivation  phase,  there  is  something  that
motivates you , and you generate have an intention to give.  Is  that  karma
or not? Is that mental factor of intention  generosity?

It is clear that the intention that is present  while  you  are  engaged  in
generosity with your body or speech is generosity, what about the  intention
at the motivational phase? That is just before you  carry  out  the  act  of
giving, and that is this intention, is that generosity as well?
In the discussion about karma during the section on the path that is  shared
with the persons of medium capacity, there is a  discussion  on  n  karma  -
what karma is and what intention is. Also in the discussion on the ten  non-
virtues, there is a distinction between karma, actions and paths of  action.
There are some that are actions that abut are not  path  of  actions  and  ,
while there are some that are both aactions  that  are  also  and  paths  of
actions. Can we use tilize those e concepts  in  those  discussions  in  our
analysis of what generosity is? [2]

It is clear that generosity is  the  intention  that  is  present  when  you
engage in giving either with your body or speech. In the Usually  generosity
is stated briefly to be a generous attitude, literally a mind of giving,  or
translated in the Lam Rrim  Chen  Mmo,  it  is   translated  as  a  generous
attitude. You should not have the idea that generosity refers to the  action
that you carry out  -the  physical  or  verbal  actions  of  giving.  -  but
Ggenerosity refers to theis generous attitude.

COMPLETING THE PERFECTION OF GENEROSITY

           B     The measure for its perfection
       The completion of the perfection of generosity  does  not  depend  on
       having eliminated the poverty of migrating beings by giving  away  to
       others substances to be given. Rather it becomes  the  perfection  of
       generosity  through  destroying  the  grasping  of  miserliness   and
       thoroughly completing one’s familiarization with the mind  of  giving
       to others along with the effects of giving. (Page 175)[3]

Next is an explanation of the measure of the perfection of generosity.
Bringing the perfection of generosity to completion  is  not  contingent  on
removing beings' poverty by giving gifts to others. You  perfect  generosity
after you destroy your stingy clinging and  you  completely  condition  your
mind to giving them away to living beings from the depths of your heart  and
also giving to others the effects of this giving as well.
[LRCM V2 page 114]  Bringing the perfection of generosity to  completion  is
not contingent on removing beings' poverty by giving gifts to others.
Otherwise, since there still remain many destitute living  beings,  all  the
earlier conquerors would not have attained  perfect  generosity.  Therefore,
the physical and verbal aspects of generosity are not the  main  thing;  the
main thing is the mental aspect. This  is  because  you  perfect  generosity
after you destroy your stingy  clinging  to  all  that  you  own—your  body,
resources, and roots of virtue—and you completely  condition  your  mind  to
giving them away to living beings from the depths of  your  heart  and,  not
only that, but also to giving to others the effects of this giving as well.
The point that was just made is anyone having the perfection  of  generosity
in the mind is not contingent on removing  the  poverty  of  every  sentient
being. Furthermore removing  the  poverty  of  all  sentient  beings  is  an
impossible task. In order to  perfect  generosity,  one  must  destroy  this
stingy clinging to things such as the body, resources and so forth.
We are talking about the measure of the perfection of  generosity.  When  do
we know Wwhat is the criteria for having developed  this  perfection  it  in
the mind? Developing such a perfection of generosity in the mind  is  It  is
not dependent at all on removing the poverty of all living beings,  which  .
That is an impossible task.
• But Rrather, first, it is  developing  the  perfection  of  generosity  in
  one’s mind is dependent on, first, having destroyed  our  all  the  stingy
  clinging to the things that we own, such as our bodyas it says  here,  the
  body, resources and our merits. But
• that is not all. On top of that, one’s mind   must  have  been  completely
  familiarised “with the mind of giving to  others,”  i.e.,  conditioned  to
  giving all these away to every sentient being, i.e. you  have  conditioned
  that you no longer have any no issue with  of  giving  .  them  away,  and
  dedicating them away.
• On top of that, even the  effects  that  you  will  ould  experience  from
  giving are will also be completely dedicated away to others, i.e., .  yYou
  do not n’t even cling on to the effects, the merits you accumulate from  ,
  the virtues or whatever from giving. That also you completely dedicate and
  give it away to others.
Only wWhen all these  factors  come  together,   then  you  would  you  have
completed have tthe perfection of generosity. Only then will the  perfection
of generosity be generated in your the mind.

       2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C1A-1A2     Subdivisions
       This has two points:

           A     Subdivisions from the point of view of individual supports
           B     Subdivisions of the entity of generosity itself


       2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C1A-1A2A    Subdivisions from the point of view of
           individual supports
       This has two points:

           1     Explanation of the individual generosities for the
             individual supports
       In Bodhisattva  Vows  of  Liberation  (Bodhisattvaprātimokṣa)  it  is
       taught that generosity of material things is generally  practiced  by
       lay bodhisattvas, whereas ordained bodhisattvas should  practice  the
       generosity of the Dharma rather than generosity  of  material  gifts.
       (Page 175)[4]

G(b’) The divisions of generosity
   1. Divisions of generosity relative to particular persons
   2. Divisions of actual generosity

1. Divisions of generosity relative to particular persons
[LRCM V2 page 121]  In general it is said that lay bodhisattvas  make  gifts
of material things and renunciate bodhisattvas make gifts of the teachings.
This is how  generosity  is  categorised  divided;  depending  on  whom  the
practitioner erson is. A lay person  primarily  makes  gift  s  of  material
things while the renunciate/ordained person primarily makes  the  giftve  of
the Dharma, the teachings.

There are reasons why the ordained renunciates  should  focus  primarily  on
making the gift of the Dharma. The whole purpose of becoming ordained is  to
first strive in,  first,  in  hearing  and  reflection.  One’s  hearing  and
reflection areis harmed or disturbed when if one has too many things to  do.
Therefore it is stated that the ordained do not have to go out purposely  to
look for material things that they can accumulate and  give  away.  If  they
were to do that, this would obstruct  their  learning  through  hearing  and
reflection. , such as one is busy running after things and having  all  kind
of things to do. If renunciates run around trying to  accumulate  wealth  so
that they  can  give,  it  hinders  their  main  activity  of  learning  and
reflecting on the Dharma. For that reason, it  is  said  that  the  ordained
renunicates should focus primarily on making the gift of the Dharma.

Therefore it is stated that renunciates do not have to go out  purposely  to
look for material things so that they can accumulate and give  it  away.  If
they do that, it obstructs their learning through  hearing  and  reflection.
Their main activity is to engage in  hearing  and  reflection  and  on  that
basis make the gift of Dharma.
However if the ordained a renunciate does happen  to  receive  get  material
goods or money that comes his way without looking for them  it  due  to  the
force of his past merits, then at that time the renunciate  he  should  also
make the gifts of material goods.
      [LRCM V2 page 122]   The  Compendium  of  Trainings  says  the  Buddha
      intended here material gifts that would become a  hindrance  to  study
      and the like. It is said that renunciates are prohibited  from  making
      offerings of material goods that they have worked to obtain, but  they
      must give them away if they obtain many things through  the  force  of
      their previous merit and without hindering their virtuous  activities.
      Also, Sha-ra-wa said:
      I am not talking to you about the benefits of giving; I am talking  to
      you about the faults of tightfistedness.
      It is displeasing news when renunciates harm their ethical  discipline
      as they strain to the utmost in their search for wealth to give away.
      2. Divisions of actual generosity
   a. The gift of the teachings
   b. The gift of fearlessness
   c. Material gifts

      2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C1A-1A2B     Subdivisions of the entity of generosity
          itself
      This has three points:

          1  The generosity of the Dharma
      The generosity of the Dharma is to unmistakenly teach the holy Dharma,
      to teach properly, without misdeeds, the worldly aims of actions  such
      as crafts and so forth, and to make others  engage  in  upholding  the
      basis of the trainings.


          2 The generosity of fearlessness
      The generosity of fearlessness is [214] to thoroughly  protect  others
      from fear of humans such as kings, bandits, and so forth, from fear of
      non-humans such as lions, tigers,  and  so  forth,  and  fear  of  the
      elements such as water, fire, and so forth.


          3 The generosity of material things
      The generosity of material  things  is  to  give  material  things  to
      others. (Page 176)[5]

a. The gift of the teachings
The gift of the teaching is teaching the Dharma with a pure  motivation.  In
general,  Iit also  refers  to  educating  or  giving  others  education  or
knowledge about things that are not harmful. When That is said to be a  gift
of the teaching as well.
If you help others to keep their precepts or you encourage  others  to  take
precepts or vows and help them to keep their  precepts,  and  that  is  also
considered to be the gift of the Dharma/teaching.
In short, the gift of the teaching is, as the  phrase  implies,  giving  the
Dharma with a pure motivation  or  just  giving  others  some  knowledge  or
education about things that are not harmful, or encouraging others  to  take
precepts, vows, or encouraging them to keep whatever vows they  have  taken.
All of these are the gifts of the Dharma.
[LRCM V2 page 122]  The gift  of  the  teachings  is  teaching  the  sublime
teaching without making mistakes, teaching the arts and  the  like  (worldly
occupations which are blameless and proper to learn), and  involving  others
in upholding the fundamental precepts.
b. The gift of fearlessness

The gift of fearlessness is protecting sentient  beings  from  the  fear  of
humans and non-humans and from fear of the elements such  as  earth,  water,
fire and wind.

[LRCM V2 page 122]  The gift of fearlessness  is  protecting  living  beings
from fear of humans such as  kings  and  robbers,  from  fear  of  non-human
beings such as lions, tigers, and crocodiles, and from fear of the  elements
such as water and fire.
Whether one is making the gift of  the  teaching/  Dharma  or  the  gift  of
fearlessness,  all   these  acts  of  giving  should  be  done  without  any
expectations of receiving anything  favors in return.  or getting  something
in return. Thoese acts kinds of giving bring about a very  special  kind  of
joy or happiness when they are carried out sincerely from one’s heart and  .
Whatever gift, whether is a gift of Dharma or gift of fearlessness, is  done
without any expectations. T, then hey that become s an acts of pure  giving.
Otherwise, the gift, whether fearlessness or something  else,  for  example,
you will be protecting some sentient beings but  somehow  deep  inside  you,
you are expecting something.  it is That doesnot n’t become pure giving.
Whether one is making the gift of the teaching or the gift  of  fearlessness
or material things, if it is done completely sincerely from  the  bottom  of
one’s heart without any expectations in return, it becomes pure giving.

When If one gives and expectsing something in return,  and  because  one  is
expecting something in return, but whatever one is expecting hope  does  for
does not materialise, happens, then all kinds of  problems  and  unhappiness
such as regretting may arise later on.

Material gift is literally giving things. When you give some material   gift
to another person, it must be done from the heart. This means that you  have
no more clinging to that object anymore. Once it is given to others,  it  is
not yours anymore, i.e., ; literally you have cut your the  connection  with
that object. It should be like that. , and that is what This is giving is.

As we saw have seen earlier, generosity is not  just  about  destroying  our
own stingy clinging  to  the  things  that  we  own.  The  mind  has  to  be
conditioned to be able to  give  away,  and  to  dedicate  to  others   away
whatever we own. From the depths of our heart,  we  are  happy  to  let  go,
and just and to to give it away. So it is the attitude. In order to This  is
bringing  the perfection of generosity to completion, it says that  we  must
condition our mind to giving things that we own away to living  beings  from
the depth of our hearts..

      2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C1A-1A3A     How in order to complete the perfection
          of generosity the mind giving away all one’s possessions rather
          than the mere destruction of miserliness is necessary
      By merely destroying all miserliness without exception regarding one’s
      body and possessions, it does not become the perfection of  generosity
      because since miserliness is included in the factor of attachment, the
      two types of arhats of the Hīnayāna have  also  abandoned  it  without
      exception along with all its seeds. Hence it is necessary not only  to
      eliminate the obstacle to giving, the holding on to all things that is
      miserliness, but to generate the thought, from  the  bottom  of  one’s
      heart, of giving away all one’s possessions to others.


      2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C1A-1A3B     Thinking about the advantages of giving
          and the disadvantages of not giving
      For that it is necessary to meditate  both  on  the  disadvantages  of
      thoroughly holding on to things and on the advantages of giving. (Page
      176)[6]

[LRCM V2 page 115]  Lama Tsongkhapa says: Simply destroying  all  stinginess
in regards to your body and resources is not the perfection  of  generosity,
for stinginess is included within attachment and so even the  two  kinds  of
Hinayana arhats have totally eliminated it along with  its  seeds.  What  is
required  then,   is   that   you   not   only   clear   away   stinginess’s
tightfistedness, which prevents  giving  things  away,  but  also  that  you
develop from the depths of your heart the intention to give away  to  others
all your possessions. For this  you  have  to  meditate  on  the  faults  of
holding on to things and the benefits of giving them away.
Essentially Wwhat I have just read out aptly describesd what the  perfection
of generosity is. In order to be a  perfection  of  generosity  Iit  is  not
sufficient simply just to have no stinginess,  - no attachment  or  clinging
to the things. Of course, this That must be present. But Oonn top  of  that,
one’s mind must have the ability to completely dedicate away, i.e.  you  are
able to give away whatever you own to others. So tThese  two  features  must
be present.

In our discussion on  the  Mahayana  pPaths  and  &  gGrounds,  there  is  a
perfection related to each of the ten grounds. The perfection of  generosity
is related to the first 1st ground. This means that  it  is  only  when  the
bodhisattvas achieve the first 1st ground only then do they have  that  they
achieve the  surpassing  a  very  exalted  practice  of  the  perfection  of
generosity. This  means  that  even  the  hearers  and  solitary  realiszers
arhats/foe destroyers  do not have the perfection of generosity.

WWe need to think about whether the perfection of generosity exists  in  the
continuaum of the ordinary bodhisattvas or not.

Khen Rinpoche (in English): What do you think?

Do ordinary bodhisattvas on the Mahayana  pPath  of  aAccumulation  and  the
Mahayana pPath of pPreparation have the perfection of generosity or not?

(Student’s  response is d inaudible).

Khen Rinpoche (in English): Because?

In order to produce the perfection of generosity in the mind,  do  you  need
to abandon overcome attachment? , true or false?

(Student’s response is inaudible).
Earlier on when we  were  looking  at  the  measure  of  the  perfection  of
generosity, it said that says “yYou perfect generosity only after  you  have
destroyed your stingy clinging to all that you own”.  Doesn’t that refer  to
one’s attachment to one’s possessions – the things  that  one  own  and  the
things that belonged to you?

Student: No pervasion.

Khen Rinpoche (in English): No pervasion?

You say, “N no pervasion.” ,  Tthen how do you destroy your stingy  clinging
and what does that mean?
What does destroying your stingy clinging means?

(Student’s rStudent responsed is  inaudible).

Khen Rinpoche (in English): No grasping of the self?

In our discussion ofn The Heart of  the  Perfection  of  Wisdom  Sutra,  the
sutra saidys, : “How should any any son of the lineage train who  wishes  to
practise the activity of  the  profound  one  train  in  the  perfection  of
wisdom?” The perfection of wisdom there means the  path  of  pPerfection  of
wWisdom.

After the question was is asked, the  answer  wasis  given.  The  answer  is
pertaineding to how one should train in the perfection  of  wisdom  starting
from the pPath of aAccumulation and pPath of pPreparation that ,  which  are
the ordinary paths. This means  that  the  practice  of  the  perfection  of
wisdom does exists on the ordinary paths.

If the practice of the perfection of wisdom  does  exists  on  the  ordinary
paths— – the Mahayana pPath of  aAccumulation  and  the  Mahayana  pPath  of
pPreparation—- you  could  say  that  the  practice  of  the  perfection  of
generosity does exists as well. If you could say that, then  basically  yyou
could say that the practice of all the six perfections does  exists  on  the
ordinary paths.  For Iif you were to say that  they  do  not  exist  on  the
ordinary paths, that position is  then it is going be  difficult  to  defend
or justify.

The point is that you  could  discuss  whether  it  is  better  to  say  the
perfection of generosity only exists on the  first  1st  ground  or  already
exists on the ordinary paths. You could  bring  together  the  positions  or
views of the major texts,  and try to make a coherent argument and then  see
which position is better.

The faults of attachment
In order to have excellent ora  good  practice  of  generosity,  first   one
must first contemplate well the benefits of generosity  and  the  faults  of
holding on to things without giving them away.

      The former are as taught in the Moon Lamp Sūtra (Candrapradīpasūtra):

          Since the body is unclean, and the  life  force  fluctuates  like
          water gushing down a steep mountain, and both body and life force
          are controlled by karma thus lacking  an  independent  self,  you
          should see them to be false, like a dream or a mirage, and  cease
          your attachment to them. If you do not reverse it, you will  come
          under the control of attachment, accumulate great faulty conduct,
          and go to the lower realms. (Page 176)[7]


In the Middle Length  Lamrim,  the  faults  of  holding  on  to  things  are
explained as this: You  should  stop  attachment  by  viewing  the  body  as
unclean, life as rushing like a mountain cascade,  both  body  and  life  as
devoid of an independent self because they are under the control  of  karma,
and both as false like a dream or a  magician's  illusion.  Furthermore,  if
you do not stop attachment, you will become dominated by it, build up  great
wrongdoing, and proceed to lower realms.
[LRCM Vol 2 page 115] The Moon Lamp Sutra says:
These childish people are attached
To this rotting body and to this
Rushing life-force, both of which lack independence
And are like a dream or a magician's illusion.
So these unintelligent beings do terrible things,
Fall under the control of sin,
And, carried away by the chariot of Death's Lord,
Proceed to unbearable hells.
This says that you should stop attachment by viewing the  body  as  unclean,
life as rushing like a mountain cascade, both body and life as devoid of  an
independent self because they are under the control of karma,  and  both  as
false like a dream or a magician's illusion.  Furthermore,  if  you  do  not
stop  attachment,  you  will  become  dominated  by  it,  build   up   great
wrongdoing, and proceed to miserable realms.
You have to understand that this discussion ofn  the practice of  generosity
is in the context of the bodhisattva deeds. Specifically Here we are  mainly
talking about the practice of generosity that  is  undertaken  done  by  the
bodhisattvas. For the  bodhisattvas,  Bbesides  giving  away  resources  and
dedicating the merits to others,  away, they  also  train  in  giving  their
bodies away. In order for the bodhisattvas to be able to dedicate  and  give
their  bodies y away to others,  first  they  first  must  overcome  reverse
whatever attachment  they  may  have  to  their  bodies.  They  do  that  by
realiszing how the body is unclean by nature  and  ,  how  their  lives  are
constantly changing, and on  the  move,   just  like  a  very  fast  flowing
riverstream. They also understand that their  own  body  y  and  lifefe  are
under the control of their own kkarma and  afflictions.  By  realiszing  all
this, ese, they are able to stop whatever attachment they may have to  their
body y and lifefe.  By  In  doing  so,  do  they  train  themselves  to  get
accustomed to the idea of giving away their bodyies.

Here the text states that the bodhisattvas also train in viewing their  body
y and lifefe to be like a dream or a  mirage.[8]magician’s  illusion.   They
come to realisze that their body and life do  not  exist  in  the  way  they
appear. When they realisze that,  tthen  they  are  able  to  stop  whatever
attachment they have to their body and life and they would be able  to  give
them away. . If you are able to stop attachment to your body and  life  then
you would be able to give it away.

This discussion is about the faults of attachment or clinging on to what  we
have. In the case of the bodhisattvas,  it is talking about  the  faults  of
their  attachment to their body and life. Usually we  regard  our  body  and
our life as something very precious. We regard our body as  very  clean  and
pure, the most precious thing and we regard our life as  something  that  is
never changing and is very stable.  Based  on  Tthis  world  view  and  this
belief, attachment comes because we find  our  body  very  clean  and  pure,
precious,  and  our  lives  as  very  stable  and  unchanging,  i.e.  always
remaining as it is. That areis the basis for attachment to arise.

Because of attachment, when we meet  with  something  undesirable,  when  we
feel that our body and life is going to be harmed, then naturally  there  is
aversion or anger towards the source of that or the origin of harm. Then  In
so doing, we follow after anger, and then we engage in  all  kinds  of  non-
virtuous actions and . In so doing, we aaccumulate  negative  karma  in  the
process. So, basically all the problems basically come from  attachment  and
th. Therefore, there is the a need to stop it. attachment.

The advantages of generosity
What about the benefits of giving away the things that we own?



      [LRCM Vol 2 page 116] The Compendium of Trainings says:
      My body and rnind
      Move on moment by moment.
      If with this impermanent body, dripping with filth,
      I attain enlightenment,
      Which is permanent and pure,
      Will I not have attained what is priceless?
      The second, the advantages of giving, are as taught in the  Compendium
      of Trainings:

          In this way my body and mind
          Pass away in every instant.
          If I attain, with this body that is
          Tainted and impermanent,
          Permanent, untainted enlightenment,
          Is it not obtained for free? (Page 176)[9]

This verse is saying  that  our  body  and  mind  areis  in  the  nature  of
impermanence, in that they are it is changing momentarily in each and  every
single moment. Our bodies while having the nature of  impermanence  changing
in every moment are is also by nature filthy, unclean  and  impure.   If  we
were to  give away and , dedicate and give away  this  body,   which  is  by
nature dirty, impure, unclean and  impermanentchanging  in  each  and  every
moment, to others and what we get in return  is  full  enlightenment,  isn’t
that an amazing and wonderful thing?

Khen Rinpoche (in English): This is lLike doing business. Y you  gives  your
the poo to others and in return,  you  get  the  gold  back.  That  is  It’s
wonderful. So This is something like that.

(Student’s  responseds is  inaudible).

Khen Rinpoche (in  English):  So  Tthe  question  is  why  areyou  you   are
attached to dirty things?.  This at is the big question.  Why  get  attached
to dirty things?


This verse is saying that our the body and life of ours, whether weyou  like
it or not, is going to completely  disintegrate  and  fall  apart  one  day.
Before that happens, if we were to do something  good  with  them—it,  let’s
say by giving it dedicating it away and dedicating it  to  others—giving  it
away  and  and  achieves  something  marvellous  in  return,  that  will  be
wonderful.
Here in tThhe teachings also it is saying that if we were  are  able  to  do
all this, dedicate our body and life away to others and  in  return  we  get
something much better with so much benefits, in the process,  we  will  also
accumulate much lless negativities.

ACTUAL METHOD OF ENGAGING IN GENEROSITY

       2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C1A-1A3C-1  How to actually generate generosity
       This has two points:

            A    The actual topic [215]
      Engaging  in  Bodhisattva  Conduct  describes  how  generosity  should
      actually be generated:

          My body as well as my resources,
          All my virtues of the three times,
          I give away without sense of loss to
          Accomplish the welfare of all sentient beings.

      Like that, taking the three—body, resources, and  roots  of  virtue—as
      your object, you should familiarize yourself again and again with  the
      thought of giving them away to all sentient beings. (Page 177)[10]

What is the actual method of engaging in generosity?
[LRCM Vol 2 page 119]  Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds says:
I will give away without a sense of loss
My body and my resources
As well as all my virtue from the past, present, and future
For the welfare of all living beings.
You focus on three things -your body, your  resources,  and  your  roots  of
virtue- and mentally give them away to all living beings.
In order  to  be  able  to  really  have  an  excellent   good  practice  of
generosity, first we first must train ourselves to have a generous  attitude
and . We  must  become  get  accustomed   toto  such   the  idea  of  thisan
attitude.
We are told asked to focus on these three things— - our body, resources  and
roots of virtue— a- and then get accustomed to mentally giving them away  to
sentient beings.

But Aas a beginners, one is not able to give away the body  and  one  should
not do sogive away the body as a beginner.  Nevertheless,  we  have  to  get
accustomed to the idea of giving it away in the  future.  In  order  to  get
accustomed  to  this  e  idea,  we  have  to  train  ourselves  by  mentally
dedicating our bodies to othersaway. W hen If we do not train our  the  mind
in this way, to get accustomed to the  idea  of  giving  the  body  away  to
others, then we will never be able to do so in reality in the future.  there
will never come a time when we will be able to do that in  reality.  Through
habituation, when the mind is fully accustomed to really able  to  giving  e
away the body to others, then when the time comes, we will  be  able  to  do
this it without any difficulty.

Even Jjust mentally giving away our body, resources and roots of  virtue  to
all sentient beings will brings about immeasurable merit. Why  is  this  so?
Because the number of sentient beings are likewise immeasurable.

[LRCM Vol 2 page 119] You focus on three things—your body,  your  resources,
and your roots of virtue—and mentally give them away to all  living  beings.
If you stop the craving  that  conceives  everything  to  be  your  personal
property and then repeatedly condition yourself to the  attitude  of  giving
it all away to others, you will be called a bodhisattva.
The Compendium of the Perfections says:
"All these things are yours;
I have no pride that they are mine/'
Someone who has this amazing thought repeatedly
And emulates the qualities of the perfect Buddha
Is called a bodhisattva—so said
The inconceivable Buddha, the supreme being.
At present, as your determination has not matured and is weak,  you  do  not
actually give away flesh, etc., though you have already mentally given  your
body to all beings. According to the Compendium of  Trainings,  however,  if
you do not train in the thought of giving away your body and life, you  will
not become accustomed to it and so will  remain  incapable  of  giving  away
your body and life. Therefore, from now on cultivate this thought.

Qualms about the practice of generosity
Next Tthe text then is addressesing some of the qualms that people  commonly
commonly have about generosity.
One may wonder: : IIf I  have  mentally  completely  already  dedicated  and
completely mentally given away my body, resources and  roots  of  virtue  to
all sentient beings, am I still allowed to use and enjoy themse things?
When If you completely have already given  to  others  the  things  you  own
completely from the depths of your heart,  to others then  those  things  do
not n’t belong to you anymore. They belong to others. If Tthat being is  the
case, can you use or partake or enjoy those things that  no  longer  do  not
belong to you?
Lama Tsongkhapa had this to say: says this:


      2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C1A-1A3C-2   Importance of the inner attitude
      This has two points:

          A    The disadvantages of forgetting the welfare of others
      Thus, when you use food, clothing, and so forth that  you  have  given
      away to sentient beings with a sincere thought, if,  having  forgotten
      the thought “I will use these for the welfare of others,” you  instead
      use them for your own welfare  as  a  result  of  craving,  it  is  an
      afflicted  downfall.  If,  without  this  craving,  you   forget   the
      discrimination that  observes  all  sentient  beings  or  if  you  are
      attached for the sake of another sentient being, it is a non-afflicted
      downfall. If you use for your  own  sake  those  things  dedicated  to
      others, having discriminated them to be the substances of  others,  it
      becomes taking what  has  not  been  given  and  if  it  is  something
      valuable, it becomes a defeat of the  pratimokṣa  vow.  On  the  other
      hand, if you use them thinking: “I will  use  the  resources  of  this
      sentient being for his own  welfare,”  there  is  no  fault.  This  is
      mentioned in the Compendium of Trainings. (Page 177)[11]

[LRCM Vol 2 page 119] If you use food, clothes, shelter and so on  that  you
have sincerely given away to all beings, and you  do  so  with  craving  for
your personal welfare, forgetting the thought, "I will use them for  others'
welfare," then you commit a major infraction (an afflictive downfall).  When
you have no craving but forget to apply the idea of focusing on  all  living
beings, or if you use those resources for a particular living being  out  of
attachment, you commit a minor infraction (a non-afflictive downfall).
With regard to the material goods that you have turned over to  others,  the
Compendium of Trainings states that when you use them for your  own  welfare
fully cognizant of their being the property of  others,  you  are  stealing,
and if the total value is enough, you commit  a  cardinal  transgression  of
the vows of individual liberation.
The point here is that Wwe are talking  here  about  the  practices  of  the
bodhisattvas. The only thing  the  bodhisattvas  are  interested  in  is  to
accomplishing  the welfare of all sentient beings.  In  order  to  do  that,
they undertake the practice of generosity whereby they  completely  dedicate
whatever they own—their bodies, resources  and  roots  of  virtue—to  others
from the depths of their hearts.   of whatever  they  own  –  their  bodies,
resources and roots of virtue- to all sentient beings. Whatever they  do  is
only to benefit sentient beings.

• SIf, for such a person,  whose only goal is to accomplish the  welfare  of
  all sentient  beings,  for  whatever  reason,  may   forget  his/her  goal
  purpose, and forgetand  about the happiness of sentient beings.  He then ,
  but uses whatever enjoyments, such as  like food, clothes and  ,  shelter,
  for his/her own purpose motivated by  attachment.  ,  then  This  it  goes
  against the very idea of what the bodhisattva practice should be.  ,  then
  Therefore it is for that reason it is incorrect.
• If such a practitioner uses the food, clothes and shelter without  craving
  but forgets to apply the idea of focusing on all living  beings,  that  is
  also incorrect.
• Or Iif such a practitioner uses those resources for a specific  particular
  sentient being out of  attachment,  this  is  also  wrong.  that  is  also
  incorrect.

In order to further clarify this issue, this issue, Lama Tsongkhapa says:

           B     Clearing up doubt concerning a defeat
       The way in which it becomes a  defeat  is  when  you  have  dedicated
       something with a sincere thought to a migrating being who is a  human
       being, and he, having cognized it, also holds it to be  his,  if  you
       take it for your own welfare with the discrimination that it  belongs
       to someone else and if it is of some value, then the factors  for  it
       to become a defeat are present. That is  the  intention  here.  [216]
       (Page 177)[12]

This You incur a  cardinal  transgression  (or  defeat)  of  the  individual
liberation vow given that the total value requirement has been met when  you
sincerely turn your food, etc., over to  a  human  being,  and  this  person
knows it and takes possession of it, whereupon you fully cognizant of  their
being the property of others and appropriate them for your own use.
This is Lama Tsongkhapa’s clarification on the intended meaning of what  was
said earlier.
Here is a discussion regarding of when when athe cardinal  transgression  or
defeat (or cardinal  transgression)  occurs,  specifically  in  relation  to
stealing, i.e., taking that which is not  given.  We  are  talking  about  a
bodhisattva or practitioner who has completely dedicated to others  whatever
he owns— – body, resources and roots of virtue— – from  the  depths  of  his
heart. In order for stealing and thus a cardinal transgression or defeat  to
occur, happen,  the  recipient  person  who  receives  that  thing  must  be
cognizant and haves the idea,  “Now this object is mine.”.
• From the giver’s side, the object person has been completely dedicated  to
  others and you know the object now belongs to someone else.   away.
• From the recipient’s side,  who  has  received  the  thing  generates  the
  thought is generated,  “Now this is mine.”.
You, as giver, has completely dedicated away to others.
The recipient has the idea that he has received this thing and  now  it  has
become his.
You, as the giver, are cognizant that it  has  become  somebody  else.  When
With all these factors come together, in place, if  you  use  whatever  ythe
object you ou have given away for your own  purpose,  stealing  and  then  a
cardinal transgression or defeat occurs.
We are talking about the cardinal transgression or  defeat  in  relation  to
stealing, i.e. taking that which is not given. In this case, when does  this
cardinal transgression happens?
We are  talking  about  someone  who  has  completely  given  and  dedicated
something away to others. For such a person, when does stealing occur?
This person gives away everything and completely  dedicate  to  others.  The
recipient must cognize that and has the  idea  of  ownership  thinking  “Now
this is mine”. The giver is also cognizant that this has  becomes  his/hers.
When these factors come together, and if you as giver use  that  object,  it
becomes a cardinal transgression of stealing.
According to the Vvinaya, to qualify as a defeat of  the  pratimoksha  vows,
the recipient must be a human being. in order to qualify as a defeat of  the
pratimoksha vow.
So for a defeat of cardinal transgression, the other party must be  a  human
being.

In the case of the bodhisattva’s  practice of generosity here, we  are  told
that the practice involves mentally giving away all  one  owns  to  sentient
beings:  – one’s body, resources and roots of virtue - to  sentient  beings.
Yes, Ssuch a practice is done.  But when we mentally dedicate  these  things
it to others,   we  won’t  don’t  have  people  coming  up  to  us  and  you
acknowledging this, at “Thank you. I have received  this  and  this  is  now
mine now.”.

Khen Rinpoche (in English): This at  means  that  you  can  still  can  give
mentally and you can sstill can use them.

There is a total value requirement that must be met.
What is conventionally accepted to be as stealing?
When If you take something that is sufficiently valued has  a  value  enough
for it to be considered stolen,  then  it  is  said  that  the  total  value
requirement is met.
What we  have  mentioned  so  far  is  the  position  of  Lama  Tsongkhapa’s
position.

In  the  Lam-Rrim  Chen  Momo,[13]  Lama  Tsongkhapa  also  did  stated  the
positions that were held by some other scholarsmasters.  Pertaining  to  the
total value requirement, in order for cardinal transgression to occur,  Lama
Tsongkhapa states: There are Ssome scholars  people  who  say,   “Since  you
have turned over your possessions, whatever it is to all living  beings,  it
is impossible for the total  value  of  the  portion  ofa  any  one  being's
portion to fulfil the total value requirement.  be  enough,  Ttherefore  you
cannot commit a cardinal transgression.”.

Let us ’s say you do dedicate whatever you own— – your body,  resources  and
roots of virtue— – and you really give themit away to all  sentient  beings.
, then They it then belongs to all  sentient  beings.  Each  sentient  being
would have his or /her share; a portion of it. The A portion  that  belonged
to of each sentient being will not be enough to constitute the  total  value
requirement.

This is the  position  of  some  scholars.   But  Tthere  are   other  other
scholars who say such a position is wrong. Why? They say,
Others say:  “This  is  not  correct  because  you  have  turned  over  your
belongings as a whole to each sentient being.
When you are giving,  away you are not dividing  them  up  before  you  give
them it away.  You are giving the whole thing to every sentient being.
There are other scholars who say: Therefore iIt is  incorrect  therefore  to
say that the total value  requirement  is  not  met.”   just  because  every
sentient being receives only a portion of what you have given away.

Anyway, what Lama Tsongkhapa says this is, “: Even if you do  mentally  give
away all that you own to sentient beings, you would not  commit  the  defeat
cardinal transgression of stealing simply because others are  not  cognizant
of your giving. They do not generate the thought that they have  now  become
the owners of everything those things that you have given away.

While you are training your mind in giving by mentally dedicating away  your
body, resources and roots of virtue to all living beings,  and at  the  time
when you are actually using  and  enjoying  thoese  resources  and  enjoying
them,,  you must do so it with the idea that you are doing it  in  order  to
help others, and you are doing it for the welfare of sentient  beings.  When
If yyou do use the resources that you have  mentally  given  away  with  the
idea that you are doing it to accomplish the welfare of others,  then  there
is no fault.”

[LRCM Vol 2 page 119] With regard  to  the  material  goods  that  you  have
turned over to others, the Compendium of Trainings states that when you  use
them for your own welfare fully cognizant of their  being  the  property  of
others, you are stealing, and if the total value is  enough,  you  commit  a
cardinal transgression of the vows of individual liberation. In response  to
this, some say that since you have turned  over  your  food,  etc.,  to  all
living beings, it is impossible for the  total  value  of  any  one  being's
portion to be enough, so you cannot commit a cardinal transgression.  Others
say this is not correct because you have turned over your  belongings  as  a
whole to each being individually. Others argue that  even  though  you  have
mentally surrendered them to others, they do not  take  personal  possession
of them, so there is no cardinal transgression.
The intended meaning behind the Compendium of Trainings  statement  is  that
you incur a cardinal transgression (given that the total  value  requirement
has been met) when you sincerely turn your  food,  etc.,  over  to  a  human
being, and this person knows it and takes possession, whereupon  you,  fully
cognizant of their being another's property, appropriate them for  your  own
use. Therefore, the positions stated by the others are wrong.
There is no fault in using some  living  beings'  resources  if  you  think,
while using  them,  "I  do  this  for  their  welfare."  The  Compendium  of
Trainings states:
There is no fault in using things if you think, "I  am  taking  care  of  my
body which is owned by  others  with  these  resources  that  are  owned  by
others." Slaves have no material goods of their own with which to survive.
You may think, "I incur a fault because, after  I  have  turned  over  these
belongings to living beings, I  use  them  without  their  permission,"  but
there is no fault. The Compendium of Trainings says:
A servant who labors hard on  a  master's  behalf  might  use  the  master's
belongings without permission when the  master's  mind  is  unclear  due  to
illness and so forth, but incurs no fault.
Do not lack faith and think, "Mentally  giving  everything  away  to  living
beings while not actually giving it is tantamount to a lie  and,  therefore,
is without real substance." The Compendium of Trainings says:
Some people who are close to a bodhisattva who practices in  this  way  fail
to understand the bodhisattva's practice accurately and lack faith. This  is
unwarranted because they are well acquainted with someone who  has  a  great
and wonderful spirit of generosity.  It is wrong  for  them  to  doubt  this
method.



Interpreted by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme; transcribed by Phuah  Soon  Ek,  Patricia
Lee and Julia Koh; edited by Cecilia Tsong.


-----------------------
[1] LRCM, 114.
[2] This topic appears on page 88 of the root  text  and  was  discussed  in
Lesson 30 of Module 1 on the Middle Length Lam-Rim.
[3] Ibid., 114.
[4] Ibid., 120-121.
[5] Ibid., 122.
[6] Ibid., 115.
[7] Ibid., 115-116.
[8] “Mirage” is translated as “magician’s illusion” in the LRCM.
[9] Ibid., 116.
[10] Ibid., 119.
[11] Ibid., 119.
[12] Ibid., 120.
[13] This discussion can be found in pages 119-120.

