Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/SixPerfections/BP2 M4 L17 (final).doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:02.665723
================================================================================


Transcript of teachings by Khen Rinpoche Geshe Chonyi  on  the  Heart  Sutra
and Stages of the Path (the Six Perfections)

The root text, Middle Length Lam-Rim,  by  Lama  Tsongkhapa,  translated  by
Philip Quarcoo, © FPMT, Inc., May 2012, is  indented.  All  page  references
refer to the root text, unless otherwise stated.

Where applicable, page numbers of corresponding  sections  in  the  Lam  Rim
Chen Mo (LRCM) are indicated in footnotes; they refer to The Great  Treatise
on the Stages of the Path  to  Enlightenment,  Volume  2,  by  Tsong-kha-pa,
translated  by  The  Lamrim  Chenmo   Translation   Committee,   Snow   Lion
Publications, 2004.

Lesson 17                                                         27  August
2013


Continuation of the perfection of patience. (From root  text,  pages  184  –
187).


DETAILS OF HOW ANGER DESTROYS VIRTUE

Anger destroys virtue. Sometimes  anger  destroys  the  fruitional  effects.
Sometimes anger destroys the causally concordant effects.

Anger destroys fruitional effects
      Moreover, even though negativities  that  have  been  accumulated  are
      cleared away by purifying them  with  the  four  powers  as  described
      above, this does not contradict the fact that they delay  the  arising
      of higher paths. Thus in some people the effects of giving  gifts  and
      guarding ethics, such  as  the  arising  of  excellent  resources  and
      bodies, are destroyed. However, due to the effect corresponding to the
      cause, familiarization with giving and the mind  of  abandonment,  the
      roots of virtue of generosity and ethics arise again easily and cannot
      be destroyed. (Page 184)[1]

The text is saying that, for some  people,  anger  destroys  the  fruitional
effects of their virtue such as having  resources  and  an  excellent  body.
However for these same people, their anger does not  destroy  their  natural
inclination for safeguarding their ethics or  familiarisation  with  giving.
These are said to be the causally  concordant  behavioural  effects  of  the
practices  of  giving  and  ethics  respectively.  For  some  people,  anger
destroys the fruitional effects of their virtue but it does not destroy  the
causally concordant behavioural effects.

Anger destroys causally concordant effects
      In others the arising of the effect corresponding to the  cause  as  a
      continuum of similar type, inner ethics and so  forth,  is  destroyed,
      but the arising of an excellent body, resources, and so forth [224] is
      not destroyed. (Page 184)[2]
For  some  people,  anger  destroys  the  causally  concordant   behavioural
effects. They may lose  their  liking  for  giving  and  safeguarding  their
ethics.  Although  the  causally  concordant  behavioural  effects  of  such
virtues are destroyed, nevertheless  they  do  experience  their  fruitional
effects. For  such  people,  although  they  may  have  resources  and  also
excellent bodies, they do not like to practise giving nor do they  safeguard
their ethics.  This shows that for some people, anger destroys the  causally
concordant behavioural effects  but  it  does  not  destroy  the  fruitional
effects of their virtues.

Anger delays progress on the path
      Again others,, as described previously, will have some realizations of
      the path that enable them to completely traverse  it  within  one  eon
      unless anger toward a bodhisattva who has obtained his prophecy arises
      in their minds. If one thought of anger arises, their traversal of the
      path within one eon will be delayed although the path that  exists  in
      their continua is not relinquished. (Page 184)[3]

For some people, anger does not  destroy  the  fruitional  effects  and  the
causally concordant behavioural effects of their virtue, but their  progress
on the path is delayed or slowed down.  For  example,  someone  may  achieve
enlightenment in an eon but if he gets angry, his enlightenment  is  delayed
for an eon, i.e., he is one eon  further away from enlightenment.

Lama Tsongkhapa mentions in his Illumination of  Thought,  a  commentary  to
Chandrakirti’s Supplement to the Middle Way, that when a bodhisattva on  the
Mahayana great path of accumulation gets angry with a  bodhisattva  who  has
obtained a prediction of enlightenment, the former bodhisattva will have  to
train again from the beginning of that path. I  am  not  exactly  sure  with
regard to the measure of having obtained a prediction  of  enlightenment  as
this is not explicitly stated.

This is something that we can think about: Is there manifest  anger  in  the
continuum of a bodhisattva on the path of preparation?

      In brief, what I mean is that, with respect to purifying  non-virtues,
      not all its efficacy[4] is necessarily  purified  and  likewise,  with
      respect to  the  destruction  of  virtue,  not  all  its  efficacy  is
      necessarily destroyed.


            B    How that depends exclusively on the scriptures
       Nonetheless this is an important point, and since it seems  necessary
       to analyze it in  dependence  on  the  Buddha’s  scriptures  and  the
       reasonings based on them,  you  should  analyze  it  looking  at  the
       Buddha’s excellent teachings.[5] (Page 184)[6]

This example shows that it is very important to learn and  reflect  on  many
texts and scriptures. When you do that, you are able to gain  a  better  and
stronger conviction in and ascertainment of the  teachings.  In  this  case,
with respect to the faults of anger  and  the  benefits  of  patience,  with
stronger conviction, one would be  in  a  better  position  to  be  able  to
counteract anger.

In an earlier discussion, conventionally speaking, we saw  how  most  people
would agree that, with some justification, it  is  all  right  to  be  angry
especially when the truth is on their side. Most  people  think  like  that.
But as we saw earlier in the text, Lama Tsongkhapa  mentions  that  when  it
comes to the destruction  of  virtue  by  anger,  there  is  no  distinction
between anger that is generated with a just  reason  or  an  unjust  reason.
Even in a situation whereby the truth is on your side and you are right,  if
that becomes a condition for you to be upset and angry, you  suffer  because
your mind is disturbed and you lose all mental peace.

So far we saw how:
• In some cases, anger destroys the  roots  of  virtue  accumulated  over  a
  thousand eons.
• In other instances, anger destroys the roots of virtue accumulated over  a
  hundred eons.
• In some  situations,  where  an  ordinary  being  is  angry  with  another
  ordinary being, the roots of virtue accumulated over  many  lifetimes  are
  also destroyed.
All these are the invisible faults of anger.  We  cannot  directly  perceive
them. We can only come to an understanding of these faults  and  develop  an
ascertainment of them by depending on the scriptures of the Buddha.

      Thus the invisible disadvantages of anger are that  it  projects  very
      unpleasant fully ripened effects and prevents the emergence  of  other
      very pleasant fully ripened effects. (Page 185)[7]

Does anyone understand this part of the sentence,  “prevents  the  emergence
of other very pleasant fully ripened effects”?

Khen Rinpoche: I don’t  understand  that  sentence.  What  is  the  sentence
saying? Now it is your turn to explain to me. What does it mean?

Student: It means that the fault of anger is that it  will  throw  you  into
many  unpleasant  rebirths  and  that  it  will  either  delay  or   destroy
measureless rebirths in good conditions.

Khen Rinpoche: Anyway I don’t understand it. You can think about it.

VISIBLE EFFECTS OF ANGER

      2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C1A-1C3A-2B  Visible disadvantages along with
          supplementary remarks
      This has three points:

          1 How peace of mind and so forth are not experienced
      The  visible  disadvantages  of  anger  are  taught  in  Engaging   in
      Bodhisattva Conduct: you do not experience mental peace and certainty,
      previous joy and happiness are ruined and later on are  not  achieved,
      sleep does not come and the mind does not  remain  at  ease,  if  your
      hatred is strong, even those you nurtured with kindness  forget  about
      your kindness and kill you, even friends and relatives  get  irritated
      and abandon you, and even those you gather with gifts do not stay, and
      so forth. (Page 185)[8]

These things are quite apparent in our lives. As it says  here,  when  there
is anger, we lose our mental calm and our mind is disturbed. When  our  mind
is disturbed, it affects us physically as  well.  Due  to  our  anger,  even
those we have cared for in the past may forget our  kindness  and  harm  and
even kill us.

Depending on the motivation, sometimes people  engage  in  the  practice  of
generosity to gather people into their fold.  Even when you do  this,  these
people may just take your gifts and leave. Then you get upset.

There isn’t a single person who has not experienced strong  anger.  Everyone
knows how anger disturbs oneself mentally. We can  say  that  we  have  full
realisation of the effects  of  strong  anger!  We  have  to  be  aware  and
cognisant of the points that are listed in the text  about  the  faults  and
disadvantages of anger and we should try to reduce our anger.

Khen Rinpoche: I think probably we all have the  perfection  of  anger,  not
generosity.  (Laughter).

           2     How to gain certainty regarding the faults
       In Engaging in Bodhisattva Conduct it says:

           There’s no negativity equal to hatred
           There’s no austerity equal to patience.
           Therefore patience should be practiced
           Earnestly, in various ways.

       Thus you should consider the advantages and disadvantages and make an
       effort to develop patience in many ways. (Page 185)[9]

It can make a difference if we were to memorise this verse,  even  just  the
first two  lines,  “There’s  no  negativity  equal  to  hatred/  There’s  no
austerity equal to patience.” When we have memorised it, then we can  recall
it when we are  upset or angry. By recalling the verse, we should  bring  to
mind the meaning of the two lines by thinking about the faults of anger  and
the benefits of patience. In doing so, we can try  to  moderate  and  reduce
our anger.

There isn’t anyone who doesn’t get angry. But if you  are  someone  who  has
full conviction in karma and  in  the  validity  of  the  teachings  of  the
Buddha, then when you recall this verse, “There’s  no  negativity  equal  to
hatred,” definitely you will be able to do something with the anger that  is
manifesting. You can get a hold of it and reduce it.

We should  derive  some  benefit  from  studying  about  the  perfection  of
patience, then reading and thinking about it. It is very difficult  to  stop
anger from arising. What we can do is to get hold of it and reduce  it  when
it does arise. At the very minimum this is what we should do after  learning
and studying about this topic.

           3     Supplementary remarks
       It should be understood from the Compendium of Trainings that  hatred
       is not ascertained to be the only faulty conduct that  collects  both
       major fully-ripened effects and the destruction of roots  of  virtue.
       [225] There is the wrong view that deprecates the law  of  cause  and
       effect, the abandonment of the holy Dharma, contempt,  generation  of
       pride, and so on toward bodhisattvas,  gurus,  and  so  forth.  (Page
       185)[10]


Anger is not the only thing that destroys the roots  of  virtue.  There  are
these examples of other mental states. For example, if we were to  have  the
wrong views that deny karma, we  abandon  the  Dharma  or  we  belittle  the
bodhisattvas and our own gurus, all these actions are also said  to  produce
terrible fruitions.

Prior to the next  section on how we should meditate on patience, we  should
first reflect on the benefits of patience and the faults of anger.  On  that
basis, then we cultivate patience.

THE ACTUAL WAY TO CULTIVATE PATIENCE


          1 How to cultivate the patience that is unconcerned with respect
            to harm
          2 How to cultivate the patience that accepts suffering
          3 How to cultivate the patience devoted to a mind of certainty
            regarding the Dharma (Page 185)[11]

1   How to cultivate the patience that is unconcerned with respect to harm
This is covered in five points:

           A     The offender’s lack of control
       If you investigate whether or not someone who harmed you was free not
       to harm you, you will find that he did not harm you  while  being  in
       control, for he generated the wish to harm  you  out  of  causes  and
       conditions such as the seeds  of  mental  afflictions  from  previous
       familiarity and improper  mental  attention.  Also  due  to  them  he
       engaged in  activities  that  inflicted  harm  and  thereby  produced
       suffering in others,  for  under  the  power  of  other,  the  mental
       afflictions, he had become as if their slave. (Page 185)[12]

In trying to develop the patience that disregards  harm  done  to  you,  the
first thing to analyse is whether the harm doers  had  any  self-control  or
not when they were harming you. Upon analysis, the conclusion  is  that  the
harm doers had no self-control. Why? Because they were completely under  the
control of their own afflictions. If the  harm  doers  were  not  under  the
control of their anger, they  would  not  harm  you.  They  were  under  the
control of their afflictions such as anger, attachment and  so  forth.  They
harmed because of their afflictions.

We have to establish with complete certainty from our  side  that  the  harm
doers have no choice whatsoever, i.e., they have completely no  self-control
or choice.  We should be convinced about this. Thinking like this  by  using
many avenues of reasoning, when you come to a  decisive  ascertainment  that
the harm doers truly  have  no  self-control  and  or  independence  in  the
matter, then definitely that will help to weaken your anger.

           B     The inappropriateness of anger given that he has no
             control
       Even if someone, driven by something else without control, has harmed
       you, anger is inappropriate. For instance, if someone,  possessed  by
       an evil spirit, were to come under its power and wish  to  harm  you,
       his benefactor freeing him from it, and if he were to strike you, you
       would not get even the slightest bit angry at him but instead  think:
       “He is acting like this now because the evil spirit has deprived  him
       of his freedom.” You would put effort into doing whatever  you  could
       to free him from the evil spirit. A bodhisattva should also act  like
       that.(Page 185)[13]

Thinking about the meaning of this analogy is a method for us  to  stop  our
anger.

Next is stating the source for this line of reasoning.

           C     The scriptural source for this
       From Four Hundred Stanzas:

           Just as a doctor is not disturbed
           By one who is gripped by a spirit and angry,
           The Sage beholds the mental afflictions
           Not the person afflicted by them.

       Master Candrakīrti also says:

           “This is no fault of sentient beings,
           It is a fault of the mental afflictions.”
           The wise who have analyzed this in detail
           Are not disturbed by sentient beings. (Page 186)[14]

The fault does not lie with the harm  doers.  Rather  the  fault  lies  with
their afflictions. This is one way of thinking. Another way of  thinking  is
linking the harm that you received back to your own karma.

           D     How anger is inappropriate if one thinks of one’s own
             karma
       Moreover, the experience of suffering produced by the one  who  harms
       you [226] is the experience  of  the  effect  of  a  negative  action
       accumulated by you yourself in the past and, in dependence  on  that,
       the action is exhausted. If you cultivate patience  with  respect  to
       it, you will not newly accumulate causes for  experiencing  suffering
       later on, whereas if you get  angry,  you  will  have  to  experience
       suffering that is even greater than that. (Page 186)[15]


Intellectually this is not a difficult thing  to  understand.  It  is  quite
straightforward. Even if you look at this from the perspective of  just  one
life, this life, good  people  do  not  have  many  problems.  Whenever  you
experience a problem, it must have  been  due  to  an  inappropriate  action
committed in the past. Maybe you did not show the proper facial  expression,
you did not  say  something  properly  or  your  way  of  doing  things  was
incorrect.

Khen Rinpoche: You didn’t say, “Hi.” You didn’t say, “Hello.” (Laughter).

It is definitely something that lies with  us  that  has  caused  the  other
party to be upset. People do not get upset without reason.  In  that  sense,
we are the condition for the other person getting  upset.  We  should  think
then about what we can do to stop the person from being upset.

In  short,  every  undesirable  thing  that  happens  to  us,  every  single
suffering and every problem is the result of our own  negative  karma.  When
we experience problems, we can think that the negative  karma  that  is  the
cause of that particular experience is being purified. We  can  also  remind
ourselves, “If I react in  a  negative  way,  I  will  only  accumulate  new
negative karma that will lead to further suffering.” This  way  of  thinking
actually summarises the other techniques for controlling anger.

           E     Consequently, the appropriateness of being patient as if
             it were a medical examination
       It is therefore quite appropriate to be patient with minor  suffering
       in order to avert greater  suffering,  such  as  being  patient  with
       bloodletting, burning, and so forth as a method for curing a  serious
       illness. (Page 186)[16]

These concepts are not difficult at all. What is difficult  is  thinking  in
these ways. We have to put effort into this and think about  them  over  and
over again. By thinking  about  these  different  points,  we  practise  the
patience of disregarding harm done to us.

2 How to cultivate the patience that accepts suffering
      This has three points:

          A      Countering the categorical aversion to suffering that
            arises

      If the suffering that has arisen is curable, aversion is  unnecessary.
      If it is not suitable to be cured, again, aversion to  it  is  useless
      because it is without benefit, and it  is  even  disadvantageous,  for
      even tiny suffering becomes extremely hard to bear  if  you  are  very
      intolerant, whereas even great suffering is bearable if you  are  less
      intolerant. (Page 186)[17]

Usually people get  upset  when  they  find  that  they  have  a  particular
sickness and the mind is disturbed. At such a time, we  should  think  about
what we have read from the lamrim. We should analyse, “Can the  sickness  be
cured?” If there is a cure, then there is no reason to be upset or  worried.
If there is no cure, likewise there is also no need to get  upset.  We  need
great fortitude and forbearance. When there is no forbearance, even a  small
problem can bring us great suffering.

Khen Rinpoche: For example, in the monastery,  there  were  some  monks  who
were very impatient. You cannot even throw a  small  pebble  at  them.  They
become  very  upset.  Everyone  teased  them,  especially  this  one   monk.
Everybody teased him. If his zhen was pulled from the  side,  he  would  get
angry. You could not touch him. This monk  had  so  much  suffering  because
everyone teased him. Everybody wanted to play with him. At times, there  may
be ten of us. Someone would throw  a  stone.  Nobody  knows  who  threw  the
stone. When he looked back, he would get angry.

After five, ten years of being teased in this way, he became  very  patient.
We need to try this here.  I am joking! So that is the benefit. After  that,
he didn’t care. No matter how many stones were  thrown  at  him,  he  didn’t
care. Once he didn’t care, nobody threw any more stones.

We had another monk in the class. Everybody teased him also. In the end,  he
became the best in class. No anger. So  there  are  example  like  that.  In
monastery it is like that. When  the  person  gets  angry,  everybody  would
tease him. But it depends on the person. Some people  generate  …  I  better
not say too much in case later the monk finds out.

           B     Considering the positive qualities of suffering itself
       The way to mentally take the side of suffering is to train  the  mind
       again and again thinking “If there was no such suffering, the wish to
       definitely emerge from cyclic existence would not arise, therefore it
       has the positive quality of exhorting my mind to liberation;  it  has
       the positive quality of eliminating my arrogance  since,  when  I  am
       beset with suffering, my conceited superiority is destroyed;  it  has
       the positive quality of making me shun negativities  because  when  I
       experience an intense feeling of suffering, since it arises from non-
       virtue, I must turn away from its cause if I do not want this effect;
       it has the positive quality of making  me  delight  in  accomplishing
       virtue since, due to being tormented by suffering, I  want  happiness
       and for that purpose I must accomplish virtue; and, having understood
       that compassion is generated for the beings of cyclic existence as  I
       think “In proportion to my own experience, others also suffer,”  this
       suffering fulfills my wishes.” (Page 186)[18]

In his teachings on the four noble truths,  the  Buddha  talked  about  true
suffering first. The Buddha gave an extensive explanation of what  suffering
is to help us recognise  it.  The  best  way  to  understand  and  recognise
suffering is at the individual level by relating it to our  own  experience.
This is the best way. When you truly recognise what suffering is,  you  will
produce a determination to be free from it.

Sometimes for whatever reason, you may feel arrogant. If you happen to  fall
very sick, naturally that sickness will  dispel  your  arrogance.  So  being
arrogant is not a good thing.

There are many good qualities of suffering. We have  to  think  about  them.
When we experience problems and when we recognise and realise that they  are
the results of our own non-virtue, our own negative karma, that will  propel
us to think about abandoning non-virtue.

The point is that we are trying to stop our mind from being  disturbed  when
we are facing crises or problems such as sicknesses or harm. When  there  is
a problem, there are techniques to remain calm and  not  be  disturbed.  The
way to remain  calm  is  to  think  about  the  qualities  and  benefits  of
suffering and the benefits.

           C     It is not difficult if you familiarize yourself in small
             steps
       Here again it says:

           Something that does not [227] get easier
           If you get used to[19] it, does not exist.
           Therefore endure even major harm
           By getting used to minor harm.


       Thus, if you put on the armor of the intention  to  accept  suffering
       and expose yourself to suffering in small  steps,  your  strength  to
       accept suffering will grow. (Pages 186-187)[20]

3   How to cultivate the patience that is devoted to a mind of certainty
  regarding the Dharma
      The way to cultivate the  patience  that  is  devoted  to  a  mind  of
      certainty regarding  the  Dharma  is  to  train  in  devotion  to  the
      following without bias: the objects of clear faith, the Three  Jewels;
      the objects to be actualized, the two selflessnesses;  the  object  of
      desire, the great power of the buddhas and bodhisattvas;  the  objects
      to be adopted and discarded, the causes that are excellent conduct and
      faulty conduct as well as their effects;  the  object  of  meditation,
      enlightenment, the meaning to be achieved; the  method  for  attaining
      that, the path of the bodhisattva trainings; the  objects  of  hearing
      and thinking, the holy Dharma of the twelve scriptural  branches,  and
      so forth. (Page 187)[21]

More on the destruction of virtue

Small, middling and great extinguishment
It is mentioned in the teachings that with  regard  to  the  destruction  of
virtue, there is:
1. small extinguishment
2. middling extinguishment
3. great extinguishment

• A small  extinguishment  is  reducing  the  length  of  time  whereby  you
  experience the effects of virtue. Without anger you would have experienced
  their positive effects for a very long time. When anger destroys the roots
  of virtue, you can only experience their  positive  effects  for  a  short
  time. Alternatively, that root of  virtue  would  have  produced  a  great
  happiness and great result for you but, due to anger, the  result  becomes
  very small. These are instances of small extinguishment.
• A great extinguishment refers to the almost complete  destruction  of  all
  effects. When virtue gives rise  to  effects,  there  are  the  fruitional
  effects and the causally concordant effects. These effects of  virtue  are
  good effects. A great extinguishment is when both the  fruitional  effects
  and the causally concordant effects are wiped out.
•  The  middling  extinguishment  is  something  between  these  two.  Using
  reasoning, you should be able to infer or posit what it is.

Meaning of destruction of roots of virtue
What does it mean to destroy the roots of virtue? What does  “destroy”  here
mean?
Destroy here means harming the capacity of those roots of virtue to  produce
or issue forth their positive effects. As for the degree  of  harm  to  that
capacity, there is great harm, middling harm and small harm.

As  we  saw  in  earlier  lessons  and  as  mentioned  in  the  lamrim,  the
destruction of roots of virtue does not mean the destructions of  the  seeds
of virtue. It does not mean that.  Our position is that the  destruction  of
the roots of virtue means harming the capacity of those roots of  virtue  to
produce pleasant effects.

                                ~~~~~~~~~~~~

Question:  What  kind  of  negativity  will  destroy  only  the  behavioural
effects? What kind of negativity will destroy only the  fruitional  effects?
Are there negativities that will destroy both?

Answer: I think it is difficult  to  posit  which  kind  of  anger  destroys
fruitional effects and which kind of anger destroys behavioural  effects.  I
guess it is possible to  conceive  of  certain  types  of  anger  being  the
destroyer of fruitional effects and certain kinds of anger that destroy  the
behavioural effects. That is different from positing. I have not  seen  such
a discussion in the texts. Neither have I thought about it.  I  didn’t  have
time to think about this.

Khen Rinpoche: Anyone has any ideas about this? I am not sure.

Question: In Western psychology, there is this therapy where  they  ask  the
patients to hit the pillow or throw darts at  a  picture  of  the  enemy  in
order to bring out the anger in  full  force  to  eliminate  the  anger.  If
someone were to ask me about this and, being  a  Buddhist  who  believes  in
karma, how should I advise this person? Are those actions  virtuous or  non-
virtuous?

Khen Rinpoche:  I heard some people say that when they get angry,  they  eat
a lot. They eat and eat in order to subdue their anger.

Answer: There are all kinds of methods that give you temporary  relief  from
frustration. These basically take your mind off unpleasant situations.  They
are a kind of distraction, thinking about something else  or,  as  you  say,
bashing up the pillow. But these are just temporary means. You are  cheating
yourself and avoiding thinking about your anger.

Khen Rinpoche: There was one businessman who told me that sometimes  he  had
so much stress, so much anger in his life. How does  he  control  his  anger
and stress? He said he would drink three  bottles  of  wine  and  then  fall
asleep so that he won’t think the whole night. This is  his  method.  He  is
not a Buddhist. But he said when he woke up in  the  morning,  the  problems
came back. Every day he had to do like that (drinking himself to sleep).

The example of hitting the pillow. Maybe you may need to hit the pillow  the
whole day, every night. You may need to hit the pillow your whole life.

There are many such temporary methods, but  they  are  just  temporary.  The
approach that  we  are  learning  here  in  the  teachings  is  a  radically
different approach because it is not seeking the solution from outside,  but
seeking change from the inside, i.e.,  changing the way we  think.  This  is
the big difference.

Venting one’s frustration on an external object like a pillow is  temporary.
It is dealing with that anger at that particular  point  in  time.  What  we
need to do is to take total control of anger, not just for one  day  or  for
one situation. As such the technique  has  to  come  from  the  inside,  for
example, thinking about karma if you have conviction in karma. If  you  have
conviction in karma, you will see for yourself that there  is  no  point  in
getting angry and you gain control over all instances when anger may  arise.
It helps.

In general, that way of thinking can act as a solution for anger.  It  is  a
very radical and very different approach. This  is  the  difference  between
the Buddhist approach  and  the  conventional  approach.  Remember,  in  the
beginning of the chapter on patience, the text said that when we subdue  our
minds, it is the same as having subdued all the outside enemies. It  is  not
possible to subdue external enemies. There will never come a  day  when  all
external enemies are defeated. But when we subdue our mind, it is  the  same
as having subdued all external enemies.

In general, when you look at all the  teachings  of  the  Buddha,  they  are
about disciplining  and  subduing  the  mind.  In  particular  the  Mahayana
teachings on the practices for the  person  of  great  capacity  stress  the
great importance of disciplining and subduing one’s own mind.

We have to see for ourselves what makes the teachings of the  Buddha  unique
and how they are different. Their approach is about working  with  the  mind
from the inside, not so much trying to  fix  things  from  the  outside.  Of
course there are methods to deal with external situations. They  can  be  of
some benefit. But what  makes  the  Buddhist  method  different  from  other
approaches is that it is  about  dealing  with  the  inside,  i.e.,  solving
problems from the inside.

If we cannot see this, we do not realise this and we cannot do it,  then  of
course it is a different matter. But if you see that  it  can  work  and  it
works when you try  it,  then  that  is  when  you  will  realise  that  the
teachings of the Buddha are different and very special.

We still have to cover the perfection of joyous effort  and  the  perfection
of concentration. We will be stopping at the fifth perfection.

Question: Ven. Gyurme mentioned that the Lam Rim  Chen  Mo  and  the  Middle
Length Lam Rim are almost identical in  Tibetan.  I  was  wondering  whether
Khen Rinpoche can please explain Lama Tsongkhapa’s  intention  in  composing
the Middle Length Lam Rim since he had already composed  a  definitive  text
on the lamrim, i.e., the Lam Rim Chen Mo. Also, are the two  texts  intended
for students of different dispositions?

Khen Rinpoche: I will answer this in the next class.






Interpreted by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme; transcribed by Phuah  Soon  Ek,  Patricia
Lee and Julia Koh; edited by Cecilia Tsong.

-----------------------
[1] LRCM, 157.
[2] Ibid.
[3] Ibid., 157.
[4] “Efficacy” is translated as “behavioural effect” in LRCM.
[5] Tib. gsung rab, usually translated here as “scriptures.”
[6] Ibid.
[7] Ibid., 157.
[8] Ibid., 157–158.
[9] Ibid., 158-159.
[10] Ibid., 159.
[11] Ibid.
[12] Ibid., 160-161.
[13] Ibid., 161.
[14] Ibid.
[15] Ibid., 164.
[16] Ibid., 165.
[17] Ibid., 173.
[18] Ibid., 174.
[19] Tib. goms, usually translated here as “familiarize yourself.”
[20] Ibid., 176.
[21] Ibid., 178-179.

