Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/SixPerfections/BP2 M4 L20 (final).doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:02.614574
================================================================================


Transcript of teachings by Khen Rinpoche Geshe Chonyi  on  the  Heart  Sutra
and Stages of the Path (the Six Perfections)

The root text, Middle Length Lam-Rim,  by  Lama  Tsongkhapa,  translated  by
Philip Quarcoo, © FPMT, Inc., May 2012, is  indented.  All  page  references
refer to the root text, unless otherwise stated.

Where applicable, page numbers of corresponding  sections  in  the  Lam  Rim
Chen Mo (LRCM) are indicated in footnotes; they refer to The Great  Treatise
on the Stages of the Path to Enlightenment, Volumes 2 and 3,  by  Tsong-kha-
pa, translated  by  The  Lamrim  Chenmo  Translation  Committee,  Snow  Lion
Publications, 2004.

Lesson  20                                                                 5
September 2013


The perfection of wisdom. How to train in  the  last  two  perfections:  the
methods for cultivating calm abiding and special insight that  are  included
in the perfections of concentration and wisdom. (From root text,  pages  194
– 202).


HOW TO TRAIN IN WISDOM

           A     The importance of hearing as a cause of wisdom
       Therefore it is necessary to generate wisdom. Its cause, hearing  the
       completely pure scriptures in accordance with one’s mental  capacity,
       …(Page 194)


You need to generate  wisdom  and  the  cause  of  wisdom  is  studying  the
stainless texts in accordance with your mental capacity.  This  sentence  is
from MLLR but not in the LRCM.

      Having heard little, blind, unable to meditate;
      What understanding would someone so lacking reflect on?
      Therefore, make effort in hearing. From that cause there’s thinking,
      While through meditation spacious wisdom arises. (Page 194)[1]

[LRCM Vol 2 page 218]
Little study is like blindness – you do not know how to meditate.
Without study, what could there be to reflect upon?
Therefore, from the cause of making an effort to study
You meditate in accord with reflection and thereby gain vast wisdom.
The goal of studying the texts is to be able to think about and  reflect  on
their meaning, and then to familiarisze your mind with those meanings.  This
is what is called  meditation. In  order  to  be  able  to  reflect  and  to
meditate, one must have vast studied extensively y, and have vast  learning.
This is the advice of Lama Tsongkhapa.
[LRCM Vol 2 page 218] Therefore, as the Compendium of the Perfections says:
Serve and venerate a guru worthy of trust,
And study to achieve wisdom.
Once you rely on a learned person,  you  must  study  in  accord  with  your
capacity, for if you do not, you will not produce  the  wisdom  that  arises
from study and the wisdom that arises from reflection,  whereupon  you  will
not know what to meditate upon, And if you do study, you  will  produce  the
wisdom that arises from reflection by thinking over the meaning of what  you
have studied, and from this you will  gain  vast  wisdom  that  arises  from
meditation.

The cause of wisdom is  to  engage  in  vast  learning  and  extensive  vast
studies. y.
Why is wisdom important?
Wisdom is important because  without  itwisdom,   we  cannot  eliminate  the
obscurations.

      Venerable Maitreya also wrote in his Sublime Continuum:


           Conceptualization of the three spheres
           We posit as knowledge obscurations,
           Conceptualization like miserliness
           As afflictive obscurations.


           Apart from wisdom there’s no cause
           That abandons them and therefore
           Wisdom is supreme. Accordingly
           Hearing for its sake is supreme. (Page 194)[2]


      [LRCM Vol 2 page 218] The venerable Maitreya also says in the  Sublime
      Continuum:
      The conceptualizations of the three spheres
      Are asserted to be cognitive obscurations,
      While conceptualizations such as stinginess and the like
      Are asserted to be afflictive obscurations.
      Solely wisdom is the cause
      Of their elimination, nothing else,
      So wisdom is supreme. Study is its basis,
      So study is supreme.
      The holy beings of  the  past  also  said:  First  you  should  gather
      together the Dharma of hearing that exists in your  mind.  Then  again
      and again you should think about it, appraise it, and investigate  it.
      It does not help to make oneself forget the Dharma and train to simply
      hold the mind once. The highest teachings are suitable  for  excellent
      meditators,  intermediate  teachings  are  suitable  for  intermediate
      meditators. However much one  meditates,  to  the  same  extent  one’s
      knowledge of the Dharma should grow. (Page 194)[3]

[LRCM Vol 2 page 221] As the former excellent beings said:
Make all the teachings you have previously heard completely  clear  in  your
mind. You must reflect  upon  them  again  and  again,  evaluate  them,  and
deliberate on them. When you have let yourself forget the  teachings,  there
is nothing gained by learning to stabilize your attention on one  object  of
meditation. The best meditators are the best teachers.  Mediocre  meditators
become  mediocre  teachers.  You  need  knowledge  of  the   teachings   and
commensurate meditation that both proceed to ever greater levels together.
Knowledge of the Ddharma/teachings is a condition  for  the  development  of
one’s mind, . It is a condition for one’s  mind  to  progress  and  improve.
i.e. become better and better.
It is good to read what we have just read out  here.  If  you  have  already
done your reading prior to coming to class, then that it is  fine.  If  not,
then you should read this particular paragraph.

CALM ABIDING AND SPECIAL INSIGHT

      The training in the last two perfections in particular [238]  consists
      in methods for cultivating calm abiding[4] and special insight because
      those two are included in the perfections of concentration and  wisdom
      respectively.


      2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B    The actual explanation
      This has six points:

          1    The benefits of cultivating calm abiding and special insight
          2    Demonstration that the two—calm abiding and special
            insight—include all meditative stabilizations
          3    The entities of calm abiding and special insight
          4    The reason why both calm abiding and special insight need to
            be cultivated
          5    How the order of calm abiding and special insight is
            definite
          6    How to train in calm abiding and special insight
            individually

The benefits of cultivating calm abiding and special insight

          A    Demonstration that all the positive qualities of the
            Mahāyāna and Hīnayāna are results of calm abiding and special
            insight
      In the Sūtra Unraveling the Intended Meaning it is set forth that  all
      the mundane and supramundane positive qualities of  the  Mahāyāna  and
      Hīnayāna are results of calm abiding and special insight.


          B    Setting out a doubt about that
      You may wonder: “Aren’t calm  abiding  and  special  insight  positive
      qualities of the mind[5] that are gained from meditation? How can  all
      those positive qualities be admissible as results of those two?” (Page
      197)[6]
      Serenity and Insight
      [LRCM Vol 3 page 13] In particular, how  to  train  in  the  last  two
      perfections
      Training in the last two perfections, in particular,  is  the  way  to
      cultivate  meditative  serenity*  and  insight  because  serenity  and
      insight are included under the perfections of meditative stabilization
      and wisdom respectively.
      *Meditative serenity is translated as calm abiding


What is the qualm  that  is  raised  here?  In  the  Sutra  Unravelling  the
Intended Meaning, it is said that aThis section has six parts:
1. The benefits of cultivating serenity and insight
2. Showing that these two include all states of meditative concentration
3. The nature of serenity and insight
4. Why it is necessary to cultivate both
5. How to be certain about their order
6. How to train in each
[LRCM Vol 3 page 13] (a) The benefits of cultivating serenity and insight
Sutra Unravelling the Intended Meaning says:
Maitreya, you  should  know  that  all  mundane  and  supramundane  virtuous
qualities, whether of sravakas, bodhisattvas, or tathagatas, are the  result
of meditative serenity and insight.
Qualm: Are not serenity and insight good qualities  in  the  mind-stream  of
someone who has reached them through meditation? How is it possible for  all
good qualities to result from those two?
All mundane and supramundane good qualities of  the  Mahayana  and  Hinayana
are the results of calm abiding and insight. You may be asked  why  this  is
so.
What is the qualm that is raised here? If somebody were to ask you “How  can
that be? Sure or not? Why?”
           C     The response to it
       Actual calm abiding and special insight are indeed positive qualities
       of the mind gained from meditation, as explained below. Therefore not
       all the positive qualities of the Mahāyāna and Hīnayāna  are  results
       of the two. Nevertheless, all the meditative stabilizations  starting
       from a single-pointed mind placed on a virtuous object  are  included
       in the class of calm abiding,  and  all  the  virtuous  wisdom  minds
       individually analyzing the meaning  of  the  mode  or  varieties  are
       included in the class of special insight. It is  with  that  intended
       meaning that all the positive qualities of  the  three  vehicles  are
       said to be results of calm abiding and special insight.  Hence  there
       is no contradiction. (Page 197)[7]

In general, not all the good qualities of the Mahayana and Hinayana are  the
results of calm abiding and special insight [LRCM Vol 3 page 14]  Reply:  As
will be explained, actual serenity and insight are  good  qualities  in  the
mind-stream of someone who has attained them through meditation, so all  the
good qualities of the  Mahayana  and  Hinayana  do  not  result  from  them.
However,  concentrations  which  at  least  involve  one-pointedness  on   a
virtuous object are  classified  with  serenity;  virtuous  cognitions  that
distinguish an ultimate or conventional object are classified with  insight.
This is what the sutra means in stating that all of the  virtuous  qualities
of the three vehicles result from serenity  and  insight,  so  there  is  no
contradiction.
The What was stated reply is essentially this -in the Sutra Unravelling  the
Intended Meaning, the meaning of what was  stated  earlier   does  not  mean
that all the good qualities of the Mahayana  and  Hinayana  come  from  calm
abiding serenity and special insight.

In general:
• Concentration means the mind that is able to stay focussed single-
  pointedly on a virtuous object.
• Wisdom means being able to distinguished objects such as ultimate and or
  conventional objects.
These two are included under calm abiding and  special  insight.  From  that
perspective, it is said that all the good  qualities  of  the  Mahayana  and
Hinayana are the results of calm abiding serenity and special insight. So
In general, not all the good qualities of the Mahayana and Hinayana are  the
result  of  calm  abiding  and  insight.  But  the  meaning  of  the   Sutra
Unravelling the Intended Meaning subsumes what I have just explained—  -that
what is concentration  and  wisdom  are  and  subsumeding  them  under  calm
abiding and special insight. From that perspective, then  it  is  said  that
all the good qualities  of  the  Mahayana  and  Hinayana  result  from  calm
abiding and special insight.

Khen Rinpoche (In English): Nobody read?
My first question to you “Did you read?”
YKhen  Rinpoche:  Did  anyone  read  this  before  class?  You  should  read
beforehand  and then try and to see whether you understand what I have  just
said. Probably it will become clearer after you read it.

      In the Sūtra Unraveling the Intended Meaning it also says:

          Having familiarized themselves
          With calm abiding and special insight,
          Beings will gain complete liberation
          From the bondage of bad states[8] and signs.

      This is what is meant: “bad states” are latencies that remain  in  the
      mind, capable of generating more and  more  mistaken  consciousnesses,
      while “signs” revive  those  latencies  for  the  adherence  to  wrong
      objects arising  time  and  time  again.  [239]  Instructions  on  the
      Perfection of Wisdom (Prajñāpāramitopadeśa) explains that  the  former
      are abandoned through special insight  and  the  latter  through  calm
      abiding. Those are the benefits of what are designated as calm abiding
      and special insight. (Pages 197-198)[9]

[LRCM Vol 3 page 14] The Sutra Unravelling the Intended Meaning states:
Once people have cultivated insight
And serenity, they are free
From the bondage of dysfunctional tendencies
And from the bondage of signs.
Here, “dysfunctional tendencies” refers to latent propensities in your mind-
stream which can  produce  increasing  degrees  of  misconceptions;  “signs”
refers to ongoing attachments  to  erroneous  objects,  which  foster  those
propensities.
[LRCM Vol 3 page 15] Ratnakarasanti's Instructions for  the  Perfections  of
Wisdom says that insight eliminates the former,  while  serenity  eliminates
the latter.
These are the benefits attributed to “serenity” and “insight”.
This is explainsing the  benefits  of  calm  abiding  serenity  and  special
insight.
• Calm abidingSerenity eliminates “those latencies for the adherence to
  wrong objects arising time and time again.”ongoing attachments to
  erroneous objects.
• Special iInsight eliminates the “latencies that remain in the mind,
  capable of generating more and more mistaken consciousnesses.”

• t propensities in the mind stream that can produce increasing  degrees  of
  misconceptions.
• [LRCM Vol 3 page 15] (b) How serenity and insight include  all  states  of
  meditative stabilizations
  The branches, leaves, flowers, and fruits of a tree are limitless, yet the
  core point at which they all  come  together  is  the  root.  As  in  this
  example, serenity and insight are the sublime core at  which  gathers  all
  that  the  Buddha  says  about  the   limitless   states   of   meditative
  concentration in Mahayana and Hinayana. The Sutra Unravelling the Intended
  Meaning states:
Know that serenity and insight include  all  of  the  many  aspects  of  the
states of  meditative  concentration  which  I  have  taught  for  sravakas,
bodhisattvas and tathagatas.
Therefore, since those who are intent on attaining meditative  concentration
cannot comprehend a limitless number of distinct  forms,  they  should  know
well and always rely on the techniques for sustaining serenity and  insight,
the synthesis of all concentrations.
Demonstration that the two—calm abiding and special insight—include all
meditative stabilisations

      In the Sūtra Unraveling the Intended Meaning  it  says  that  all  the
      limitless meditative stabilizations proclaimed in the Mahāyāna and the
      Hīnayāna are nevertheless subsumed  under  calm  abiding  and  special
      insight.  Therefore,   since   those   who   strive   for   meditative
      stabilization cannot investigate  all  its  limitless  manifestations,
      they should thoroughly investigate how to sustain the epitome  of  all
      meditative stabilizations—calm  abiding  and  special  insight.  (Page
      198)[10]


THE ENTITY OF CALM ABIDING


          1 Stating a source
      The entity of calm abiding is set forth in the  Sūtra  Unraveling  the
      Intended Meaning:

          Dwelling alone in solitude,  he  directs  the  mind  inward   and
          attends to those  very  phenomena,  just  as  he  has  thoroughly
          reflected on them. He attends to  them  with  the  mind  directed
          inward continuously and attentively. The states  he  thus  enters
          and abides in many times in which  physical  and  mental  pliancy
          arise are called calm abiding. (Page 198)[11]

The Sutra Unravelling the Intended Meaning states that serenity and  insight
are the sublime core at which gathers all that the  Buddha  says  about  the
limitless states of  meditative  concentration  in  Mahayana  and  Hinayana.
Therefore, since those who are intent on attaining meditative  concentration
cannot comprehend a limitless number of distinct  forms,  they  should  know
well and always rely on the techniques sustaining serenity and insight,  the
synthesis of all concentrations.
[LRCM Vol 3 page 15] (c) The nature of serenity and insight
As to the nature of serenity, it is as stated in the Sutra  Unravelling  the
Intended Meaning:
While you dwell in solitude and properly direct your attention  inward,  you
attend to just those topics upon which you have  carefully  reflected.  Your
attention is mentally engaged by continuously attending inwardly. The  state
of mind wherein you do this, and stay this way  often,  and  in  which  both
physical and mental pliancy arise, is called “serenity.”
What exactly is serenity? What exactly is insight? This is  how  the  Buddha
describes calm abiding  serenity  in  the  Sutra  Unravelling  the  Intended
Meaning. So This that is the quotation. e. Now Lama Tsongkhapa explains  its
the meaning of that.

           2     The meaning of this statement
       The meaning of this is that  if  the  mind,  having  attended  to  it
       continuously without distraction, stays on the object  by  itself  so
       that the joyful bliss of physical and  mental  pliancy  arises,  that
       meditative stabilization becomes calm abiding. This will  arise  from
       merely keeping the mind inward undistracted; it does  not  depend  on
       internalizing the suchness of things. (Page 198)[12]

[LRCM Vol 3 page 16] With undistracted mindfulness and vigilance, you  focus
your attention on this object and fix it  to  the  object  continuously,  so
that your mind stabilizes of its own accord on  the  object  of  meditation.
When you produce the delight and bliss of physical and mental pliancy,  then
your state of meditative concentration becomes serenity.  This  comes  about
through just sustaining your attention inwardly,  without  distraction  from
the object of meditation;  it  is  not  contingent  upon  understanding  the
reality of the thing.
The details about calm abiding will come later when we look  at  how  it  is
actually developed.
• For now, you can take calm abiding to be a mind that is able to focus
  single-pointedly on any chosen object.
• This single-pointedness of mind has to be free from the faults of
  excitement and laxity.
• On top of that, together with this concentrated mind, you must have also
  achieved the bliss of physical pliancy and the bliss of mental pliancy. I
  will explain later what  physical and mental pliancy are. There is an
  order in which they arise.
For now, calm abiding is a mind that is able to  focus  single-pointedly  on
any chosen object i.e. chosen object of observation.
So calm abiding is a mind that is able to focus single-pointedly on that.
This single-pointedness of the mind has  to  be  devoid  or  free  from  the
faults of excitement and laxity.
On top of that, together with calm  abiding,  this  concentrated  mind,  you
must have also achieved the bliss of  physical  pliancy  and  the  bliss  of
mental pliancy.
I will explain what physical and mental pliancy is, and what  is  the  bliss
of physical pliancy and what is the bliss of mental pliancy.   There  is  an
order in which they arise. That will be covered later on.
In short, calm abiding is a mind  focus  focussed  single-  pointedly  on  a
chosen object of observation that which is devoid of excitement  and  laxity
and is accompanied by the bliss of physical and mental pliancy.

From what was stated we have read out earlier, it is clear that you  do  not
need to realisze emptiness in order to achieve calm abiding.

The entity of special insight

      Next is the entity of insight. What did Buddha say about the entity of
      insight?
      The entity of special insight is set forth in the same sūtra:
          Having achieved physical pliancy and mental  pliancy,  he  abides
          in them, abandons the aspects of  the  mind,  and  [240]  devotes
          himself to the individual investigation of the images within, the
          objects of meditative stabilization, the very  phenomena  he  has
          likewise reflected on. Thus, with regard to the images  that  are
          the   objects   of   meditative   stabilization,   any   thorough
          differentiation of the meaning of those objects of knowledge, any
          exceedingly thorough differentiation,  full  investigation,  full
          analysis, tolerance,  acceptance,  classification,  viewing,  and
          conceptualization, is called special insight.  In  that  way  the
          bodhisattva is skilled in special insight. (Pages 198-199)[13]


[LRCM Vol 3 page 16] As to the nature of insight, the same sutra says:
After you have attained  mental  pliancy  and  physical  pliancy,  you  stay
therein and eliminate other mental aspects. You  then  regard  inwardly  and
with discernment the mental image which is  the  domain  of  the  meditative
concentration on the topics upon which you have reflected. With relation  to
the images that are the domain of such  concentration,  any  differentiation
of  the  meaning  of  these  topics,  or  full   differentiation,   thorough
examination,  thorough  analysis,  forbearance,  wish,  differentiation   of
particulars, view, or thought is called "insight."  Thus  is  a  bodhisattva
skilled in insight.
Khen Rinpoche (In English): This at is what  the  Buddha  said.  Then  after
that,   what  Lama  Tsongkhapa  said  is  his   -  the  commentary  on  this
quotation. at.

           2     Elucidating the meaning of the sūtra passage
       Here,  “thorough  differentiation”  is  a  differentiation   of   the
       varieties   and   “exceedingly   thorough   differentiation”   is   a
       differentiation  of   the   mode.   “Investigation”   is   a   coarse
       investigation and “analysis” is a subtle analysis. (Page 199)[14]

[LRCM Vol  3  page  16]  In  that  sutra  passage,  "differentiation"  means
distinguishing   the   diversity   of    conventional    phenomena;    "full
differentiation" means distinguishing  their  real  [ultimate]  nature.  The
noble  Asanga  explains  that  "thorough  examination"  is  when  conceptual
attention possessed of wisdom apprehends a sign; "thorough  analysis"  means
proper examination. "Examination" means rough examination; "analysis"  means
detailed analysis. The apprehension of a sign  does  not  here  refer  to  a
conception of  true  existence,  but  rather  to  distinguishing  the  exact
particulars of  an  object.  Accordingly,  there  is  both  examination  and
analysis of both the real nature and the diversity of phenomena.
There are these different terms that came out in the quotation.
• “"Thorough differentiation" means differentiating stinguishing the
  varieties or diversity of conventional phenomena.
• “"Exceedingly thorough full differentiation"  (or full differentiation)
  means differentiating their mode or stinguishing their real nature.
• “Full investigation” (also translated as "thorough examination")  is
  “when conceptual attention possessed of wisdom apprehends a sign.” [15]
• "“Full analysis” (or thorough analysis) " means “proper examination.”[16]

You have the mental factor  of  examination  and  analysis.  Examination  is
translated  as  investigation  in  the  Lorig  module.  [There   are    four
changeable mental factors. Of which two are investigation and analysis]
Among the four changeable mental factors, you have  the  mental  factors  of
investigation[17] and analysis:
• IWhat is nvestigation examination? Examination is a rough analysis of  the
  object.
  is a rough analysis of the object.
• Analysis is a detailed examination nquiry of the object.

In terms of the order of arising, first you generate calm  abiding.  Special
insight is achieved within calm abiding. Within calm  abiding,  you  already
have the bliss of physical and mental pliancy. Within that state,  you  then
engage in the thorough  examination  of  the  object  with  the  two  mental
factors of investigation and analysis. When  this  examination  induces  the
bliss of pliancy, that is when special insight is achieved.
Only then Aftedo you r that, only then  you  can  have  the  union  of  calm
abiding and special insight.

First, you achieve calm abiding. Insight is essentially an investigation  of
the object – it is an analysis of the object. Investigation is  the  pursuit
with these two mental  factors  –  examination/investigation  and  analysis.
When the investigation of  the  object  is  able  to  induce  the  bliss  of
pliancy, then special insight is generated.
First, you have to achieve calm abiding. Special insight is achieved  within
calm abiding.
So within calm abiding, you already have the bliss of  physical  and  mental
pliancy.
Within that state, then one engages in the  thorough  investigation  of  the
object with the two mental factors of examination and  analysis.  When  this
investigation  induces  the  bliss  of  pliancy  that  is  when  insight  is
achieved. Only then,  you  have  the  union  of  calm  abiding  and  special
insight.

      … in Stages of Meditation II it also says:
          The abidance within the mind  itself,[18]  in  which  distraction
          toward external objects  has  calmed  down,  and  the  mind  gets
          continuously and naturally involved in its internal  object  with
          joy and pliancy, is called “calm abiding.” That which  thoroughly
          analyzes suchness at the time of abiding in that  very  state  of
          calm abiding is special insight. (Page 199)[19]

      I
[LRCM Vol 3 page 18] Also, [Kamalasila’s] the second  Stages  of  Meditation
says:
After you have quelled the distraction of external objects, you  rest  in  a
delighted and pliant  mind  which  naturally  and  continuously  engages  an
internal object of meditation. This is  called  meditative  serenity.  While
you remain in serenity, any analysis of that very object is called insight.
It is important to read these passages over and over  again.  Analysze  them
thoroughly in order to gain a very good understanding  of  what  exactly  is
the entities y of calm abiding meditative serenity and special insight  are.
As you see here in  Lama  Tsongkhapa’s  lamrim  textLamrim,  the  scriptural
authority is cited -first,  taking quotations from the Buddha’s  own  words,
and  then supplementing them ed with by quotations  from  the  great  Indian
masters.  It  is  very  important  that   the   whatever   explanations   or
presentations of what exactly  calm abiding  is  and  what  exactly  special
insight are is must be based on a  reliable  and  trustworthy  sources.  For
that reason, purpose, LLama Tsongkhapa took great  pains  to  quote  and  to
cite all these passages from the words of the Buddha’s own  words  and  from
the words of the great Indian masters.

Lama Tsongkhapa then  goes  on  to  explain  that  calm  abiding  meditative
serenity and special insight areis not differentiated by their objects.

Calm abiding and special insight are not distinguished by way of the
observed object
       So according to Bodhisattva Levels and Instructions on the Perfection
       of Wisdom, each of them, calm abiding and special insight,  can  have
       both the mode and the varieties as its object. Therefore calm abiding
       and special insight are not differentiated by way of  their  objects.
       There is calm abiding that realizes  emptiness,  and  there  is  also
       special insight that does  not  realize  emptiness.  In  fact  it  is
       because the rush to external objects has calmed down and the mind  is
       abiding on internal objects that something is  called  calm  abiding,
       and it is because of a special, that is, distinguished, insight  that
       something is called special insight. (Page 199-200)[20]

Calm abiding [LRCM Vol 3 page 18] Thus, meditative serenity and insight  are
not differentiated in terms of their respective objects of  meditation,  for
there is meditative serenity that  knows  emptiness  and  there  is  insight
which does not know  emptiness.  Also,  meditative  serenity  is  your  mind
quieting movement toward external objects, and then abiding on  an  internal
object of meditation; insight is superior, i.e., special, seeing.
Meditative serenity and special insight are not differentiated in  terms  of
their objects that  they  take.  This  is  because  there  is  calm  abiding
focusing on emptiness and while there  is  special  insight  that  does  not
observe emptiness. You cannot explain the “‘special”’ in special insight  to
mean seeing emptiness, ; which is superior. This is not  necessarily  so.  ,
and Yyou cannot explain in that way.
Also meditative serenity and special insight are not  to  be  differentiated
by whether there is a presence or absence of vivid intensity of the mind.

How it is inappropriate to distinguish calm abiding and special insight
based on whether or not the clarity factor of the consciousness is intense
Also calm abiding and special  insight  are  not  to  be  differentiated  by
whether there is a presence or absence of intense clarity[21] of the mind.



    The assertion by some that the mind abiding non-conceptually without an
    intense clarity factor is calm abiding, whereas that  with  an  intense
    clarity  factor  is  special  insight,  is  inappropriate  because   it
    contradicts everything explained earlier, … (Page 200)[22]

[LRCM Vol3 page 18] Some claim that  a  mind  resting  in  a  non-discursive
state without vivid intensity is serenity, while  such  a  mind  with  vivid
intensity is insight.  This  is  not  correct  because  it  contradicts  the
definitions of serenity and  insight  that  are  established  at  length  in
sources such as the words of the Conqueror, the  treatises  of  the  Regent,
the texts of Asanga, and Kamalasila's Stages of Meditation.
IIt is likely that there weremust have  been  explanations  that  that  were
floating around and ppurporteding that calm abiding serenity is a  state  of
mind where the your mind is abiding  resting  without  any  intense  clarity
vivid intensity, and that special insight insight is a mind  that  has  such
intense clarity. vivid intensity. There  must  have  been  such  explanation
floating around, and Lama Tsongkhapa is  saying  that  theseis  explanations
are  is wrong.
They are is is not incorrect because they it contradicts the definitions  of
calm abiding serenity and special insight that werewas  established  earlier
on.

      … and because this distinction  is  merely  a  distinction  between  a
      meditative  stabilization  with  and  without  laxity.  This  is  also
      because, to be sure, every meditative stabilization  of  calm  abiding
      also  needs  to  be  purified  of  laxity,  and  in  every  meditative
      stabilization that is free from laxity, the clarity factor of the mind
      will definitely arise.[23] (Page 200)[24]
[LRCM Vol3 page  19]  In  particular,  the  presence  or  absence  of  vivid
intensity of mind in a non-conceptual consciousness  indicates  whether  the
concentration is lax; it is utterly incorrect to  claim  that  it  indicates
the difference  between  serenity  and  insight.  This  is  because  in  all
concentrations  of  meditative  serenity  you  definitely  must  clear  away
laxity, and because all  concentrations  free  from  laxity  are  invariably
limpid states of mind.
It is incorrect to say that:
• Sspecial insight is a mind that possesses intense clarityvivid intensity.


• Ccalm abiding/meditative serenity is a mind that does not possess such
  intense claritya vivid intensity.
•  It is incorrect to say that because calm abiding is a mind that
  necessarily has intense clarity. This is vivid intensity, because before
  you can actualisze calm abiding, you must remove all forms of laxity.

In short, Lama Tsongkhapa is saying that it is wrong to  differentiate  calm
abiding and special insight based on whether there  is  vivid  intensity  of
mind or not.
Calm abiding and special insight is not differentiated by whether  there  is
vivid intensity of mind or not. Neither is it differentiated by the  objects
they take, for example, whether they take emptiness as the object or not.
Basically you cannot say calm abiding  is  a  mind  that  does  not  realize
emptiness and special insight is a mind that realizes  emptiness.  Therefore
you cannot differentiate calm abiding and special insight based  on  whether
the object is emptiness or not.
Why? Because there is calm abiding that focuses on emptiness  and  there  is
special insight that does not observe emptiness.
Because of these  reasons,  meditative  serenity/calm  abiding  and  special
insight are not differentiated by  whether  they  have  emptiness  as  their
object.
You cannot differentiate calm abiding and meditative  serenity  and  special
insight based on:
• wWhether they take emptiness as their object or not.
  o You cannot say calm abiding is a mind that does not realise emptiness
    and special insight is a mind that realises emptiness.
  o The reason is because there is calm abiding that focuses on emptiness
    and there is special insight that does not observe emptiness.
• wWhether there is the factor of intense clarity vivid intensity or not.
  o So Yyou cannot say that special insight is a mind that has intense
    clarity the vivid intensity whereas  calm abiding is a mind that does
    not have intense clarity. vivid intensity.
  o Why is that so? In order to be calm abiding, it must necessarily be
    separated or free of from aall forms of laxity.
  o If a mind is free from all forms of laxity, ies, it necessarily has
    intense clarity. vivid intensity.

The explanation of excitement and laxity insight will come when we  look  at
the actual way to of generating or cultivateing  calm  abiding.   meditative
serenity. There is an explanation of excitement and there is an  explanation
of laxity. Both excitement and laxity have coarse and subtle forms.

The need to differentiate between the realisation of emptiness and  blissful
lucid non-conceptuality
      Thus it is necessary to identify whether or not a mind is a meditative
      stabilization that observes emptiness, a wisdom consciousness, on  the
      basis of  whether  or  not  that  mind  realizes  either  of  the  two
      selflessnesses because there are countless  non-conceptual  meditative
      stabilizations of bliss and clarity in which the mind is not  directed
      at the suchness[25] of an object. Since direct perception  establishes
      that the mind can be held like that in  a  non-conceptual  state  even
      though the view realizing the mode of being has not been found,  there
      is not even  the  slightest  contradiction  in  the  arising  of  non-
      conceptual meditative stabilizations that do not understand emptiness.
      From that point of view, if the mind is held for a long time,  through
      the power of the mind being held, a workability of vital energies will
      arise. [242] Since it is natural for joyful bliss to arise in the body
      and the mind when that has arisen, it is not contradictory  for  bliss
      to arise. Once that has arisen,  through  the  power  of  one’s  vivid
      sensation of joyful bliss, the factor of clarity arises. Therefore  it
      cannot be posited that all blissful, clear, non-conceptual  meditative
      stabilizations realize suchness. Consequently, since  bliss,  clarity,
      and non-conceptuality arise in meditative stabilizations that  realize
      emptiness, and since there are also many meditative stabilizations  in
      which the mind is not directed at emptiness yet  bliss,  clarity,  and
      non-conceptuality still occur, it is necessary to distinguish  between
      the two. (Page 200)[26]

[LRCM Vol3 page 19] Thus, identify concentration and wisdom  that  focus  on
the real nature according to whether your mind knows as  its  object  either
of the two selflessnesses. Do not identify them according  to  whether  your
mind rests in a non-discursive, clear, and  blissful  state,  because  there
are countless states of concentration which are blissful,  clear,  and  non-
discursive, yet which  do  not  orient  your  mind  toward  the  reality  of
objects, their lack of self. Even without finding the view  that  knows  the
way things are, any totally non-discursive mind can be  adequate  to  induce
bliss and clarity. Even without understanding emptiness by  establishing  it
in perception, nothing at all prevents you  from  developing  non-discursive
concentration. If you keep your mind that way for a  long  time,  you  cause
the  wind-energies  to  become  serviceable.  Once  this   occurs,   nothing
precludes the arising of bliss, as it is the nature of  such  serviceability
to create mental and physical delight and  bliss.  Once  bliss  has  arisen,
then there will be mental clarity by virtue of the  quality  of  clarity  in
the feelings of delight and bliss. For this reason, there is  not  a  single
authentic  source  to  prove  that  all  blissful;   clear,   non-discursive
concentrations know reality.  Therefore,  since  bliss,  clarity,  and  non-
discursiveness are present in concentrations that know emptiness,  yet  very
often occur in concentrations that are not directed  toward  emptiness,  you
have to differentiate these two.
You do not n’t need to  realizse  emptiness  as  your  object  in  order  to
produce or experience a blissful, clear and non-discursive consciousness.
You don’t need to have emptiness as your object.
You don’t need to realize emptiness in order to have  this  blissful,  clear
and non-discursive concentration, because  you  can  choose  any  object  of
observation, focus on it   and  use  it  to  and  focus  on  it  to  develop
meditative serenity/calm abiding. Once you  focus  on  an  object,  you  can
achieve serviceability of the body, i.e, when ; where it says all the  wind-
energies in the body become serviceable, at  that  time  .  When  the  wind-
energies become serviceable then you will  experience delight.
By focusing on the chosen object of observation, you can reach  a  point  in
time  whereby  your  wind-energies  become  serviceable.  Through  that  you
achieve a very special state of bliss and delight. When there is such  bliss
and delight,  the mind can also be very clear.

Let us ’s say you take the mind as the object of your  observation  and  you
focus on it the mind to develop meditative serenity.  You  focus  on  it  to
develop concentration. You focus on it and cCome the time when  you  develop
your  concentration  and  ,  then  your  wind-energies  become  serviceable.
whereby Tthe body feels the blissful  and delighted. Your  mind  also  feels
this bliss and delight and . In this case, you are using your  mind  as  the
object of observation. In that case, the mind becomesbecomes  very clear.  ;
clean clear. But this does not n’t mean that you have realiszed emptiness.

The reason why both calm abiding and special insight need to be cultivated

Why is it necessary to cultivate both calm abiding and special insight?  The
explanation is done by employing an analogy and explaining  the  meaning  of
the analogy used.

           A     Illustration
       Why is it not enough to cultivate  either  calm  abiding  or  special
       insight?? Why is it necessary to cultivate both?

       To illustrate this: when you light a butter lamp at night in order to
       look at murals, if the butter lamp is both very bright and  does  not
       flicker due to wind, you will see the painted figures  very  clearly.
       However, if the butter lamp is not bright or if—even though bright—it
       flickers in the wind, you will  not  see  the  forms  clearly.  (Page
       200)[27]

[LRCM Vol3 page 19] (d) Why it is necessary to cultivate both
Why is it insufficient to cultivate either serenity or  insight  alone?  Why
is it necessary to cultivate both? I will explain.
Why it is necessary  to  cultivate  both  meditative  serenity  and  special
insight?  The  explanation  is  done  by  employing  an  analogy  and   then
explaining the meaning of the analogy.
First, he gives an analogy:
[LRCM Vol3 page 19] If you light an oil-lamp for the purpose  of  viewing  a
picture in the middle of  the  night,  you  will  see  the  depictions  very
clearly if the lamp is both very bright and  undisturbed  by  wind.  If  the
lamp is not bright, or is bright but flickering in the wind, then  you  will
not see the images clearly.
This at is the analogy. Next follows its ow the meaning.

           B     Explaining the meaning
       Likewise, with respect to viewing the profound meaning, if  you  have
       both the wisdom unmistakenly ascertaining the meaning of suchness and
       the imperturbability of a mind that stays on its object at will,  you
       will see suchness clearly. However, if you do  not  have  the  wisdom
       realizing the mode of being, despite your  non-conceptual  meditative
       stabilization in which your mind remains unscattered, you will not be
       able to realize the mode  of  being,  however  much  you  familiarize
       yourself with meditative stabilization. On the  other  hand,  if  you
       have the  view  that  understands  selflessness  but  lack  the  firm
       meditative stabilization in which the  mind  remains  single-pointed,
       you will not be able to clearly see the meaning of the mode of being.
       Therefore both calm abiding and special insight are necessary.  (Page
       200-201)[28]

[LRCM Vol3 page 20] Likewise, when looking for  the  profound  meaning,  you
will clearly see reality  if  you  have  both  the  wisdom  that  unerringly
discerns the meaning of reality and an unmoving attention that stays as  you
wish on the object of meditation. However, if you do not  have  wisdom  that
knows how things are -even if you have  a  non-discursive  concentration  in
which your mind is stable and does not scatter to other objects -  then  you
lack the eyes which see reality. Hence, it will be impossible  to  know  how
things are no matter how much you develop your concentration. And even  with
a perspective that understands reality – selflessness - if you lack  a  firm
concentration that stays one-pointedly  on  its  object,  then  it  will  be
impossible to clearly see the meaning of the  way  things  are  because  you
will be disturbed by the  winds  of  uncontrollably  fluctuating  discursive
thought. This is why you need both serenity and insight.
What we have just read out is  supported  by  the  citation  of  couples  of
passages from Kamalaśsila’s Stages of Meditation. You should read themis  on
your own.

When one has calm abiding, whatever virtue you  accomplished  will  be  very
  strong and powerful.How doing something virtuous  has  great  power  once
  calm abiding has been accomplished
      When you accomplish calm abiding, not  only  does  it  counteract  the
      fault of your  wisdom  consciousness  wandering  off  while  correctly
      investigating selflessness. The fault of distraction to other  objects
      stops for all analytical meditations that you do with  the  wisdom  of
      individual investigation: on impermanence, actions and their  effects,
      the disadvantages of cyclic existence, love, compassion,  training  in
      the mind of enlightenment, and so forth. Then, since you get  involved
      in  each  individual  object,  whatever  it  may  be,  without   being
      distracted to something else,  everything  virtuous  you  do  is  very
      powerful. As long as you  have  not  obtained  calm  abiding,  due  to
      predominant distraction to other objects [244] any  virtuous  practice
      you do will be weak. It is as it says in Engaging in  the  Bodhisattva
      Conduct:

          A person whose mind is being distracted
          Is in the fangs of mental afflictions.

      And:

          The Seer taught that recitation,
          Ascetic practices, and so forth,
          Even if engaged in long, are
          Pointless with a distracted mind. (Pages 201-202)[29]

[LRCM Vol3 page 20] Kamalasila's second Stages of Meditation says:
With bare insight that lacks serenity, the  yogi's  mind  is  distracted  by
objects; like an oil-lamp in the wind, it  will  not  be  stable.  For  this
reason, what sublime wisdom sees will not be very  clear.  As  this  is  so,
rely equally on both. Therefore, the Great Final Nirvana Sutra says:
Sravakas  do  not  see  the  lineage  of  the   tathagatas   because   their
concentration is  greater  than  their  wisdom;  bodhisattvas  see  it,  but
unclearly, because their wisdom is greater  than  their  concentration.  The
tathagatas see everything because they have serenity and  insight  in  equal
measure.
With the power of serenity, your mind—like a lamp placed where there  is  no
wind—will be unmoved by the  winds  of  discursive  thought.  With  insight,
others  cannot  divert  you  since   you   have   abandoned   the   infinite
entanglements of bad views. As the Moon Lamp Sutra says:
The power of meditative serenity makes your mind steady;  insight  makes  it
like a mountain.
So, the mark of meditative serenity  is  that  your  attention  stays  right
where it is placed without distraction from the object  of  meditation.  The
mark of insight is that you know the reality of selflessness  and  eliminate
bad views such as the view of self; your mind is like a mountain in that  it
cannot be shaken by opponents. Therefore, you should distinguish  these  two
marks.
Before you achieve meditative serenity, you may  use  discerning  wisdom  to
analyze the meaning of selflessness, but your mind  is  extremely  unsteady,
like a lamp in the wind, so your concept of selflessness is unclear. On  the
other hand, if you analyze when you have achieved serenity,  you  avoid  the
fault of extreme unsteadiness, so  your  concept  of  selflessness  will  be
clear. Thus, the mental state of insight has a quality of  steadiness  which
derives from non-discursive meditative serenity and  a  quality  of  knowing
how things exist  which  does  not  derive  from  meditative  serenity.  For
example, a lamp's ability to illumine forms derives from the  wick  and  the
preceding moments of flame; it does not  derive  from  such  things  as  the
screen that protects it from the wind. However, the stability of the  steady
flame of the lamp does derive from this  screen.  Thus,  if  you  engage  in
analysis with a wisdom possessed of the meditative equipoise  of  serenity—a
state undisturbed by laxity or excitement—  then  you  will  understand  the
meaning of reality. With this in  mind,  the  Compendium  of  the  Teachings
Sutra states:
When your mind is in meditative equipoise, you will understand reality  just
as it is.
Kamalasila's first Stages of Meditation says:
Because your mind  moves  like  a  river,  it  does  not  rest  without  the
foundation of  meditative  serenity;  a  mind  that  is  not  in  meditative
equipoise cannot understand reality just as it is. Also, the Bhagavan  says,
"With meditative equipoise, you know reality just as it is."
[LRCM Vol3 page 21] When you achieve serenity, you not only stop  the  fault
of  movement  in   the   wisdom   consciousness   that   properly   analyzes
selflessness, you also stop the fault of  distraction  from  the  object  of
meditation  whenever  you  use  discerning  wisdom  to  conduct   analytical
meditation on topics such  as  impermanence,  karma  and  its  effects,  the
faults of cyclic existence, love, compassion, or the practice of the  spirit
of enlightenment*. No matter what your object of meditation, you  engage  it
without  distraction,  so  that  any  virtue  you  cultivate  is  much  more
powerful. On the other hand, before you reach serenity, you  weaken  all  of
your  virtuous  deeds  by  frequent  distraction  to   other   objects.   As
Santideva's Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds says:
The person whose mind is distracted
Lives between the fangs of the afflictions.
And:
The One Who Knows Reality has said that
Prayers, austerities, and such—
Even if practiced for a long time—
Are pointless if done with a distracted mind.
*Translated as bodhichitta
We are still discussing the benefits of calm abiding.  meditative  serenity.
As the text says, it makes a big difference  that iwhen our  meditation  and
reflection on topics such as  f   we  have  single-pointedness  of  mind  on
whatever meditation topics we pursue such  as  reflecting  on  impermanence,
karma and its effects, the faults of samsara, love  and  compassion  and  so
forth , it makes a big difference if such a  reflection  are  is  done  with
concentration. This is evidentce. It also makes a  difference  when  if  you
have concentration whenever you recite your prayers or mantras.

Is there an order in the cultivation of  meditative  serenity  and  insight?
Yes there is.

HOW THE ORDER OF CALM ABIDING AND SPECIAL INSIGHT IS DEFINITE

      In Engaging in the Bodhisattva Conduct it says:

          Having understood that special insight
          Conjoined with calm abiding destroys the afflictions,
          First seek calm abiding … (Page 202)[30]

[LRCM Vol3 page 23] (e) How to be certain about their order
Santideva's Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds says:
Insight possessed of serenity
Destroys the afflictions. Knowing this,
Seek serenity at the outset.
According to  this  statement,  you  first  achieve  calm  meditativeabiding
serenity and then you  cultivate special insight on that basis.
There is an order in the cultivation of  meditative  serenity  and  insight.
The cultivation of special insight must be preceded by calm  abiding.   This
is the case in acAccordance with ing to the perspective of sutra. , this  is
the case.

In this section, there are two qualms and the replies to these  qualms.  You
have to read them is on your own first. O; otherwise  it  will  is  be  very
difficult for me to explain them. So you  should  read  this.  In  the  next
lesson,  I will give a brief explanation.  Then  we  will  move  on  to  the
actual way of cultivating calm abiding.

                                ~~~~~~~~~~~~

Question: Can[LRCM  Vol3  page  23]  Qualm:  Kamalasila's  first  Stages  of
Meditation says, "Its object of meditation is indeterminate,"  meaning  that
the object  of  meditation  of  meditative  serenity  is  indeterminate.  As
explained above, the object of meditation of serenity may be either  reality
itself or a conventional phenomenon  possessed  of  reality.  If  you  first
understand the meaning of selflessness, and then meditate while focusing  on
this, it should be enough to simultaneously produce both the serenity of  an
undistracted mind and insight focused on emptiness. Why, then,  is  it  said
that you first seek serenity and then cultivate insight?
Reply: The way in which serenity precedes insight is as follows. You do  not
need to have serenity already in order to develop an  understanding  of  the
view that knows that there is no self, for we see that even those  who  lack
serenity develop this view. Nor do you need  to  have  serenity  already  in
order to experience  mental  transformation  in  regard  to  the  view,  for
nothing precludes mental transformation being brought on by the practice  of
repeated analysis with discerning wisdom, even in the absence  of  serenity.
If you claim that the absence of serenity  precludes  mental  transformation
in regard to the view, then the  very  same  reasoning  forces  you  to  the
extremely absurd conclusion that serenity is  required  even  to  experience
mental transformation when meditating on impermanence, the faults of  cyclic
existence, or the spirit of enlightenment.
So,  why  is  serenity  required  for  insight?  According  to   the   Sutra
Unravelling the Intended Meaning, as long as the practice of  discrimination
and special discrimination with discerning wisdom cannot  generate  physical
and mental pliancy, it constitutes a type of  attention  which  approximates
insight; when it generates pliancy, then it is insight. Thus,  if  you  have
not attained serenity, then no matter how much analytical meditation you  do
with discerning wisdom, in the  end  you  will  not  be  able  generate  the
delight and bliss of physical and mental pliancy.  Once  you  have  attained
meditative serenity, then  even  the  analytical  meditation  of  discerning
wisdom  will  culminate  in  pliancy.  Hence,  insight  requires  meditative
serenity as a cause. This will be explained below.
Discerning wisdom  becomes  insight  when,  without  focusing  on  a  single
object,  it  can  generate  pliancy  through  the  power  of  analysis.   So
generating  pliancy  by  setting  your  attention  on  a  single  object  of
meditation—even if the object is emptiness—is nothing more  than  a  way  to
achieve serenity; that alone does not count as attaining  insight.  Why?  If
you thus first seek an understanding of selflessness, analyzing its  meaning
again and again, it will be impossible to achieve serenity on the  basis  of
this analysis since you have not previously achieved  serenity.  If  you  do
stabilizing meditation without analysis, you will achieve serenity  on  that
basis. However, as there is no way to sustain insight except  by  sustaining
serenity, you have to seek insight later. Hence, this does not fall  outside
the pattern in which,  having  previously  sought  serenity,  you  cultivate
insight based on it.
Accordingly,  the  way  insight  develops  is  that  discerning   analytical
meditation generates pliancy. If this were not so, there would  not  be  the
slightest good reason to seek serenity  first  and  then  cultivate  insight
based on it. Failing  to  do  these  meditations  in  this  order  is  quite
inappropriate because the Sutra Unravelling the Intended Meaning  states  in
a passage cited above that you cultivate insight  on  the  basis  of  having
attained serenity. Also, the order of meditative  stabilization  and  wisdom
among the six perfections— of which it is  said  that  "the  latter  develop
based on the former"— as well as the sequence in which  training  in  higher
wisdom is based on training in higher concentration are  in  agreement  with
the sequence in which, having  previously  cultivated  serenity,  you  later
cultivate insight. Asanga's  Bodhisattva  Levels  (cited  earlier)  and  his
Sravaka Levels   indicate  that  insight  is  cultivated  on  the  basis  of
meditative  serenity.  Also,  Bhavaviveka's  Heart  of   the   Middle   Way,
Santideva's Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds, Kamalasila's three Stages  of
Meditation, Jnanakirti, and Ratnakarasanti  all  state  that  you  cultivate
insight after previously seeking serenity. Some Indian masters  claim  that,
without seeking serenity separately, you generate insight  from  the  outset
through analysis by discerning  wisdom.  Since  this  view  contradicts  the
texts of the great trailblazers, the wise deem it to be untrustworthy.
This is the sequence in which you newly develop  serenity  and  insight  for
the first time; later the sequence  is  indefinite,  as  you  may  cultivate
serenity after previously cultivating insight.
Qualm: Asanga's Compendium of Knowledge states, "Some  attain  insight,  but
do not attain serenity; they strive for serenity on the basis  of  insight."
How do you account for this?
Reply: This means that they have not attained the  serenity  of  the  actual
first meditative stabilization,  or  beyond;  it  does  not  preclude  their
having attained the serenity which is included in the access  to  the  first
meditative stabilization. Also, once you have perceptual  knowledge  of  the
four truths, you can establish on that basis  the  serenity  of  the  actual
first meditative stabilization and  the  higher  meditative  stabilizations.
For Asanga's Levels of Yogic Deeds says:
Moreover, you can accurately know the reality of the truths  from  suffering
to path, without having attained the first  meditative  stabilization,  etc.
As soon as this knowledge of the truths occurs, you stabilize your mind  and
do not analyze phenomena. Based  on  this  higher  wisdom,  you  pursue  the
practice of higher states of consciousness.
In general, for the sake  of  comprehensive  terminology,  the  nine  mental
states are called meditative serenity and the fourfold  analysis  is  called
insight. However, you must apply the terms  "actual  serenity"  and  "actual
insight"—as will be explained—after the generation of pliancy.
Student: (Ven Gyurme rephrased  the  question):  Give  you  please  give  an
example of how you cultivate calm abiding using emptiness as its object  and
. hHow do you you can cultivate special insight using an object  other  than
emptiness. Specifically, how do you develop special insight using the ?
Student: Maybe with the same object  will  be  clearer  because  our  normal
understanding is that insight on having realized emptiness. How is  it  that
you can actually develop insight in a conventional aspect of the object?

Khen Rinpoche: Wasn’t Lama Tsongkhapa is very clear in stating on  the  fact
that  calm  abiding  meditative  serenity  and  special  insight   are   not
differentiated based on having emptiness as their object?

Student: Yes, it is clear.

Khen Rinpoche (in English): If tThat is very  clear,  .  So,  what  is  your
question now?

Ven Gyurme: He wants an example of special  insight  focusing  on  something
other than emptiness.

Khen Rinpoche: Let us kKeep it simple. The  object  could  be  impermanence.
You generate calm abiding focusing on  impermanence.  Within  the  state  of
calm meditative abiding,  serenity  then  you  use  the  mental  factors  of
examination and investigation and analysis. When that induces the bliss  ofr
pliancy,  you have the special insight observing impermanence.

Student: Are you saying that you  focus  on  impermanence  to  develop  calm
abiding serenity first?

Ven Gyurme: Because you wanted an example of special insight  realising  zes
something other than emptiness, so  Khen Rinpoche gave ives  anthe   example
of impermanence.

Khen Rinpoche: There is calm abiding observing impermanence. There  is  also
special insight observing impermanence. Bear in mind that calm  abiding  and
special insight are is a qualities y that areis  shared with  non-Buddhists.
So  They  are  it  is  not  necessarily  a  Buddhist’s   realiszations    or
qualities.y.

Student: When you develop calm abiding serenity based on  impermanence,  you
have to investigate examine and you  have  to  analysze  the  object  first.
After you have investigated examined aand analyszed  the  object,  you  then
focus on it and develop pliancy. In that  sense,  isn’t  that  the  same  as
developing insight? Where is the difference between the two?

Khen Rinpoche: What is the problem?
Ven Gyurme: I know what you are getting at. You are saying  that  you  focus
on impermanence to actualize calm abiding? Once you actualized calm  abiding
focusing on impermanence you have bliss as well,  isn’t  it?  To  you,  just
because there is bliss and pliancy therefore it makes  it  special  insight,
right?
Student: Yes. So what is the difference here?
Khen Rinpoche: Calm abiding does not  engage  in  analysis.  It  is  just  a
single- pointed  of mind focussing  on the object of observation. , and  Oof
course there is clarity of the object of observation. When  If  it  is  calm
abiding,   there  is  the  bliss  ofr  pliancy  there,  but  there   is   no
investigation of the object. When If you start to analysze the object,  then
the mind does not n’t remain stay single- pointed on  the  object,  in  this
case, impermanence.

                                 ~~~~~~~~~~

If you don’t have time to read before coming to class then  nothing  can  be
done. If you do have time,  and can read at least two or three pages  before
coming to class, whether you understand them it or not. , Yyou  should  just
read it at least  once. That It makes a huge difference  when  you  come  to
class.





Interpreted by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme; transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek,  Vivien  Ng
and Aki Yeo; edited by Cecilia Tsong.


-----------------------
[1] LRCM, Vol. 2, 218.
[2] Ibid., 218.
[3] Ibid., 221.
[4] Calm abiding is translated as meditative serenity in the LRCM.
[5] Tib. rgyud
[6] LRCM, Vol. 3, 13-14. All page references hereinafter refer to Vol. 3  of
the LRCM.
[7] Ibid., 14.
[8] Tib. gnas ngan len gyi ‘ching ba, literally “from the  bonds  of  taking
on bad states.”
[9] Ibid., 14-15.
[10] Ibid., 15.
[11] Ibid., 15-16.
[12] Ibid., 16.
[13] Ibid.
[14] Ibid., 16.
[15] Ibid., 16-17. “The noble Asanga explains  that  ‘thorough  examination’
is when conceptual attention possessed of wisdom  apprehends  a  sign;  …The
apprehension of a  sign  does  not  here  refer  to  a  conception  of  true
existence, but  rather  to   distinguishing  the  exact  particulars  of  an
object.”
[16] Ibid., 16.
[17] “Investigation” is translated as “examination” in the LRCM.
[18] The term sems nyid, “mind itself” is often used synonymously with
“nature of the mind.”
[19] Ibid., 17-18.
[20] Ibid., 18.
[21] “Intense clarity” is translated as “vivid intensity” in the LRCM.
[22] Ibid., 18-19.
[23] Tib. ‘ong ba’
[24] Ibid., 19.
[25] Synonym for emptiness.
[26] Ibid., 19.
[27] Ibid., 19-20.
[28] Ibid., 20.
[29] Ibid., 21-22.
[30] Ibid., 23.

