Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/SixPerfections/BP2 M4 L14 (final).doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:02.711461
================================================================================


Transcript of teachings by Khen Rinpoche Geshe Chonyi  on  the  Heart  Sutra
and Stages of the Path (the Six Perfections)

The root text, Middle Length Lam-Rim,  by  Lama  Tsongkhapa,  translated  by
Philip Quarcoo, . © FPMT, Inc., May 2012, is indented. All  page  references
refer to the root text, unless otherwise stated.

Where applicable, page numbers of corresponding  sections  in  the  Lam  Rim
Chen Mo (LRCM) are indicated in footnotes; they refer to The Great  Treatise
on the Stages of the Path  to  Enlightenment,  Volume  2,  by  Tsong-kha-pa,
translated  by  The  Lamrim  Chenmo   Translation   Committee,   Snow   Lion
Publications, 2004.

Lesson 14                                                         15  August
2013


More on the perfection of generosity. Generosity that  is  a  mere  thought.
Practising generosity with the six perfections. The  perfection  of  ethics.
(From root text, pages 177-181).




We are now on the section on the perfection of generosity. As  mentioned  in
the previous lesson, generosity is a generous attitude. So generosity  means
having this generous attitude whereby you completely give whatever  you  own
from the depths of your heart to others.
It is taught that there are three forms of generosity:
1. tThe gift of Ddharma
2. tThe gift of material things,
3. tThe gift of fearlessness.

As seen in the previous lessonT, the text says that whenever we utilisze  or
enjoy something that we hadve already dedicated to others  from  the  depths
of our hearts to others, it is very important to  do  so  use  those  things
wwith the thought of benefitting others. At the time when one is  utiliszing
those enjoyments, one should think,  “I am doing this  for  the  welfare  of
others.”.

Whenever we partake of the food, the drink and the other substances that  we
hadve already offered to the Three Jewels, then it is important to  utilisze
those objects without any craving and . We should partake  of  those  foods,
drinks and  those  offering  substances  with  the  thought  of  benefitting
others. In the tantric context, there are methods or teachings on  how  that
involve to enjoying such those food and drinks in the  aspect  manner  of  a
burnt offerings.

It is also said in the teachings that there are many living  beings  abiding
inside our body. The teachings  mentioned  that  there  are  84,000   minute
sentient beings. So whenever we eat or drink, we can ould  also  think  that
we are making the an offering of food and  drinks  to  these  living  beings
abiding in our body. Through this such an act of  gathering  them  with  the
gift of material things, then one can set the  motivation  es  and  pray,  s
“Through this connection, may I gather and bring all of  you  into  my  fold
with the Ddharma in the future.”.  When If you know how to  think  properly,
then every time when you eat and drink,  you  can  ould  accumulate  a  vast
amount of merit.

Whenever you eat and drink, you are supposed to make offerings to the  Three
Jewels. When we make offerings to  the  Three  Jewels,  we  will  accumulate
merit. At the same time, if we were to think that we are making  a  gift  of
food and drink to the living beings in our body, we  also  accumulate  merit
and virtue. So whenever we eat or drink, we  make  offerings  to  the  Three
Jewels, and that offering helps us to accumulate a vast amount of merit.


In order to practicse the  Ddharma,  weyou  need  to  sustain  the  physical
basis, our body, sfor doing so, this  body  of  ours.  At  the  very  least,
minimum, the motivation  for  eating  and  drinking  should  be  the  desire
wanting to sustain our this physical basis, the body of  ours,  so  that  we
can continue in our learning and practice. At the very minimum, this  should
be the motivation.  It is also very important not to  allow  strong  craving
and attachment to arise  when we eating. This is very important.

Imagine this a scenario:  f  that  from  your  heart,  you  have  completely
dedicated away or given an object away to another person. The recipient  has
the idea that the object now belongs to him.  and Hhe is the owner. You  Aas
the giver, you  are aware that has happened.
• In this scenario, Iif you  are  a  fully  ordained  monk  utiliszing  that
  object, you commit a defeat of the pratimoksha vow,  or  translated  as  a
  cardinal transgression of the vows of of the fully ordained monk. ’s
• vow. For those who are not fully ordained monks, they incur the  fault  of
  taking that which is not given, i.e., stealing.

There may be instances In the case where, by from the depths of your  heart,
you have given turned over something from the  depths  of  your  heart  over
tosomething to  another person but that  and that person is unnot  aware  of
this and has not generated the thought, idea that  “I’m  now  the  owner  of
this at object.”, In such a case when and if you do  utiliseze  that  object
that you have completely dedicated to others  away from the depths  of  your
heart, then in that situation, it is most likely that you  do  not  incur  a
cardinal transgression or a defeat (or cardinal transgression).

This is the explanation by of Lama Tsongkhapa of the intended meaning  of  a
verse from the Compendium of Trainings:.

           B     Clearing up doubt concerning a defeat
       The way in which it becomes a  defeat  is  when  you  have  dedicated
       something with a sincere thought to a migrating being who is a  human
       being, and he, having cognized it, also holds it to be  his,  if  you
       take it for your own welfare with the discrimination that it  belongs
       to someone else and if it is of some value, then the factors  for  it
       to become a defeat are present. That is  the  intention  here.  [216]
       (Page 177)[1]

       Lama Tsongkhapa says “You incur a cardinal transgression  given  that
       the total value requirement has been met when you sincerely turn your
       food, etc., over to human being, and this person knows it  and  takes
       possession, whereupon you, fully cognizant of their  being  another’s
       property, appropriate them for your own use”.

       2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C1A-1A3C    The actual method for engaging in
           generosity
       This has four points:

          1    How to actually generate generosity
          2    Importance of the inner attitude
          3    Generosity that is a mere thought
          4    How to associate generosity with the six perfections (Page
            177)
      2. Divisions of actual generosity
   a. The gift of the teachings
   b. The gift of fearlessness
   c. Material gifts
      c. Material gifts
      1. The generosity of actually giving material things
      2. The generosity which is just mental

       2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C1A-1A3C-3   Generosity that is a mere thought
      Apart from that, Bodhisattva Levels teaches that the training  in  the
      aspiration to emanate immeasurable varieties of phenomena, objects  to
      be offered, and to give them to sentient beings with clear faith  from
      the bottom of one’s heart increases  immeasurable  merit  with  little
      effort and is the generosity  of  the  wise  bodhisattva.  (Page  177-
      178)[2]

2. The generosity which is just mental
With a pure motivation  and  faith  from  the  depths  of  your  heart,  you
construct with your  thoughts  an  immeasurably  vast  quantity  of  diverse
gifts. Then imagine that you are offering them to all  living  beings.  This
increases merit immeasurably with little difficulty, and  moreover,  is  the
giving of wise bodhisattvas, according to the Bodhisattva Level.
[LRCM V2 page 140]  The generosity which is just  mental  means  that  after
you go to a quiet place and then withdraw your  mind  inward,  with  a  pure
motivation and faith from the depths of your heart, you construct with  your
thoughts an immeasurably vast  quantity  of  diverse  gifts,  and  you  then
imagine that you are offering them to  all  living  beings.  This  increases
merit immeasurably with little difficulty and, moreover, is  the  giving  of
wise bodhisattvas, according to the Bodhisattva Levels.
When we make offerings, there are offerings that are mentally imagined.  You
construct and visualisze them with your mind and then you  offer  them,  for
example, to the Three Jewels.

Likewise, there is the mental practice of generosity which is  just  mental,
in which where you mentally construct various offerings and  then  you  give
them away.  This  is  the  generosity  which  is  just  mental  whereby  you
construct with your thoughts a whole a range of diverse of  gifts  and  then
you mentally give it it away to others. Personally, I am  not  exactly  sure
exactly how that would accumulates merit. Perhaps it would be better  if  we
mentally transform imagine that our  roots  of  virtue   has  the  basis  of
transformation of the various mentally  constructed  offerings.  Perhaps  we
could mentally transform whatever roots of virtue/merit that  we  have  into
various offering substances and then giveing them  it  away  to  others.  By
doing this, I think thatin so doing, this will becomes a  condition  for  us
to accomplish the welfare of sentient beings in the future. This is just  my
a personal opinion.

In any case, if we get accustomed to mentally giving things  away,  and  due
to the force of familiarity  overtime,  that  would  translate  into  actual
giving, i.e. carrying it  out  either  physically  or  verbally  an  act  of
giving. It is a matter of familiarization. Therefore it  is  very  important
to mentally construct diverse offering substances and then give it away.  It
is important to train like that. The point is  to  bring  forth  a  generous
attitude - a mind that willing to give, and wanting  to  give.  If  iIn  the
first place, if you do not n’t even have the wish to give,  or  you  do  not
n’t even think of giving, then generosity is not going to  happen.  It  will
never happen. Therefore it is very important to start  training  like  this:
mentally constructing a large quantity of various  offering  substances  and
giving them  away  to  others.  The  purpose  is  to  cultivate  a  generous
attitude, a mind that is willing and wants to give.

Therefore, it is very important to get accustomed to this idea  of  generous
attitude by initially constructing all these different substances and  gifts
mentally and then mentally give  them  away  to  others.  Therefore,  it  is
extremely  important  to  start  training  now  by  constructing  with  your
thoughts immeasurably vast quantity of diverse gifts and  then  giving  them
away.  Once  you   getare   accustomed  to  this  such  a  mental  form   of
generosity, and due to the force of familiarity, it will manifest  into  you
will be being able to really give physically and verbally. This will  slowly
cumulate, and Oone day,  you will be able to give likes in the same  way  as
the bodhisattvas. They  bodhisattvas  are  able  to  give  away  everything,
including their  bodies—y, which is something we the thing that  we  usually
cherish the most—. The bodhisattvas are able to give it  away  and  dedicate
it to others without any sense of loss.  Their  ability  comess  from  their
familiarity with a generous attitude.

In order to be able to have a pure  practice  of  generosity,  we  first  we
must understand the benefits of giving. When If we are  hindered  obstructed
by our  attachment, then we have to think about the  faults  of  attachment.
So Bby realiszing the faults of attachment, the faults  of  not  giving  and
the benefits of giving, then we will be are aable to start the  practice  of
giving.

Even if the practice is not that spectacular,  maybe  a  small  practice  of
generosity, that itself will bring about  much  a  lot  of  benefit.  It  is
mentioned in the teachings that we should think about the  faults  of  being
attached to the things that we own, such as our possessions,  our  body  and
so forth. By thinking about this, e faults of attachment to the things  that
we own, we will be are able to cultivate a generous attitude in relation  to
them, and be we are able to really give them away. We should reflect on  the
impermanent nature of what we own. faults of being attached  to  the  things
that we own by realizing how they are impermanent by nature, and  Tthey  are
subject to change anyway. There will definitely come a  time  when  that  we
will be separated from them forever, se  things,  be  it  our  body  or  our
possessions, forever.

Then Tthe  text  goes  on  to  discuss  the  practice  of  about  practicing
generosity with the six perfections present. In the case of the practice  of
generosity, iWhen f generosity is practised this practice is done wwith  all
the other perfections present, ,  then  that  will  makes  the  practice  of
generosity very powerful:.
• At the time of giving, whether you are making the gift of Ddharma, or  the
  gift of fearlessness or the gift of material things, it  is  important  to
  restrain yourself from selfish considerations, i.e., . At  the  time  when
  one is giving, it is important to refrains our self from considerations of
  your own purposes and your own welfare. This at restraint is the  practice
  of ethics. al discipline.
• During the time when you are practising giving and the recipients  respond
  with making a gift, whether it is dharma or material things or the gift of
  fearlessness, if there are people who  exhibit  an  unpleasant  demeanour,
  i.e. “showing you their black face” as in Singlish,  thisat  is  the  time
  that we are supposed to apply patience.
• During the process of giving, one should do so it with  a  mind  of  great
  enthusiastically, m and taking great delight in what you are  doing.  This
  at is joyous effort (or joyous perseverance). perseverance.
• When you dedicate the merit that you  acquired  from  the  act  of  giving
  single-pointedly  and  with  concentration  to  the  achievement  of  full
  enlightenment, , and you perform that dedication with a single pointedness
  of mind and with concentration, then this at becomes  the  a  practice  of
  concentration (or  mmeditative stabiliszation).
• At the time of giving, you should also reflect on how (1) the object  that
  you are giving away—, whether it be is the teachings,  or  material  thing
  or fearlessness or material things—that  you  are  giving  away,  (2)  you
  should reflect that these things, yourself as the giver and (3) the person
  that you are giving itto to , all of theseall  do  not  exist  inherently.
  and Tthey are like illusions. Once you give with  such  an  understanding,
  this becomes the a practice of wisdom.
•
This is how one can engage in the practice that contains  all  the  practice
of the six perfections. Whenever you engage in the practice  with  that  has
all the six perfections present, it this becomes a very powerful  method  to
purify  the  obscurations  and  it  becomes  a  method   to   achieve   full
enlightenment.

THE PRACTICE OF ETHICS

      2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C1A-1B How to train in ethics
      This has three points:

          1    The entity of ethics
          2    Its subdivisions
          3    How to generate ethics in one’s mental continuum


      2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C1A-1B1         The entity of ethics
      This has two points:

          A    The entity of ethics
      Ethics is the mind of abandonment that is  a  mind  turned  away  from
      harming others together with its basis. This is mainly from the  point
      of view of the ethics of restraint. (Page 178)[3]

The Perfection of Ethical Discipline
(ii) How to train in the perfection of ethical discipline
1. What ethical discipline is
2. The divisions of ethical discipline
3. The way to produce it in your mind
The next perfection is the perfection of ethical discipline. In  the  Middle
Length Lamrim, this perfection of ethical discipline is  treated  under  the
three outlines.
1. What ethical discipline is.
2. The divisions of ethical discipline
3. The way to produce it in your mind.
1. What is ethical discipline
[LRCM V2 page 143]  Ethical discipline is an  attitude  of  abstention  that
turns your mind away from harming others and from the sources of such  harm.

2. The divisions of ethical discipline
1. The ethical discipline of restraint
2. The ethical discipline of gathering virtue
3. The ethical discipline of acting for the welfare of living beings
When the text talks about what ethics (or ethical al discipline) is,  it  is
identifies y the entity of ethicsa l discipline, and is  speaking  primarily
about the to be primarily the ethicsa  l  discipline  of  restraint.  ,  the
definition that was just read out earlier.
[LRCM V2 page 143]  Although  ethical  discipline  does  indeed  have  three
divisions [the ethical discipline of restraint, the  ethical  discipline  of
gathering virtue, and the ethical discipline of acting for  the  welfare  of
living beings],  it  is  explained  in  this  context  as  the  attitude  of
abstention in terms of the ethical discipline of  restraint,  the  principal
division.
What is ethical discipline or ethics? What is ethics?  In  situations  where
you are about to engage in a non-virtue, i.e.,  just prior  to  engaging  in
non-virtue, you have theis thought, “I should  not  be  doing  this  because
doing  this  is  incorrect.”.  With  that  thought,  you  restrain  yourself
completely and turn yourself away from doing  that  action.  There  is  this
thought. There is this restrain. You restrain yourself completely, and  stop
yourself completely from engaging in that non-virtuous action.  e.  That  is
ethical discipline. TThis at is what ethics is.
You cannot say somebody  is  ethical,  or  somebody  is  practicing  ethical
discipline just because he is sitting there and not  doing  any  non-virtue.
Just being there, whether is sitting or sleeping, then in a situation  where
time and space you are not doing any non-virtue that  does  not  necessarily
mean that the person is practicing ethical discipline. So  the  practice  of
ethics is not simply sitting around and  not  engaging  in  any  non-virtue.
Ethical discipline is what I just  mentioned  earlier,  when  you  are  just
about to engage in  a  non-virtue,  you  realized  that  it  is  wrong.  For
whatever reason you tell yourself that you are not going to do it  and  then
you effectively  stop  yourself  from  doing  it.  You  restrain,  and  turn
yourself away from the action. That is ethical discipline.
    Next is the measure of the completion  of  the  perfection  of  ethical
    discipline.

         B  The entity of the perfection of ethics
    Through thoroughly completing the familiarity with this mind  more  and
    more, it  becomes  the  perfection  of  ethics.  It  is  not  that  you
    externally establish all sentient  beings  in  freedom  from  all  harm
    without exception. In Engaging in Bodhisattva Conduct it says:

         Achieving the mind of abandonment
         Is taught as perfection of ethics. (Page 178)[4]

What exactly is the completion of the perfection of ethical discipline?
[LRCM V2 page 143]  Therefore you bring about the perfection  of  discipline
by progressively increasing your habituation  to  this  attitude  until  you
reach completion. However, it is not the case that you bring the  perfection
of ethical discipline to completion in the external  world  by  establishing
beings in a state free of all harm.
[LRCM V2 page 143]  Shantideva’s  Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds says:
Where can beings such as fish be sent
Where they will not be killed?
So it is said that by attaining an attitude of abstention
You perfect ethical discipline.
An illustration of the  ethical  discipline  of  restraint  is  the  ethical
discipline of restraining from the ten non-virtues.
There are three classes of vows:
1. 1. The pratimoksha vow,
2. 2. The bodhisattva vow
3. 3. The tantric vow
You could say that bodhisattvas necessarily have bodhisattva  vow,  but  you
cannot say that bodhisattvas necessarily have the pratimoksha vow.
Is the pratimoksha vow in the continuum of  a  bodhisattva  the  bodhisattva
vow? The answer is no.

      2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C1A-1B2       Its subdivisions
      This has three points:

          A      The ethics of restraint
          B    The ethics of accumulating virtuous qualities
          C The ethics of bringing about the welfare of sentient beings
            (Page 178)[5]

      2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C1A-1B2A     The ethics of restraint

      This has two points:

          1 General presentation

       The ethics of restraint, [217] from the point of view of its being
       accompanied by a motivation, is the ten abandonments that abandon the
       ten non-virtues.

          2 Precise features
      This is the intention of Bodhisattva Levels in stating that the ethics
      of restraint in the continuum of a bodhisattva is the seven  types  of
      vows of individual liberation:  When  those  possessing  the  vows  of
      individual liberation possess the  bodhisattva  vows,  the  ethics  of
      restraint is the actual vows of individual liberation of the class  of
      the laity or the ordained and  the  abandonments  and  vows  that  are
      common to them in their continua. When those who are unsuitable  as  a
      support for the vows  of  individual  liberation  possess  bodhisattva
      vows, the ethics of restraint is the abandonments  and  restraints  of
      abandoning either the natural misdeeds or the formulated misdeeds that
      are common to individual liberation. Although the vows  of  individual
      liberation in the continuum of a bodhisattva are vows of ethics in the
      continuum of a bodhisattva, they  are  not  actual  bodhisattva  vows,
      whereas the rest have a common basis with the bodhisattva vows. (Pages
      178- 179)[6]

There are two kinds of faults:
   1. a deed that is wrong by nature
   2. a deed that is wrong by prohibition
There are those actions that are  wrong  because  they  are  prohibited  but
there are also actions  that  are  wrong  regardless  of  whether  they  are
prohibited or not. Those actions are wrong by nature.
(c') The divisions of ethical discipline
a. The ethical discipline of restraint
b. The ethical discipline of gathering virtue
c. The ethical discipline of acting for the welfare of living beings
a The ethical discipline of restraint
[LRCM V2 page 148]  The Bodhisattva Levels says the  ethical  discipline  of
restraint, in the continuum of bodhisattvas*1, is the seven  types  of  vows
of individual liberation. Thus, given that there are those  who  have  taken
vows of individual liberation*2 and are also keeping the  bodhisattva  vows,
the ethical discipline of restraint is either the actual vows of  individual
liberation for the group of either laypersons or renunciates,  or  it  is  a
practice of restraint and abstention that would  be  associated  with  those
actual vows.
Also, given that there are those who  have  the  bodhisattva  vows  who  are
unsuited to be recipient of  vows  of  individual  liberation,  the  ethical
discipline of restraint is the practice of  restraint  and  abstention  that
gives up any deed that is wrong by nature or  any  deed  that  is  wrong  by
prohibition  that  would  be  associated  with  the   vows   of   individual
liberation.
*1 “in the continuum of bodhisattvas” is in the Middle  Length  Lamrim,  but
not in the Lam Rim Chenmo.
*2 Individual liberation is pratimoksha vow
There are:
1. Deeds that are wrong by nature
2. Deeds that are wrong by prohibition

With regard to d1. Deeds that are wrong by nature
Deeds that are wrong by nature,  are just wrong, it does not n’t matter  who
commits them, whether one is a lay person or does it. Whether  you  are  lay
person or renunciate. , those deeds that are wrong by nature are just  that.
Whoever engages in them it creates negative karma. So this is  what  a  deed
that is wrong by nature. For example, the ten  non-virtues  are  deeds  that
are wrong by nature and . It doesn’t matter who engages in  it;  whether  it
can be a lay or renunciate, whoever engages  in  the  the  tten  non-virtues
creates negative karma.

2. With regard to dDeeds that are wrong by prohibition, an example will be
dDrinking of alcohol. This  is not a deed that is wrong by nature but .  iIf
an ordained person wereas  to  drink  alcohol,  he  or  /she  would  creates
negative karma because drinking alcohol is prohibited for  the  ordained  an
act that is prohibited by the Buddha for ordained persons.  If  an  ordained
person wereas to drink alcohol, he would transgress  or  goes  against  what
wasis prohibited by the Buddha. The drinking of alcohol in this case is   In
so doing, therefore he create a deed that is wrong by prohibition.

There are these two kinds of fault:
   3. Fault which is a deed that is wrong by nature
   4. Fault which is a deed that is wrong by prohibition
There are those actions that are wrong because  they  were  prohibited.  But
there  are  actions  that  are  wrong  regardless  whether  there   is   any
prohibition or not; those actions that are wrong by nature.
There are The three categories of vows:
1. tThe pratimoksha vows[7]
2. tThe bodhisattva vows
3. tThe tantric vows
These vows are not the  same.  Thesey  are  different  categories  of  vows,
because they are taken by different people: rson.
• The basis or the person who takes the pratimoksha vows must be   can  only
  be a human being.
• The basis for taking the bodhisattva vows can be any of the six  types  of
  migratory beings.
• The basis for taking the tantric vows,  something that ………….

Khen Rinpoche (In English): I am  not  sure,  the  six  realms  whether  the
sentient beings of the ? Whether the six realms sentient  beings  ccan  take
the tantric vows. ?

These  two  vows,  the  pratimoksha  vows  and  the  bodhisattva  vows,  are
distinct; one is not the other. The ethics of restraint
The ethical discipline of restraint is present in both the pratimoksha  vows
and, it is also present in the bodhisattva vows.
The pratimoksha vows are is the ethicsal discipline of restraint.  There  is
also  part of the bodhisattva vows that fall under the  ethicsal  discipline
of restraint as well. While thatere is so,  the  pratimoksha  vows  and  the
bodhisattva vows are distinct from one another. O; one is not the other.


You can say that bodhisattvas necessarily have the bodhisattva vows but  you
cannot say that bodhisattvas necessarily have the pratimoksha vows. Are  the
pratimoksha vows in the continuum of a bodhisattva the bodhisattva vow?  The
answer is no.

You should read  theat  quotation   paragraph  again  and  i.  If  there  is
anything that you still do not understand,  then you should bring it up.


       2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C1A-1B2B    The ethics of gathering virtuous
           qualities
       The ethics of gathering virtuous qualities is to observe virtues such
       as the six perfections and to generate that which has not yet  arisen
       in one’s own continuum, to not degenerate that which has arisen,  and
       to increase it more and more.


       2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C1A-1B2C    The ethics of bringing about the welfare
           of sentient beings
       The ethics of bringing about the welfare of  sentient  beings  is  to
       accomplish the welfare of sentient beings in this  and  future  lives
       through ethics without any misdeeds as appropriate. (Page 179)[8]

b. The ethical discipline of gathering virtue
[LRCM Page 148] The ethical discipline of gathering virtue  means  that  you
focus on virtues such as the six perfections and then  develop  the  virtues
that you have not developed in your mind, do not spoil  the  ones  that  you
have already developed, and increase both of these ever further.
c. The ethical discipline of acting for the welfare of living beings
The ethical discipline of acting for the  welfare  of  living  beings  means
that you accomplish their aims in  this  and  future  lives  in  a  suitable
manner  and  without  wrongdoing.  Whenever  we  talk  about  the   ethicsal
discipline, it primarily refers to the ethics al  discipline  of  restraint.
With that acting as the foundation or basis there comes the other two  forms
of ethicsal discipline:
1. (1) the ethicsal discipline  of gathering virtuous qualities e and
2. (2) the ethics al discipline ofof bringing about the welfare of   helping
   sesentient beings or acting for the welfare of living beings.

How to generate ethics in one’s mental continuum[LRCM Page 148] The  ethical
discipline of acting for the welfare of living beings means that  you  focus
on the welfare of eleven sorts of living beings, and then  accomplish  their
aims in this and future lives in a suitable manner and  without  wrongdoing.
Since I have already detailed these in  my  Basic  Path  to  Awakening,  you
should definitely read that over and over again.
3. The way to produce it in your mind

Next is the manner or  the  way  to  produce  ethical  discipline  in  one’s
continuum.
The way to do this  so is to reflect on:
• the  grave  consequences  or  the  faults  of  not  safeguarding  ethicsal
  discipline and
• the benefits of safeguarding ethicsal discipline.

When one has a the good understanding of  the  faults  of  not  safeguarding
ethicsal discipline  and  the  benefits  of  doing  so,  one’s  practice  of
ethics—safeguarding it, one’s practice of cultivating  adopting  what  needs
to be cultivated adopted and abandoningdiscarding what is  to be  abandoned—
discarded, then one’s practice of ethical discipline  would  be  stable  and
would be very good.

There is Aa quotation from The King of the Concentrations Sutra  which  says
that if one  makes  offerings  of  umbrellas,  victory  banners,  light  and
ornaments of jewels to a hundred billion  buddhas  for  eons  equal  to  the
number of sand grains in  the  River  Ganges,  a  great  deal  of  merit  is
acquired. However, if, during these degenerate times, a  person  keeps  just
one precept or vow for a day and a night, the merit acquired is far  greater
than that of giving so many offerings to countless buddhas over such a  long
period of time. :
Compare the merit of making limitless offerings of foods, drinks,  parasols,
victory banners with faith to many zillions and millions of buddhas, to  the
virtue of keeping even with just one ethical training, or just  one  vow  or
one precept in this degenerate time, that  merits  of  making  offerings  is
smaller and the merits of keeping just one precept or one training  in  this
degenerate age is much more powerful.

It was Earlier on we saw how it is stated earlier  in  the  text  that  each
preceding perfection is inferior to the perfection  that  follows  it.  This
means that  the  perfection  of  ethicsal  discipline  is  superior  to  the
perfection of generosity. You can see why from  the  above  quotation.  Just
using this quotation as the illustration, now you can see why.

By  safeguarding  one’s  ethicsal  discipline,  one  experiences   joy   and
happiness.  By  not  safeguarding  one’s  ethicsal  discipline,   one   will
experience suffering. With such an  understanding,  one  would  be  able  to
generate a very strong and stable wish  attitude  of  wanting  to  safeguard
one’s ethicsal discipline. It is with this strong  and  stable  attitude  of
safeguarding one’s ethical discipline that one goes about  safeguarding  the
ethical discipline.

      2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C1A-1B3B     The entity of ethics
      This has three points:

          1 Instruction on the importance of how you train in ethics
      Although  there  are  three   kinds   of   ethics,   the   ethics   of
      restraint—practicing the engagements  and  avoidances  concerning  the
      formulated rules of individual liberation or what is common to them—is
      itself important for bodhisattvas in the beginning. If it is  guarded,
      the others will also be guarded, whereas if it  is  not  guarded,  the
      others will  not  be  guarded  either.  Therefore  the  Compendium  of
      Determinations says  that  if  the  ethics  of  the  bodhisattva  vows
      degenerates, all the vows are degenerated.  Whoever  thinks  that  the
      vows of individual  liberation  are  for  hearers  and  rejects  their
      formulated rules of engagement and avoidance saying: “I must train  in
      the other bodhisattva trainings” has thus not  grasped  the  essential
      point of the training in ethics of bodhisattvas, for it is taught many
      times that the ethics of restraint is the basis and  province  of  the
      two subsequent ethics.

    [MLLR page 180]  Although there are three kinds of ethical  discipline,
    the ethical discipline of restraint - practicing what to be adopted and
    what  to  be  cast  aside  concerning  the  formulated  rules  of   the
    pratimoksha vows  or what is common to them -is  itself  important  for
    bodhisattvas in the beginning. If this is guarded, the others will also
    be guarded, whereas if it is  not  guarded,  the  others  will  not  be
    guarded either. Therefore the Compendium of Determinations says that if
    the ethics of the  bodhisattva  vows  degenerates,  all  the  vows  are
    degenerated.
    Whoever thinks that the vows of the  individual  liberation*1  are  for
    hearers  and  rejects  their  formulated  rules   of   engagement   and
    avoidance*2 saying: “I must train in the other  bodhisattva  trainings”
    has thus not grasped the essential point of the training in  ethics  of
    bodhisattvas, for it is taught many times that the  ethical  discipline
    of restraint is the basis and province of the  two  subsequent  ethical
    discipline.

         2  The main ethics of restraint: how the mind of restraining from
           natural misdeeds should be generated again and again
    The main ethics of restraint is to abandon the  natural  misdeeds.  The
    synthesized essential points of the great disadvantages of the  natural
    misdeeds are to abandon the ten  non-virtues.  Therefore  the  mind  of
    restraint that does not even move toward their  motivations  should  be
    generated again and again. [220] (Page 180)[9]

*1 Pratimoksha vows
*2 the rule that is pertaining to what is to be adopted and what  is  to  be
cast aside.
[MLLR page 180] 2 The main ethics of restraint: how the mind of  restraining
from natural misdeeds should be generated again and again
The main ethics of  restraint  is  to  abandon  the  natural  misdeeds.  The
synthesized essential points of  the  great  disadvantages  of  the  natural
misdeeds  are  to  abandon  the  ten  non-virtues.  Therefore  the  mind  of
restraint that does  not  even  move  toward  their  motivations  should  be
generated again and again.
If one thinks,  “The pratimoksha vows are  only  for  the  hearers.  I  have
something else to pracctisce.  such as I am going to  keep  the  bodhisattva
vows,”, that is actually a sign that one  has  of  not  having  grasped  the
essential points of the training in the vowsprecepts.

When the training of  the  ethicsal  discipline  is  condensed,  it  is  the
ethicsal discipline of restrainting  from the ten non- virtues. It  is  said
that Apart aside from not committing the ten non-  virtues,  the  text  says
that  one should even restrain oneself from the motivation of  even  wanting
to commit them. We have to ethically avoid the ten non virtues. As  says  in
the  text,  we  must  mentally  correctly  restrain  ourselves   from   even
entertaining even mentally by not allowing a flicker athe   mere  motivation
of wanting to engage in for  these  non-virtues.  We  should  even  restrain
ourselves mentally from wanting to engage in these non-virtues.


           3     Summarized presentation
       In brief, to take this as the basis and train again and again in  the
       mind of restraint that trains in the trainings of whatever ethics one
       has promised is the practice of ethics. (Page 181)

[LRCM Page 148] Therefore,  since  the  rules  of  the  vows  of  individual
liberation are one aspect of the precepts for  renunciates  who  have  taken
the bodhisattva vows, they are not set  off  apart  from  the  precepts  for
bodhisattvas. Also, within the three divisions of  ethical  discipline,  the
ethical  discipline  of  restraint—the  actual  rules  of   the   individual
liberation vows or the practice of engaging in what is  to  be  adopted  and
rejecting what is to be cast aside  that  would  be  associated  with  these
vows—is initially very important even for bodhisattvas, so  train  in  this.
The Bodhisattva Levels' Compendium of Determinations states:*
Among the three aspects of ethical discipline,  the  ethical  discipline  of
restraint includes and reaches to the other two; when you are  bound  by  it
and safeguard it, you will be bound by the other two and safeguard  them  as
well, and when you are neither bound by nor protect  it,  you  will  not  be
bound by the other two nor safeguard them. Consequently, it is said that  if
bodhisattvas' ethical discipline of restraint degenerates,  all  their  vows
degenerate.
If you think that the vows of individual liberation are  for  sravakas,  and
if you cast aside their prescriptive and proscriptive rules and say,  "There
are other precepts, bodhisattva precepts, to train in," then  you  have  not
grasped the key point of the bodhisattva  training  in  ethical  discipline,
for it is often said that the ethical discipline of restraint is  the  basis
and source of the next two types of ethical discipline.
[LRCM Page 150] Furthermore, the principal aspect of the ethical  discipline
of restraint is abstaining from deeds that are wrong by  nature.  Abstention
from deeds that are wrong by nature is  the  abstention  from  the  ten  non
virtues, which comprise the crux of the major faults of the deeds  that  are
wrong by nature. You must correctly restrain  yourself  by  not  allowing  a
flicker of mere motivation for these non-virtues.
[MLLR page 181]  3 Summarized presentation
In brief, to take this as the basis and train again and again  in  the  mind
of restraint that trains  in  the  trainings  of  whatever  ethics  one  has
promised is the practice of ethical discipline.
Like the perfection of generosity, when if we practisce  the  perfection  of
ethicsal discipline with all the other perfections present,  then that  will
make the practice of ethicsal discipline very powerful.
Earlier on we saw how the practice of the six  perfections  can  be  present
when one is practicing the perfection of giving or  generosity.  You  should
write out,  on your own,   how  the  practice  of  ethicsal  discipline  can
involve all the other perfections. There is no great rush  to  do  it  right
away. now. You can do it at your own leisure. any time of your choosing.
                                ~~~~~~~~~~~~

Khen Rinpoche (in English): You can do it next life also.
[LRCM Page 149] (d') How to practice
You practice the three types of ethical discipline in association  with  the
six supremacies and the six perfections. When you  practice  in  association
with  the  six  perfections,  the  generosity  of  ethical   discipline   is
establishing  others  in  ethical  discipline  after  you  have   stabilized
yourself in it. The remaining perfections are as presented before.
(e') A summary
Not to weaken and to increase steadily  the  spirit  of  enlightenment—  the
basis of the bodhisattva deeds—is the root of engaging in deeds  of  ethical
discipline and so forth. It is also the best way to desist from harming  any
living being. Aspire to practice the ethical discipline  of  those  at  high
levels and then train your mind in it. Sincerely learn  right  now  what  to
adopt and what to cast aside, starting with  the  ethical  discipline  of  a
beginning bodhisattva.  In  particular,  each  day  frequently  exercise  an
attitude of restraint with respect to what you know  about  deeds  that  are
wrong by nature - such as the ten non-virtues -and deeds that are  wrong  by
prohibition. Among these also strive again and again to  apply  an  attitude
of restraint toward the fundamental transgressions of the vow to  which  you
are committed.  Once  you  do  this,  you  will  be  able  to  complete  the
bodhisattva  training  in  another  lifetime  as   a   causally   concordant
behavioral  effect,  with  little  difficulty  and  with  little  suffering.
However, if you neglect these things now, you will  be  continually  tainted
by very grave faults and transgressions, and moreover  for  many  lives  you
will be unable to learn the bodhisattvas' trainings. So from now  on  strive
at these practices.
The section on the f perfection of patience is a bit longer, so  you  should
read it on your own. When we come to class, we can just go through  some  of
the points without having to cover go through everything.

Sunday Discussion Questions for Sunday:
                 1. “At the time of small merit, i.e.,  for  those  with  ho
                    small merit, with regard to this Dharma,  the  teachings
                    on selflessness, one does not generate  profound  doubt.
                    However, even if one merely generates doubt, that  doubt
                    will tear apart cyclic existence.”
                 2. [Geshe Sopa's commentary on Lam Rim Vol 2 (Karma)
Those of little merit would not even
Entertain doubts that things are ultimately empty.
Even suspicion that objects are empty
Wrecks the seeds of cyclic existence. ]
1. This The above is a statement by the great Indian master Aryadeva.

   How does entertaining mere doubt of the nature  of  reality  “tear  apart
   cyclic existence”?


2. It  is  said  that  the  view  of  emptiness  is  indispensable  if  full
   enlightenment is to be achieved. It is indispensable even if one is  only
   seeking the enlightenments of the hearers or solitary realiszers. Why  is
   this so?

3. Discuss what the fourfold emptinesses mean.

Question 1:
The quotation just says that those who have no merits would not  even  think
about emptiness, and would not even query how things exist.  But  for  those
who even entertain some doubts or start to wonder about emptiness,  that  it
is said to tear samsara into pieces.

The question is how is this so? How does even such a small understanding  of
emptiness, the ultimate nature of reality, can start to  shake  your  entire
samsara?


Question 2:
The view of emptiness is also indispensable even if  you  are  only  looking
for liberation. Why is this so?

The purpose of this ese questions is are to  help  you  understand  why  the
understanding of inherent existence is necessarily even for someone  who  is
only aiming for the enlightenment of the  hearers  or  solitary  realiszers’
enlightenment.

If you remember from the tTenets, with the exception of the CMWS,  everybody
else starting from the AMWS and down to the MOS and so forth, all the  other
tenets assert that  of  them  yyou  do  not  n’t  need  to  realisze  subtle
selflessness, the emptiness of inherently existence,  in  order  to  achieve
liberation. But the CMWS says very clearly that you  need  to  realisze  the
emptiness of inherently existence to achieve even the  enlightenment of  the
hearers or solitary realiszers’ enlightenment. Why is this so?

The purpose oint of this e question is to help you , and move you closer  to
arriving at theis heartfelt conviction that what the CMWS says  is  correct:
that  even  to  achieve   liberation,   setting   aside   forget   aboutfull
enlightenment, why you would need to realisze the  emptiness  of  inherently
existence. ?  That is the purpose of the question - to move you towards  its
conviction.

During the In the course of discussion, those who do not  know  should  then
you have to ask those who do know. You have to be  interested  to  find  out
and you really have to ask find out for your self, “Why  is  it  like  this?
Why is  it  like  that?”  own  why  and  why  until  you  get  some  a  real
understanding.

For those who know,  you  should  share  what  you  know  with  others  with
patience and with affection,  sharing  what  you  know  and  and  trying  to
explain to those who do not know.

We should just have to keep this in mind. All of us are the  same.  When  we
are put in athe situation where after we are presented  with  get  too  many
questions, one after another, then we  may  one  will  get  irritated.  This
happens frequently all the time. So what Wwe then  need  to  apply  is  tthe
practice of patience. This is why  during  in  the  process  of  practiscing
generosity,  we also need patience. forbearance.

Khen Rinpoche (In English):  We will be playing the game on Sunday, we  will
also play the game. The game We are trying to play the game is  as  part  of
fun, part of studying, and part bondingof gathering. This at  is  the  whole
idea. We are just trying this out. Please come and join in.

 for that. Whoever is  playing the game  should  not  be  stressed  at  all.
Whether you get the right answer or wrong answer,  you  should  still  smile
and enjoy yourself. Okay? Most of the people don’t want  to  participate  to
play game because all of them have…., better don’t say.

Please join in  because we are trying out this game. We hHope it  this  will
become very successful. Then that is  then wonderful. Of  course,  since  it
is the fFirst time, it cannot be perfect. So, please join to  play.  Whether
right or wrong it doesn’t matter. It is part of the fun.

I h Hope this can help a little bit with your understanding  of  the  topic.
After that, Then we have dinner  together.  During  dDinner  time,  you  can
aalso can discuss, “ Wwhy is this answer right?  Why   and  what  is  it  is
wrong?” , Yyou can find out more the details then. This at is  the  the  way
to learn.

Maybe Yyou can start the Sunday discussion at 2pm. YYou  can  come  at  2pm.
Maybe 2pm to to 3:30pm for discussion. Then you have  half  an  hour  break.
Then we start the game. Even if yYou do not n’t want to play, you  can  also
you can come. You can enjoy yourself,  and sit down and eat dinner.

Anyway, I just want to tell you that whoever plays the game should  not  n’t
be stressed. This is not an  exam for you. This is part of  fun  and  games.
play. It is nothing. You get right answer? That then it  is  good.  You  get
wrong answer?  tThat is hen it is also good. You sit down.  ,  Ssomeone  who
is clever can come out and answer. Anyway, I just want to tell you this  one
more time. What I see is that people are think that it is  so  stressed.  It
should not be like Nothing about that. It is jJust playing a game.




Interpreted by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme; transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek,  Vivien  Ng
and Aki Yeo; edited by Cecilia Tsong.

-----------------------
[1] LRCM, 120.
[2] Ibid., 140.
[3] Ibid., 143.
[4] Ibid., 144.
[5] Ibid., 148.
[6] Ibid.
[7] Also translated as the vows of individual liberation.
[8] Ibid., 148.
[9] Ibid., 148-149.

