Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/SixPerfections/BP2 M4 L11 (Final).doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:03.390209
================================================================================


Transcript of teachings by Khen Rinpoche Geshe Chonyi on the Heart Sutra
and Stages of the Path (the Six Perfections)

The root text, Middle Length  Lam-Rim  by  Lama  Tsongkhapa,  translated  by
Philip Quarcoo. © FPMT, Inc., May 2012, is indented.[1] All page  references
refer to the root text, unless otherwise stated.

Where applicable, page numbers of corresponding  sections  in  the  Lam  Rim
Chen Mo (LRCM) are indicated in footnotes; they refer to The Great  Treatise
on the Stages of the Path  to  Enlightenment,  Volume  2,  by  Tsong-kha-pa,
translated  by  The  Lamrim  Chenmo   Translation   Committee,   Snow   Lion
Publications, 2004.

Lesson                                                                    11
                       1 August 2013


Continuation of the Stages of the Path. Why there is the need  to  train  in
the six perfections and settling misconceptions and wrong views. (From  root
text, pages 160-168).


We are continuing from where we had left off about  over  one  year  ago.[2]
In the Middle Length Lam-Rim, we had completed  the  section  on  developing
bodhicitta through the sevenfold instruction on cause  and  effect  and  the
instructions of exchanging oneself and others.

What follows after that is training in  the  conduct  of  the  bodhisattvas,
i.e., learning the bodhisattva deeds.

   Explanation of how to train in the conduct having generated the mind of
                                enlightenment


    2B4B-2A2C-2C Having generated the mind of enlightenment, how to train
         in the conduct
    This has three points:

         1  The reason why it is necessary to train in the trainings, having
           generated the mind of enlightenment
         2  Demonstration that buddhahood is not achieved by training in
           method or wisdom alone
         3  Explanation of the actual stages of training in the trainings
           (Page 160)[3]



1     The reason why it is necessary to train in the trainings, having
  generated the mind of enlightenment

It is emphasised in the teachings that one must  definitely  engage  in  the
training of the bodhisattva deeds after one  has  developed  bodhicitta.  We
had seen that just developing bodhicitta alone brings many benefits.  It  is
stated very clearly in the teachings that when one does  not  train  in  the
bodhisattva deeds, taking them to be the heart or essential practice, it  is
not possible to achieve enlightenment even though one has bodhicitta.

The need to train in the bodhisattva deeds after developing  bodhicitta,  in
order to achieve full enlightenment, is the intent of the Buddha himself.

  In the King of Meditative Stabilizations Sūtra it says:

       “One should make it the essential practice. Why? Because, oh youthful
       one, for one who makes it his  essential  practice  it  will  not  be
       difficult to obtain unsurpassed  perfectly  complete  enlightenment.”
       (Page 161)[4]

Before one can subdue the minds of others, first one must subdue  one’s  own
mind. It is mentioned  in  the  teachings  the  importance  of  disciplining
oneself prior to  disciplining  others.  Therefore  after  having  developed
bodhicitta, one must train in the practice of the six perfections  in  order
to subdue one’s own mind. The main purpose of doing that is to  be  able  to
achieve the capacity to subdue or discipline others. This is  the  goal  and
the general procedure of how we should practise but  generally  we  are  not
like that. We want  to  help  others  first  before  we  can  even  help  or
discipline ourselves.

According to the lam-rim teachings:
• First one generates bodhicitta.
• After one has generated  bodhicitta,  one  adopts  the  vows  through  the
  ritual.
• After one has adopted the vows, one  trains  in  the  six  perfections  in
  order to subdue oneself.
• By doing so, one will achieve full enlightenment.
• When one achieves full enlightenment, one will be in a position to  render
  perfect help to all sentient beings.

2  Demonstrating that you will  not  become  a  buddha  by  learning  either
method or wisdom separately

Lama Tsongkhapa emphasized many times the need to train in a  path  that  is
both unmistaken and complete. When one trains in a path  that  is  mistaken,
no matter how hard one tries, one will not achieve  enlightenment.  Likewise
even if one were to train in an unmistaken path but the path is  incomplete,
i.e. some  essential  elements  are  missing,  one  will  also  not  achieve
enlightenment.

In the text, Lama Tsongkhapa clearly states that, in order to  achieve  full
enlightenment, one must train in the  path  that  unifies  both  method  and
wisdom. He demonstrates how one will not become a buddha by learning  either
method or wisdom separately. We had covered this point before.

Lama Tsongkhapa brought up many examples of the  wrong  concepts  and  ideas
that people had about achieving enlightenment. During  his  time  in  Tibet,
perhaps even now, there were people who  posited  a  path  to  enlightenment
that did not involve the union of method and wisdom:
• For example, there was this very strong  view  in  Tibet  that  conceptual
  thoughts, i.e., any kind of thinking, are a  hindrance  to  enlightenment.
  There was a school of thought that propounded that  one  should  focus  on
  nothing, i.e., one places one’s mind in a state that  lacks  any  kind  of
  thought.
• Then there are also people who  assert  that  in  order  to  achieve  full
  enlightenment, one does not  have  to  engage  in  the  practices  of  the
  perfection of generosity, the perfection  of  ethics,  the  perfection  of
  patience and so forth. According to them, these are obstacles to achieving
  enlightenment.
• There is also a view that  the  practices  of  such  perfections  are  the
  practices of those with dull faculties, not for those of sharp faculties.
These were  all  wrong  concepts  that  Lama  Tsongkhapa  refuted  by  using
scriptural authority and reasoning.

In order to be able to put our heart into engaging in the  correct  path  to
enlightenment that involves the union of method and wisdom,  first  we  must
be convinced that such a path is necessary. In order to do that, we have  to
eliminate all the possible wrong concepts, ideas or  misunderstandings  that
one may have, such as:  “There is no need to do this. There is  no  need  to
do that.” It is absolutely essential for an  individual  who  is  traversing
the path to be convinced personally of the need to engage in the  path  that
unifies method and wisdom. This conviction can only arise  by  depending  on
scriptural authority and reasoning.

It is quite easy  to  subscribe  to  the  idea  that  in  order  to  achieve
enlightenment and become a buddha, one needs to get  rid  of  all  kinds  of
conceptual thought, believing that enlightenment  is  achieved  in  a  state
where there are no thoughts,  and  believing  that  is  how  one  becomes  a
buddha. When one questions oneself, one may not be able  to  come  out  with
any reasons why one needs to  do  all  these  different  practices  such  as
giving, practising ethics and so forth.

The main reason that Lama Tsongkhapa used to substantiate  the  need  for  a
path  that  unifies  method   and   wisdom   is   the   goal,   i.e.,   what
enlightenment—sometimes referred to  as  non-abiding  nirvana—is.  A  buddha
does not abide in samsara. Neither does a  buddha  abide  in  the  peace  of
individual liberation. Such a non-abiding nirvana is  the  final  object  of
attainment of someone on the Mahayana path.

Wisdom realising emptiness prevents the extreme of samsara
What prevents someone from abiding in samsara? Ultimately it is  the  wisdom
realising emptiness—the ultimate nature  of  reality—that  prevents  someone
from  abiding  in  samsara.  Whether  it  is  called  the  wisdom  realising
emptiness, the mind realising  the  ultimate  truth  or  the  collection  of
wisdom, it is referring to the same thing.

When one generates the wisdom directly perceiving emptiness, one  no  longer
accumulates new projecting karma for a samsaric rebirth and the  process  of
liberation or freedom from cyclic existence begins.

Only the wisdom directly perceiving emptiness, nothing else, will enable  an
individual to be liberated from samsara. Of the two practices of method  and
wisdom, it is the practice of wisdom, the wisdom realising  emptiness,  that
prevents or stops one from abiding in samsara.

The final object of attainment of the Mahayana path  is  full  enlightenment
or non-abiding nirvana, i.e., a state whereby one is free of and  no  longer
abides in the two extremes: the extremes of  samsara  and  the  extremes  of
nirvana (or individual liberation).

In order to avoid and not fall into the extreme of samsara, one has to  have
wisdom,  the wisdom realising emptiness. In  the  context  of  the  Mahayana
path, it has to be the perfection of wisdom.

We have completed studying with tenets recently and now you have  some  idea
about the tenets. You also have some idea about the paths and grounds.  When
you put together what you have learnt, it becomes clearer  and  clearer  why
the wisdom realising emptiness is so important and indispensable for one  to
achieve full enlightenment.

Setting aside achieving full enlightenment,  from  the  perspective  of  the
CMWS, even to achieve the lower nirvanas—the hearers’ enlightenment  or  the
solitary realisers’ enlightenment—one needs to destroy the  root  of  cyclic
existence. In order to destroy the root of cyclic existence, ignorance,  one
must realise selflessness.

You must see for yourself why you need the  wisdom  realising  emptiness  in
order to achieve liberation and full  enlightenment.  Why  do  you  need  to
learn and develop this wisdom? Why is it that you cannot achieve  your  goal
simply by stabilising your mind in a state that lacks any kind  of  thinking
or thought? You have to see the point for yourself. You have  to  gain  this
conviction. This is one of the main reasons why  we  study  these  subjects.
All the texts say the same thing, “In order to achieve liberation  and  full
enlightenment, one needs the view of  selflessness.  It  is  indispensable.”
This is what the texts say but you have to see  this  for  yourself  and  be
convinced that this is so.

Factor of method prevents the extreme of nirvana
The state of full enlightenment or non-abiding  nirvana  is  free  from  the
extremes  of  samsara  and  is  also  free  from  the  extremes  of  nirvana
(individual liberation).

As you saw in the tenets, according to the GES, the SS and the  MOS,  arhats
achieve the nirvana  with  remainder  and  the  nirvana  without  remainder.
Whether one achieves nirvana with or without  remainder,  one  is  basically
achieving a state whereby one is at peace with oneself and  one  remains  in
that state for a very long time, i.e., abiding in the sphere of  peace.  Why
are the arhats like that? The main reason why the arhats abide in the  peace
of nirvana for such a long time is due  to  the  fact  that  they  have  not
developed great compassion and bodhicitta.

From this, you can see that one will not  be  able  to  achieve  non-abiding
nirvana when one does not have great  compassion  and  bodhicitta.  This  is
because one would fall into the extreme of nirvana. In order to achieve non-
abiding nirvana, one also needs the factor of method, i.e., the practice  of
method. One needs to generate great compassion and bodhicitta. You  have  to
gain this understanding for yourself as to why the practice  of  method  and
wisdom are both necessary in order to achieve enlightenment.

Refuting practice of  method  is  only  for  those  who  have  not  realised
emptiness
There is another wrong view that purports that training in  the  perfections
of generosity, ethics, patience and so forth, which  constitute  the  factor
of method, is  only for those who have not  realised  emptiness.  For  those
who have realised emptiness, these practices that constitute the method  are
not necessary and can be set aside.  Lama Tsongkhapa said  that  this  is  a
very wrong view.

If you remember our discussions of the paths and grounds, from the first  to
the seventh grounds, the bodhisattva  accumulates  both  the  collection  of
method and wisdom in order to destroy the afflictive obscurations. The  work
of destroying the knowledge obscurations (or cognitive obscurations)  begins
only on the eighth   ground.  Therefore  on  the  eighth,  ninth  and  tenth
grounds, the bodhisattva works at overcoming the knowledge obscurations.

The actual antidote that  enables  the  bodhisattva  to  overcome  both  the
afflictive and  knowledge obscurations is the same thing. What is it? It  is
the wisdom directly perceiving emptiness.

Why is it that the bodhisattva’s wisdom  directly  perceiving  emptiness  on
the first to the seventh  grounds  can  only  act  as  an  antidote  to  the
afflictive obscurations and not the knowledge obscurations? Why is  it  that
after  achieving  the  eighth  ground,  the  bodhisattva’s  wisdom  directly
perceiving emptiness can act as an antidote to the  knowledge  obscurations?
The difference must come in the method aspect of the path.

The very thing that  makes  the  bodhisattva’s  wisdom  directly  perceiving
emptiness on the eighth, ninth and tenth  grounds  powerful  enough  to  act
against the knowledge obscurations must be the factor of method and not  the
wisdom itself. If the wisdom  directly  perceiving  emptiness  is  the  main
factor, then why is it that the hearers and the  solitary  realisers  cannot
achieve full enlightenment? Both the hearer  arhats  and  solitary  realiser
arhats have the same wisdom directly perceiving emptiness. Why  is  it  that
they can only become an arhat and not a buddha? What the arhats lack is  the
factor of method. Otherwise there is no reason why they cannot be a  buddha.


In our  discussion  of  the  paths  and  grounds,  there  was  a  perfection
associated with each of the ten grounds, starting  from  the  perfection  of
generosity on the first ground, the  perfection  of  ethics  on  the  second
ground and so forth. So in order to  achieve  non-abiding  nirvana  or  full
enlightenment, one needs the factor of method. The factor  of  wisdom  alone
is insufficient and must be conjoined with method.  The  primary  factor  of
method here is great compassion and bodhicitta.

We should work towards being able to explain why the  factor  of  method  is
necessary in order to achieve full enlightenment. If  someone  were  to  ask
you this, you should be able to explain it to them.

Refuting collection of merit only results in worldly enjoyments
There is yet another wrong view that purports the results of the  collection
of merit is only experiencing enjoyments such as long life and so forth.  In
order to achieve full enlightenment that is a much loftier goal  and  higher
state, one should do away with these mundane concerns  such  as  long  life,
good health and enjoyments.   Therefore  the  collection  of  merit  is  not
important.

The collection of merit results in the achievement  of  the  form  body.  As
Nagarjuna said in his Precious Garland:

    The form body, in brief, Your Highness,
    Is born from the collection of merit. (Page 166)[5]


When one achieves full enlightenment, one achieves both the truth  body  and
the form body. The form body is the result of the collection of merit.

We do practices such as giving, observing ethics and so forth  in  order  to
accumulate merit. We have to analyse whether such practices become  a  cause
of liberation or enlightenment when they are not conjoined with  the  factor
of wisdom. When you think about it, it is probably  very  difficult  to  say
that such practices alone will become causes of  liberation  or  omniscience
when they are not complemented with the factor of wisdom. In  general,  when
what one does is not conjoined with either the factor of method  or  wisdom,
those activities will only become causes of samsara.

WHY WRONG VIEWS OR MISCONCEPTIONS ARISE

Often wrong views or misinterpretations  of  the  teachings  of  the  Buddha
arise because of the inability to discover the actual intent of the  Buddha,
i.e., not knowing how to distinguish the purpose of the  various  statements
that the Buddha made. It is the  inability  to  discover  what  exactly  the
Buddha meant when he made a  particular  statement.  Due  to  this  lack  of
ability, when one sees certain passages, one will  take  them  literally  or
misinterpret their meaning. For example, the  Buddha  said  in  one  of  the
sutras:

      Strong adherence to the six, generosity and so forth, is the action of
      Māra. (Page 166)[6]

If you were to take this statement at  face  value,  what  it  seems  to  be
saying is that practising  the  six  perfections  is  an  obstacle  to  full
enlightenment. Therefore in order to achieve full  enlightenment,  one  does
not have to practise. One may arrive at such a conclusion.

In order to understand and discover  the  intent  of  the  Buddha  behind  a
particular statement, one cannot rely on one text alone and try  to  explain
what one thinks the Buddha said. In  order  to  discover  the  intent  of  a
particular statement made by the Buddha in a particular  text,  one  has  to
factor in what the Buddha had said in other situations  as  well.  Basically
one needs to have an overview of all the teachings of the Buddha. Only  then
would one be able to situate a particular statement in its rightful  context
and arrive at a correct  interpretation.  To  do  this  based  on  just  one
statement is not correct. A lot  of  problems  come  from  not  having  this
overview of the teachings of the Buddha in all the different texts.

THE NEED FOR AN OBJECT OF OBSERVATION

  In the Sūtra of Showing the Tathāgata's Inconceivable Secret it says:

       Child of the lineage, it is like this. For instance, a fire burns due
       to a cause; if the cause is absent, it  subsides.  Likewise,  a  mind
       blazes due to an observed object; if the observed object  is  absent,
       it subsides. (Page 168)[7]


This quotation from the  Sutra  of  Showing  the  Tathagata’s  Inconceivable
Secret  highlights  the  need  for  the  mind  to  focus  on  an  object  of
observation (or observed object) in order for it to develop and  to  improve
just as a  fire  needs  a  cause  before  it  can  blaze.  This  means  that
stabilising the mind  in  a  state  that  lacks  any  kind  of  thought  and
believing  that  by  not  thinking  of  anything  one   can   achieve   full
enlightenment  is  nonsense.  One  will  not  be  able   to   achieve   full
enlightenment by thinking of nothing.

In order for the mind to improve, it must  focus  on  a  certain  object  of
observation. Even in the case  of  meditating  on  emptiness,  there  is  an
object of observation for that mind. When we meditate on emptiness,  one  is
not meditating on nothingness. That is  not  meditating  on  emptiness.  The
object of observation here is a non-affirming negative that  is  a  negation
of the object of negation.

In order for the mind to improve, it must have  an  object  of  observation.
When one is meditating on emptiness, emptiness is the object of  observation
that one is focussing on. If we think that meditating on emptiness  is  just
focussing on nothingness, this is not true at all. The object is  emptiness.
According to the highest school, emptiness is a non-affirming negative  that
is the negation of the object of negation.

Before one can meditate on emptiness, first one must identify correctly  the
object that one is focussing on. In order to be able to focus on  emptiness,
one must first identify the object. This is the reason why we have to  study
tenets where there are   explanations  of  what  selflessness  or  emptiness
means. On the basis of identifying  correctly  the  object  of  observation,
only then can one take it to be the object of observation and focus  on  it.
It is not an easy thing.

Lama Tsongkhapa went  to  great  lengths  to  refute  all  the  wrong  views
pertaining to training in the perfections. We covered much of  this  in  the
first year of the Basic Program. Now that you have some idea  of  the  paths
and grounds, you should go back to this topic and read it again.  Definitely
you will get a better understanding and better perspective of this  subject.


You should start reading the text on your own.  The  sections  covering  the
first four perfections—the perfections of generosity, ethics,  patience  and
joyous perseverance—are relatively short and easy. It is not that  difficult
to read. Hopefully we can finish  that  quickly.  You  should  help  out  by
reading on your own. But there will be a more extensive explanation  of  the
last two  perfections,  the  perfections  of  meditative  stabilisation  (or
concentration) and wisdom.

                                 ~~~~~~~~~~~

Question: In relation to the Heart Sutra, since  Chenrezig  was  abiding  in
meditative equipoise looking upon the five aggregates, how  could  he  still
hear the question that Shariputra asked him?

(Khen Rinpoche posed the question to a  few  students  who  offered  various
answers).

Khen Rinpoche: So there are four different answers:
• Someone said it was due to the blessings  of the Buddha.
• Someone said Chenrezig was not meditating.
• Someone said he was in meditation but he could still hear.
• Someone said in reality, Chenrezig is a buddha so he can hear.
So you choose one of those answers!





Interpreted by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme; transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek,  Vivien  Ng
and Aki Yeo; edited by Cecilia Tsong.







-----------------------
[1]  The root text can be downloaded from the following link:
http://www.fpmtabc.org/download/teaching/geshe-
chonyi/bp/sixperfections/handouts/MLR_RootText_LTK_translPhQuarcoo_FINALDRAF
T2012.pdf.
[2] The audio recordings and transcripts for Module 1 on Stages of the  Path
can be found at this link:
http://www.fpmtabc.org/teachings_files/bp2ndM1.php.
[3] LRCM, pages 85-86.
[4] Ibid., 86.
[5] Ibid., 94.
[6] Ibid.
[7] Ibid., 97.

