Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/SixPerfections/BP2 M4 L18 (final).doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:02.803582
================================================================================


Transcript of teachings by Khen Rinpoche Geshe Chonyi  on  the  Heart  Sutra
and Stages of the Path (the Six Perfections)

The root text, Middle Length Lam-Rim,  by  Lama  Tsongkhapa,  translated  by
Philip Quarcoo, © FPMT, Inc., May 2012, is  indented.  All  page  references
refer to the root text, unless otherwise stated.

Where applicable, page numbers of corresponding  sections  in  the  Lam  Rim
Chen Mo (LRCM) are indicated in footnotes; they refer to The Great  Treatise
on the Stages of the Path  to  Enlightenment,  Volume  2,  by  Tsong-kha-pa,
translated  by  The  Lamrim  Chenmo   Translation   Committee,   Snow   Lion
Publications, 2004.

Lesson  18                                                                29
August 2013


Continuation of  the  perfection  of  patience.  The  perfection  of  joyous
effort. (From root text, pages 185- 189).


We talked about the practice of  patience  and  I  had  suggested  that  you
should memorise the verse that says:

      There is no negativity equal to hatred
      There’s no austerity equal to patience.
      Therefore patience should be practised
      Earnestly, in various ways. (Page 185)[1]

It is useful to recall this verse whenever you are upset or angry.  Bringing
its meaning to mind, try to use this verse to deal with your anger. Most  of
the time, anger sets in after a particular problem  has  surfaced  or  after
harm has been done. Whatever harm was  done,  it  is  already  done.  It  is
finished. But usually we follow that up  with  anger.  If  we  really  think
about this, our anger serves no purpose or benefit.  We  are  only  creating
more disturbance to our mind.  In  the  process,  we  get  angry  again  and
accumulate fresh negative karma.

So the best  thing  to  do  is  to  remind  ourselves  that  the  unpleasant
experience is the result of the ripening  of  negative  karma  that  we  had
created in the past. Otherwise when we continue to be upset after  the  harm
is done, then the mind  is  very  disturbed  and  we  accumulate  a  lot  of
negative energy and negative karma. If getting angry after the harm is  done
can reverse or undo that harm, perhaps there is some purpose to  our  anger.
But getting angry after harm is done can never undo  the  harm.  On  top  of
that, it creates more problems and more unhappiness.

It is very easy to get upset. We get upset at the slightest provocation.  So
it is not easy to counteract anger. We have to counteract anger  and  debate
with ourselves by using many lines of reasoning,  in  different  ways,  from
different perspectives. We have to prove to and convince ourselves  that  it
is pointless to get upset. It is only when  we  develop  that  ascertainment
and conviction for ourselves that change can come.

Once we accept in our heart that there is no point in getting  angry,  after
thinking through the reasons over  and  over  again  and  strengthening  the
conclusion that we have reached, only then can change come. What we need  is
a very sharp discriminating wisdom. When we have this  sharp  discriminating
wisdom, when we are able to think well, then we can stop all  the  different
negative thoughts. So  by  thinking  about  all  these  points  and  putting
whatever we have learnt into practice, it is good if we can  stop  ourselves
from getting angry.

Even if that does not happen, at least we  can  avoid  holding  grudges  and
feeling resentful. It is a sad and rather silly state of  affairs  that,  on
the one hand, one is a Buddhist and studying the Dharma, but in relation  to
some situation, one keeps such unhappiness and resentment in the  heart  for
life. Of course resentment and grudges will arise but  at  least  we  should
think that the purpose of learning  and  practising  the  teachings  of  the
Buddha is not to make ourselves miserable for life by holding on to  grudges
and resentment. Doing so makes ourselves unhappy and makes  others  unhappy.
We definitely  create  negative  karma  when  we  hold  on  to  grudges  and
resentment. This is in the future but, even in  the  present,  we  are  also
very miserable and unhappy when we see the  object  of  our  resentment  and
grudge.

Here we are talking about the perfection of patience, which  is  a  practice
of the bodhisattvas. Learning  about  it  can  be  a  condition  for  us  to
practise it and at least  implement some of these things in our lives.  Even
if we are not able to fully  counteract or stop our anger, our studies  will
serve some purpose if we are not affected by resentment or holding  grudges.
Perhaps you can  consider  pledging  this  as  your  goal,  the  outcome  of
studying this topic.

Khen Rinpoche: Once His Holiness the Dalai Lama was giving  refuge  vows  or
something like that in Dharamsala. He asked  those  present  whether  anyone
can commit to not getting  angry.  One  person—I  think  it  was  Rinpoche’s
brother, Sangye—said, “Yes, I can.” His  Holiness  was  very  surprised  and
couldn’t believe it. He said, “It is not possible not  to  get  angry.”  But
Rinpoche’s brother, Sangye said, “I will keep this vow.” He said  that.  His
Holiness was very happy. Whether Sangye got angry after that, I don’t know.

                                 ~~~~~~~~~~~

HOW TO TRAIN IN JOYOUS EFFORT


      This has three points:
          1    The entity of joyous effort
          2     Its subdivisions
          3     How to generate joyous effort in one’s continuum (Page 187)
            [2]



The entity of joyous effort
      In Bodhisattva Levels joyous  effort  is  explained  as  a  mind  that
      delights strongly for the sake of gathering virtue and working for the
      welfare of sentient beings, as well as the actions of the three  doors
      motivated by it. (Page 187)[3]

Joyous effort (or joyous perseverance)  is  the  enthusiasm  for  “gathering
virtue and working for the welfare of sentient beings.” It  is  a  mind,  an
attitude:
• At the causal motivation phase of a virtuous physical or verbal  activity,
  i.e., before you engage in those activities, there is this enthusiasm that
  is posited as joyous effort.
• At the time when you are carrying out those virtuous activities with  your
  body and speech, the enthusiasm that is present, you could also call  that
  joyous effort. So joyous effort is that enthusiasm.
It is a mind and it does not refer to the physical or verbal activities.

ITS SUBDIVISIONS

1    Armour-like joyous effort
      From  the  three,  the  first  is  armor-like  joyous   effort.   When
      bodhisattvas undertake joyous effort,  prior  to  applying  themselves
      they put on the armor of the thought that  first  delights  the  mind.
      That is they delight, even if they  are  to  attain  buddhahood  after
      abiding only in hell for 100,000 times  10  million  rounds  of  three
      immeasurable eons in order to eliminate the suffering  of  one  single
      being. Also with respect to  putting  in  effort  to  attain  complete
      enlightenment, they wear the armor of the thought “If I will not  give
      up engaging in joyous effort for that length of  time,  what  need  is
      there to mention that I will not give it up if the time is  less  than
      that and if the suffering is less?” (Page 187)[4]

Bodhisattvas put on this armour-like joyous  effort.  They  have  the  idea,
“Even if I have to spend eons  in  hell  to  cause  one  sentient  being  to
produce a single virtue, I will do it.”

You can apply this to many things: your studies,  your  quest  in  attaining
qualities, your meditation and  so  forth.  For  example,  in  the  case  of
educating yourself in the teachings of the Buddha,  you  can  think,  “I  am
going to dedicate my whole life towards learning and educating myself.”

Although this study program is supposed to finish in five years,  the  point
is that it shouldn’t matter whether it is five years, ten  years  or  twelve
years.   You  have  to  be  enthusiastic  about  wanting  to  do  it.   That
enthusiasm will make a difference.

You could wear this armour-like  joyous  effort  by  thinking,  “Whatever  I
don’t understand in this life, I will make sure  I  will  understand  it  in
future lives.” We should see that we have to continue to  educate  ourselves
and to learn until enlightenment is attained.

We need to have wisdom. Wisdom can only come from learning and studying.  So
as long as we need to develop this wisdom, we  should  have  this  idea,  “I
will study for as long as it takes so  that  I  can  develop  this  wisdom.”
Whether that happens in this life or our future lives, when we put  on  this
kind of armour-like  joyous  effort,  this  way  of  thinking  will  make  a
difference. When it comes to your own education, you  need  this  enthusiasm
for yourself. When you have this enthusiasm, it will make a big difference.

2   The joyous effort of gathering virtuous dharmas
      The joyous effort of gathering virtuous dharmas is to apply oneself to
      them for the sake of accomplishing the six perfections. (Page 187)[5]

The joyous effort of gathering virtuous dharmas is joyously  persevering  in
practising and accomplishing the six perfections. In short, whatever  virtue
we engage in, it has to be done happily with enthusiasm.

3    The joyous effort of working for the welfare of sentient beings
      The joyous effort of working for the welfare of sentient beings  [228]
      is similar to the above.(Page 187)[6]

This means having enthusiasm  while  one  is  working  for  the  welfare  of
sentient beings.

HOW TO GENERATE JOYOUS EFFORT IN ONE’S CONTINUUM

For the actual way of producing joyous effort in our mind, we first have  to
reflect on the benefits of having  joyous  effort  and  the  faults  of  not
having it.

The benefits of undertaking joyous effort
      From Ornament for the Mahāyāna Sūtras:

          Joyous effort is best within virtue’s collection.
          Thus, relying on it, one attains that which follows.
          Through joyous effort, immediately, best source of happiness,
          Including mundane and supramundane attainments.

          Through joyous effort one gains worldly wealth one desires.
          Through joyous effort one becomes totally pure.
          Through joyous effort one is liberated
          Passing beyond the transitory collection.

          Through joyous effort one wakes to supreme  enlightenment.  (Page
          188)[7]

Joyous effort is praised as supreme among virtues.  Why?  Because  when  you
have joyous effort, everything can be attained. Joyous effort  collects  all
other virtues.
• When you look at the object of attainment of a person of  small  capacity,
  it is high status, rebirth as a human or god. Such high status is achieved
  through joyous effort.
• The object of attainment of the person of middling capacity is  liberation
  from cyclic existence.  Achieving  liberation  is  also  achieved  through
  joyous effort.
• The object of attainment of the person of great  capacity,  the  state  of
  buddhahood, full enlightenment, comes about through joyous effort.

      In the Compendium of the Perfections it also says:

          For him who has great joyous effort and does not dismay,
          There’s  nothing  that  can’t  be   attained,   that   can’t   be
          accomplished.

      And:

          Also all non-humans like to benefit him.
          He achieves all manners of samādhi.[8]
          He passes days and nights having results.
          He won’t decline because of his mass[9] of good qualities,

          Through aims more noble than concerns of humans
          He will flourish like an utpala flower. (Page 188)[10]


Whenever one engages in virtue happily and with real enthusiasm, it is  said
that  one  will  not  experience  harm  from  humans  and  non-humans.   Not
experiencing harm means that they are helping you. When one  has  a  lot  of
confidence and enthusiasm for virtue with that kind of powerful  mindset,  I
guess one will not be susceptible to harm from non-humans.

We become susceptible to harm from non-humans when our mind is  low  and  we
are feeling down, discouraged and we lose heart.  In  that  state,  probably
our mind is also under the influence  of  some  afflictions.  This  is  what
allows the external beings, non-human beings, to  cause  problems  and  harm
us.

Most of the time, due to the lack of strong and powerful  enthusiasm  and  a
happy mind when carrying out our practices or studies,  one  is  susceptible
to obstacles. During the course of our studies or  practice,  obstacles  may
arise. But when there is strong  enthusiasm,  even  when  we  do  meet  with
obstacles, they may not affect us.

When you are not very enthusiastic about  doing  something,  when  you  meet
with a problem, even though  it  may  be  a  very  small  problem,  it  will
overwhelm you completely. There is not much  interest  at  the  onset.  With
little enthusiasm, problems arise. You don’t want to study, you  don’t  want
to do your mantras, you don’t want to recite prayers and you don’t  want  to
come to class. You stop whatever practices you were engaged  in.  You  don’t
feel like doing anything even though the problem is very small.

However  when  you  really  want  something,  let’s  say,   when   you   are
enthusiastic about your studies, a small problem remains  as  just  that,  a
small problem, and soon it goes away. Even when the problem is big,  due  to
your strong interest in and desire and enthusiasm for the  object,  it  does
not affect you much. It will not stop you.

Enthusiasm is a positive mind. When it is a powerful mind, it can  overwhelm
external obstacles. I guess this explains how having joyous effort can  stop
harm from non-human beings. This is why the text  says,  “For  him  who  has
great joyous effort and does not dismay,/  There’s  nothing  that  can’t  be
attained, that can’t be accomplished.”

Many people say that they cannot  study.  They  put  forth  this  thesis:  I
cannot study. Whenever there is a thesis, there is a  reason.  They  provide
many reasons: “I don’t have brains. I am slow. I am old. My memory is  poor.
I forget what I have studied.”  They posit many reasons to prove  that  they
cannot study. All these are what we call  incorrect reasons.   Actually  the
real reason is this: “I am not  really  interested.   I  don’t  have  joyous
effort.” This is the actual reason.

Khen Rinpoche: Don’t you agree? No?

It is true that there is nothing that one cannot  learn.  There  is  nothing
that one will not come to know when one has joyous effort.

The disadvantages of not undertaking joyous effort
      The disadvantages of not undertaking joyous effort  are  described  in
      the Sūtra Requested by Sāgaramati:

          For the lazy, enlightenment is very far and far in all  ways.  In
          the lazy, generosity through wisdom does not exist. For the lazy,
          the welfare of others does not exist.

      And Mindfulness of the Excellent Teaching also says:

          The one foundation of mental afflictions
          Is laziness, no matter in whom.
          He who has laziness by itself,
          Does not have qualities whatsoever. (Page 188)[11]

These are the faults of not asserting  joyous  effort.  In  the  absence  of
joyous effort, there is laziness. With laziness, nothing is achieved.

ADVERSE CONDITIONS FOR JOYOUS EFFORT

      There are two adverse circumstances for joyous effort:

          A    Seeing that one is able to accomplish virtuous dharmas but
            not    engaging in them
          B  The discouragement that thinks: “How could I ever accomplish
            anything   like that?”


      2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C1A-1D3C-1A  Seeing that one is able to accomplish
          virtuous dharmas but not engaging in them [229]
      This has two points:

          1 The actual topic
      One postpones things till later thinking “There is still time,” and if
      not that, one is overcome  by  attachment  to  bad  activities.  (Page
      189)[12]

1   The laziness of procrastination
The real obstacle that prevents us from practising something  that  we  know
we are capable of is the laziness of procrastination, thinking  “I  will  do
it tomorrow or the day after tomorrow.”  We  are  all  like  that.  Whatever
virtuous activities you can name, for example, prostrations. We know we  can
prostrate. We have the time to prostrate and we  can  even  talk  about  the
benefits of prostrating—“you create the causes  to  be  reborn  as  a  wheel
turning king for countless times”—but we think,  “Maybe  I  will   prostrate
next time.”

Khen Rinpoche: You say, “Next time,” but next time never comes. Before  next
time happens, the next life happens.

This is  what  stops  us  from  virtue.  This  is  called  the  laziness  of
procrastination. When there is the laziness of procrastination, there  isn’t
any enthusiasm for virtue at all.

The same attitude is present when we are studying. “Oh, this module  is  not
turning out very well for me. This module has already ended. Never  mind.  I
will study harder for the next module.”

Khen  Rinpoche:  Now  I  am  saying  I  have  clairvoyance.  I  am   joking.
(Laughter).

Procrastination is a form of laziness. It is very bad.  It  is  one  of  the
worst things because it pushes all virtues away.

~ The antidote
      The antidote to the first, the  laziness  of  procrastination,  is  to
      meditate on the three:  this  body  that  you  have  obtained  quickly
      disintegrates, after death you will fall into the lower realms, and it
      will be difficult to find such a good support  once  again.  This  was
      already taught before. (Page 189)[13]

We have to  reflect  on  how  we  ourselves,  our  life  and  our  body  are
disintegrating  moment  by  moment.  We  have  to  reflect  on   death   and
impermanence using the nine-point meditation that  is  taught  in  the  path
that is shared with the person of small capacity.

To stop ourselves from not practising when  we  see  that  we  are  able  to
practise, we have to  reflect  on  death  and  impermanence.  As  the  great
Kadampa masters of the past have said, “We  do  not  know  which  will  come
first—tomorrow or our next life.  Therefore, start now.”

When we are unable to use this life in a meaningful and virtuous way, it  is
not incorrect to say that we are headed for the lower realms. Once we go  to
our next life and if we go to the lower realms, it will  be  very  difficult
to get such an opportunity again. As said in the teachings, the  opportunity
that we have is something that is very difficult to come by. We have  to  go
back to the section in the beginning of the  lamrim  on  the  difficulty  of
obtaining this human life of leisure and endowments. We have to meditate  on
death and impermanence all the time, over  and  over  and  over  again.  The
constant reflection on death and impermanence will enable us  to  engage  in
virtue.

2   Attachment to bad activities
This is another kind  of  laziness,  a  laziness  that  takes  the  form  of
attachment to bad activities that prevents us from engaging  in  virtue.  We
see that we can engage in virtue but what stops us is our attachment to  bad
activities, e.g., passing time in  meaningless  talk,  going  out  or  doing
meaningless activities like watching movies ...

Khen Rinpoche: … watching TV ... going to karaoke ...

Attachment to bad activities means coming under the  control  of  and  being
overwhelmed by distractions. In the  midst  of  being  distracted,  you  may
still have the idea that you need to practise but, in the end, nothing  gets
done.

~ The antidote
      The following considerations are the antidote  to  attachment  to  bad
      activities: the holy Dharma is the cause for the arising of  boundless
      joy in this  and  future  lives,  meaningless  idle  chatter  and  the
      distractions of excitement and so forth degenerate the  great  aim  in
      this life, and seeing that it is the source  that  generates  manifold
      suffering in future lives, it should be stopped. (Page 189)[14]

Practising the Dharma means engaging in virtue  and  abandoning  non-virtue.
This is the solution to our attachment to bad activities.  The  solution  is
to think about karma and its effects:
• thinking about what is virtuous karma and what are its effects
• thinking about what is non-virtuous karma and what are its effects

We have to be convinced ourselves that the happiness we seek has  its  cause
in virtue. We have to  think  about  the  presentation  of  karma  that  was
explained in the section of the path that  is  shared  with  the  person  of
middling capacity.

The laziness of discouragement
Another kind of laziness is thinking, “This is beyond me. There is no way  I
can  do  this.  I  really  cannot  do  this.”  This  is  the   laziness   of
discouragement. There are three kinds of  discouragement  that  we  need  to
stop:

~ 1    Discouragement with respect to the goal of attainment
This is thinking, “I cannot possibly achieve all these  limitless  qualities
of a buddha.” When we look at  the  explanation  of  the  qualities  of  the
Buddha, we will realise that they are limitless. We cannot  imagine  how  it
is possible for us to achieve not just one but so many of  these  qualities.
This becomes the reason for us to get discouraged, “So many  qualities!  How
is it possible for me to actualise them all?”

It is the same with your studies. You may think, “Sometimes you  say  ‘Yes.’
Later you say, ‘No.’  So what is the answer? How am I supposed  to  know  or
understand? Can’t you just tell me?  This  is  impossible!”   This  is  what
happened in the debate last week.

You may get discouraged because there are so many tenets. All  of  them  are
saying their own things. “The  Vaibashikas  say  this.  The  Prasangika  say
that. They all say different things. Then  there  are  all  these  different
texts. It is so complicated! How is it possible for  me  to  learn  this?  I
don’t understand all this.” Then you get discouraged.

When you get discouraged in  this  way,  definitely  you  will  not  achieve
anything. Once you get discouraged, nothing happens. So there  is  no  point
to  getting  discouraged.   Therefore  armour-like  joyous  effort  is  very
important.

~ 2   Discouragement with respect to the method
“In order to achieve the goal, I have to give up my arms  and  legs  and  so
forth. I need to do many  such  things.  It  is  so  difficult.  How  is  it
possible?” Then you get discouraged. Or some  people  get  discouraged  when
they hear that one needs to accumulate  the  collections  over  three  great
countless eons.

~ 3   Discouragement with respect to the locale of accomplishment
One thinks, “In order to become a buddha,  between  now  and  buddhahood,  I
still have to be reborn in samsara  for  so  many  lifetimes.  During  those
times when I am in samsara, I will experience  a  lot  of  suffering.”  This
becomes another source of discouragement.

~ Antidote to discouragement with respect of the object of attainment
You have to think in this way, “In the past, all the buddhas did  not  start
out  with  high  realisations.  They  were  all  like  me.  They   gradually
progressed higher and higher and that is how they became buddhas.”

“The Buddha also said, ‘Those sentient beings that are  lower  than  me  now
can also achieve enlightenment.’ So as long as I do not give up my  practice
of joyous effort, I can also achieve enlightenment. There is no  reason  why
I cannot achieve it. Although the Buddha has limitless qualities, if I  work
at it, I will achieve them also.”

You can apply this to your learning here and generate the  determination  to
learn. “There is no reason why I cannot understand this.  There  are  people
who understand it. If they can understand it,  there  is  no  reason  why  I
cannot understand it. If I put in the effort, I would come to understand  it
one day.” You generate that kind of determination.
I guess you would have heard this. Most people would  say,  “Of  course  all
the gurus, our teachers and the bodhisattvas can do it because they are  our
gurus, our teachers. They are bodhisattvas. But we are not teachers. We  are
not bodhisattvas. How can you expect me to be like them?”

But the bodhisattvas were not bodhisattvas from the  start.  They  became  a
bodhisattva.  If  they  can  become  bodhisattvas,  we   can   also   become
bodhisattvas by putting in the  effort.  It  is  the  same  thing  with  the
teachers. The teacher was not a teacher from the beginning. He  didn’t  know
everything from the start. He also had to study and learn. We should  think,
“The teacher studied. Then he came to understand the topics.  If  I  do  the
same, I can also be like him.”

Khen Rinpoche: If he can do it, I can do  it.  There  is  a  famous  cooking
show, Yan Can Cook. Now I don’t see the show. Last time, I saw this  Chinese
guy on American TV. When he teaches, cooking seems very easy. At the end  of
the show, he would say, “Yan can cook. I  can  cook  also.”  Something  like
that.

There are a few more pages that cover the last two perfections briefly.  You
should read that. After that we  will  look  at  the  way  to  develop  calm
abiding.






Interpreted by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme; transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek,  Vivien  Ng
and Aki Yeo; edited by Cecilia Tsong.

-----------------------
[1] LRCM, 159.
[2] Ibid., 182.
[3] Ibid., 182.
[4] Ibid., 184.
[5] Ibid., 185.
[6] Ibid., 186.
[7] Ibid., 182-183.
[8]  Tib.  ting  (nge)  ‘dzin,  usually  translated  here   as   “meditative
stabilization.”
[9] Tib. tshogs, usually translated here as “collection.”
[10] Ibid., 183.
[11] Ibid., 183-184.
[12] Ibid., 186-187.
[13] Ibid., 187.
[14] Ibid., 187.

