Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/SixPerfections/BP2 M4 L23 (final).doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:02.846373
================================================================================


Transcript of teachings by Khen Rinpoche Geshe Chonyi  on  the  Heart  Sutra
and Stages of the Path (the Six Perfections)

The root text, Middle Length Lam-Rim,  by  Lama  Tsongkhapa,  translated  by
Philip Quarcoo, © FPMT, Inc., May 2012, is  indented.  All  page  references
refer to the root text, unless otherwise stated.

Where applicable, page numbers of corresponding  sections  in  the  Lam  Rim
Chen Mo (LRCM) are indicated in footnotes; they refer to The Great  Treatise
on the Stages of the Path  to  Enlightenment,  Volume  3,  by  Tsong-kha-pa,
translated  by  The  Lamrim  Chenmo   Translation   Committee,   Snow   Lion
Publications, 2004.

Lesson   23                                                               17
September 2013


Continuation  of  how  to  generate   flawless   meditative   stabilisation.
Identification of mindfulness and eliminating faulty approaches. (From  root
text, pages 212- 214).


FOCUSSING ON ONE’S OBJECT OF MEDITATION


Remember  the  text  said  ys  that  when  if  one  develops  single-pointed
concentration,  when one has single-pointedness of mind,  then  oone’s  mind
will not be distracted. With an  undistracted  mind,  whatever  virtues  one
engages in will becomes very powerful.

It is also mentioned in the teachings that when one  achieves  concentration
single-pointed concentration, ly, one will experiences bliss  and  delight,.
and Oone does no longer not experiences any  physical  heaviness  physically
or other kind of difficulties that associated with the one’s body.

The main reason for developing calm- abiding is to be  able  to  proceed  to
the cultivation of  so that one can go on to cultivate special insight.

SSpecial insight is that which can cuts the root  of  samsara.  So  Wwithout
it, special insight we cannot cut the rroot of samsara and we would  have  .
If we cannot cut the root of samsara, we just have  to  to  go  on  circling
over and over again  in  samsara,   and  experiencing  all  ththee  samsaric
sufferingss of samsara. Therefore iSo in order to abandon samsara,  we  have
to cut its root and we must . In order to cut the root of samsara, one  must
have cultivate special insight.  In  order  to  do  this,  cultivating  calm
abiding have special insight,  it  is  indispensable.   to  cultivate  calm-
abiding.

In order Tto develop calm -abiding, you must engage in  meditation.  As  for
the object of meditation, Iit is recommended that you take the body  of  the
Buddha’s body as an object of meditation.  When  you  meditate,  focus  your
attention on the body of the Buddha’s body. Meditation is not done with  the
senseory consciousnesses, e.g., for example, it is  not  performed  done  by
staring at the Buddha’s body with your eyes. Rather, the meditation is  done
with the mental consciousness meditating on the . When you meditate  on  the
Buddha’s body, you are meditating on the mental image .  The  meditation  is
done by focusing on the mental image of the Buddha’s body.

The text mentions It is mentioned in the text that first you have to form  a
mental image of your the chosen object of meditation. How do  you  go  about
doing this? This is done through (1)
How do you form a mental image of the chosen object of meditation?
It is either through looking at a representation of  the  object—.  iIn  the
case of a Buddha’s body, you should look at a sculpture or painting  of  the
same—. Oor (2) by  listening  to  your  teacher’s  an  explanation  of  your
teacher description bing how of tthe object.  looks like and so forth.

The point is to here is that you develop a meaning -generality or  a  mental
image  of the object and to try  – a mental image. Then you try to  generate
that have the mental image of that object that will appear  to  yourin  your
mind. When  you  roughly  have  this  mental  image  of  the  chosen  object
appearing to your mind, you focus your attention on it. the mental image  of
the object.

With regard to As for the size of the appearance of the mental image of  the
object, how big or how small should it be?

• When If it is too big, there is the a danger of of developing  excitement.


• When If it is too small, there is the a danger of developing laxity.

Let us ’s say that you are meditating on the body of the Buddha’s  body.  It
is mentioned in the teachings that you should think of the mental  image  of
the Buddha’s body that is appearing to you to you should be  thought  of  to
be in the nature of light, which is very bright light.  At  the  same  time,
you should visualisze the mental image as to be sslightly heavy so  that  it
is does not floating about around.  i.e.In other words, the image should  be
 bbright,  luminous  and  heavy.  This  will  .  That  helps  in  countering
excitement and laxity.

As for the size of the image, you have to  choose  whatever  is  comfortable
for you and that fits your mind.  and whatever is comfortable for  yourself.
In certain practices, it is  mentioned  that  the  object  can  be  you  can
visualised ze the object to be the size of a  pea.  But  This  that  is  too
difficult for us when it is so too small. Perhaps you could  visualisze  the
image to be one cubit in height, i.e., the length of one’s forearm.

tall - half arm length. Visualise ze  and  meditate  on  the  image  of  the
chosen object, in this  case  the  Buddha’s  body,  and  thinking  that  the
Buddha’s body is in the  space  in  front  of  you  at  the  level  of  your
forehead.
 There are teachings that talk about visualiszing the object  of  meditation
above one’s crownone’s crown. Since Since for most of us  there is a  strong
link or connection between our senseory and mental  consciousnesses,  it  is
would be easier if we were to think that of  the  object  of  meditation  is
right in front of us at the level of our forehead, i.e.,  literally  at  the
level of at tthe point between our eyebrows. That would  be  easier  for  us
because there is a strong link  between  what  goes  on  and  the  emotional
feeling.  This  is  link  connection  between   our   sensory   and   mental
consciousness.  However if If you are fine with  visualising  your  thinking
of the object of meditation on your one’s crown, then it  is  fine  if   you
can do thatit.
In fact there are various places  whereby  you  can  place   the  object  of
meditation can be placed. Some texts talk about visualiszing the  object  of
meditation above one’s head. , and Other some  ttexts  mentioned   that  the
object can be it is in one’s heart and so forth.

It is important to correctly identify your object  of  meditation  correctly
right from the beginning and, once identified, . You are supposed tto  focus
your attention on it. once you have identified  the  object  of  meditation.
This means that after you have chosen a specific the  object  of  meditation
and its specific size,  you should have to stick to  with  it.   So  if  you
have chosen a specific object of meditation and its specific size, you  stay
with it. You then meditate on it until you have developed concentration,  no
matter that it may take months or even; be it months  or  years.  You  stick
with the same object of meditation. The teachings mention that when  If  you
switch the object of meditation or you change  the  aspects  of  the  object
such as its by changing the size and so forth during  in the course of  your
meditation, it is mentioned in  the  teachings  that  you  will  never  ever
achieve concentration.

Once you have chosen the object  of  meditation,  you  have  to  focus  your
attention on it. As to the concentration that you are  seeking  to  develop,
with respect to your object of meditation, first there must  be  the  factor
of intense clarity (or vivid intensity)  whereby  there  is  intense  mental
clarity, so there is the a clear appearance of the object. As for  the  mind
apprehending or focusing on  thate  object,  it  is  a  mind  that  is  both
energetic and it is a mind that is alert.

The teachings say that perfect concentration, the concentration we  seek  to
develop, must possess both vivid intensity and single-pointedness.
• There must be vivid intensity whereby there  is  intense  mental  clarity.
  What hinders the arising of vivid intensity is laxity. Laxity is the  main
  obstacle to the arising of vivid intensity. Here the concentration that we
  are seeking to develop must have  the  features  of  vivid  intensity  and
  single-pointedness as well. So
• Wwhat hinders single-pointedness of mind is excitement.

PRESENTATION  OF  THE  FAULTLESS  METHOD  The  teachings  say  that  perfect
concentration is one that possesses vivid intensity and  single-pointedness.

It is laxity and excitement that mainly hinders the arising of these two.
How to focus your mind on the object of meditation
   1) Presenting the flawless method
   2) Eliminating flawed methods
   3) Indicating the length of sessions.
(1) The flawless method
[LRCM Vol3 page 47] The concentration that you will accomplish here has  two
special  features:  vivid  intensity—an  intense  mental  clarity—and   non-
discursive stability, staying one-pointedly on the object of meditation.
[LRCM Vol 3 page 48] Since the development of this sort of  vivid  intensity
is blocked as long as there is laxity, while one-pointed  non-discursiveness
is blocked as long as there is excitement, laxity  and  excitement  are  the
chief obstacles to achieving genuine concentration.
|2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6A2B-2B1B-2A3 Identification of laxity   |
|and excitement and the importance of skill in the method for |
|sustaining meditative stabilization that stops the two       |
|Laxity hinders the arising of vivid intensity                |
|Excitement hinders single-pointedness of mind.               |


      That is why, if you do not know  how  to  identify  subtle  and  gross
      laxity and excitement, and if you do not know an impeccable method for
      sustaining meditative stabilization that stops both of them, even calm
      abiding—not to mention special  insight—cannot  arise.  Therefore  the
      intelligent who strive  for  meditative  stabilization  should  become
      skilled in this way. (Page 212)[1]

[LRCM Vol 3 pg. 48] So if you do not understand how to  identify  accurately
the subtle and coarse forms of laxity and excitement, or if you do not  know
how to correctly sustain a concentration which stops  these  once  you  have
identified them, then it will be impossible for  you  to  develop  serenity,
not to mention insight.  Hence,  those  who  diligently  seek  concentration
should master these techniques.
It  is  said  that  when  if  you  are  aspiring  to  develop   the   actual
concentration, you need to identify correctly the  two  obstacles—excitement
and laxity— for developing concentration and be experienced in doing so.

There are both coarse and subtle forms of The two obstacles  are  excitement
and laxity.
You  need  to  identify  them  correctly  and  experience  it.  As  for  the
excitement and laxity. , there are both coarse and  subtle  forms.  When  If
you are unable to not able to icorrectly identify these two  main  obstacles
correctly for developing concentration, you will may end up  with  a  flawed
concentration and . This means that you will never ever achieve the  perfect
actual perfect concentration you seek.  So  for  those  who  are  diligently
seeking and truly who are really aspiring to  develop  have  a  the  correct
kind of concentration, you must really know what exactly exactly  excitement
and laxity areis.

Coarse laxity
• First you one must identify your the object of meditation.
• Once you have identified your the object of meditation, then you are
  suppose to focus your mental attention continuously on thate  object of
  meditation.  and keep the attention focused continuously on the object of
  meditation. This is at has to be done with mindfulness. Mindfulness does
  that.
• With such mindfulness, there will come a time when the factor of
  stability will arise when When you do that, you may reach a time whereby
  there is the factor of stability in which your mind is is abidinging on
  your the object of meditation.
• But although your mind is abiding on the object, there isn’t a factor of
  clarity - there is no clarity.  but your mind is abiding on the object.
  This at is what happens a situation when whereby coarse laxity is present.

Subtle laxity
Then byAs you  continueing with mindfulness to keep  your  mental  attention
focussed on the object of meditation with mindfulness, there  it  will  come
to a time where, byin addition to the factor of stability,   you  will  also
also have the factor of clarity on top  of  the  factor  of  stability.  But
there is no intensity behind the way the mind is mind’s way of  apprehending
its the object. There is no intense clarityno vivid intensity.  There  is  a
factor of stability and there is a factor  of  clarity  but  there  isn’t  a
force behind the mind’s way of apprehending the object. As such there is  no
vivid intensity. This is the  situation  when  reby  the  subtle  laxity  is
present.

This is where Lama Tsongkhapa said that this is when many  where  a  lot  of
people mistakenly believe that they have achieveddeveloped concentration.  T
- there is the a factor of stability and the a factor of  clarity  but  they
are not aware of the presence of  subtle  laxity.  They  do  not  know  what
subtle laxity is therefore  mistakenly  believed  that  they  have  achieved
concentration. These people keep their mind in  that  state  when  there  is
still subtle  laxity.  Thinking  they  have  achieved  concentration,  tThey
continue to just keep the mind meditateing with their mind  in  that  state.
on that.

So Lama Tsongkhapa said that there is theis great danger of developing  such
a this flawed  concentration.   whereby  oneOne   thinks  one  has  achieved
developed concentration whereas  in  actuality  one  has  not  yet  done  so
because  there  is  still   subtle   laxity.   Therefore   Lama   Tsongkhapa
emphasiszeds how important it is to identify correctly what laxity  is  and,
in particular, what subtle laxity is. This is an essential point.

When It is very important  to  correctly  identify  what  subtle  laxity  is
otherwise one ends up  with  a  flawed  concentration,  and  one  mistakenly
believe one has achieved concentration. one continues  to  If  you  keep  on
meditateing like when there is the fa factors of stability and  there  is  a
factor of clarity are present but there is no intense clarity,  there is  no
vivid intensity, then over time,  one’s mental  powers  will  become  weaken
and one’s memory will start to fail, i.e., r. Being weakened  by  this,  one
becomes basically more dumb and one’s  memory  starts  to  fail  i.e.  one’s
memory is weakened over time by such meditation.

Whereas When if one has developed the a correct perfect  concentration  with
intense claritywhereby there is vivid intensity i.e.  when  there  is  vivid
intensity in one’s concentration,, then in fact the more one you  meditates,
the more one’s your mental powers would should increase  and  .  Also  one’s
memory  would  improve  should  also  increase  instead   of   degenerating.
Therefore it is extremely important to  know  exactly  what  is  laxity  and
specifically in particular subtle laxity is.

Therefore Lama Tsongkhapa is emphasising  how  important  this  is  when  he
said, ys “Therefore the intelligent who strive for meditative  stabilisation
should become skilled  in  this  way.”  Hence,  those  who  diligently  seek
concentration  should  master  these  techniques”.  He  is  emphasizing  how
important it is.

Laxity summarised
• Coarse laxity is when one’s concentration has the factor of stability  but
  no clarity.
• Subtle laxity is when one has both the factor of clarity  and  the  factor
  of stability but there is no intensity in the way the mind is apprehending
  its object, i.e., there is no intense clarity or vivid intensity.
In short, when one’s concentration  has  the  factor  of  stability  but  no
clarity, this happens during the time there is coarse laxity.
When one has the factor of clarity on top of the  factor  of  stability  but
there is no force behind the mind’s way of  apprehending  the  object,  i.e.
there is no vivid intensity, then that is the time  there  is  still  subtle
laxity in the mind.

Coarse excitement
What about coarse excitement? Let’s say you have identified  the  object  of
meditation correctly. But as you focus  your  attention  on  the  object  of
meditation, your mind cannot abide on it. Your mind  goes  off  almost  very
quickly. This is the time where there is coarse excitement.
You have identified your object of meditation. As you focus  your  attention
on it, your mind is distracted almost immediately away from that  e  object,
i.e.,  of meditation. So literally you lose your object  of  meditation.  As
long as During the time when you can you  still  can  lose  your  object  of
meditation, coarse excitement is  present.   is  the  time  where  you  have
coarse excitement.

Subtle excitement
Now you roughly know when there is a coarse excitement.
What about subtle excitement?
During the time wWhen your mind is  still  under  the  influence  of  subtle
excitement, you will never lose your object of meditation, but  there  is  a
part of the mind that which moves to, say, for example, a  pleasant  object.
, this is the time in which there is still subtle excitement.

The two main obstacles  for  developing  concentration  are  excitement  and
laxity.
We will look at these two in greater more details  as  we  go  through  move
through the text. How do you prevent the mind from being distracted?
What is the method for preventing the mind from being distracted?
How to you  enable  the  mind  to  keep  its  attention  on  the  object  of
meditation?
How do you prevent the mind from being distracted?
What are the two antidotes you things that needyou need?
You need mindfulness and introspection (or vigilance).

THE TWO ANTIDOTES ARE MINDFULNESS AND INTROSPECTION

      2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6A2B-2B1B-2A4 How both mindfulness and
          introspection are necessary as means for the mind not to be
          distracted away from its object
      In this regard, meditative stabilization is the  factor  of  the  mind
      single-pointedly abiding on its object, that is to say it must stay on
      the object continuously. For that there are two requirements: a  means
      of not letting the mind get distracted from its  original  object  and
      awareness of whether or not it actually is distracted.  The  first  is
      mindfulness, the second is introspection. (Page 212)[2]
[LRCM Vol 3 page 48] Here, concentration refers to your attention  remaining
one-pointedly on an object of meditation; in addition it must stay with  the
object continuously. Two things are needed for  this:  (1)  a  technique  in
which your attention is not distracted from whatever it had as its  original
object of meditation, and (2) an  accurate  awareness  of  whether  you  are
distracted  and  whether  you  are  becoming  distracted.  The   former   is
mindfulness; the latter is vigilance.

The concentration you that we are seeking  to  develop  is  a  concentration
where the n your mind remains one-pointedly on  its  the  object  and  stays
with the object continuously. You  need  mindfulness  to  achieve  this.  So
mindfulness  is  extremely  important  for  developing   concentration.   So
mMindfulness is indispensable for developing concentration.

It  is  said  that  it  is  also   very  important  to  be  vigilant,  i.e.,
cepractising introspection. At certain intervals one  should  check  whether
the mind is becoming or is distracted. or the mind is  becoming  distracted.
So introspection vigilance is very important.

IDENTIFYING MINDFULNESS

      In the Commentary on “Ornament for the Mahāyāna Sūtras” it says:

          Mindfulness and introspection [258] direct it, for  one  prevents
          the mind from scattering away from its object, and the second  is
          fully aware of the mind scattering away.

      When mindfulness deteriorates and you forget  the  meditation  object,
      there is distraction and you lose the  object  immediately.  Therefore
      mindfulness that does not forget the object is the root. (Page 212)[3]

[LRCM Vol 3 page 48]  Vasubandhu's  Commentary  on  the  "Ornament  for  the
Mahayana Sutras” states:
Mindfulness and vigilance bring about close mental focus because the  former
prevents your attention from wandering from the  object  of  meditation  and
the latter clearly recognizes that your attention is wandering.
If a lapse in mindfulness leads to forgetting the object of meditation,  you
will be distracted and will immediately lose the object upon which  you  are
meditating.  Therefore,  the  foundation  of  cultivating  concentration  is
mindfulness which does not forget the object.
In  order  to  develop  concentration,  you  cannot  lose  the   object   of
meditation. When If you lose your object of meditation, you  cannot  develop
concentration. It is mindfulness that prevents you us from losing  your  the
object of meditation, i.e., being distracted from the object of  meditation.
For that reason, mindfulness is the foundation or root of  concentration.  ,
literally is the root of concentration.
What is it that stops the mind from being  distracted  from  its  object  of
meditation? It is mindfulness.

      2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6A2B-2B1B-2A5 How the mind is directed toward the
          meditation object through mindfulness
      This is how to direct the mind toward its object:  You  visualize  the
      basis of observation as explained above.  Then,  once  it  just  about
      appears, you should generate  a  forceful  mode  of  apprehending  the
      object with your consciousness, uplift the mind, and place it  without
      newly analyzing anything. (Page 212)[4]

Next is an explanation of how mindfulness focuses your  mind  right  on  the
object of meditation.
[LRCM Vol 3 page 48] How does such mindfulness focus your mind right on  the
object of meditation?  Once you have  at  least  visualized  the  object  of
meditation in the minimal manner as explained  above,  generate  a  powerful
apprehension of the object that tightly holds it with your attention.  After
you have set your attention at a high level,  stabilize  it  on  the  object
without newly analyzing anything.
What Tthis paragraph is saying is that first you  you  first  must  identify
your  object  of  meditation.  Once  you  have  identified  your  object  of
meditation in the way I have explained, then you then place  your  attention
on it.
You have are supposed to generate a powerful  apprehension  of  the  object.
There must be a force or intensity behind your the  manner  of  apprehending
the object.  You  keep  your  attention  on  theat  object.  ,  and  Iit  is
mindfulness that will help you to do  does that.



Since So if mindfulness is that which keeps the mind from  being  distracted
from the object of meditation, then what exactly is itmindfulness?

      2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6A2B-2B1B-2A6A      A source identifying the
          entity of mindfulness
      In the Compendium of Knowledge  mindfulness  is  said  to  have  three
      features:

          What is mindfulness? Non-forgetfulness of the mind  with  respect
          to a thing it is familiar with; so its  function  is  utter  non-
          distraction. (Page 212)[5]


      2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6A2B-2B1B-2A6B      The features of mindfulness
      This has three points:

          1 The object feature
      The feature of the object:  Since  mindfulness  does  not  arise  with
      respect to a hitherto unfamiliar  object,  it  says  “a  thing  it  is
      familiar with.” In this context, it is the appearance of the basis  of
      observation having been ascertained before. (Page 213)[6]
[LRCM Vol 3 page 49] With regard  to  mindfulness,  Asanga's  Compendium  of
Knowledge says:
What is mindfulness? In regard to  a  familiar  object,  your  mind  is  not
forgetful and operates without distraction.
This indicates that mindfulness has three features.
(1) Its observed object is "a familiar object," since mindfulness  does  not
occur with regard to a previously  unfamiliar  object.  In  this  case,  the
image of a previously ascertained object of meditation appears.

Initially you must seek the object of meditation.
Then you find your object of meditation. It is the appearance of the  aspect
of the object of meditation that which is  the  observed  object  here.  The
observed object is a familiar object.
Mindfulness has three features.
1st feature: The observed object which is a familiar object.

2nd feature: What about its subjective aspect?


           2     The feature of the mode of apprehension
       The feature of the mode of apprehension,  “Non-forgetfulness  of  the
       mind” is the factor that the mind does not  forget  that  object;  in
       this context it does not  forget  the  basis  of  observation.  (Page
       213)[7]
[LRCM Vol 3 page 49] (2) Its subjective aspect or manner of apprehension  is
your mind's not forgetting the object, as  indicated  by  the  phrase  "your
mind is not forgetful
." In this case, it is  your  mind's  non-forgetfulness  of  the  object  of
meditation.
If the subjective aspect is non-forgetfulness of the object  of  meditation,
so wwhat exactly is non-forgetfulness?

      The manner in which the mind does not forget it is not said to be  the
      mere  ability  to  remember  your  master  teaching  “The   basis   of
      observation is like this...” when others ask,  and  you  are  made  to
      think about it. Rather, the  mind  tied  to  the  object  is  directly
      mindful of it and does not get distracted even in the slightest.  When
      there is distraction, mindfulness is lost through its mere occurrence.
      (Page 213)[8]

[LRCM Vol 3 page 49] What does non-forgetfulness mean?  It is not  mentioned
in reference to merely being able to remember  what  your  guru  taught  you
about  the  object  of  meditation,  thinking  or  saying  "The  object   of
meditation is like this" when you cast your mind to it or when someone  asks
you about it. Rather, it refers to  how  your  attention  is  fixed  on  the
object of meditation  and  brings  it  to  mind  clearly  without  even  the
slightest distraction. If you are distracted, you lose your  mindfulness  to
the extent that you are distracted.
So Hhere mindfulness refers to your mind being  able  to  stay  continuously
with the object of meditation without being distracted from it. If the  mind
is distracted from the object of meditation, then there is no mindfulness.

[LRCM Vol 3 page 49] Therefore, after you have set  your  attention  on  the
object of meditation in the manner explained  above,  you  think,  "In  this
way, I have fixed my attention on the object of meditation."  Then,  without
new examination, you  sustain  the  force  of  that  awareness  in  unbroken
continuity. This is the most critical point in the technique of  maintaining
mindfulness.

      Hence, after you have placed the mind on the basis of observation, you
      should generate the thought: “That is how it is tied  to  the  object”
      and  then,  without  renewed   conceptual   [259]   thought,   without
      interrupting the force of this very  mind,  sustain  it  continuously.
      That is the essential point about how mindfulness is applied.[9] (Page
      213)[10]

In Ssummary:
• , Ffirst, you have to seek the object of meditation.
• Upon seeking the object of meditation, Oonce you have found the object  of
  meditation, keep your mind’s attention on it without losing or  forgetting
  the object of meditation. Your mind’s attention is kept on the  object  of
  meditation without forgetting it. That is what mindfulness does.  This  is
  mindfulness.

           3     The feature of function
       Its functional feature is not to let the mind get distracted from its
       object.


       2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6A2B-2B1B-2A7      How it is shown through an
           analogy that mindfulness continuously ties the mind to the
           object
       That being so, tying the mind to an object so as to tame it is taught
       through the analogy of taming an elephant. In this  analogy,  a  wild
       elephant is tied to a very firm tree trunk or pillar with many  thick
       ropes, and if it follows the instructions of the elephant-tamer, that
       is all the better. If it does not,  it  is  repeatedly  prodded  into
       submission with a sharp hook and thus tamed. Likewise the mind  which
       resembles an untamed elephant is tied to a firm  pillar,  the  object
       explained earlier, with the rope of mindfulness,  and  if  it  cannot
       stay there,  it  is  pricked  with  the  hook  of  introspection  and
       gradually brought under control. In Essence  of  the  Middle  Way  it
       says:

           The erring elephant of the mind
           Is firmly tied with the rope of mindfulness
           To a stable pillar, the object, and
           Gradually ruled with the hook of intelligence.

       And in Stages of Meditation II:

           With the rope of mindfulness and introspection, the elephant  of
           the mind should be tied to that very tree trunk of  the  object.
           (Page 213)[11]

3rd feature: What is the function of mindfulness?
[LRCM Vol 3 page 49]  (3) Its  function  is  to  keep  your  attention  from
wondering from the object of meditation.
Next is an explanation of how mindfulness places the  mind  continuously  on
the object of meditation through an analogy.
[LRCM Vol 3 page 49] Fixing your attention on an  object  of  meditation  in
this way and controlling it is said  to  be  like  taming  an  elephant.  An
elephant trainer ties a wild elephant to a tree or  sturdy  post  with  many
thick ropes.  If it does as the trainer teaches it, then fine;  if  not,  it
is subdued and controlled, struck repeatedly with a sharp  iron  hook.  Your
mind is like the untamed elephant; you bind it with the rope of  mindfulness
to the sturdy pillar of an object of meditation such as I  explained  above.
If you cannot keep it there, you must gradually bring it  under  control  by
goading it with the iron hook of vigilance.
Then you have quotations  from  Heart  of  the  Middle  Way  and  Stages  of
Meditation.
[LRCM Vol 3 page 49] Bhavaviveka's Heart of the Middle Way states:
The erring elephant of your mind
Is securely bound by the rope of mindfulness
To the sturdy pillar of the object of meditation
And is gradually controlled with the iron hook of intelligence.
Also, Kamalasila's second Stages of Meditation states:
With the ropes of mindfulness and vigilance, tie the elephant of  your  mind
to the tree trunk, the object of meditation.
The wild elephant is an analogy of of one’s unsubdued and untamed mind.
• In order to tame a wild elephant,  one ties  it  with  rope  to  a  sturdy
  pillar.
• The sturdy pillar is an analogy of of our object of meditation.
• Tying the wild elephant with rope to the sturdy pillar is  an  analogy  of
  keeping our mental  attention  focussed  continuously  on  the  object  of
  meditation with mindfulness.

We need to tame our untamed mind in the way a wild elephant is tamed.
As for mindfulness has a way of apprehendsing its object with an  aspect  of
ascertainmentthat carries a sense of certitude, there  must  be  some  force
behind its the manner of  apprehending  its  object.  Otherwise,  one  would
develop a flawed concentration.

      2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6A2B-2B1B-2A8 How meditative stabilization becomes
          faulty without a firm mode of apprehension of the ascertaining
          consciousness
      It is said that meditative stabilization is accomplished in dependence
      on mindfulness and that, like a rope,  mindfulness  continuously  ties
      the  mind  to  the  object.  Therefore  the   principal   method   for
      fostering[12]the accomplishment of meditative stabilization is that of
      sustaining mindfulness. Yet mindfulness has  a  mode  of  apprehension
      with an  aspect  of  ascertainment.  So  when  you  foster  meditative
      stabilization and place the mind without a firm mode  of  apprehension
      of the ascertaining consciousness, you  gain  the  clarity  factor  of
      mental limpidity, but the clarity factor of  stark  intensity  of  the
      ascertaining consciousness does not  emerge.  As  a  result,  powerful
      mindfulness does not arise, and since subtle  laxity  is  not  stopped
      either, the  meditative  stabilization  becomes  faulty.  (Pages  213-
      214)[13]

As much as w[LRCM Vol 3 page 50]  It is said that you achieve  concentration
on the basis of mindfulness  and  that  mindfulness  is  like  a  rope  that
actually fastens your attention to the object  of  meditation  continuously,
so mindfulness is the main technique to sustain in achieving concentration.
Also, mindfulness has a way of apprehending its object that carries a  sense
of certitude. If, while maintaining concentration, you stabilize  your  mind
casually without a solid sense of certainty  about  the  object,  then  your
mind may take on a limpid clarity, but it will not have the vivid  intensity
of  certain  knowledge,  so  you  will  not  develop  powerful  mindfulness.
Therefore, subtle laxity will be unchecked, and  only  flawed  concentration
will ensue.
We need mindfulness,  but that the  mindfulness  must  also  be  strong  and
powerful as  well.  There  must  be  an   intensity  underlying  behind  the
mindfulness, i.e.,  it must possess strength and power. When If  mindfulness
lacks intensity and strength and intensity, it will not  be  able  to  check
subtle laxity. When  If subtle  laxity  is  unnot  checked,  only  a  flawed
concentration will ensue.
Here it is saying that just having mindfulness alone is not  enough.  It  is
the quality of thate mindfulness that is important. There  must  be  a  some
power force behind thate mindfulness. It must be powerful.

It also says hHere it says that mindfulness has a way  of  apprehending  its
object “with an aspect of ascertainment.”  This  that  carries  a  sense  of
certitude. That is important because you may have mindfulness but  when  the
way  if  your  mindfulness’  way  of  apprehendsing  its   object   is   not
intense—“without  a  firm  mode  of   apprehension   of   the   ascertaining
consciousness”—, you may will still experience clarity of the object but  it
will not be able to check subtle laxity. When If  you  cannot  check  subtle
laxity,  then you will not develop perfect concentration.


      2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6A2B-2B1B-2A9 Even someone wishing to achieve calm
          abiding by placing the mind without thinking of anything must
          generate the power of mindfulness [260]
      Even someone who sustains mere non-conceptuality of the  mind  without
      placing it on any other basis of observation such as a  deity’s  body,
      should remind himself “I will place the mind without thinking  of  any
      object whatsoever” and then prevent the mind from scattering and being
      distracted. Since non-distraction is also synonymous with  mindfulness
      that does not forget the object, he does not deviate  from  the  above
      method of sustaining mindfulness. Therefore, someone who meditates  in
      this manner also applies the mindfulness that reveals the power of the
      ascertaining consciousness. (Page 214)[14]
[LRCM Vol 3 page 50]  Those  who  cultivate  just  non-discursive  attention
without stabilizing their attention on other objects of meditation, such  as
a divine body, bring to mind the personal instruction, "Stabilize your  mind
without thinking of any object at all." Then they must keep their  attention
from being distracted and  wandering.  This  non-distraction  is  synonymous
with mindfulness that does not forget the object of meditation. Thus,  since
this meditation is simply the technique of  maintaining  mindfulness,  those
who meditate in this way must also rely on a mindfulness  that  carries  the
force of certain knowledge.
ELIMINATING FAULTY APPROACHES

Next is eliminating flawed  methods.  First  we  ,  identify  what  are  the
misconceptions and then we  eliminateing them.

           1     Identifying a misconception that should be eliminated
       There is the following kind  of  misconception:  “When  the  mind  is
       roused as explained above, held tight, and placed on the object  non-
       conceptually, there is no laxity, but excitement predominates. I  can
       see that I will not thereby gain the capacity[15]  for  a  continuous
       stability factor.  However,  with  my  lofty  awareness  lowered,  by
       loosening my tight grip on it a lot, I see the stability factor  rise
       quickly. This is an excellent method.” A lot of people think  so  and
       expound: “Best meditation during best relaxation.”


           2     Its elimination
       However, this position fails to distinguish between the occurrence of
       laxity and  the  occurrence  of  meditation.  As  explained  earlier,
       faultless meditative stabilization requires  two  features,  and  the
       stability factor of the non-conceptual mind by itself is not  enough.
       If you think that “In such a case, when the mind has become  confused
       and there is darkness,  this  is  laxity,  whereas  otherwise  it  is
       faultless meditative  stabilization  because  there  is  the  clarity
       factor of mental limpidity,”  apparently,  you  fail  to  distinguish
       between lethargy and laxity. These will  be  explained  below.  (Page
       214)[16]

(Note: Alternative translation for this section from the Lam  Rim  Chen  Mo,
pages 50-51. [LRCM Vol 3 page 50]  (b')) Eliminating flawed methods
There are misconceptions to dispel, such as the following.
         Wrong position: If you set your consciousness at a  high  level  as
      you have  explained  above  and  then  tightly  stabilize  it  without
      discursiveness, there will indeed not be even the slightest  fault  of
      laxity. However, since this increases excitement, you  will  see  that
      you cannot prolong  stability,  and  your  elevated  consciousness  is
      brought down. As you will see  that  relaxing  a  well-tightened  mind
      quickly leads  to  stability,  this  technique  is  a  great  personal
      instruction.
         Then Lama Tsongkhapa replied:
         [LRCM Vol 3 page 51]  Reply:  With  a  sense  of  assurance,  these
      words proclaim in a loud voice, "Good relaxation is good  meditation."
      Yet, they fail to differentiate laxity  and  meditation.  Thus,  as  I
      explained above, flawless concentration must have  two  features;  the
      firm stability of non-discursive attention does not alone suffice.”
         Then, another position:
         [LRCM Vol 3 page 51]  Wrong position: At that time, laxity is  when
      your mind darkens and becomes clouded; without this, your mind  has  a
      limpid clarity, so your concentration is flawless.)
         Reply: As  this  statement  does  not  differentiate  lethargy  and
      laxity, I will elaborate on them later.)"

As I have mentioned earlier, during the time  when  there  is  still  subtle
laxity, there is the factor of stability and  the  factor  of  clarity.  But
flawless  concentration  has  vivid  intensity,  not  just  the  factor   of
stability and  clarity.  It  must  be  Vvivid  intensity  must  be  present.
Therefore So you cannot  ’t  differentiate  a  flawed  concentration  and  a
flawless concentration just by simply seeing  whether  both  the  factor  of
stability and factor of clarity are present there or not.

There are people who say,  “When your concentration possesses  both  clarity
and stability, and when your mind is relaxed, you  can  just  stay  in  that
relaxed state.”
For them, there is no n’t this force or intensity behind  their  the  manner
of apprehending the object although . For  them,  there  is  the  factor  of
clarity  and  factor  of  stability  are   there.   They   think   that   is
concentration. They say,  “Yyou can relax in on  thiast  state.”.  Once  you
relax in this state, you can do so relax in this state for a long time.
They say that this is good meditation.

Of course Lama Tsongkhapa says,  “This is incorrect because in order for  it
to be good  meditation  –  actual  concentration,   -  besides  clarity  and
stability,  there must be intensity the force behind that  awareness.  There
must be intense clarity in , and the manner of apprehending the object.”
 there must be vivid intensity.
From this  you can see that  perfect  concentration  consists  of  not  only
clarity and stability but it must also be have an energetic and alert  mind.
There is this intensity or force behind in its the way of  apprehending  the
object is apprehended. When If you possess such a concentration,  then  your
mind will continue to develop and grow in strength stronger. When  there  is
no intensity in your apprehension of the object,  If  you  don’t  have  this
force behind the mind manner of apprehending  the  object  i.e.there  is  no
intensity, even though you may have clarity and  stability,  the  mind  will
not develop.

Khen Rinpoche (in English): Too much talking? Sometimes  when  I   talk  too
much,  nothing goes inside. But if I   don’t  talk,  I   cannot  finish  all
this.
                                 ~~~~~~~~~~
QuestionStudent: [LRCM Vol 3 page 18] “Some claim that a mind resting  in  a
non-discursive state without vivid intensity is serenity, while such a  mind
with vivid intensity is insight.” (LRCM, 18)[17]  What  is  the  meaning  of
vivid intensity[18] here?

Answer: Vivid intensity (or intense clarity)  is talking  about  the  energy
of the mind. There is this force, energy or strength behind its its  way  of
apprehending its object. When there is vivid intensity, not  only  does  the
object appears clearly but , the perceiving mind  is  also  very  clear.  An
analogy of holding a cup is given to illustrate such this  vivid  intensity.
You hold a cup in your hand. You can hold it with the appropriate  tightness
or  you  could  hold  it  in  a  relaxed  manner.  Likewise  tThe  mind   is
apprehending the  object  of  ,  and  the  object  must  be  the  object  of
meditation. There must be a force and energy behind the  way  the  mind  way
ofis  apprehending its the object.

Question: I refer to the following passage from the text:
      Student: What are discursive and non-discursive thoughts?
      Khen Rinpoche (in English): I don’t know.

      Student: [MLLR Text page 213] The feature of function -How meditative
          stabilization 2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6A2B-2B1B-2A8     How
          meditative stabilization becomes faulty without a firm mode of
          apprehension of the ascertaining consciousness
      It is said that meditative stabilization is accomplished in dependence
      on mindfulness and that, like a rope,  mindfulness  continuously  ties
      the  mind  to  the  object.  Therefore  the   principal   method   for
      fostering[19]the accomplishment of meditative stabilization is that of
      sustaining mindfulness. Yet mindfulness has  a  mode  of  apprehension
      with an  aspect  of  ascertainment.  So  when  you  foster  meditative
      stabilization and place the mind without a firm mode  of  apprehension
      of the ascertaining consciousness, you  gain  the  clarity  factor  of
      mental limpidity, but the clarity factor of  stark  intensity  of  the
      ascertaining consciousness does not  emerge.  As  a  result,  powerful
      mindfulness does not arise, and since subtle  laxity  is  not  stopped
      either, the  meditative  stabilization  becomes  faulty.  (Pages  213-
      214)[20]
becomes faulty without a firm  mode  of  apprehension  of  the  ascertaining
consciousness
It is said that meditative stabilization is accomplished  in  dependence  on
mindfulness and that, like a rope, mindfulness continuously  ties  the  mind
to  the  object.  Therefore  the  principal   method   for   fostering   the
accomplishment  of  meditative   stabilization   is   that   of   sustaining
mindfulness. Yet mindfulness has a mode of apprehension with  an  aspect  of
ascertainment. So when you foster meditative  stabilization  and  place  the
mind without a firm mode of apprehension of the ascertaining  consciousness,
you gain the clarity factor of mental limpidity, but the clarity  factor  of
stark intensity of the ascertaining consciousness  does  not  emerge.  As  a
result, powerful mindfulness does not arise, and since subtle laxity is  not
stopped either, the meditative stabilization becomes faulty.

What causes “the clarity factor of stark  intensity  of  theat  ascertaining
ment cconsciousness” to arise so that subtle laxity  can  be  stopped?  Does
powerful mindfulness have something to do with thisit so that  we  can  stop
subtle laxity? What must you do to let it emerge so that subtle laxity  will
be stopped?

Ven Gyurme: What is the antidote to subtle laxity?
Answer:  In the first place, you must have an idea  of  what  subtle  laxity
is. Subtle laxity is present in the mind possessing  stability  and  clarity
but there is no force,  or energy or strength behind the mind’s   manner  of
apprehending the object. There isn’t a force or  strength  behind  the  mind
manner of apprehending the object. So  you  must  tighten  thate  manner  of
apprehending the object.

Even though you may have mindfulness but when  if  the  mindfulness  is  not
strong,  you cannot tighten the manner of apprehending the object. In  order
to tighten the manner of apprehending the  object,   first  you  first  must
strengthen “up” your the mindfulness to give it more power and force.  .  It
must be powerful by strengthen it and give it a force. It is Just  like  the
example I have gave earlier about holding a cup in your hand. You  can  hold
it tightly or you can just hold it in a relaxed  manner.  it in  your  hand.
You do not n’t have to grasped the cup firmly but it  is  still  sitting  in
your hand.

Questions: Student: Does one abandon the two obstacles of these two in  this
sequence: first you abandon coarse  excitement,  followed  by   then  subtle
excitement,  and then coarse laxity and then subtle laxity?


What is the reason for in saying that when one is  under  the  influence  of
subtle laxity, one’s the mental power  and  memory  will  deteriorates  over
time?

Once the antidote to laziness is attained,  one  has  pliancy.  This-  which
means that at this stage of developing  our  building  up  mmindfulness  and
introspection to vigilance, abandoning excitement and laxity,  one also  has
pliancy. What is the difference between this pliancy and  the  pliancy  that
one attains after equanimity?

Khen RinpocheAnswer: I will answer these in the Nnext lesson.







Interpreted by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme; transcribed by Phuah  Soon  Ek,  Patricia
Lee and Julia Koh; edited by Cecilia Tsong.



-----------------------
[1] LRCM, 48.
[2] Ibid., 48.
[3] Ibid.
[4] Ibid., 48-49.
[5] Ibid., 49.
[6] Ibid.
[7] Ibid.
[8] Ibid.
[9] Tib. bsten, usually translated here as “rely on” or “attend to.”
[10] Ibid., 49.
[11] Ibid., 49-50.
[12] Tib. skyong tshul, usually translated here as “way to sustain.”
[13] Ibid., 50.
[14] Ibid.
[15] Tib. thub pa
[16] Ibid., 50-51.
[17] “The assertion by some that the mind abiding  non-conceptually  without
an intense clarity factor is calm abiding,  whereas  that  with  an  intense
clarity factor is special insight, …” (MLLR, 200).
[18] Vivid intensity is translated as intense clarity in the MLLR.
[19] Tib. skyong tshul, usually translated here as “way to sustain.”
[20] Ibid., 50.

