Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/SixPerfections/BP2 M4 L19 (final).doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:53:57.375290
================================================================================


Transcript of teachings by Khen Rinpoche Geshe Chonyi  on  the  Heart  Sutra
and Stages of the Path (the Six Perfections)

The root text, Middle Length Lam-Rim,  by  Lama  Tsongkhapa,  translated  by
Philip Quarcoo, © FPMT, Inc., May 2012, is  indented.  All  page  references
refer to the root text, unless otherwise stated.

Where applicable, page numbers of corresponding  sections  in  the  Lam  Rim
Chen Mo (LRCM) are indicated in footnotes; they refer to The Great  Treatise
on the Stages of the Path  to  Enlightenment,  Volume  2,  by  Tsong-kha-pa,
translated  by  The  Lamrim  Chenmo   Translation   Committee,   Snow   Lion
Publications, 2004.

Lesson  19                                                                 3
September 2013


Question & answer. Review of  Lesson  18.  Continuation  of  joyous  effort.
(From root text, pages 189 – 190).


Question: Student 1: What is the difference between the roots of virtue  and
the seeds of virtue?
The text says, “Cuts the roots of virtue.” What does that it means?
Is there a difference from the seed of virtue?  If  aAfter  having  cut  the
roots of virtue, the seeds are is still there, so what is  the  function  of
the seeds?

Answer: Khen Rinpoche: If you think about the words,   “roots  of  virtue,”,
the meaning of that term, “roots of virtue” would seems to be  the  same  as
“seeds of virtue”, because the  roots  of  virtue  is  that  which  produces
virtue.

We saw how anger can destroy the roots of virtue.  i.e.,  .  So  when  anger
destroys roots of virtue, it what the anger harming or destroysing  are  the
seeds and the latencies of those at virtuous actions that were .  The  seeds
of the action and the latencies of the action are deposited on the mind.

Student 1:  The text says,  “the roots.”,  Wwhy can’t  cannot  it  just  say
“the seeds”?  Furthermore, tThe text says that “aafter having destroyed  the
roots, the seed is still there”. It is very confusing.

Khen Rinpoche (English): It is nNot confusing. Sometimes the  text  it  says
““roots.””,  Ssometimes the text it says “seed.”.  The meaning is  the  same
but different the words are different..

Khen Rinpoche: When we accumulate virtue, the seeds of that virtue  and  the
latencies or /imprints of that virtue are deposited on the mind. When  anger
destroys the roots of virtue, , what this it means that  it  is  that  anger
is haharming those seeds and the latencies.

We did ttalked about the meaning of “the destruction  of  roots  of  virtue”
before.[1]. Anger can harm the production or  the  arising  of  the  ripened
effect. A pThese particular seeds of virtue  could  have  given  rise  to  a
powerful effect such as happiness, , but anger destroys that  in  the  sense
of making the effect it very small. (That particular seeds of virtue)  could
have been very wonderful and spectacular effect but anger  comes  along  and
makes it very small.   Alternatively,  Or  we  could  have  experienced  the
positive ripened effect for a very long time, but when  anger  comes  along,
it reduces that  duration,  the  span  of  time,  i.e.i.e.,   it  makes  the
positive effect experiencelasts for  a much much shorter time.

The seeds of virtue and the  latencies  of  virtue  have  the  potential  to
produce a ripened effects. So Wwhen we say that  anger  destroys  the  roots
of virtue, it , means that what anger does is that it  harms  the  potential
of the seeds and latencies  potential  to  issue  forth  their  an  effects.
Therefore, a big effect becomes a small effect, and  a  positive  experience
that you could have experienced it for a very long period of time no  longer
lasts as long. is much reduced.

Student 1: So destroying  roots  of  virtue  means  that  the  seed  is  not
entirely destroyed.

Khen Rinpochee (English): Yes.

Student 1: So it not Not like the  “burnt  seed”  that  like  what  we  have
learnted before? That means evEven after you get angry, you can still  enjoy
the effects of your virtuous actions. It  is   just  that  they  are  it  is
smaller and  last  for  a  shorter  period  of  time.  It  is  not  entirely
destroyed?

Khen  Rinpoche:   Essentially,  Wwhat  are  the  seeds  of  virtue  and  the
latencies of virtue? They are  the  potential  that  to  issue  forth  their
respective effects. So  Wwhen  we  harm  the  roots  of  virtue,  we  it  is
rendering the potential to issue forth an effect, i.e.  are  rendering  that
potential ineffective, and,  in some cases,  rendering it impotent.

We have talked about the three levels of extinguishment:  - the  great,  the
middling and the small extinguishment. The great extinguishment  means  that
the potential to issue forth the ripened effect is mostly destroyed.

Student 1: Once the potential is destroyed,  why  are  the  seeds  is  still
there? What is  their  function  of  the  seed  after  their   potential  is
destroyed?  Why you can’t wenot just destroy the seeds and  just  leave  the
latencies behind?. That would will be easier to understand.

Ven Gyurme: It is interesting why the seed is there. When an  effect  ripens
the seed is gone, but when it is destroyed by anger it is  still  there.  It
is kind of weird.
Khen Rinpoche: It is very clear in the text that anger  cannot  destroy  the
seed of virtue even though . While anger  can  harm  its  the  potential  to
issue forth an effect i.e. anger can completely  harm  the  seed  of  virtue
such that it will not give rise to any effect at all. But that anger  cannot
destroy the  seed.  ItsThe  potential  to  issue  forth  an  effect  can  be
completely destroyed, but the seed remains. is there. If  the  seed  is  not
destroyed then the seed is still there.

Then question then arises,  “What does is that seed do? Does it  still  have
a function?”  its job? Does it have a role? What does it do?”

Imagine there is a barley seed that , and barley seed iis burnt. Let  us  ’s
say that you leftave a barley seed out in the sun  and  ,  it  then  becomes
completely driesd  up.  such that Iit can no longer produce a  seedling  not
grow no matter how much water you pour on it. put. The seed is there but  it
can no longer not produce anything.

An individual on the forbearance stage of the  pPath  of  pPreparation  will
never take rebirth in the lower realms. But hHas he abandoned the  seeds  of
rebirth in the lower realms rebirth? The answer is  “nNo. ,  Hhe  still  has
the seeds of rebirth in the lower realms. rebirth”.

But ifIf you were to ask,  “Is he ever going  to  be  reborn  in  the  lower
realms?”  tThe  answer  is  no.  “No”.   Even  though  this  person  on  the
forbearance stage of the pPath of pPreparation has the seeds of  rebirth  in
the lower realms rebirth, he will not be reborn  in  the  lower  realms.  So
Tthe analogy for this is like the burnt barley seed.

Although a burnt barley seed has lost all its the  potential  to  produce  a
seedling, but nevertheless it is still  there.  Likewise  Just  like  how  a
person on the forbearance stage of the pPath of pPreparation has  the  seeds
to be reborn in the lower realms but he will never be reborn there in  lower
realms, although the seeds are still exist.
Going bthere.  Back to the barley seed, although the barley  seed  is  burnt
and has lost its potential to produce athe seedling, but the burnt  seed  is
still there. In order to destroy thate seed, you need another condition.  It
does not go away just like that. There must be another condition.  You  have
to do something else in order to destroy it completely.

Student 1:  Why  do  you  have  to  destroy  athe  virtuous  seed?  I  don’t
understand.

Khen Rinpoche (English): First, you  have  to  understand  get  the  example
example clearly. Do you understand You got the exampleexample clearly?

Student 1: No. Now Aare we talking about virtueous or non-virtueous now?

Khen Rinpoche: There are spoilt seeds such as barley  seeds  and  so  forth.
or whatever seed. No matter what you do to athe spoilt seed, it  will  never
produce a seedling. But the spoilt seed exists  and  is  still  there.   The
spoilt seed can be dYou can destroyed.  the spoilt seed such as burn  it  in
very high temperature.

The person on the forbearance stage of the pPath  of  pPreparation  has  the
seeds of the rebirths in the lower realms rebirth,  but  he  will  never  be
reborn in the lower realms even though  although  he  has  those  e  seedss.
Because it is said that regardless of no  matter  whatever   conditions  may
arise, come about, ththose at seeds cannot produce a rebirths in  the  lower
realms rebirth. He still has  the  seed,  i.e.  the  seed  is  still  there.
Although the seed is there, that individual will not be reborn in the  lower
realms.

The seed can be destroyed , and  it  has  to  be  destroyed  by  a  powerful
antidote, just aslike how  a normal seed can must be destroyed by  something
powerful. The very thing that can destroy athe karmic  seed  is  the  wisdom
directly perceiving emptiness.

Student 1: Does that it apply to virtuous seeds as well?

Khen Rinpoche: You can destroy seeds of non-virtue but .  Ccan  you  destroy
seeds of virtue?

Student 2: offered an explanation. (27mins – 28.40mins)
 When a seed issues its effect, the sprout, the seed is no more. It  is  now
a sprout. When a seed is burnt it becomes  rubbish  that  we  will  have  to
sweep away one day. With regard to seeds of  virtue  and  non-virtue,  which
are all contaminated, when we become a buddha, they evaporate  and  are  all
gone.

Khen Rinpoche: According to your view,  when do you think  the  contaminated
seeds of virtue are destroyed?

Student 2:  When At enlightenment is achieved.

Ven Gyurme: There must be a destroyer. So it is destroyed by what?
Student 2:  You destroy even the obstruction to knowledge.
Ven Gyurme: So all seeds are obstruction to omniscience?
Student 2:  I wouldn’t say that.
Khen Rinpoche:  We  will  accumulate  the  roots  of  virtue  when  we  make
prostrations to the Buddha. We accumulate the roots of virtue when  we  make
offerings. Let’s say we dedicate these roots of virtue it to  enlightenment.
, Ddo thoese roots of virtue go to enlightenment or not?

Student 2: They It will be with you all the way to enlightenment.

Khen Rinpoche (English): All the way to enlightenment?  But  Then  just  now
you said you have to stop themall these?

Student 2:  Right. But the contaminated seeds of  virtue …

Khen Rinpoche: There is no doubt  that  all  the  virtues  that  we  do  are
necessarily contaminated.

Student  2:  CI  thought   the   contaminated   virtue   and   pure   virtue
uncontaminated karma would obviously be very different. The pure virtue  (or
uncontaminated karma)  would come be from someone who body that  hasve  seen
emptiness directly and whose activities are done doing things  with  a  pure
motivation.

Khen Rinpoche: It follows that all  contaminated  paths  do  not  go  on  to
enlightenment.

Student 2: Thatat is not true.

Khen Rinpoche: It This follows that the wisdom realiszing emptiness  in  the
continuum of someone on the  pPath  of  pPreparation  does  not  go  on   to
enlightenment because it is a contaminated path.

Student 2: That is also not true too.

Khen Rinpoche: It follows then that it is not a contaminated path.

Student 2: The path is not contaminated but the karmic seeds t that  is  hat
are accumulated without seeing  emptiness  directly,   i.e.,   we  still  do
things  by  seeing  with  everything  to  be  as  inherently  existent,  are
contaminatedce. , so Oobviously the act and the  motivation  would  be  very
different.

Khen Rinpoche: You said y that  contaminated  virtue  does  not  go  on   to
enlightenment. First lLet us ’s posit what  is  contaminated  virtue  first.
What is the measure of contaminated virtue?

Student 2: I guess it is not knowing  that  .  wWhatever  we  posit  is  not
inherently existent, ce and  because  of  thate  ignorance,  our  motivation
would be somewhat different.

Ven Gyurme: Are you saying that If it is a virtue that is not  done,   which
is not conjoined with  the  wisdom  directly  perceiving  emptiness,   is  a
contaminated virtue?, are you saying that?

Student 2: Yes.

Khen  Rinpoche:  So   whatever   virtue   we   accumulate   is   necessarily
contaminated?

Student 2: Yes.

Khen Rinpoche: Because they are it is contaminated, so all  the  virtues  in
our continuum would not proceed on to enlightenment, right?

Student 2:  Not necessarily.

Khen Rinpoche: Your fundamental thesis from the beginning is that a  bBuddha
has no contaminated phenomena .  No  contaminated  because  either  they  it
didn’t come or they it disappeared. It follows that the contaminated  virtue
does not go to enlightenment.
S that the contaminated virtue does not go on to enlightenment.
Student 2:   Maybe they it areis destroyed along the way.

Ven Gyurme: If it is destroyed it doesn’t go to enlightenment, right?
Student 2:   At the time of enlightenment it would all be burst out.
Khen Rinpoche: If they are  destroyed,  they  It  does  not  n’t  go  on  to
enlightenment, so it is destroyed..  HHow are  they   is  it  destroyed?  Is
there a destroyer of the seeds of virtue?

We must remember the meaning of the destruction of roots of virtue  that  is
.  What  is  the  meaning  of  the  destruction  of  roots  of  virtue?  The
destruction of roots of virtue is posited as h:  “Harming  the  capacity  of
the roots of virtue to issue forth a ripened result.”
The meaning of destroying the the roots of  virtue  is  not  destroying  the
seeds of virtue.

What we need to think about  is this:  “Is there really a  time  or  a  need
forthat the seeds of virtue to be are eliminated?”

Student 2:   I don’t think there is such a need at all. Since For  the  sake
of like putting a destroyed seed somewhere, because it is  already  rendered
ineffective, and it would not ever issue any function/effect at  all,  .  So
it is not a bother. , it is not physically or mentally bothering actually.

Khen Rinpoche (English): Since it is not a o nothing bother, it  so  can  go
on  to enlightenment, n? No?

Student 2:  You can carry this so-called debris e Even up to  enlightenment.
, you can still carry those so called debris.

Ven Gyurme: That means your thesis defeated.
Student: I am sure, but at least I learn.
Ven Gyurme: You accept?
Student 2:   I accept in the fact that  by  understanding  the  seed  is  no
longer issuinges any effect  which is good enough for us  to  to  practisce.
Beyond that I think ,  whether  it  disappears  or  not  evaporates  or  not
evaporate, I think is of no practical relevanceference.

Ven Gyurme: Cannot. Cannot. You cannot account for a contaminated Buddha.
Khen Rinpoche: Let’s say when we develop a good heart. , Tthere  is  a  part
of the mind that is a virtuous mind, the a good heart. D, does  that  go  on
to enlightenment or not?

Student 2:   Yes. Any virtuous activity would propel us towards the path  of
enlightenment. Yes, the good heart goes on to enlightenment.

Ven Gyurme: Does the virtuous mind (the good heart) go to enlightenment?
Student 2:   Yes, it does.
Khen Rinpoche: Does itIt goes on to the next life isn’t it?

Student 2:   Of course.

Khen Rinpoche (English): Of course it goes to enlightenment.

Khen Rinpoche: So yYou cannot totally eradicate the seeds of virtue.

Student 2:   Because of that,  I believe that  all sentient beings will  one
day goes on  to enlightenment.

Ven Gyurme: Why is it that you can destroy the seed of  non-virtue  and  not
the seed of virtue?
Khen Rinpoche: The sSeeds of non-virtue,and   latencies  of  non-virtue  and
the  ,  seeds  and  latencies  of  afflictions  are   all   included   under
obscurations. They are all obscurations and t. Therefore, they  are  objects
of abandonment, and need to be abandoned. The  objects  of  abandonment  are
either abandoned by the pPath of sSeeing or by the pPath of mMeditation.  So
it is all right to say that the seeds of non-virtue haves to  be  abandoned,
and the seeds of rebirths  in  the  a  lower  realms  rebirth  haves  to  be
abandoned.

Now Tthe question that remains now regards is about the seeds of virtue.  Do
, has they it got have to be destroyed? If they it can  be  destroyed,  what
is their its destroyer? This at is what we need to think about.

In the case of a  spoilt  seed  of  virtue  that  which  has  been  rendered
ineffective in issuing forth its an effect, and it is a seed of virtue,  how
far can it go?

In the previous lesson, there was  a  discussion  about  how  you  can  call
something a seed a seed even when it no longer functions as a seed.  If  the
seed of virtue has completely lost all potential to issue forth its  ripened
effect, is it a seed?

Student 2:   I think it lost the function of being a seed already  i.e.  the
function is no longer there. So Iif you define a seed by its function,  that
seed it can only be debris and not a functioning seed with function.

Khen Rinpoche: If that particular phenomenon that ,  which  you  call  ed  a
seed, has completely lost all its  potential to  produce  its  effect,  what
reason do you have to still call it a seed?

Student 2: There is noNo reason to do so , because it has is no function.

Khen Rinpoche (English): It is not a No seed?

Ven Gyurme: A corpse is not a human right?
Student 2:   A corpse is not a human.
SStudent 1: Regarding the question,  “Why is it still  called  a  seed?”,  I
remember  something  vaguely  but  I  cannot  quote  it  exactly,  ,  “After
realiszing emptiness directly, can do thosee seeds that have  been  rendered
impotent ripen or not?”  So a
Ven Gyurme: You mean seed of  virtue?  Before  the  Path  of  Seeing  it  is
impotent, and then after the Path of Seeing, it revives?
Student 1:  You said the seed is still there,  but  only  the  potential  is
destroyed. After you have realiszed emptiness, the seedit is  empty.  ,  Can
so can it still ripen?

Khen Rinpoche (English): This is getting vVery, very interesting  now.  This
Now is more interesting, what  of what she (referring to Student  1)   said.


Khen Rinpoche: It is quite amazing to see  how  the  roots  of  virtue  that
wereas destroyed before the pPath  of  sSeeing  can  produce  results  after
entering the pPath of sSeeing.

Khen Rinpoche (English): I mean Iit is  an  interesting  idea.  ,  Yyou  can
think about it. I don’t know if it is possible, but  I  don’t  know  why  it
cannot be the case.

Student 3:  I was asked a  question,   “Whether  a  seed  can  be  still  be
called a seed when it cannot issues forth an effect?” My answer wasis  this:
 “All compounded phenomena are themselves effects  and  causes.  A  seed  is
produced by its causes.  -iIt iis s produced as a seed in order  to  produce
a certain effect.

For example, a mango seed is produced from a mango trees. The tree  has  its
causes and it All these got its causes, so it produces an effect,  which  is
the seed. It is not called a seed just because it can produce a  mango  tree
but because it produced from s a certain causes.

Similarly, the virtuous seed is produced from virtue. ; Iit produces a  seed
in order to bring forth an effect.

It is true that tThe fact that its potentiality has been destroyed by  anger
means , it is true that it can no longer  produce  an  effect.  B,  but  the
causes that produced it as a the seed is still there. So it still can  still
be considered a seed albeit  i.e. is a seed without its  potentiality.  This
at is my take on ing why it still can still be labelled as a seed.

Khen Rinpoche: Please explain the reason for a spoilt seed to  be  called  a
seed. A spoilt seed is something  that  has  been  rendered  ineffective  in
producing its effect. Although it is rendered ineffective, why do you  still
call it a seed? There isA  barley seed  that  cannot  produce  any  any  new
barley: , will do you still call it a barley seed or not?

Student 3:  Yes, it is a spoilt barley seed. I  don’t  think  it  can  still
produce an effect but its the characteristics are  is still there.  When  If
you open up the seed, its structure is it still  mostly  still  intact.  got
all its structure.
Ven Gyurme: Is a person alive and the person dead in the  coffin  the  same?
He came from the same causes. He is produced from the same causes  and  when
you opened up, the structure is the same, and the only  difference  is  that
he cannot function.
Student 3:   I am not saying that all the structure is completely  the  same
but . The way it is produced it was produced as a barley seed, and there  is
a structure to thatit.

Ven Gyurme: Dead person was also produced as a person.
(FSurther ome discussion on this is inaudible). s from 56 mins to 58mins)


Khen Rinpoche (English): I don’t know exactly. This is jJust  for  the  sake
of to discussion. Think more it. . Now go back to our topic.
                                 ~~~~~~~~~~~

Employing the methods to eliminate the incompatible factors
1. Stopping the laziness of procrastination
2. Stopping attachment to ignoble activities
We have looked at joyous perseverance. It is said that when if there  is  no
joyous effort, perseverance, nothing can be achieved.  With  joyous  effort,
perseverance all qualities can be achieved.

Adverse conditions for joyous effort

We talked about the two factors that are incompatible  with  joyous  effort.
perseverance. When If thesere are these two factors are  present,  you  will
not be able to cannot engage in joyous effort. perseverance.
These two factors incompatible with joyous effortperseverance are:

    A Seeing that one is able to accomplish virtuous dharmas but not
       engaging in them
    B The discouragement that thinks: “How could I ever accomplish anything
       like that?” (Page 189)[2]



Seeing that one is able to accomplish virtuous dharmas but not  engaging  in
them
1. Seeing that you can do it, let’s say, the practice, but not doing it.
2. Thinking that it is too difficult and then not doing it.
Of the two incompatible factors, the first is due it  is  mentioned  in  the
text that “not doing it despite seeing that you can do it”  is  due  to  two
reasons:
1. the pProcrastination:  thinking that there is time and . Basically  just
   postponpostponing what should be done day after day after day e in doing
   it - day after tomorrow, day after tomorrow
2.
3. Not doing something that you know you can do due to aattachment  to  bad
   ignoble activities.


 The solution is reflecting on topics such as the human life of leisure and
   endowments and death and impermanence from the section of the  practices
   of the persons of small capacity. These two fundamental meditations  are
   extremely important. When we start to  practise,  we  begin  with  these
   reflections. Without engaging in  these  reflections,  the  reflections,
   meditations and practices that come after them will be very difficult to
   accomplish.

It is mentioned in Tthe lLamrim texts  talk  about  the  nature  of  worldly
activities. Once you start the  worldly  activities/affairs,  they  it  will
continue forever and ever. They will never come to an end on their own.  The
question is: “When will do the worldly activities end?”  The  answer  is,  :
“The day when you put a stop to them. it”.

Having obtained this The thing about the human life of leisure freedom  aand
endowments,  is that while after having obtained it, it  is  important  that
at the end of your life, you do not go empty- handed, i.e., ; wyou  did  not
make full use of your human life of leisure and endowments. hich  means  you
didn’t use it.
As mentioned in the teachings, when that happens,  you  we  are  advised  to
think of how you we may go to the lower realms and suffer.  This is the  way
to counteract attachment. We are advised to keep this in mind, and by  doing
so, keeping this in mind, we then strive to engage  in  virtue.

There is The Kadampa masters advisedalso a Kadampa’s advice that says, :”
Due to the precious past, you have obtained this precious jewel of  a  human
life of freedoms and endowments. Now
Now you have obtained this precious jewel – the human life  of  freedom  and
endowments.
Now when you have this precious jewel, please do not
Please do not throw it down the cliff.” The
pPrecious past refers to our – past lives.
Throw it down the cliff  refers to our -literally is the future livesfe.

The discouragement that thinks: “How could I ever accomplish  anything  like
that?”
This discouragement is of three types:
Another incompatible factor  with  joyous  perseverance  is  discouragement,
thinking “I cannot do it, it is just too difficult”.
• There is the discouragement about the goal, thinking,  “There is  no  way,
  Hhow can I possibly ever achieve such athe  state of buddhahood?”  We  are
  then advised to think and remember that t“The Buddha in the past was  just
  like us. He was not a bBuddha from  the  beginning.  to  begin  with.  But
  through his gradual practice,  he became a bBuddha. When If we strive  and
  put in the effort, there is no reason why  and strive, why can’t we cannot
  achieve the same thing. be one as well?” We have to think about  this  and
  encourage  for ourselves.  and to have encouragement.

[LRCM page 188] Stopping discouragement about the goal
Qualm: If the goal is buddhahood—the total elimination  of  all  faults  and
the total completion of all  good  qualities—then,  since  it  is  extremely
difficult for me to accomplish even a few good qualities or to  remove  even
a few faults, how could someone like me  be  capable  of  attaining  such  a
result?
Reply: If such a sense of discouragement  manifests,  it  is  a  very  great
fault because it constitutes giving up the spirit of enlightenment. Even  if
such a thought does not fully manifest, you must stop it  at  its  incipient
stage.
How to stop it? Encourage yourself  with  this  thought:  "The  Bhagavan—the
authoritative person who speaks what is true  and  correct,  never  what  is
false or erroneous—said that even flies,  etc.  will  attain  enlightenment.
That being so, why should I not attain it—so  long  as  I  do  not  give  up
persevering—inasmuch as human birth gives me an excellent basis and  I  have
the mental capacity to analyze what to adopt and what to cast aside?"
Furthermore, stop your discouragement with this thought: "In the past  there
were former buddhas, now there are living buddhas, and in the  future  there
will also be those who reach buddhahood. It is not the case  that  just  one
person who has already become a buddha accomplishes the path. Rather,  those
just like myself, gradually progressing  upward,  have  become  buddhas  and
will become buddhas."
• There is also discouragement with respect to the method. During our  about
  the means to attain the goal. In the course of learning, we discover  that
  “Iin order to become a bBuddha, we you have to do many a  lot  of  things.
  When it comes to giving, weyou have to give away  everything, including  -
  give your arms and legs. We - and you also have to engage in hardships. ”.
  When we learn about this, ese, we may  think,  “How is this  possible?  It
  is too so difficult. Forget about it.”. There  is  this  such  a  kind  of
  discouragement.

      The antidote to the second is to think: “As long as the discrimination
      arises that it is difficult to give away my body and so forth, I  will
      not give it away. However, when it is time to give it  away,  it  will
      not be difficult but will be  like  giving  away  cooked  vegetables.”
      (page 190)[3]

 Very difficult pThe answer to that qualm is: “You do not  give  away  your
 body so long as you perceive it to be a difficult deed, but rather  do  so
 once it becomes very easy, like giving a vegetable”. The practices such as
 of giving the body away and those very difficult things are practices that
 are meantare  fmeant for people who have  reached  a  certain  level  inof
 their practice. In the case of giving away the body, you must have reached
 a very advanced stage in your practice of giving. This Such  practices  is
 are not meant for people who have not  reached  that  level.  It  is  said
 thatBut  once a person has reached that level, this such a practice is not
 difficult for that person. The advice then  is that  “Tthhere is  no  need
 to beget discouraged now.”.
[LRCM page 190] Stopping discouragement about the means to attain the goal
Qualm: To accomplish buddhahood you have to  give  away  your  feet,  hands,
etc., but I am not capable of such feats.
Reply. You must bear suffering to that extent, for even those  who  live  as
they please without engaging in the bodhisattva  deeds  experience  as  they
pass through cyclic existence unspeakable sufferings such  as  having  their
bodies cut open, torn to pieces, stabbed, set on fire,  and  so  forth,  but
they do not accomplish even their own welfare. The suffering  occasioned  by
undergoing hardships for the sake of enlightenment is not  even  a  fraction
of this suffering, and also has the  great  purpose  of  accomplishing  both
your own and others' welfare.
With respect to giving away your body, you do not give it in  the  beginning
when you are afraid. But through graduated training in generosity,  you  end
your attachment to your body. Once you have increased the strength  of  your
great compassion, you have no difficulty when you give it away, provided  it
is for a great purpose
Some say that since practitioners of the perfection vehicle must  give  away
their bodies and lives, they undergo torment and are on a path that is  very
difficult to follow. This text clearly refutes  this,  because  you  do  not
give away your body so long as you perceive it to be a difficult  deed,  but
rather do so once it becomes very easy, like giving a vegetable.
• Another reason for getting discouragdiscouragement ed  is  thinking,   “In
  order to achieve enlightenment, I will  we would  have  to  take  so  many
  rebirths.  and Aall these rebirths will be are in samsara where I . In all
  these rebirths in samsara, I will suffer greatly.”.
    The answer to that is: Bodhisattvas have eliminated  all  negativities;
    therefore, sin's effect - the feeling of suffering  -  will  not  arise
    because they have stopped the cause. Through firm knowledge that cyclic
    existence lacks an intrinsic nature, like a magician's  illusion,  they
    also have no mental suffering. Given that  their  physical  and  mental
    bliss increases, they have no reason to become disheartened even though
    they are still in cyclic existence.


    The antidote to the third [230] is to  stop  discouragement,  thinking:
    “Due to  the  abandonment  of  negativities  by  a  bodhisattva,  their
    effects,  suffering  feelings,  do  not  arise.  Due  to   his   stable
    realization that cyclic existence lacks  inherent  existence,  like  an
    illusion, there is no suffering in his  mind.  If  he  thrives  due  to
    physical  and  mental  happiness  even  though  he  remains  in  cyclic
    existence, despair is useless.” (Page 190)[4]
 I think the bodhisattvas referred to here  are  bodhisattva  superiors   -
 those who have realisze emptiness  directly.  Such  bodhisattva  superiors
 have abandoned all negativities. Because of their  powerful  insight  into
 emptiness, they  do  not  experience  pain  or  suffering  mentally.  Such
 bodhisattvas do not experience physical and mental pain. As such  it  does
 not n’t matter to them  how many such more times they  are  rebirths  they
 have to take. reborn, Iit does not n’t affect them.
[LRCM page 191] Stopping discouragement because wherever you are is a  place
to practice
Qualm: Reaching buddhahood requires  taking  limitless  rebirths  in  cyclic
existence, so I will be harmed by the suffering therein. I  am  not  capable
of such a thing.
Reply: Reflect as follows. Bodhisattvas have eliminated all sin;  therefore,
sin's effect—the feeling of  suffering—will  not  arise  because  they  have
stopped the cause. Through firm knowledge that  cyclic  existence  lacks  an
intrinsic nature, like a magician's  illusion,  they  also  have  no  mental
suffering. Given that their physical and mental bliss increases,  they  have
no reason to become disheartened  even  though  they  are  still  in  cyclic
existence.

Thesere  are  all  these  different  advices.  The  point  is  not  to   get
discouraged because . That is the whole message.o Once you  are  discouraged
and you give up, nothing  can happens.
One also needs to gather the favourable conditions as  well  for  developing
joyous effort. perseverance. There are the four powers that we are  supposed
to develop.

RELYING ON FAVOURABLE CONDITIONS FOR JOYOUS EFFORT

[LRCM Vol 2 page 195] (b") Gathering the forces of the favorable conditions
1. Developing the power of aspiration
2. Developing the power of steadfastness
3. Developing the power of joy
4. The power of relinquishment
1. Developing 1   Tthe power of devotion (or aspiration)
The power of aspiration is essentially yearning i.e. you want it  so  badly.
So, Ddeveloping the power of aspiration is developing this  yearning,  i.e.,
wanting something badly.  When If you apply  it  to  studying,  you  develop
this e yearning by seeing  what  is  in  there  for  you-  the  benefits  of
studying, i.e., what is  in  it  for  you.  That  is  how  you  develop  the
yearning. This e yearning is a long- term and thing. The yearning should  be
athe yearning to complete the process of learning. Time should not beis  not
really a factor. Instead you should  think, ing “It does not doesn’t  matter
how long it takes. T, this is what I will do.”
.
2.   The power of stability (or  Developing the power of steadfastness)
The e ppower of steadfastness is not engaging in  just  any  action  without
prior investigation. But once  you  engage  in  an  the  action  after  upon
investigation, you make sure you carry it out to the end  and  complete  the
actionit. Just like how By one  striving  every  day  es  in  one  day,  and
completing your activities in oneevery  day,  you  develop  like  that  then
developing  the  steadfastness   of   practising   being   joyously   effort
persevering your entire for the entire life.

3.   Developing Tthe power of joy
The attitude we should develop is have is like that  of a child  who,   once
engaged  in  play,  he  does  so  engages  in  play   without   being   ever
satisfied/satiated or satisfied. So Wwhen we joyously persevere  in  virtue,
the attitude should be like that of a child while engaging in play.

4.4  The power of suspension (or relinquishment)
The power of relinquishment is that you should resting  for a while when  if
you become physically or mentally fatigued from your  effort.  perseverance.
Once you are rested,  you  should  continue  joyously  persevering  at  that
whatever activity you were engaged in.

The power of joy and the power of relinquishment go together. So Uusing  the
example of play, when if you are playing a  game  in  which  that  you  have
great interest, you will play the game for a long  time.  But  you  need  to
rest as you just cannot carry on just go doing so on for 24 hours.  So  then
yyou take a rest.

But when you are resting, you should still have the urge and desire want  to
play. After you are rested, you will continue  with  the  game.  As  in  the
example, Tthis aspect is important. While joyously persevering,  whether  it
is in relation to a particular practice or our studiesy, we will  do  gegett
tired out while in the process. When we are tired out, we can take  a  short
rest.  But wWhile we are resting, at the back of our mind,  we  should  have
this idea that we want to continue. This at is what is nwe needed  to  have.
Once we have  rested  are  sufficiently  rested,  we  engage  again  in  our
practice or the studies. y or practice and then continue.

The power of  joy  and  the  power  of  relinquishment  are  very  important
especially with regard  to  in  seeiseeing  ng  a  virtuous  act  to  itsthe
completion.  One  of  the  reasons  why  we  do  not  n’t  really   complete
whateverthe  virtuous acts s we haveve started is due to lack of joy in  the
first place. Even if we haveve a little bit of joy when we  start  out,  get
at it, we will have some rest when we are tired, . bBut for us, the rest  is
permanent.  and Tthere is no continuity. This at is why the virtuous act  it
all ends there.

The power of aspiration and power of steadfastness are also very  important.


These are the  four  favourable  conditions  for  producing  joyous  effort.
Tperseverance. These powers can be also basically applied y to anything  you
do, in order to complete those activities. . In order to start  on  anything
and complete it, these powers apply.

There is also advice given in the teachings that when we  engage  in  virtue
and we are joyously persevering, whatever virtue that we  do  should  do  so
be done with an expansive and   calm  mind  that  is  not  tense.  Then  the
practice of the virtuous activity will be effective.

Ven Gyurme: I don’t use the word “relax” because it sounds like loose. So  I
use the word “not tense” - kind of “open spacious” mind.
While there is joyous perseverance, it is important that the  mind  engaging
in virtue is spaciousness, i.e. not tense.
You can see for yourself that amany  lot of people,   when  they  engage  in
virtue, their  mind becomes very tight, very tense,  and  not  expansive  at
all. spacious.  Because  of  that,   such  people  are  unlikely  to  hardly
complete the virtuous activities that things they had started with.

Khen Rinpoche  (in  English):  Practicing  too  hard  become  stressed,  too
intense or too relax?
      2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C1A-1D3C-3   How the body and the mind become
          serviceable through joyous effort
      In this way, in dependence on stopping adverse conditions and  relying
      on favorable conditions, you should undertake joyous effort until your
      body and your mind become light like a piece of cotton carried by  the
      wind. (Page 190)[5]

Strive in joyous perseverance till the time whereby just as  wind  drives  a
piece of cotton to and fro, a joyful energy enthused  for  virtue,  controls
your body and mind. This comes by depending  on  stopping  the  incompatible
factors with joyous perseverance and  developing  the  favorable  conditions
for joyous perseverance.
First you have to know what the incompatible factors that  are  incompatible
with  joyous  effort,  i.e.,  perseverance  are,  i.e.  the   obstacles   or
hindrances to joyous effort. perseverance.
Once yYou know what they are, you then oppose and overcome tthem.   and  get
rid of them.
Then you should kKnow  what  the  compatible  factofactorsrs  or  favourable
conditions for developing joyous effort  are and then ddevelop them.
When you are able to do so, then you are able  to  engage  in  any  virtuous
activities happily and joyously.
[LRCM Vol 2 page 206] Question:  What  form  will  the  joyous  perseverance
produced by such efforts take?
Reply: Just as wind drives a piece of cotton to and fro,  a  joyful  energy,
enthused for virtue, controls your body and mind. When you  act  along  with
this energy, joyous  perseverance  is  well-established.  Once  you  produce
this, you will easily achieve all the collections.

In the nNext lesson we will  start  on  with  calm  abiding  (or  meditative
serenity). Please read on your own,  starting from the end of joyous  effort
perseverance till just before the section on calm abiding,   i.e.,   on  the
short  descriptions  of  the  perfection  of  concentration  (or  meditative
stabiliszation),  and the  perfection  of  wisdom,  and  the  four  ways  of
gathering people around you. We will start on calm  abiding  on  the  coming
lesson.




[LRCM Vol 2 page 195-201]
(1") Developing the power of aspiration
As it is said that yearning acts  as  the  basis  for  joyous  perseverance,
aspiration here refers to yearning.
(2") Developing the power of steadfastness
Developing the power of steadfastness means that you  bring  to  conclusion,
without turning back, anything at which you joyously  persevere.  First,  do
not try to do everything; examine the situation carefully. If you  see  that
you can do it, you engage in it; whereas if you cannot do  it,  you  do  not
engage in it. You should not even start in the first place things  you  will
do for a  while  and  then  discard.  The  reason  is  that  if  you  become
habituated to giving up in the middle what you have  committed  yourself  to
do, then through this conditioning you will in  other  lives  again  abandon
your commitment to the training, etc. Consequently, your sin  will  increase
in that life, and in subsequent lives the suffering that is  the  effect  of
this sin will increase. Furthermore, you will not accomplish  other  virtues
because you will be thinking of carrying out your earlier commitment;  there
will be an inferior  result  because  you  turned  away  from  your  earlier
commitment; and  your  earlier  commitment  itself  will  not  be  fulfilled
because you did not follow  through.  In  sum,  committing  yourself  to  do
something but leaving it unfinished is a hindrance  to  your  accomplishment
of other projects, and the conditioning also  destabilizes  your  commitment
to the vows you have taken.
(3") Developing the power of joy
You develop the power of joy after  the  power  of  aspiration,  an  intense
yearning, produces a joyous perseverance not  previously  present,  and  you
have achieved the power of steadfastness (also called the  power  of  pride)
which  causes  the  perseverance  that   has   already   developed   to   be
irreversible. The power of joy means  that  when  you  first  engage  in  an
activity, you do it joyfully, and once you have engaged, you  have  a  sense
of being insatiable in that you do not want to discontinue the activity.
So strive with an attitude like that of children who engage in play  without
being satiated. That is, you must be just as insatiable  about  what  causes
pleasurable results as  you  are  about  the  results  themselves.  For,  if
ordinary persons strive even when  they  are  uncertain  whether  they  will
obtain a pleasant result, what need  is  there  to  speak  about  activities
which are certain to bear pleasurable results?
(4") The power of relinquishment
If you become physically or mentally fatigued from  your  perseverance,  you
must rest for a  while.  Otherwise,  you  will  become  exhausted  and  very
disheartened,   thereby   later   preventing   your   joyous   perseverance.
Immediately after you have  rested,  persevere  again,  and  when  you  have
completely finished your earlier activity, do not let this satisfy you.  You
must joyously persevere at other, higher activities
The above presentation shows how to joyously  persevere.  Do  not  overexert
yourself. You  must  avoid  both  being  overly  intense  and  being  overly
relaxed, so make your effort continuous like  a  river.Interpreted  by  Ven.
Tenzin Gyurme; transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek, Patricia  Lee  and  Julia  Koh;
edited by Cecilia Tsong.

-----------------------
[1] Refer to Lesson 15.
[2] LRCM, 186.
[3] Ibid., 191.
[4] Ibid., 191-192.
[5] Ibid., 206.

