Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/SixPerfections/BP2 M4 L16 (final).doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:53:57.285008
================================================================================


Transcript of teachings by Khen Rinpoche Geshe Chonyi  on  the  Heart  Sutra
and Stages of the Path (the Six Perfections)

The root text, Middle Length Lam-Rim,  by  Lama  Tsongkhapa,  translated  by
Philip Quarcoo, © FPMT, Inc., May 2012, is  indented.  All  page  references
refer to the root text, unless otherwise stated.

Where applicable, page numbers of corresponding  sections  in  the  Lam  Rim
Chen Mo (LRCM) are indicated in footnotes; they refer to The Great  Treatise
on the Stages of the Path  to  Enlightenment,  Volume  2,  by  Tsong-kha-pa,
translated  by  The  Lamrim  Chenmo   Translation   Committee,   Snow   Lion
Publications, 2004.

Lesson 16                                                         22  August
2013


Question & answer & mock debate. Topic: Are  the  perfections  practised  on
the ordinary paths?
____________________________________________________________________________
______________________

Question: In relation to the practice  of  the  perfections  of  generosity,
there was a discussion in  an  earlier  lesson  that  the  practice  of  the
perfection starts on the path  of  accumulation  upwards,  even  though  the
surpassing practice of the perfection of  generosity  only  appears  on  the
first ground. Although the lam-rim text indicates clearly what qualifies  as
the  completion  of  the  different  perfections,  when  it  comes  to   the
perfections on the different grounds, there seems  to  be  something  beyond
the completion of those perfections.
1. I am wondering whether a perfection has to be conjoined with  the  direct
   perception of emptiness for it to be a fully qualified perfection?
2. With regard to the perfections related to the  different  grounds,  there
   seems to be something beyond being a perfection. But once a perfection is
   completed and perfected, what can there be beyond that? Can Khen Rinpoche
   please clarify this point.

Ven  Gyurme:  What  is  the  criterion  for  being  a  perfection  of,  say,
generosity?

Student 1: This is clearly stated in the text. In lesson  13,  there  was  a
discussion regarding the perfection of generosity on the  first  ground.  In
that lesson, Khen Rinpoche reiterated that the path perfection of wisdom  is
not the direct perception of wisdom. It is the  wisdom  realising  emptiness
conjoined with bodhicitta. Just as the practice of the perfection of  wisdom
exists  on  the  ordinary  paths,  likewise  the  practice  of   the   other
perfections starts from the path of accumulation.

So what is happening with the perfections on their  respective  grounds?  It
seems as if there is something else happening with that perfection  that  is
beyond the completion of perfection on their respective grounds.

Ven Gyurme: To summarise what you are asking:
• At which ground or level is the perfection of generosity completed?
• In order to be a perfection of generosity, must it be conjoined  with  the
  wisdom directly perceiving emptiness?
• Is the practice of the perfection of generosity the same as achieving  the
  perfection of generosity?
• Is there a  difference  between  the  perfection  of  generosity  and  the
  completion of the perfection of generosity?

Answer: With regard to the perfection of wisdom, there is  a  position  that
states that, in order to be a perfection of wisdom, it has to  be  a  wisdom
that directly realises  emptiness.  However,  there  is  another  school  of
thought  that  says  that  this  is  not  necessary.  There  are  these  two
positions. You can see for yourself which position is better and  should  be
adopted.

Let us say you take the position  that  the  perfection  of  wisdom  is  not
necessarily a wisdom directly perceiving emptiness.  It  follows  then  that
the practice of the perfection of wisdom exists on the ordinary  paths  such
as the Mahayana path of accumulation. If you were to say that  the  practice
of the perfection of wisdom exists on the  Mahayana  path  of  accumulation,
then it would be all right to say that the practice of the  six  perfections
exists on the Mahayana path of accumulation. There  is  nothing  wrong  with
saying that.

If it is a mind realising emptiness,  is  it  necessarily  a  perfection  of
wisdom? The answer is no, because the wisdom  directly  realising  emptiness
in the continuum of an arhat (or foe  destroyer)  is  not  a  perfection  of
wisdom. Why? Because that wisdom is  not  conjoined  with  bodhicitta.  This
means that, in order to be a  perfection  of  wisdom,  it  must  be  a  mind
realising emptiness that is conjoined with bodhicitta.

That being the case—a  mind  realising  emptiness  must  be  conjoined  with
bodhicitta to be a perfection of  wisdom—you  can  likewise  apply  this  to
generosity,  ethics,  patience,  joyous   effort   and   concentration   (or
meditative stabilisation). For example,  generosity  is  not  necessarily  a
perfection of generosity. Ethics is not necessarily a perfection of  ethics.
It is just generosity or ethics on its own but when they are conjoined  with
bodhicitta, they become the perfection  of  generosity,  the  perfection  of
ethics and so forth. By extension, this logic should apply to  the  rest  of
the perfections.

Student 1: Then what about the completion of that perfection? We  are  still
practising and practising on the  various  paths  to  the  point  where  the
perfection is completed. Does that mean  the  perfection  of  generosity  is
completed on the first ground, the perfection of ethics is completed on  the
second ground and so forth? Is it like that?

Answer: You know that there is a perfection that is related to each  of  the
ten bodhisattva grounds. There is the perfection of generosity on the  first
ground. What that means  is  that  on  the  first  ground,  the  bodhisattva
achieves the surpassing practice of the perfection of  generosity.  This  is
what is mentioned in the text.

On the second ground, the bodhisattva achieves the  surpassing  practice  of
ethics. The practice of ethics that he has achieved  on  the  second  ground
surpasses the practice of ethics that was present on the first ground.  This
is how it works on all the subsequent grounds.

The question then is  this:  if  the  bodhisattva  achieves  the  surpassing
practice of the perfection of generosity on  the  first  ground,  does  that
mean that he has achieved a completion  of  the  perfection  of  generosity?
That is what we need to think about.

Equating completion of a perfection with its surpassing practice

My personal opinion is that probably there  is  nothing  wrong  with  saying
that the perfection of generosity has reached  its  pinnacle  on  the  first
ground.  Likewise, on the second ground, we could say that  the  bodhisattva
has achieved the completion of the perfection of ethics. We are saying  this
from the perspective of equating the achievement of the surpassing  practice
of a particular perfection to  the  completion  of  that  perfection,  i.e.,
achieving the surpassing practice  of  a  perfection  is  the  same  as  the
completion of a perfection. This is how it can be  explained.  Therefore  on
the  first   ground,  the  bodhisattva  achieves  the  completion   of   the
perfection of generosity.

What is the fallacy if you were to take this position?

Equating “perfection” with its completion

If you were to understand the word, “perfection,” to mean  completion,  then
you could say that in order to achieve the  perfection  of  generosity,  you
need the wisdom directly perceiving emptiness.  This  is  to  say  that  the
perfection of generosity does not exist before the first ground.   When  the
bodhisattva  achieves  the  first  ground,  the  bodhisattva  achieves   the
perfection of generosity. This is if you were to take “perfection”  here  to
mean, literally, perfected or completed.

Is there any difference between what I just said and what was said  earlier?


Khen Rinpoche: What I said earlier  and  what  I’m  saying  now  is  totally
different. Do you get that?

(Students nod).

Khen Rinpoche: OK. That is good. If you get it , that is the point.

This is what analysis and discussion is about.  It  is  a  debate.  You  can
argue, “No, the perfection of generosity does not  exist  before  the  first
ground because one must have the wisdom directly realising  emptiness  first
before one can achieve the perfection of generosity.”

In the root text, Lama Tsongkhapa states:

      The completion of the perfection of  generosity  does  not  depend  on
      having eliminated the poverty of migrating beings by  giving  away  to
      others substances to be given. Rather it  becomes  the  perfection  of
      generosity  through  destroying  the  grasping  of   miserliness   and
      thoroughly completing one’s familiarization with the mind of giving to
      others along with the effects of giving. (Page 175)


He says that you perfect generosity after you have  destroyed  the  grasping
of miserliness (or stingy clingingingness). This  states  clearly  that  the
perfection of generosity does not exist in  the  continuum  of  an  ordinary
being.

This is why analysis and discussion is so important. It is not  enough  just
to hear something and  think,  “That  is  it.  This  is  the  one  and  only
position.” You have to compare what is mentioned in the root text,  what  is
mentioned in the philosophical  texts  and  so  forth.  Then  you  put  them
together and see for yourself before you make up your mind.

Khen Rinpoche: Are you getting what I’m trying to do here?

Position A: Refuting that there is  the  perfection  of  generosity  on  the
ordinary paths.

(Khen Rinpoche addresses Student 1): Now someone asks  you,  “Is  there  the
perfection of generosity on the ordinary paths?” What are you going to say?

Khen Rinpoche: If somebody were to ask you such a  question,  what  are  you
going to say? You cannot keep quiet. You must say something.

Is there the perfection of generosity on the path of  accumulation?  Yes  or
no?

Student 1: Maybe …

Khen Rinpoche: “Yes” or “No” does not matter. You cannot  say  “Maybe!”  You
must say something. You must be decisive. If you say,  “Maybe,”  then  there
is no need to debate. You can say, “Yes.” You can say, “No.”

You must confidently say, “Yes!” In the very beginning part, if your  answer
is, “Maybe yes, maybe no,”  then there is no fun in debating.  You  must  be
strong from the very beginning.  Then there is fun in fighting. If  you  are
weak from the outset, then there is no fun in fighting.  When  you  have  to
fight, your tone must be firm. You must be ready. So you want to fight?

When you debate, you must analyse. This is the way to do  it.  You  have  to
take a position and then you move forward from there.  If  nobody  wants  to
take a position, then I have nothing else to say.

When you debate, you have to hold on to one position. Then you  defend  that
position. You cannot hold on to two positions.

Student 1: The answer is yes. But I have another question.

Khen Rinpoche: It is not about yes or no. It is more important  to  be  sure
why you are taking a position. Make sure you know  why.  It  doesn’t  matter
whether it is right or wrong. You have your reasons that you have  to  stand
by and defend. That is the important thing.

Student 1: My question is regarding Khen Rinpoche giving  another  point  of
view whereby the perfection of generosity is perfected  or  completed  after
emptiness is realised directly.

Khen Rinpoche:  What  was  your  answer?  Yes?  I  have  already  given  the
overview. Now I am asking the questions and you answer them. You don’t  talk
about other things.

Student 1: My answer was yes.

Khen Rinpoche: So now you hold on to your answer for 10 minutes.

Why do you say that there is the perfection of generosity  on  the  Mahayana
path of accumulation?

This exercise is not  just  between  the  two  of  us.  All  of  you  should
participate. For those who agree that there is a  perfection  of  generosity
on the path of accumulation, do you know why? You must  know  why  when  you
say, “Yes.”

Why  is  there  the  perfection  of  generosity  on  the  Mahayana  path  of
accumulation?

When you respond to a question during debate, your response has  to  address
only what is covered in the question. You cannot bring  in  other  auxiliary
topics to the discussion.

Student 1: To answer Khen Rinpoche’s question, there is the practice of  the
perfection of generosity on the ordinary paths  because  the  activities  of
the bodhisattvas on the the ordinary paths are the  perfections.  So  during
the ordinary paths, when they are ordinary bodhisattvas, yes, we  will  have
to say that they are practising  the perfection of generosity.

Khen Rinpoche: You are not answering the question. Why?

Student 1: Isn’t the practice of generosity conjoined with bodhicitta?  Just
saying I am practising the perfection of generosity does  not  mean  I  have
completed the practice of the perfection of generosity.

Khen Rinpoche: If it is a perfection of generosity, is it not necessary  for
stingy clingingness to be destroyed?

Student 1: Yes.

Khen Rinpoche:  Has  the  ordinary  bodhisattva  on  the  Mahayana  path  of
accumulation abandoned stingy clingingness?

Student 1: Not yet.

Khen Rinpoche: You have to think. If you say, “No,”  you  are  contradicting
yourself. Now you have to say “Yes.”

Student 1:  I have no choice but to say, “Yes,” right?
Khen Rinpoche: You have no choice? You do have a  choice.  So  what  do  you
say?

Student 1 (emphatically): Yes.

Khen Rinpoche: Why do you say, “Yes”?

In order for them to have stingy clingingness, there must be  a  cause.  The
main cause of stingy clingingness is attachment. Do the bodhisattvas on  the
Mahayana path of accumulation have attachment? Do the ordinary  bodhisattvas
have attachment to their own bodies?

Student 1: Yes.

Khen Rinpoche: It is not taught that the practice of giving the body is  for
an ordinary bodhisattva or an ordinary person.  These ordinary  bodhisattvas
have attachment to their bodies. They have  miserliness.  They  have  stingy
clingingness.  They  have  not  destroyed  their  miserliness   and   stingy
clingingness. If they have not destroyed their stingy clingingness, do  they
still have the perfection of generosity?

Do you see the line of reasoning? This is an exercise for everyone.

The ordinary bodhisattvas have  not  destroyed  their  stingy  clingingness,
isn’t that so?

Student 1: Yes.

(After further discussion,  the  debate  starts  again  with  Khen  Rinpoche
demonstrating how the opposing position—that the  perfections  do  exist  on
the ordinary paths—can be argued).

Position B: That the perfections do exist on the ordinary paths

Khen Rinpoche: If you say that there is no perfection of generosity  on  the
ordinary paths, you are explicitly saying that the perfection of  generosity
is the same as the completion of the perfection of generosity.

Khen Rinpoche:  Now they are exactly the same. Isn’t that so?

Student 1: Yes.

Khen  Rinpoche:   It  follows  that,  in  the  continuum  of   an   ordinary
bodhisattva on the Mahayana path of accumulation, there is  no  practice  of
any of the perfections including the perfection of wisdom.

Student 1: No, there is not.

Khen Rinpoche: This is for everyone.  Everyone  has  to  think.  It  follows
that, on the first ground, all the six perfections are not in the  continuum
of the first ground bodhisattva.

Student 1: No.

Khen Rinpoche: In the continuum of the first  ground  bodhisattva,  the  six
perfections are not there?

Student 1:  Yes.

Khen Rinpoche: When the first ground bodhisattva  practises  the  perfection
of generosity, that practice of the  perfection  of  generosity  encompasses
all the other perfections, doesn’t it?

Student 1: No.

Khen Rinpoche: It is mentioned in the text that when  the  practice  of  the
perfection of generosity is accompanied by all six perfections,  it  becomes
extremely powerful.

(Based on your position), it follows that the first  ground  bodhisattva  do
not have the practice of perfection of generosity that encompasses  all  the
other perfections. If, on the first ground, the practice of  the  perfection
of generosity is not accompanied by the other perfections, then there is  no
basis for saying that the practice of generosity becomes more powerful  when
it is accompanied by the other perfections.

Student 1: I can’t continue. I am stuck. If I am following my  own  line  of
argument, I would have to say no.

Khen Rinpoche: So there is no basis for saying  that  there  is  a  stronger
practice of the perfection of generosity  when  it  is  accompanied  by  the
other perfections.

Student 1: Yes.

Khen Rinpoche: But Lama Tsongkhapa said that there is the  practice  of  the
perfection of generosity is stronger when it is  accompanied  by  the  other
perfections. What exactly is Lama Tsongkhapa talking about if  there  is  no
such thing?

Isn’t there the practice  of  the  perfection  of  wisdom  on  the  path  of
accumulation and the path of preparation?

In  the  Heart  of   the   Perfection   Wisdom   Sutra,   Shariputra   asked
Avalokiteshvara, “How should one train in the  perfection  of  wisdom?”  The
perfection of  wisdom  is  the  mind  realising  emptiness.  Avalokiteshvara
replied, “This is how you should train in the perfection of  wisdom  on  the
path of accumulation and the path of preparation.” Therefore it is wrong  to
say that there isn’t any practice of the perfections on the ordinary paths.

Otherwise Avalokiteshvara should  have  just  said,  “The  practice  of  the
perfection of wisdom starts from the first ground.”

Student 1: He was referring only  to  the  practice  of  the  perfection  of
wisdom. He wasn’t talking about the  other  practices  such  as  generosity,
ethics and so forth.
Khen Rinpoche: Wasn’t he talking about wisdom?

Student 1: Yes, he was talking only about wisdom. But we are  talking  about
generosity here.

Khen Rinpoche: The  practice  of  the  perfection  of  wisdom  is  basically
talking about the practice of the mind realising emptiness, isn’t it?

Student 1: Correct.

Khen Rinpoche: In the Heart of the Perfection Wisdom Sutra,  the  perfection
of wisdom is taken to be the mind realising emptiness. Based on that, it  is
asserted that there is the practice of  the  perfection  of  wisdom  on  the
Mahayana path of accumulation and path of preparation.

Student 1: Yes.

Khen Rinpoche: There is the practice of  the  perfections  on  the  ordinary
paths and there is the practice of the perfection of wisdom on the  ordinary
paths.

Student 1: Yes.

Khen Rinpoche: The practice of perfection of wisdom exists in the  continuum
of ordinary bodhisattvas. So in order to achieve the perfection  of  wisdom,
you need not be on the first ground.

Student 1: Yes.

Khen Rinpoche: In  order  to  possess  a  perfection,  you  need  not  be  a
superior.

Student 1: Yes.

Khen Rinpoche: So there is no perfection of wisdom in the continuum  of  the
bodhisattva on the path of accumulation? The  bodhisattva  on  the  path  of
accumulation does not have the perfection of wisdom?

Student 1: No.

Khen Rinpoche: What do you think? Does that bodhisattva have the  perfection
of wisdom or not?

Student 1: That bodhisattva has the perfection of wisdom.

Khen Rinpoche: You need not be a superior, right? Earlier you  have  already
agreed one must be a superior being (to have  a  perfection).  Now  you  say
have  the  bodhisattva  has  the  perfection  of  wisdom  on  the  path   of
accumulation.

Student 1: I am very flexible!
                                 ~~~~~~~~~~~

Please understand that this exercise is not a waste of time at all. This  is
to show you how you can  utilize  your  time  during  discussion.  During  a
discussion,  you  usually  have  questions  that  you  answer.  You  take  a
position. So it is not so much about saying, “Yes” or “No.”

When someone says “Yes” or “No,” you should question in-depth, “Why  do  you
say this?  Why do you say that?” This is what discussion is  all  about.  It
is not simply taking out a piece of paper and writing yes or no.  From  what
I have seen, most of you are  contented with just writing yes or no. You  do
not think much about it. Many of you are comfortable with agreeing  to  what
I have said in class—that there is the practice of the  perfections  on  the
ordinary paths. But that understanding is not stable at all.

Actually you have to know why you take such a position. You have to keep  on
questioning. Once you have sorted out all the different reasons,  with  that
understanding, you will have greater certainty  about  your  position.  Then
you know why you believe in something. One of the benefits is that you  will
never forget it. You will never forget your position.

Khen Rinpoche: Once the fallacy of your position is pointed out to you,  you
will never forget. The point of debate is this: you  really  think  you  are
right and someone comes along  and  squeezes  your  neck  until  you  cannot
breath. Then you will never forget. You probably get what I mean. It is  not
about squeezing the neck literally but when  your  opponent  uses  different
reasons, this way and that way. You don’t know where to go.   Then  you  get
some idea. So debate is like that.

Student 1: May I clarify a point?

Khen Rinpoche: There is no further clarification as  I  have  already  given
you two views.

Student 1: Is Lama Tsongkhapa of the view that the perfections  are  present
on the ordinary paths? Based on the way Lama Tsongkhapa wrote  the  lam-rim,
which view does he support?

Khen Rinpoche: I don’t know. You think about it.

Student 2: There are ten grounds and  there  are  ten  perfections.  Do  the
other four perfections[1] at the end exist on the ordinary paths?

Khen Rinpoche: What if I were to say “Yes.” What  would  you  say  to  that?
This is an answer given in response to a question in debate.  It  is  not  a
conclusion.

Many of you always think that when I say, “Yes,” that is  it  and  you  just
leave it at that. This is not the case and was never the case.
Student 2: Does LamaTsongkhapa think that it is not  important  for  him  to
include these as part of the perfections to be taught in the  text?  If  you
say, “Yes,” then why did Lama Tsongkhapa not  teach  them  as  part  of  the
perfections to be practised? Then there should  be  ten  perfections  to  be
practised, not six. So Lama Tsongkhapa is not perfect.

Khen Rinpoche: Now Swee Kim (name of Student  2)   knows  how  to  debate  a
little bit.

Khen Rinpoche: Lama Tsongkhapa did explain them  and  explained  them  well.
The compositions of Lama Tsongkhapa come up to a  total  of  18  volumes  of
which the Lam Rim Chen Mo is  just  one  text.  For  example,  there  is  an
explanation of the other four perfections  in  his  composition  called  The
Golden Rosary that is a commentary on the Ornament of Clear Realisations.

It is said clearly in the lam-rim that there isn’t any bodhisattva  practice
that cannot be condensed into  the  six  perfections.  All  the  bodhisattva
practices can be condensed into the six perfections. As such if you want  to
include the perfection of method, the perfection of prayer,  the  perfection
of power and the perfection of exalted wisdom, these  four  perfections  can
be condensed into the perfection of  wisdom.  One  has  to  know  how  these
remaining four perfections are condensed into the perfection of wisdom.  You
have the remaining four  perfections  by  expanding  on  the  perfection  of
wisdom.

Student 3: (1) How are  the  six  or  ten  perfections  transformed  in  the
continuum of a buddha? (2) It was said that the continuum of a non-human  is
a suitable basis for the bodhisattva vows but not a suitable basis  for  the
pratimoksha vows. How is it then that a non-human is able  to  take  up  the
bodhisattva vows without having taken the pratimoksha vows?

Khen  Rinpoche:  There  are  two  bodies  on  the  buddha  ground:  (1)  the
embodiment of  truth  or  the  truth  body  (the  dharmakaya)  and  (2)  the
embodiment of form or form body (the rupakaya). They are the results.
• You have the two truths on the basis.
• You have method and wisdom on the path.
• The results are these two bodies.

All the bodhisattva deeds can be condensed into  the  six  perfections.  The
six perfections can be condensed into method  and  wisdom.  The  first  five
perfections are included under method. The last perfection,  the  perfection
of wisdom, is included in the collection of wisdom.

It is mentioned clearly in the teachings on the perfection vehicle that  the
practice of  method  results  in  the  rupakaya,  the  form  body,  and  the
collection of wisdom results in the truth body.  One  accumulates  merit  by
practising generosity, ethics, patience and so forth.  The  effect  of  this
collection of merit is the form body.  Through  familiarity  with  the  mind
realising emptiness, one accumulates the collection of wisdom.

By practising the perfection of generosity, one accumulates  the  collection
of merit. What is this collection of merit? This is  something  we  need  to
think about. I would think it  is  a  non-associated  compositional  factor,
which is an impermanent phenomenon that is neither form  nor  consciousness.
Can generosity, which is a consciousness, act as a substantial cause  for  a
form body? This is the question. It was explained that the  six  perfections
are all consciousnesses. For example, what is generosity? It is  a  generous
attitude. That is a consciousness.

What if we were to say that generosity cannot act as a substantial cause  of
the form body?

Is it all right to say that the collection  of  merit  that  is  accumulated
through the practice of generosity can act as a cause of the form body?

This is an extremely important point  because  when  we  are  talking  about
achieving the result, the result is buddhahood, which consists  of  the  two
bodies, the form body and the truth body. These two bodies  have  their  own
substantial causes. In the perfection vehicle, the best explanation of  what
exactly is the cause of the form body is none other than the  collection  of
merit.

The superior bodhisattvas have a mental body, i.e., a body that  is  in  the
nature of mind. The tenth ground bodhisattva also has  such  a  mental  body
but that mental body  cannot  proceed  to  enlightenment,  i.e.,  it  cannot
transform into the form body of a  buddha.  Why  is  this  so?  Because  the
actualising cause for this mental body is the levels  of  predisposition  of
ignorance together with uncontaminated karma. So this is something  we  have
to think about. This is the explanation of the perfection vehicle.

According to the perfection vehicle, what is the substantial cause  for  the
body of the next life?  Does  the  consciousness  of  this  life  act  as  a
substantial cause for the body of next life? The consciousness of this  life
definitely is a cause of the body of next life. The  consciousness  of  this
life is one of the causes for the body of next life but what exactly is  the
substantial cause of the body of the next life? Is it the karmic imprint  or
latency that is deposited on the mental continuum of a sentient being?

Khen Rinpoche: What is the substantial cause? This is the question.

So you see, it is not so straightforward. You really  have  to  think  about
it. From the perspective of the Mahayana  perfection  vehicle,  how  is  the
accomplishment of the form body  explained?  They  can  only  point  to  the
collection of merit. This  is  all.  But  if  you  think  about  this,  many
questions arise. This means that the explanation of the  perfection  vehicle
for achieving the form body is not very profound.  It  is  not  quite  there
yet.

This is where tantra comes in  and  why  tantra  is  so  important.   Tantra
offers an  explanation of the  extremely  subtle  winds  and  the  extremely
subtle  mind.  Based  on  that,  it  explains  after  death,  what  are  the
substantial causes and cooperative conditions for the body and mind  of  the
intermediate state being. It  is  only  in  tantra  that  you  will  find  a
coherent explanation of what is the substantial cause of a form body.   This
will come towards the end of the Basic Program where we will be  looking  at
tantra.
Therefore it is important to study this in the  future.  When  you  have  an
overview of the  general  procedure  of  both  sutra  and  tantra,  whatever
understanding you gain will not be ordinary but very special and different.

In dependence on studying and learning these great treatises,  even  if  you
only get some rough understanding of the  general  procedure  of  sutra  and
tantra, this would still make your present life meaningful. All  of  us  are
extremely fortunate even to have just  this  small  faith  and  interest  in
wanting to learn.

While we still have some faith and interest in  learning  the  teachings  of
the Buddha,  you should  grasp  this  opportunity  and  strive  as  much  as
possible in learning and analysing the teachings in order to leave  as  many
imprints as possible in our minds. The more imprints we  place  there,  then
there is some hope that things will improve and become clearer from life  to
life.

I mentioned a number of times that simply coming to class, merely  listening
to the teachings and merely reading the texts on your own, those  activities
alone make it quite difficult to learn anything. It  is  very  important  to
think and analyse deeply whether through  discussions  or  debate.  This  is
very important because it is only through analysis and deep reflection  that
you come to gain  clear  understanding,  firm  conviction  and  very  stable
knowledge. This is what we need to do. We all  have  to  do  this.  From  my
side, I would like to request and encourage you all to make this happen.

If you  have  questions  or  something  that  you  do  not  understand,  you
shouldn’t feel embarrassed or shy to ask. If you don’t understand, you  must
ask.

I see that, most of the time, the  students  who  are  asking  questions  in
class are those who have finished the  first  Basic  Program.  I  don’t  see
those who have just joined this current Basic Program  asking  questions.  I
don’t know why. Is it because you are too shy?

There is no such thing as a stupid  question.  You  should  not  think,  “My
question is so stupid. Therefore I don’t want to ask.”




Interpreted by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme; transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek,  Vivien  Ng
and Aki Yeo; edited by Cecilia Tsong.
-----------------------
[1] These are the perfections of method (7th ground), prayer  (8th  ground),
power (9th ground) and exalted wisdom (10th ground).

