Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/SixPerfections/BP2 M4 L24 (final).doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:53:57.264664
================================================================================


Transcript of teachings by Khen Rinpoche Geshe Chonyi  on  the  Heart  Sutra
and Stages of the Path (the Six Perfections)

The root text, Middle Length Lam-Rim,  by  Lama  Tsongkhapa,  translated  by
Philip Quarcoo, © FPMT, Inc., May 2012, is  indented.  All  page  references
refer to the root text, unless otherwise stated.

Where applicable, page numbers of corresponding  sections  in  the  Lam  Rim
Chen Mo (LRCM) are indicated in footnotes; they refer to The Great  Treatise
on the Stages of the Path  to  Enlightenment,  Volume  3,  by  Tsong-kha-pa,
translated  by  The  Lamrim  Chenmo   Translation   Committee,   Snow   Lion
Publications, 2004.

Lesson   24                                                               24
September 2013



Continuation  of  how  to  generate   flawless   meditative   stabilisation.
Eliminating faulty approaches. Indicating  the  length  of  sessions.  (From
root text, pages 214-217).




ELIMINATING FAULTY APPROACHES

Next is looking at the difficulties  and  the  challenges  of  developing  a
flawless concentration that possesses the two features. As we have had  seen
earlier, the concentration that we need to develop in this  e  context  here
is a concentration that possesses the two special features, intense  clarity
and single-pointedness, :
The feature of vivid intensity
The feature of single-pointedness; whwhere the mind is  abiding  es  on  its
the object.
This is the type of concentration that we need to develop. It is  said  that
developing such a concentration that  possesses  these  two  features  is  a
challenging task.

How it is difficult for faultless meditative stabilisation with the two
  features to arise
       Therefore,  whenever  your   awareness,   held   overly   tight,   is
       intensified,  the  clarity   factor   is   present   but   excitement
       predominates so that it is difficult  for  the  stability  factor  to
       arise. On  the  other  hand,  whenever  you  relax  it  a  lot  while
       sustaining your meditation, the stability aspect is there but  laxity
       predominates so that intense clarity is absent. Yet it  is  difficult
       to maintain[1] just the right level of tightness and relaxation,  and
       therefore it is [261] difficult  for  meditative  stabilization  free
       from laxity and excitement to arise. Thinking  of  that,  Candragomin
       says:
           When I make an effort, excitement arises,
           Sinking occurs when I abandon it.
           If by this it is hard to get even engagement,
           What shall I do with my agitated mind? (Page 214)[2]

[LRCM Vol 3 page 51]  Thus, if you use an  intense  cognition  that  is  too
tight, you may have clarity, but excitement  will  predominate  so  that  it
will be hard to develop stability.
If you sustain your meditation after becoming greatly relaxed, then you  may
have stability, but laxity will  predominate  so  that  there  is  no  vivid
intensity. It is very hard to find the right balance of tension so as to  be
neither too taut nor too relaxed, and for this reason it is hard to  develop
a concentration free from laxity and excitement.  With  this  in  mind,  the
master Candragomin stated in his Praise of Confession-
If I use exertion, excitement arises;
If I abandon it, slackness ensues;
It is hard to find the right balance in this—
What should I do with my troubled mind?
[LRCM Vol 3 page 51]  The meaning of this  is  as  follows:  "Use  exertion"
means your mind is too tight; when you do this, excitement arises. When  you
let the tightness go and relax too much, you produce  slackness,  with  your
attention remaining inward. So it is difficult to find  the  proper  balance
for an even state of mind, free from laxity and excitement.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): So he  is  saying,  said  “Better  to   relax.”.
(Laughter).


      When I practice with effort, excitement arises;
      Whenever I relax it, sinking occurs.
      If it is hard to find the middle between them,
      What shall I do with my agitated mind? (Page 214-215)[3]

[LRCM Vol 3 page 52]  Candragomin's Praise of Confession also states:
If I strain to engage the object, excitement occurs;
If I relax, slackness develops.
It is hard to find a practice midway between these two—
What should I do with my troubled mind?
Now Lama Tsongkhapa explains what Master Candragomin is saying.

      He is saying that when you hold your mind tight thus making an effort,
      there is excitement. On the other hand, when you  notice  this,  relax
      your mind that tries hard to get involved in its object,  and  abandon
      the endeavor, the laxity of sinking arises within the mind.  Therefore
      it is difficult to find the middle ground free from the  two  extremes
      of laxity and excitement, an even engagement in which the mind  abides
      evenly balanced. If he was  thereby  presenting  relaxation  as  best,
      there would be no reason whatsoever for difficulties, and since he  is
      saying that laxity arises from it, it  is  inappropriate  to  practice
      meditative stabilization that way. (Page 215)[4]

He is saying that when you strain for a tight focus on the object and  exert
yourself, excitement arises. When you see that you  relax  your  mind  which
has been straining to engage the object  and  give  up  your  exertion  that
produces the laxity or slackness in your mind. Therefore it is difficult  to
find a proper balance for an even state of mind that is a  mid-way  practice
free from the two extremes of laxity and excitement. If he was  saying  that
getting quite relax were adequate, then there would be not  any  problem  at
all. Since he said that this leads to laxity, it is  obviously  improper  to
use this method to achieve concentration.
So you can see that it is very difficult and  is  extremely  challenging  to
develop a concentration that possesses  those  two  features.  It  is  quite
obvious from our experience when we try to practise like  what  has  beenwas
explained in the earlier lessons. :

Ffirst you seek out your the object of meditation, then y and then you  have
to find it.
You are supposed to tighten your focus on thate  object  of  meditation  and
try to have the mind stay on it.
But in At the beginning,  it is really difficult for the  mind  to  stay  on
the object of  meditation.  In  the  initial  stages  Tthere  is  a  lot  of
excitement and the mind just cannot stay on  the  object  or  ,  either  the
object  changes  into  something  else,  sayfor  example,  a  white   object
bechaving white color becomeomes s red in colour. This shows that  there  is
a lot of excitement in the mind.

Among Of the nine mental stages that one goes through as one progresses  are
moving towards calm- abiding, the first mental state  is  called  placement,
i.e., . That is the time when one when you is are supposed to focus  on  the
object. After Hhaving found  the  object  of  meditation,  one  is  you  are
supposed to place one’s your mind on it  .  The  way  to  do  it  is  to  by
tightening  one’s focus so that one can stay on the  object  of  meditation.
If you have ever experienced this, you would know that  this  initial  level
is already very challenging. When you try to tighten your focus and when  it
becomes too much, excitement arises easily.

AAfter having found the object of  meditation,  and  after  having  achieved
some stability when re your your mind is abiding  on  the  object,  at  that
time,  you relax your mind.  But wWhen you relax your focus, and  when  that
becomes tootoo muchrelax, there is the a danger of laxity arising.  This  is
what it is being said in the text.


How to meditate by balancing tightness and relaxation
• In short, Wwhen one’s focus is too tight, there is the a danger of
  excitement arising.
• But Wwhen onethe mind’s’s focus is too relaxed, there is  manner of
  apprehending the object is too relax i.e. the focus is too relax, there is
  the a danger of laxity arising.
Therefore it is said that it is very difficult to  develop  a  concentration
that is free from laxity and excitement.

As for Ffinding the right balance between tightness and relaxation, this  is
something that can only be found  and  understood  through  your  one’s  own
experience. You have to see for yourself in your own  experience  that  when
you tighten your mind too  much,  above  a  certain  level,  then  you  will
experience excitement. Then wIn your own experience when  you  relax  loosen
your mind too much, then you find that you developed laxity. This at is  the
sign that you have gone too far. So
wWhat is the  right  balance  between  tightness  and  relaxation?  This  is
something you one haves to discover  for  youroneself  during  your  in  the
practice. It is not possible to specify and measure,  “It is  this  and  not
that.”.

Here Lama Tsongkhapa is said ying that it is  not  difficult  to  developing
the kind of concentration whereby by your mind is not distracted,  and  your
mind is able to stay on  the  object  and  yet   very  relaxed  without  any
thoughts.  is not difficult at all. The problem is  that  this  is  not  the
correct form kind of concentration that you are one is supposed to  develop.

Achieving such an experience whereby your mind  has  found  your  object  of
meditation, your mind is abiding on it but your  mind  is  quite  relax,  in
this state, there is no thoughts are operating. You  are  kind  of  relaxed.
Your mind are kind of staying on  the  object  when  you  feel  relax.  Lama
Tsongkhapa is saying: “Such kind of experience is not difficult  to  attain,
but it is not the correct form of concentration”.
For Iif you were gain such an this kind of experience and abide in it, ,  in
fact, stay in this kind of experience is it  will  become  a  hindrance  and
impediment to the development ing of  the  actual  concentration  you  seek.
Why? Because such an a kind of  experience  allowss  for  laxity  to  arise,
i.e., it is . It isthe  condition for the arising of laxity of the mind.

What is said to be a right balance between tightness and relaxation?
       As for the point where tightness and relaxation are balanced,  having
       investigated this for yourself you should be more relaxed  than  that
       level of awareness where you think  “If  I  heighten  it  this  much,
       excitement will surely arise,” and you should  also  place  it  above
       that level where you think “If I leave[5] it just here,  laxity  will
       easily arise”. (Page 215)
As for the right balance of tightness and  relaxation,  having  investigated
for yourself, you should be more relaxed than the level of  awareness  where
you think “If I heighten it this much, excitement would surely  arise,”  and
you should place your mind above the level where you think “If  I  place  it
at this low level, laxity will arise”.
[MLLR page 215]  How to meditate balancing tightness and relaxation
As for the  point  where  tightness  and  relaxation  are  balanced,  having
investigated this for yourself you should be more relaxed  than  that  level
of awareness where you think “If I heighten it this  much,  excitement  will
surely arise,” and you should also place  it  above  that  level  where  you
think “If I leave it just here, laxity will easily arise”.
So we have to find the right balance between  tightness  and  relaxation  by
looking at our own experience, or by checking for oneself.

[LRCM Vol 3 page 52]  Buddhasanti's commentary on this is clear:
If you strain for a tight focus on the object and exert yourself, your  mind
becomes excited and distracted, and you thereby destroy your  concentration.
Therefore, you are not attaining mental stability through exertion. This  is
problematic, so in order to avoid it you relax your  mind,  which  has  been
straining to engage the object, and give up your exertion. Then faults  such
as forgetting the object of meditation lead to slackness and laxity.
Therefore, Candragomin says "it is hard to find"  a  concentration  that  is
the right balance or midway practice free from the two  extremes  of  laxity
and excitement. If getting quite relaxed were adequate, there would  not  be
any problem at all. Since the text says that this leads  to  laxity,  it  is
obviously improper to use this method to achieve concentration.
It is not enough to have the clarity which is simply the limpid  quality  of
a very relaxed mind; there also must be a degree of  tightness  in  the  way
you apprehend the object.
The root text then Next is citesing the  scriptural e of  authority  ies  to
prove this e point.


The fault of not knowing how to apply mindfulness
       If you sustain your meditation without knowing the above  method  for
       applying mindfulness, however much you meditate, only lots of  faults
       will  come  out  of  it:  great  forgetfulness,   dulling   of   your
       intelligence that discriminates among phenomena, and so forth.  (Page
       215)[6]
We look at the section where it  says  the  need  for  relying  properly  on
mindfulness.
[LRCM Vol 3 page 53]  The above-mentioned way of maintaining mindfulness  is
extremely important. Without knowing it your meditation will  show  a  great
number of faults, such as slipping  into  great  forgetfulness  commensurate
with  the  amount  of  your  meditation   or   dulling   the   wisdom   that
differentiates phenomena

We If you discussed remember our earlier discussion about how  important  it
is to have a very strong mindfulness. It is very important to cultivate  not
just mindfulness but  a strong mindfulness.,  not  just  mindfulness  but  a
strong mindfulness.  When your If there is no  strong  mindfulness  is  weak
and your mind is too relaxed—, even though if you may have found the  object
of meditation and your mind is abiding on itthe object, but if your mind  is
too relax and there is no strong mindfulness, then— it  is  said  that  this
will lead to an increase in forgetfulness and make  your  wisdom  dull.  the
dulling of one’s wisdom.Such a relaxed mind with little intensity  or  force
behind the way with which it is apprehending its object is  not  a  flawless
concentration.
The state of mind where you have found the object of  meditation  i.e.  your
mind is abiding in it but your mind’s way  of  apprehending  the  object  is
very  relax,  there  isn’t  any  intensity  or  force  behind  the  way   of
apprehending  the  object.  So,  it  is  kind  of  relaxed.  That  kind   of
concentration is not a flawless concentration. IIn fact,  this that kind  of
meditation without any intense clarity, mental activity  or  thought  is  is
actually a meditation whereby you are only  accumulating laxity. Over  time,
this will contribute When your mind is going to relax and there is no  force
or no vivid intensity i.e. no force  behind  its  way  of  apprehending  the
object, basically there is no activity, no thoughts, not thinking,  you  are
just kind of spacing out when there is laxity. If you are accumulating  that
over time, that contributes to more and more forgetfulness and,  .  Also  as
mentioned it said in the teachings, it will make dulls your wisdom dull.

There You do hearare such   accounts  of  meditators  who  are  striving  to
actualisze  calm-  abiding.  Talking  from  hey  talked   from   their   own
experiences,  .  Tthey  say  that  after  coming  out  from  their  retreat,
practice, they feel that they had become a little bit more  slower  mentally
slower. They feel that they are , not as quick and  not  as  intelligent  as
before.

This shows that the kind of concentration that one should  seek  to  develop
is the concentration that possesses the  two  special  features  of  intense
clarity  and  :  vivid  intensity  and  stability.   TheSuch   a   kind   of
concentration that possesses these two special features  is  very  difficult
to accomplish.

You should  understand  From  this  you  have  to  understand  what  is  the
essential point or characteristics of the concentration that you are  trying
to develop. What is its the main purpose? It is not about relaxing the  mind
, or developing some stability of  the  mind  where  you  do  are  just  not
thinking about anything, i.e.,  your mind may is  not  be  distracted,   yet
but you are yet not really  thinking of anything at all. This at is not  the
kind of concentration that you one  should  develop.  Yes,  wWhen  you  have
achieved such a concentration, an experience, you will  do  experience  less
mental chatter, less mental disturbance and thoughts. But aApart from  that,
 there is no great benefit and no great purpose  behind  achieving  it  such
concentration because such a kind of concentration or such kind of state  or
experience it will only leads to more forgetfulness  and  make  your  wisdom
dull. dulling of wisdom. This is not what you we are looking for.

The main purpose whole point of developing  concentration  is  to  make  the
mind more stable, sharper and quicker, one’s your  mindfulness  become  more
powerful and , to improve having betterone’s   memory,  having  sharper  and
quicker mind. The whole point of Hhaving such a the concentration  with  all
these features will is enable us so that you  uto  use  it  to  develop  the
wisdom realiszing selflessness.

When one is seeking to develop concentration, it is extremely  important  to
rely on powerful and very strong mindfulness with  continuous  placement  of
the mind on the object.  The mindfulness has to be very powerful. It has  to
be continual placement on the object and that has to be  strong.  Only  then
can there be some is hope of . Then you having e a basis for improving  your
memory. You then  have  a  basis  for  making  the  mind  sharper  and  more
powerful.

The  need  to  watch  with  introspection  while  holding  the  object  with
mindfulness
      You may wonder: “Well then, while the mind is tied to the object  with
      mindfulness, is it appropriate to  generate  conceptual  thought  that
      watches whether or not the object is being held well?”  In  Stages  of
      Meditation  II  it  says  that  this  is  what  needs  to   be   done.
      Specifically,  it  is  not   that   you   first   abandon   meditative
      stabilization and then watch[7] in this way. Rather, from within  your
      state of  abidance  in  meditative  stabilization,  you  merely  watch
      whether or not the mind is still remaining on the original  object  it
      was placed on earlier, and if not, whether it has  become  excited  or
      lax. Once your mind is placed in meditative stabilization, you  should
      watch it now and then, neither at too short nor at too long intervals.
      If you do this before the force of the  previous  mind  is  exhausted,
      this has the value that the mind will become intense again,  that  its
      intensity will last for a long time, and that  laxity  and  excitement
      will be recognized quickly. (Page 215)[8]

Next is the  discussion  for  the  need  for  vigilance  when  you  maintain
mindfulness on the object of meditation.
[LRCM Vol 3 page 53]
Question:  While  mindfulness  fixes  your  attention  on  the   object   of
meditation as explained above, is it appropriate to monitor your  meditation
and think about whether you are holding the object of meditation well?
The answer to this: Yes, it is said in the second Stages of Meditation  that
you have to do this.
[LRCM Vol 3 page 53]  Reply: You have to do this,  for  Kamalasila's  second
Stages of Meditation states:
After you have thus set your attention on whatever  your  chosen  object  of
meditation may be, fix it there continuously. While you stay right with  the
object,  analyze  and  investigate  your  mind,  thinking:   "Is   my   mind
apprehending the object  of  meditation  well?  Or  is  it  lax?  Or  is  it
distracted by the appearance of external objects?"
It is not that you stop your concentration  and  then  look  at  your  mind.
Rather, while maintaining your state of concentration, you just look to  see
whether your attention is  staying  where  it  was  previously  set  on  the
primary object of meditation and, if it is not, whether there is  laxity  or
excitement.
[LRCM Vol 3 page 53]
While maintaining your state of concentration, you just look to see  whether
your attention is staying where it was previously set on the primary  object
of meditation and, if it is not, whether  there  is  laxity  or  excitement.
After you have settled into concentration,  you  monitor  this  at  moderate
intervals, neither too often nor too  seldom.  If  you  do  this  while  the
intensity and force of the previous awareness are not quite gone,  it  takes
place within the perspective of this awareness.  This  has  the  purpose  of
both enabling long-lasting,  intense  stability,  and  letting  you  quickly
recognize laxity and excitement.
While maintaining your the concentration  (mindfulness)  on  the  object  of
meditation with mindfulness, you one haves to check  your  one’s  meditation
with introspection (or vigilance). Introspection  is  not  done  outside  of
your meditation.The way to utilize vigilance is  not  doing  it  outside  of
that perspective/experience/meditation. It is not as if you  you  set  aside
your put the object of meditation one side, the experience of being in  that
meditation one side and you switch to introspection  instead  vigilance  and
to check see what is happening. No, not like that,  but  rRather,   as  your
mind abides on the object, you employ  introspection  vigilance  within  the
perspective of that awareness.  where your mind is abiding  on  the  object.
So that is how you should be vigilant.

As for Tthe frequency of introspection,  vigilance  i.e.,   checking  up  on
one’s concentration, the frequency should be moderate—“neither at too  short
nor at too long intervals.”  - not too often and not too seldom.


• Returning Back to the analogy of the wild elephant, thate elephant is
  analogous of one’s unsubdued mind.
• When If you want to tame such a the wild elephant, you tie it down tto a
  sturdy pillar post with a very strong rope. This is analogous of focussing
  our attention on the object of meditation with strong mindfulness.
• After you have tied the wild elephant with a strong rope to a sturdy
  pillarost, every now and then,  you should check to see if the elephant is
  still tied to the pillar ost or not. You do not have to watch n’t have to
  sit there all the time and stare at the elephant all the time to see
  whether it has the elephant has run off oraway or not.  This is analogous
  to introspection.

You check every now and then to see whether the elephant  is  still  secured
to the post by the  strong  rope.  Likewise,  after  you  have  placed  your
attention on the object of meditation, while maintaining mindfulness of  the
object, every now and then at moderate intervals, you check to  see  if  the
mind is still abiding on the object or not. C
We check whether the mind is abiding on  the  object  of  meditation  within
that awareness i.e. within the mind being mindful of the object;  just  like
you check whether the elephant is tied to the post or not. There  isn’t  any
checking is not needed  to be done once after the elephant has escaped.


Khen Rinpoche (in English): Most of the time, s after the elephant  has  run
away,  then we check. Before that,  we are too relaxed. Once the  After  the
elephant run away then you check. And  after  elephant  has  run  away,  you
cannot tie it  back to the pillar as  the  elephant  is  too  strong.  I  am
talking about the mind elephant of the mind.

When the elephant trainer realizes the rope that is tying  the  elephant  to
the sturdy post has become somewhat loose, he will  tighten  the  noose.  So
Eevery now and then,  the elephant trainer  will  checks  whether  the  rope
that is tying the elephant to the sturdy pillar ost  is  in  place  or  not.
When he sees that the  rope  has  is  becomes  somewhat  loosened,  he  will
tighten it while the elephant is still tied by the  rope  is  still  holding
the elephant to the sturdy pillar, ost and nnot after the elephant  has  run
away!.  When the rope is a bit loose, it is so much  easier  to  tighten  it
while the elephant is still tied by attached to the rope.

Likewise, one is we are supposed to focus one’s our attention on the  object
of meditation. With mindfulness one does not forget the  object.  Every  now
and then,  behind that mindfulness, there is  this  introspection  vigilance
that checks to sees whether  if the mind is staying on the  object  or  not.
For example, if such introspection the vigilance discovers that the mind  is
about to lose the object,  i.e.,  when the mind is about  to  be  distracted
or run away from the object, then one you hhas ave  to  tighten  one’s  your
mindfulness. This is why the teachings Therefore, the teachings say that  s;
“oneOne  needs  to  cultivate  or  develop  mindfulness  and   introspection
vigilance in order to develop concentration.”.

Using analogiesy makes s it easier for  us  to  understand  this  especially
when weone do not esn’t have any experience to talk about. So using  analogy
will helps us to understand.  So, Bback to the elephant again.  ,  now  Yyou
have tied the elephant down with a strong rope to a sturdy  pillarpost.  You
do it in such a way that you gain et this confidence, :  “I  think  for  the
next one hour, the elephant will probably not run  away.  It  will  probably
stays there  happily as it is right  there.”.  Likewise,  it  is  said  that
t“Through finding the proper balance between tightness and  relaxation,  one
gains this confidence,  “I can probably stay on this  object  of  meditation
for say a few couple of minutes without any laxity or excitement.”.

Many people have this question: There  are  always  many  questions  arising
about if one employs introspection vigilance to check whether one’s mind  is
staying  on  the  object  or  not,   would  that   become  an  obstacle  for
developing stability?  Many people have this question.  So  Lama  Tsongkhapa
states that very clearly that introspection : No, vigilance  does  not  harm
mindfulness, i.e., . Vigilance does not harm oone’s ability to stay  on  the
object of meditation. There is a proper way of  using  introspection.  While
maintaining one’s mindfulness of the object of meditation,  one  to  do  it.
You employs introspection vigilance from  within  the  perspective  of  that
awareness.  while maintaining  mindfulness  on  the  object  of  meditation.
Within that, then Eevery now and then at moderate intervals— -not too  short
oftenbut , not too longseldom either—one- you checks  whether  the  mind  is
coming under the influence of laxity or excitement. This is important.  When
one If you does not employ introspection, one vigilance then one  would  not
be able to detect laxity or excitement when they arise. When  If laxity  and
excitement arises, and one if one does not n’t check them,  then  one  would
not develop a flawless concentration.

So Cchecking with introspection vigilance is done at the time when in  one’s
experience and at one’s  level  of  attainment  where  there  is  still  the
danger of laxity and excitement arising. When When there is still  a  danger
of laxity and excitement arising, you have to employ vigilance.  Until  when
you have have reacheded a level of attainment  state  whereby  there  is  no
longer any more danger of laxity or excitement arising,  then  there  is  no
need to check. All you have to  do  is  to  abide  single-pointedly  on  the
object.
So when there is no danger of laxity and excitement arising, then  there  is
no need for one to check. You just have to abide and focus  single-pointedly
on the object. While doing so, the mind is actually relaxed.

The need to sustain  this  meditation  again  and  again  with  mindfulness,
without forgetting the object
      Sustaining the meditation like that, occasionally recalling the  first
      object, is also necessary as a cause  for  powerful  mindfulness  that
      operates  continuously.  That  is  why  this  method  for   sustaining
      mindfulness is set  forth  in  Śrāvaka  Levels  and  why  it  says  in
      Explanation of the  “Separation  of  the  Middle  from  the  Extremes”
      (Madhyāntavibāghațīkā):

          In the statement “Mindfulness  consists  in  not  forgetting  the
          object” the instruction on making the mind  abide  on  it  is  to
          express it with the mind.

      The application of mindfulness is for the purpose  of  stopping  being
      distracted  from  the  object  and  forgetting  it.   Therefore,   not
      forgetting the object consists  in  mentally  expressing  the  object,
      attending to it again and again. By way of analogy, it  is  like  when
      you are afraid that you might forget something you know. If you recall
      it again and again, you will hardly forget it. (Page 216)[9]
Next is an explanation of  how  important  it  is  to  continually  rely  on
mindfulness without forgetting the object.
[LRCM  Vol  3  page  53]   Accordingly,  this  is  how  you   sustain   your
mindfulness, for a necessary cause of powerful  and  continuous  mindfulness
is  sustaining  your  meditation  by  repeatedly  reminding   yourself,   at
intervals, of the intended object of meditation.
[LRCM Vol 3 page 54]   Also, Sthiramati's Explanation of the "Separation  of
the Middle from the Extremes" states:
The statement "Mindfulness means not forgetting the  object  of  meditation"
means that you mentally express the instructions on stabilizing your mind.
Therefore, you maintain mindfulness to stop forgetfulness wherein you  stray
from the object of meditation. Hence, non-forgetfulness  of  the  object  of
meditation  -wherein  forgetfulness  is  stopped-  is  when  you   "mentally
express" the object of meditation; you bring the  object  of  meditation  to
mind again and again. For example, when you  are  anxious  about  forgetting
something you know, it will be hard to forget if you  recall  it  again  and
again.

We need to rely on mindfulness over and over again. For Wwhen  we  do  that,
we will not forget the object of meditation,  and we will be able  to  place
our mindfulness continually on the object and our .  For  example,  when  we
recall the object of meditation over  and  over  again,  when  you  rely  on
mindfulness over and  over  again,  one’s  mindfulness  will  increases  and
becomes more stable.

INDICATING THE LENGTH OF SESSIONS[LRCM Vol 3 page  54]  Thus,  you  have  to
remind yourself of the object of meditation at moderate intervals  in  order
to develop strong mindfulness. The way to strengthen your  vigilance,  which
notices laxity and excitement, is to lock your attention on  the  object  of
meditation without distraction, and then to monitor it. Realize that if  you
repudiate such a procedure by thinking, "This is  discursiveness,"  it  will
be extremely difficult to develop powerful mindfulness and vigilance.


      Now then, is there  an  established  length  of  meditation  sessions,
      specified in terms of “The mind is tied to the object and  placed  for
      just this long?” The major texts such as Śrāvaka Levels do not seem to
      clearly uphold an established length.  However,  [263]  in  Stages  of
      Meditation III it says:

      Like that, gradually, you should sit for twenty-four minutes,[10]  one
      and a half hours,[11] three hours,[12] or as long as you can.

      Apparently this was set forth in the context of the established length
      of meditation sessions  for  special  insight  meditation  after  calm
      abiding has already been accomplished, but in the context of initially
      practicing calm abiding it is evidently similar. (Page 216)[13]

Next is a discussion of the length of the meditation session.
[LRCM Vol 3 page 54] Question: When you fix your attention on the object  of
meditation with mindfulness, is there a definite  length  for  the  session,
such that you say, "I will stabilize  my  mind  on  the  object  only  until
then"?
Reply: On this matter, Asanga’s Sravaka Levels and other  classic  texts  do
not state the  length  of  sessions  clearly.  However,  Kamalasila's  third
Stages of Meditation does say:
At this stage engage in meditative equipoise  for  twenty-four  minutes,  an
hour-and-a-half, three hours, or as long as you can.
While this statement occurs in the context of the length of the session  for
cultivating insight after you have already achieved serenity, it is  clearly
similar when you are first achieving serenity, so do it this way.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): How long do you  have  to  meditate?  One  hour?
Twenty-four minutes? I don’t know. What does the lLamrim says?

Student: There is a footnote in the MLLR that says, “One chu tshod, a unit
based on traditional Indian time measurement and used in the Abhidharma. It
is equivalent to one out of 60 parts of a day i.e., 24 minutes.”
(Student response inaudible)

Khen Rinpoche (in English): So oOne part is  twenty-four  minutes?  That  is
all right. It is Okay, so not too long. I thought it was four hours!.

The third second  Sstages  of  Mmeditation  says  that  one  can  remain  in
meditative equipoise that is divorced of free of laxity and  excitement  and
then staying in that equipoise ffor, let’s say, twenty-four minutes.

It is said This says that the duration of a session is indefinite.
The point is that about first, based on your own  experience,  you  have  to
ffinding a proper balance between tightness and relaxation whereby based  on
your own experience, you judge for yourself, ; “If  I  were  to  tighten  my
mind this much, I can stay in equipoise for  five/,  ten/,  fifteen  minutes
or whatever time without being affected by excitement”.” Likewise,
bBased on your own judgment, ; “If I loosen or relax my mind  this  much,  I
can stay in equipoise for the next  five/,  ten/  or  fifteen  minutes  also
without being affected by laxity.”. You have to judge for yourself.

I think it would be good if you try to relate  the  finding  the  of  proper
balance between tightness and relaxation back to the analogy  of  tying  the
an elephant with a ropes to a sturdy pillar that  post  like  what   I  have
mentioned earlier.

How it is difficult for beginners to cut through laxity  and  excitement  if
the sessions are long
      In fact, if you recall the object every so often and  watch  every  so
      often, the method for  sustaining  mindfulness  and  introspection  as
      explained earlier is indeed faultless even for long sessions. However,
      in most beginners forgetfulness arises if the sessions are long.  They
      get distracted and wander off,  and  although  laxity  and  excitement
      occur in the meantime, they do not  identify  them  quickly  but  only
      recognize them after a long time. Alternatively, even if they  do  not
      forget their mindfulness, they easily fall under the power  of  laxity
      and excitement and do not identify them quickly. (Page 216)[14]


Next is explaining or stating that it would be difficult  for  beginners  to
eliminate or to cut laxity or excitement if the length  of  the  session  is
too long.
[LRCM Vol 3 page 55] If you  practice  the  techniques  of  mindfulness  and
vigilance explained above—reminding yourself of  the  object  of  meditation
and monitoring your meditation at moderate intervals—it does not  matter  if
the session is a little long.  However,  usually  one  of  two  things  will
happen when you are a beginner and have a long session. On the one hand  you
may become distracted due to forgetfulness.  In  this  case,  you  will  not
recognize the occurrence of any laxity or excitement quickly but only  after
a long period of time. On the other hand,  though  you  may  not  lose  your
mindfulness, it is easy to fall under the sway  of  laxity  and  excitement,
and you will not quickly recognize them when they occur.
For the beginner, when if the session is too  longtoo  long,  there  is  the
danger of forgetting or losing the object of meditation or losing  it  or  .
Or one you becomes distracted. For such a person,  there is the danger  that
excitement and laxity will arises and will be  is  there  for  a  long  time
before one is but you  are  not  aware  of  them.   it;  It  is   just  like
discovering that the elephant has already run away after a long time.

Khen Rinpoche (in English): It ran away a lLong time  ago  but  only  now  ,
then you recognisze that!.

• For the beginner, when  if the session is too long, this is one of the
  dangers: o. ne You completely loses and forgets  the object of meditation.
  You forget it.
•
For the beginner, when if the session is too long, even if one you does not
n’t lose the object of meditation, excitement and laxity arises easily and
one is .
• For beginner who is doing too long a session, even though he may be
  abiding on the object without losing it, but laxity and excitement arises
  easily and he is not aware of them it immediately.

These are the two situations. The first situation  hinders  the  development
of strong mindfulness, which requires that .  In  order  to  develop  strong
mindfulness oone must apply  and  rely  continuously  rely  on  mindfulness.
Application of mindfulness has to continue all the time in order to  develop
strong mindfulness.
In this case, first situation, for a  beginner  who  is  doing  too  long  a
session, the beginner has lost the object of meditation  completely  and  is
not even aware of it. When one you loses the object  of  meditation  through
non-mindfulness,  obviously  that  is  an  obstacle  to  developing   strong
mindfulness.

      Since  the  former  of  these  two  impedes  the  arising  of   strong
      mindfulness  whereas  the  latter  impedes  the  arising   of   strong
      introspection, it is difficult to cut through laxity  and  excitement.
      (Page 216)[15]
[LRCM Vol 3 page 55] The first situation hinders the development  of  strong
mindfulness; the latter hinders the development of strong vigilance.  Hence,
it is very difficult to stop laxity and excitement.

In the second situation, the beginner who is doing a long  session  has  not
lost the object of meditation but he is not aware of the presence of  laxity
and excitement have or are about to arise due to the  a  lack  of  employing
introspection at moderate intervals. vigilance.  In  order  for  one  to  be
aware that laxity and excitement has risen or is about to  arise,  you  must
employ vigilance at certain intervals - moderate intervals.

Development of strong mindfulness  occurs  within  the  non-degeneration  of
mindfulness  that  was  cultivated  or  developed  earlier.  Likewise,   the
development  of  strong  introspection  vigilance  occurs  within  the  non-
degeneration of the introspection vigilance that was developed earlier.

      Specifically, it is a lot worse to forget the meditation  object,  get
      distracted, and then fail to identify the  occurrence  of  laxity  and
      excitement  than  not  to  identify  the  occurrence  of  laxity   and
      excitement quickly while  still  remembering  the  meditation  object.
      Therefore, as  the  antidote  that  counteracts  distraction  and  the
      deterioration of mindfulness, the  method  of  sustaining  mindfulness
      explained above is very important. (Page 216)[16]

[LRCM Vol 3  page  55]  In  particular,  failing  to  recognize  laxity  and
excitement after you have become distracted due to forgetting the object  of
meditation is much worse  than  failing  to  quickly  recognize  laxity  and
excitement while not forgetting the object of meditation. So the  techniques
for maintaining mindfulness—the previously  explained  remedies  which  stop
the breakdown of mindfulness ensuing from distraction—are very important.
The need to act in accordance with one’s mental abilities and so forth
      In case of  great  forgetfulness,  the  mind  getting  distracted  and
      wandering off a lot, and if the introspection that quickly  identifies
      laxity and excitement  is  weak,  short  sessions  are  needed.  (Page
      216)[17]
Next is an explanation of the need to act in accordance  with  one’s  mental
capacity.
[LRCM  Vol  3  page  55]  If  you  have  great  forgetfulness  ensuing  from
distraction, as  well  as  vigilance  so  weak  that  it  does  not  quickly
recognize laxity and excitement, then your session must be short.

Khen Rinpoche (in English): So here it ssays to do very short sessions!.

      On the other hand, if forgetfulness hardly arises and  it  seems  that
      laxity and excitement can be  recognized  quickly,  there  is  nothing
      wrong with slightly longer sessions either. With this intention it  is
      said that  the  duration,  twenty-four  minutes  and  so  on,  is  not
      specified. In brief, since it needs to be in accord with one’s  mental
      abilities, it says “as long as you can.”

      Apart from that, [264] rest in meditative equipoise unless you  suffer
      some temporary physical or mental harm. If  you  do,  you  should  not
      persist in your meditation but  rather  eliminate  the  constitutional
      obstacles and then meditate. That is the meaning[18]  of  experts,  so
      you should understand acting like that to be another  factor  for  the
      length of sessions. (Page 216-217)[19]
[LRCM Vol 3 page 55]  If it is hard for you to forget  the  object  and  you
can quickly notice laxity and excitement, it does not matter if the  session
is a little long. This is the idea behind Kamalasila's statement above  that
the duration of a session is indefinite—twenty-four minutes  and  so  forth.
In short, since the duration has  to  comport  with  your  mental  capacity,
Kamalasila says "as long as you can."
If temporary injury to your mind or body does not occur, set  your  mind  in
equipoise. If such injury does occur, do  not  persist  in  meditating,  but
immediately stop your session and then clear away the  impediments  in  your
mental and physical constituents. Then meditate. This  is  what  the  adepts
intended, so  recognize  that  doing  this  is  an  aspect  of  how  long  a
meditation session should be.

                                ~~~~~~~~~~~~

Question: Next is what to do after you focus on an object of meditation.
Student: Does one need to have  calm  abiding  in  order  to  generate  have
uncontrived bodhicitta?

Answer: It is pretty much the case and clears that without calm abiding  one
cannot enter any path. Here the path is the Mahayana path.
According to the Ornaments for  of Clear Realiszations when  there  is  this
the application in the complete  aspects  is  complete  application  in  all
aspects. When one achieved, s that one achieves the union  of  calm  abiding
and special insight.

So whWhen does one  does  one  achieve  this  complete  application  in  the
complete all aspects?  Wwhen one generates bodhicitta. ?
Based on this assertion that of the complete application in the complete  of
all aspects , it is achieved when one you actualiseszed bodhicitta,  this  .
It is a complete application in the complete aspects of all aspects  and  it
is a union of calm abiding and special insight. Now yYoou know  that  before
you can have special insight,  you must actualisze calm  abiding.  For  that
reason,  you need calm abiding in order to enter the Mahayana path.  iIt  is
quite clear that you need calm abiding  in  order  tto  enter  the  Mahayana
path.

But iIn general, do you need calm abiding to enter any path? This at is  not
evident or clear in any texts.  and it is not clear. I wonder whether  there
is a need for that or not.

Question: Student: The [MLLR] text says, : “… rest in  meditative  equipoise
unless you suffer some temporary physical or mental harm” (Page  217).  When
you are experiencing  mental  harm  you  should  stop  your  meditation  and
overcome the physical or mental harm before you meditate again”.  What  kind
of mental harm is being referred to here?

Answer: The As in the text says, : “… rest in  meditative  equipoise  unless
you suffer some temporary physical or mental harm. If  you  do,  you  should
not persist in your  meditation  but  rather  eliminate  the  constitutional
obstacles and then meditate.” If temporary injury  to  your  mind  and  body
does not occur, set your mind in equipoise. But if such injury  does  occur,
do not persist in meditating but rather clear away the  impediments  of  the
physical and mental constituents”.
At the times when your mind  is  gets  disturbed,   from  meditation  it  is
important to relax the mind. Also s and loosen it up. Sometimes  due  to  an
imbalance in the four elements in the body,  you   one  will  feel  physical
discomfort. This has an effect on the mind as well. You just feel not  right
because there is an imbalance  in  the  elements  of  the  body.  When  this
happens,  it is said that you that we should rest.

Generally speaking, we know  what  our  limits  are  is.  When  If  we  push
ourselves beyond those limits, that  we  will  get  disturbed.  We  have  to
meditate in accordance with our one’s own situation. We may  do  eexperience
physical discomfort when we are sitting down to  meditateing.  Sometimes  we
have pain in the neck or pain in the  back.  We  shouldn’t  push.   and  Wwe
should rest. Sometimes when if we one pushes ourselves  over and  above  our
one’s limits, our  then the physical condition can or situation become  even
worsen. This at will prevents us  you from doing any meditation at all.

But mMost people stopped meditating at the onset of the slightest  onset  of
any discomfort. This at is incorrect as well. You do  have to push  yourself
a little bit and . You have to practisce  forbearance  in  putting  up  with
some of these difficulties. Of course,  if you really  know  that  you  have
really reached your physical limits, then you have to stop.

Anyway, Ffinding the proper balance between tightness and  relaxation  being
too relaxed is something that has to be applied in everything  that  we  do.
Therefore, the text says that it  is  very  difficult  to  find  the  proper
balance.  – Iin the case  of  developing  concentration,  this  refers   tto
finding  the proper balance between tightness and relaxation.

This That is our problem behind everything that we do. We do  not  n’t  find
the proper balance. For most people, as in our case,  the  problem  here  of
not finding the proper balance is being too overly relaxed. For  us,   there
is no danger of being too tight or  overly  focussing   in  one’s  D  dharma
practice. Rather it is a matter of being too relaxed.

Khen Rinpoche (in English): So you do not need to no worry  about  that.  of
that. So You should push harder.
There is more to come about introspection. vigilance.

Question:
Student:  There  is  the  physical  and  mental  pliancy  that  comes   from
concentration whereby  you achieve calm abiding. but there is
There is also a pliancy that comes from  the  power  of  investigation  that
which is special insight. What is the difference between these two types  of
pliancyy? There was aone footnote in the root text that  said  ys  that  the
pliancy that comes  from  investigation  is  even  more  blissful  than  the
pliancy that comes from concentration.

Answer: The pliancy section on pliancy part will come  towards  the  end  of
the module. section.

Question: Student:  Why  is  the  practice  of  concentration  which  is  so
important only discussed at such great length at coming only  at  the  great
scope by which time ? wWe would  have  presumably  meditated  on  the  small
scope and the medium scope without any concentration to speak ofto  come  to
the great scope?

Khen RinpocheAnswer: The best part always comes in the last. I  don’t  know.
We’ll see.


Discussion questions (Sunday, 29th September 2013)

1. (a)       Explain how the six perfections are  definite  in  number  from
     the point of view of   high status.
    (b)      Why is there a definite order to the six perfections?

2. (a)   What is the perfection of generosity?
    (b) How is the perfection  of  generosity  practised  by  including  the
      other    perfections?

3. (a)      What is the meaning of destruction of roots of virtue?
    (b)      How are the roots of virtue destroyed?
    (c)     What is the advice given for developing patience?

4. (a)       What are the four favourable conditions for  developing  joyous
effort?
    (b)     How does each of them help in the development of joyous effort?




Interpreted by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme; transcribed by Phuah  Soon  Ek,  Patricia
Lee and Julia Koh; edited by Cecilia Tsong.

-----------------------
[1] Tib. zin pa
[2] LRCM, 51.
[3] Ibid., 52.
[4] Ibid., 51-52.
[5] Tib. bzhag, usually translated here as “place.”
[6] Ibid., 53.
[7] Tib. lta ba, usually translated here as “view.”
[8] Ibid., 53.
[9] Ibid., 53-54.
[10] One chu tshod, a unit based on traditional Indian time measurement and
used in the Abhidharma. It is equivalent to one out of 60 parts of a day
i.e., 24 minutes.
[11] Tib. thun phyed, literally “half a night watch.”
[12] Tib. thun gcig, literally “one night watch”—common measure for a full
meditation session.
[13] Ibid., 54-55.
[14] Ibid., 55.
[15] Ibid.
[16] Ibid.
[17] Ibid., 55.
[18]9:=HM_itvwx‡œãÊ®?ãrÊãÊãÊW;7h+A­hÏuá6?CJOJPJQJ_HQaJmH HnHsH
HtH4h+A­hÏuáCJOJPJQJ_HQaJmH  HnHsH      HtH:h°y¾hÏuá5?6?CJOJPJQJ_HQaJmH
HnHsH HtH:h/f§hÏuá5?6?CJOJPJQJ_HQaJmH   HnHsH
HtH7h°y¾hÏuá5?CJOJPJQJ_HQaJmH     HnHsH HtH1hÏuá5?CJOJPJQJ_HQaJmH   HnHsH
HtH7 Tib. dgongs pa, usually translated here as “thought” or “intention.”
[19] Ibid.

