Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/SixPerfections/BP2 M4 L21 (final).doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:53:57.326798
================================================================================


Transcript of teachings by Khen Rinpoche Geshe Chonyi  on  the  Heart  Sutra
and Stages of the Path (the Six Perfections)

The root text, Middle Length Lam-Rim,  by  Lama  Tsongkhapa,  translated  by
Philip Quarcoo, © FPMT, Inc., May 2012, is  indented.  All  page  references
refer to the root text, unless otherwise stated.

Where applicable, page numbers of corresponding  sections  in  the  Lam  Rim
Chen Mo (LRCM) are indicated in footnotes; they refer to The Great  Treatise
on the Stages of the Path to  Enlightenment,  Volume  32,  by  Tsong-kha-pa,
translated  by  The  Lamrim  Chenmo   Translation   Committee,   Snow   Lion
Publications, 2004.

Lesson   21                                                               10
September 2013


How the order of calm abiding and special insight is definite. How to  train
in calm abiding. How  to  generate  flawless  meditative  stabilisation  (or
concentration).(From the root text, pages 202-207).

____________________________________________________________________________
______________________

HOW THE ORDER OF CALM ABIDING AND SPECIAL INSIGHT IS DEFINITE

This talks about there being a certainty in Tthe order  of  developing  calm
abiding  and  special  insight  is  definite.  There  is  indeed  an  order:
Firstfirst, calm-  abiding  is  developed  and  then  followsed  by  special
insight.
So, Tthe development of special insight comesfollows  after the  development
of calm- abiding.

      In Engaging in the Bodhisattva Conduct it says:

          Having understood that special insight
          Conjoined with calm abiding destroys the afflictions,
          First seek calm abiding …

      Thus you first accomplish calm  abiding  and  then  cultivate  special
      insight based on it. (Page 202)[1]

Qualm 1
According to Santideva's Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds says:
Insight possessed of serenity
Destroys the afflictions.
Knowing this,
Seek serenity at the outset.
According to this statement, you first achieve meditative serenity and  then
cultivate insight on that basis.
The text then presents an argument from an opponent who  states  that  there
is no definite order. and that
This  opponent  argues  that  calm-  abiding  and  special  insight  can  be
developed simultaneously.



      2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-5B1      Setting out an objection: If you meditate
          observing emptiness from the beginning, since you have reality as
          the observed object of calm abiding, calm abiding and special
          insight will arise simultaneously so that the two do not need to
          be sequential
      With regard to that you may wonder: In Stages of  Meditation  I,  “Its
      object of observation is  indefinite”  the  observed  object  of  calm
      abiding is said to be indefinite, and as  explained  previously,  both
      phenomena and reality are among the objects of calm abiding. Therefore
      it  should  actually  be  all  right  to  understand  the  meaning  of
      selflessness and then simultaneously generate  both  calm  abiding,  a
      meditation observing that understanding due to which the mind does not
      get distracted, and special insight  observing  emptiness.  Why  first
      seek calm abiding and then cultivate special insight? (Page 202)[2]

[LRCM Vol3 page 23] Qualm: Kamalasila's first  Stages  of  Meditation  says,
"Its object of meditation is indeterminate,"  meaning  that  the  object  of
meditation of meditative serenity is indeterminate. As explained above,  the
object of  meditation  of  serenity  may  be  either  reality  itself  or  a
conventional phenomenon possessed of reality. If you  first  understand  the
meaning of selflessness, and  then  meditate  while  focusing  on  this,  it
should  be  enough  to  simultaneously  produce  both  the  serenity  of  an
undistracted mind and insight focused on emptiness. Why, then,  is  it  said
that you first seek serenity and then cultivate insight?
The position of the opponent is this:  “T“The object of  calm-  abiding  can
be emptiness. As such, first one gains an understanding  of  emptiness,  and
based on that  with  whatever  understanding,  one  has  on  emptiness,  one
focuses on theat object,  emptiness,  in order  to  develop  calm-  abiding.
Calm- abiding will eventually be eventually attained. At theat time when  of
attaining  calm-  abiding  observing  emptiness  is  attained,  ,   sspecial
insight will also be attained”.”

The reply
This is what the opponent is saying.
Lama Tsong Khapa replies:

           A     For an understanding of emptiness and a mere experience of
             mental transformation to arise, prior calm abiding is not
             necessary
       Now, this is the  manner  in  which  calm  abiding  precedes  special
       insight: For an understanding of the view realizing  selflessness  to
       arise, prior calm abiding is not necessary because the view  is  also
       seen to arise in the absence of calm abiding. For  an  experience  of
       mental transformation concerning  that  view  to  arise,  prior  calm
       abiding is not necessary either because  even  without  calm  abiding
       there  is  nothing  contradictory  in  an    experience   of   mental
       transformation arising through familiarization with repeated analysis
       by means of individual investigation. [245] If it were contradictory,
       it would absurdly follow from the same reason that the experience  of
       mental transformation  arising  with  respect  to  impermanence,  the
       faults  of  cyclic  existence,  or  the  training  in  the  mind   of
       enlightenment[3] also depends on calm abiding. (Page 202)[4]

[LRCM Vol3 page 24] Reply: The way in which serenity precedes insight is  as
follows. You do not need to have serenity already in  order  to  develop  an
understanding of the view that knows that there is no self, for we see  that
even those who lack serenity develop this view. Nor  do  you  need  to  have
serenity already in order to experience mental transformation in  regard  to
the view, for nothing precludes mental transformation being  brought  on  by
the practice of repeated  analysis  with  discerning  wisdom,  even  in  the
absence of serenity. If you claim that the  absence  of  serenity  precludes
mental transformation in regard to the view, then the  very  same  reasoning
forces you to the extremely absurd  conclusion  that  serenity  is  required
even to experience mental transformation when  meditating  on  impermanence,
the faults of cyclic existence, or the spirit of enlightenment*.
* Spirit of enlightenment is also translated as bodhicitta
Khen Rinpoche (English): What is Lama  Tsongkhapa  answering?  How  does  he
answer the question?
One of the things that Lama Tsongkhapa has just said was that is;  “yYou  do
not need a  prior  realiszation  of  calm  -abiding  in  order  to  gain  an
understanding of selflessness or a  mental  transformation  concerning  that
view”. These
The above paragraph that was just read out is stating that you do  not  need
a  prior  realization  of  calm-abiding  in  order   to   gain   either   an
understanding of selflessness or a mental transformation with regard to  the
view of selflessness. Basically, mental transformation with  regard  to  the
view or an understanding of selflessness  can  be  attained  gained  without
having achieved calm- abiding.

Lama Tsongkhapa said that  prior to developing calm -abiding,  one can  gain
an  understanding  of  selflessness  through  the  wisdom  of   discernment.
Therefore you do not n’t need  the   prior  realiszation  of  calm-  abiding
before gaining  an  understanding  of  the  view  of  selflessness.  If  you
disagree, then this at would lead to the extremely  aabsurd  consequence  of
the assertion that  having  to  also  assert  that  prior  to  gaining  calm
-abiding, you cannot realisze impermanence  or  ,  you  cannot  realize  the
faults of samsara and or you cannot meditate on bodhicitta.

So prior to developing calm- abiding, you can develop  an  understanding  of
the view  and  you  can  realise  emptiness  with  thewith  the   wisdom  of
discernment.
You  do  realize  emptiness  with  the  wisdom  of  discernment.  BBut  that
realiszation is not special insight. For that reason, when  you  do  develop
calm- abiding with emptiness as your object of  observation,  and  at  theat
time of achieving  calm-  abiding,   you  cannot  say  that  you  have  then
achieved special insight. This is what Lama  Tsongkhapa’s  answer  to   says
which act as an answer to tthe qualmargument.


The manner in which calm abiding needs to precede special insight
       The manner in which calm abiding needs to  precede  special  insight:
       What, then, is the manner in  which  calm  abiding  precedes  special
       insight? Here the context for the generation of  special  insight  is
       that of ordinary beings without a previous  realization  arisen  from
       meditation who newly generate it. In this regard, there is  a  method
       of meditation on  selflessness  with  a  special  consciousness  that
       realizes emptiness. Its peculiarities will be explained below.  Apart
       from that, in the context of the Pāramitāyāna  and  the  three  lower
       classes of tantra, analytical meditation is necessary because special
       insight, which is a realization born from meditation, does not  arise
       unless you have examined the meaning  of  selflessness  by  means  of
       individual investigation and then engaged  in  analytical  meditation
       sustaining it. If you  seek  an  understanding  of  selflessness  and
       repeatedly analyze its meaning before accomplishing calm abiding,  it
       will be impossible to accomplish calm abiding in dependence  on  that
       because calm abiding has not been accomplished. If you  perform  non-
       analytical stabilizing meditation, even though  you  accomplish  calm
       abiding in  dependence  on  it,  this  will  only  be  a  method  for
       sustaining  calm  abiding,  and  you  will  not  have  a  method  for
       sustaining special insight apart from that. Therefore you  must  seek
       special insight afterwards. That is why you do not deviate  from  the
       order of seeking calm abiding  first  and  then  cultivating  special
       insight in dependence on it. So if this system did not understand the
       method for generating special insight to be the generation of pliancy
       by means of the analytical meditation  of  individual  investigation,
       there would be no good reason to seek calm  abiding  first  and  then
       meditate on special insight in dependence on it[5]. (Pages 202-203)
Next section is not in the LRCM but is in the MLLR
[MLLR page 202) B The manner in which calm abiding needs to precede  special
insight
What, then, is the manner in which calm abiding  precedes  special  insight?
Here the context for the generation of special insight is that  of  ordinary
beings without a previous  realization  arisen  from  meditation  who  newly
generate  it.  In  this  regard,  there  is  a  method  of   meditation   on
selflessness with a  special  consciousness  that  realizes  emptiness.  Its
peculiarities will be explained below. Apart from that, in  the  context  of
the  Pāramitāyāna  and  the  three  lower  classes  of  tantra,   analytical
meditation is necessary because special  insight,  which  is  a  realization
born from meditation, does not arise unless you have  examined  the  meaning
of selflessness by means of individual investigation  and  then  engaged  in
analytical meditation  sustaining  it.  If  you  seek  an  understanding  of
selflessness and repeatedly analyze its meaning  before  accomplishing  calm
abiding, it will be impossible to accomplish calm abiding in  dependence  on
that because calm abiding has not been accomplished.  If  you  perform  non-
analytical stabilizing meditation, even though you accomplish  calm  abiding
in dependence on it,  this  will  only  be  a  method  for  sustaining  calm
abiding, and you will not have  a  method  for  sustaining  special  insight
apart from that. Therefore you must seek special  insight  afterwards.  That
is why you do not deviate from the order of seeking calm abiding  first  and
then cultivating special insight in dependence on it. So if this system  did
not  understand  the  method  for  generating  special  insight  to  be  the
generation of pliancy by means of the analytical  meditation  of  individual
investigation, there would be no good reason to seek calm abiding first  and
then meditate on special insight in dependence on it.
(Ven Gyurme’s translation) Well then, what is the way in which  calm-abiding
precedes  special  insight?  Here  developing  special  insight   is   newly
developing a previously undeveloped realization arisen  from  meditation  in
the context of ordinary being. As for special insight, there  is  a  way  of
meditating on selflessness with a special consciousness realizing  emptiness
which will be explained below. Apart from this exception, in the  perfection
vehicle and the three lower classes of tantra, special insight  which  is  a
realization  arisen  from  meditation,  will  not   be   developed   without
analytical meditation that is  sustained  by  analysis  on  the  meaning  of
selflessness  with  the  wisdom   of   discernment.   Therefore   analytical
meditation is needed.
If you thus first seek  an  understanding  of  selflessness,  analyzing  its
meaning again and again, it will be impossible to  achieve  calm-abiding  on
the basis of this analysis since  you  have  not  previously  achieve  calm-
abiding. If  you  do  stabilizing  meditation  without  analysis,  you  will
achieve calm-abiding on that basis. However as there is no  way  to  sustain
special insight except by sustaining calm-abiding, you have to seek  special
insight later. Hence this does not fall outside the pattern in which  having
previously sought calm-abiding, you cultivate special insight based on it.
Accordingly  the  way  special  insight  develops  is  that  the  discerning
analytical meditation generates pliancy. If this were not  so,  there  would
not be the slightest  good  reason  to  seek  calm-abiding  first  and  then
cultivate a special insight based on it.”

This is What was just read out is a difficult point and .  This  needs  time
to sort out. , and Yyou have to read the text and think about it. In  short,
what it is saying is this: in general, special insight must be  preceded  by
calm-abiding.

Generally speaking, in the context  of  the  Pperfection  Vvehicle  and  the
three lower classes of tantra, special insight must  be  preceded  by  calm-
abiding. In the Perfection Vehicle and the three lower  classes  of  tantra,
it is not possible to actualise  special  insight  wWithout  calm  -abiding,
there is no way to actualize  special  insight  in  the  perfection  vehicle
(Pāramitāyāna) and the three lower classes of tantra.
.

Why it is that must calm- abiding must precedes special insight?
In order for it to be special insight, there must be the  bliss  of  pliancy
induced by the force of the analysis  done  by  theindividual  investigation
(also translated as wisdom of discernment).
So Iin order for thate bliss of pliancy to arise, first there must  be  calm
-abiding. Without calm- abiding, you cannot have  special  insight,  because
special insight is a wisdom that is conjoined  with  the  bliss  of  pliancy
that is induced through the force of analysis by  individual  investigation.
the wisdom of discernment.

As it says says in the text, ; “So if this system  did  not  understand  the
method for generating special insight to be the  generation  of  pliancy  by
means of the analytical meditation of individual investigation, there  would
be no good reason to seek calm abiding first and then  meditate  on  special
insight in dependence on  it.”  Accordingly  the  way  the  special  insight
develops is that the discerning analytical meditation generates pliancy.  If
this were not so, there would be not the slightest good reason to seek calm-
abiding first and then cultivate special insight based on it”.
[LRCM Vol3 page 24] So, why is serenity required for insight?  According  to
the Sutra Unravelling the Intended Meaning,  as  long  as  the  practice  of
discrimination and special  discrimination  with  discerning  wisdom  cannot
generate physical and mental pliancy, it constitutes  a  type  of  attention
which approximates insight; when it generates pliancy, then it  is  insight.
Thus, if you have not attained serenity, then no matter how much  analytical
meditation you do with discerning wisdom, in the end you will  not  be  able
generate the delight and bliss of physical  and  mental  pliancy.  Once  you
have attained meditative serenity, then even the  analytical  meditation  of
discerning  wisdom  will  culminate  in  pliancy.  Hence,  insight  requires
meditative serenity as a cause. This will be explained below.
Discerning wisdom  becomes  insight  when,  without  focusing  on  a  single
object,  it  can  generate  pliancy  through  the  power  of  analysis.   So
generating  pliancy  by  setting  your  attention  on  a  single  object  of
meditation—even if the object is emptiness—is nothing more  than  a  way  to
achieve serenity; that alone does not count as attaining  insight.  Why?  If
you thus first seek an understanding of selflessness, analyzing its  meaning
again and again, it will be impossible to achieve serenity on the  basis  of
this analysis since you have not previously achieved  serenity.  If  you  do
stabilizing meditation without analysis, you will achieve serenity  on  that
basis. However, as there is no way to sustain insight except  by  sustaining
serenity, you have to seek insight later. Hence, this does not fall  outside
the pattern in which,  having  previously  sought  serenity,  you  cultivate
insight based on it.
Accordingly,  the  way  insight  develops  is  that  discerning   analytical
meditation generates pliancy. If this were not so, there would  not  be  the
slightest good reason to seek serenity  first  and  then  cultivate  insight
based on it.

Question: When Student: If I use a  mental  image  of  selflessness  as  the
object of meditation to achieve calm- abiding, the object of  meditation  is
a mental image of selflessness. Based on that, I develop calm-  abiding.  So
that So this state of mind is still calm- abiding, not special insight?

Khen Rinpoche (English): Correct.

You have to read this section a few times in order to get a clearer idea.  I
also have to think about  it  in  more  detail  so  as  of  how  to  to  put
everything together in a coherent package.

The point being made here  is  that  calm  -abiding  must  precedes  special
insight. The development  of  special  insight  must  be  preceded  by  calm
-abiding. Any assertions contrary to this  are  assertions  that  contradict
flies in the face of wwhat the trailblazers hadve presented.

           C     How it contradicts the texts of the great trailblazers to
             assert an order other than this
       It is completely inadmissible not to meditate in accordance with that
       order. As mentioned earlier it  says  in  the  Sūtra  Unraveling  the
       Intended Meaning that you cultivate special insight in dependence  on
       the attainment of calm abiding. [246] This is because  the  order  of
       the concentration and wisdom forming part of the six  perfections—“In
       dependence on the former the latter  arises”—and  the  order  of  the
       higher training in meditative stabilization in  dependence  on  which
       the higher training in wisdom arises is an order in which  you  first
       cultivate calm abiding  before  special  insight  is  cultivated.  In
       Bodhisattva Levels and Śrāvaka Levels  (Śravakabhūmi)  it  also  says
       that special insight is cultivated in  dependence  on  calm  abiding.
       Essence of the Middle Way, Engaging in the Bodhisattva  Conduct,  and
       the three volume Stages of Meditation,  as  well  as  Jñānakīrti  and
       Śāntipa, set forth that you seek  calm  abiding  and  then  cultivate
       special insight. (Page 203)[6]

[LRCM Vol3 page 25] Failing to do these meditations in this order  is  quite
inappropriate because the Sutra Unravelling the Intended Meaning  states  in
a passage cited above that you cultivate insight  on  the  basis  of  having
attained serenity. Also, the order of meditative  stabilization  and  wisdom
among the six perfections— of which it is  said  that  "the  latter  develop
based on the former"— as well as the sequence in which  training  in  higher
wisdom is based on training in higher concentration are  in  agreement  with
the sequence in which, having  previously  cultivated  serenity,  you  later
cultivate insight. Asanga's  Bodhisattva  Levels  (cited  earlier)  and  his
Sravaka Levels   indicate  that  insight  is  cultivated  on  the  basis  of
meditative  serenity.   Also,  Bhavaviveka's  Heart  of  the   Middle   Way,
Santideva's Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds, Kamalasila's three Stages  of
Meditation, Jnanakirti, and Ratnakarasanti  all  state  that  you  cultivate
insight after previously seeking serenity.
The fact that special insight is cultivated after calm  -abiding  is  stated
clearly by the Buddha in the Sutra Unravelling the Intended Meaning and  the
subsequent Indian masters who subsequently  commented  on  his  thought  his
thought aare all in agreement as well.


      Therefore the assertions of some Indian masters that  without  seeking
      calm  abiding  separately,  you  generate  special  insight  from  the
      beginning  out  of  an  analysis  with  the   wisdom   of   individual
      investigation,  are  in  contradiction  to  the  texts  of  the  great
      trailblazers. Therefore it is inappropriate  for  the  intelligent  to
      rely on them.


      The order of calm abiding and special insight is like  that  when  you
      newly generate them. Later on  the  order  is  undefined,  for  having
      cultivated special insight, you still cultivate  calm  abiding.  (Page
      203)[7]
[LRCM Vol3  page  25]  Some  Indian  masters  claim  that,  without  seeking
serenity separately, you generate insight from the outset  through  analysis
by discerning wisdom. Since this view contradicts the  texts  of  the  great
trailblazers, the wise deem it to be untrustworthy.
This is the sequence in which you newly develop  serenity  and  insight  for
the first time; later the sequence  is  indefinite,  as  you  may  cultivate
serenity after previously cultivating insight.

Qualm 2
Next is the a qualm which stating that ays  that  the  position  that  which
claims that calm -abiding  must  be  cultivated  prior  to  special  insight
contradicts certain texts.

           1     The objection that there is a contradiction to scripture
             in this
       But then, how is it that the Compendium of Knowledge says:

           Some have attained special insight but have  not  attained  calm
           abiding. They strive for calm abiding in dependence  on  special
           insight. (Page 203)[8]

The reply
           2     The response that abandons the fault pointing out the need
             to distinguish between the actual level and the calm abiding
             included in the preparatory stage
       This does not refer to those who  have  failed  to  attain  the  calm
       abiding included in the preparatory stage of the first  concentration
       but to those who have failed to attain the calm abiding of the actual
       level of the first concentration and above. Upon  direct  realization
       of the four truths, calm abiding of the first concentration and above
       are in fact attained in dependence on that because  in  Actuality  of
       the Stages it says:

           Furthermore, someone who has fully understood suffering  and  so
           on up to the path as they really are and who  has  not  attained
           the first concentration and so forth [247] places the  mind  and
           does not perform any thorough  differentiation  as  soon  as  he
           attains it. In  dependence  on  just  that  superior  wisdom  he
           applies himself to a superior state of mind.

       In general, to put it simply, nine minds may be called  calm  abiding
       and four investigations,[9] thorough investigation and so forth,  may
       be called special insight. However, actual calm abiding  and  special
       insight, as explained here, must be posited after pliancy has arisen.
       (Pages 203-204)[10]
[LRCM Vol3 page 25]  Qualm: Asanga's Compendium of Knowledge  states,  "Some
attain insight, but do not attain serenity; they strive for serenity on  the
basis of insight." How do you account for this?
Reply: This means that they have not attained the  serenity  of  the  actual
first meditative stabilization,  or  beyond;  it  does  not  preclude  their
having attained the serenity which is included in the access  to  the  first
meditative stabilization. Also, once you have perceptual  knowledge  of  the
four truths, you can establish on that basis  the  serenity  of  the  actual
first meditative stabilization and  the  higher  meditative  stabilizations.
For Asanga's Levels of Yogic Deeds says: Moreover, you can  accurately  know
the reality of the truths from suffering to path,  without  having  attained
the first meditative stabilization, etc. As soon as this  knowledge  of  the
truths occurs, you stabilize your mind and do not analyze  phenomena.  Based
on this  higher  wisdom,  you  pursue  the  practice  of  higher  states  of
consciousness.
In general, for the sake  of  comprehensive  terminology,  the  nine  mental
states are called meditative serenity and the fourfold  analysis  is  called
insight. However, you must apply the terms  "actual  serenity"  and  "actual
insight"—as will be explained—after the generation of pliancy.
We talked about the mind or consciousness of the higher realms in  terms  of
the preparatory stage (also translated as “a”access”)  and in terms  of  the
“actual level”. While the preparatory stage and access and the actual  level
actual are is not the uUninterrupted pPath and  the  pPath  of  rRelease  as
presented it is known in the context of studying the  pPaths  and  gGrounds,
we can relate to the way of relatinthe preparatory stage and g  or  the  way
of thinking about access and the actual level of  concentration   meditative
stabilization can be thought of in athe similar way.

These two—the  preparatory  stage  of  concentration   -  access  meditative
stabilization and the actual  level  of  concentration—refer  to  meditative
stabilization - are talking about  the  minds  of  the  higher  realms,  for
example, the form realms. There is a certainty in their  order.   –  Ffirst,
the preparatory stage an access must be attained before one you  can  attain
the actual level of concentration. meditative stabilization.

With regards to the access to the meditative stabilization,  there  are  two
kinds of access:
1. there are access which is calm-abiding and
2. there is an access which is special insight
With regard to Tthe mind of the higher realms such as  ,  for  example,  the
form realm, there are different these  different  concentrations  and  there
are:
 /meditative stabilization:-
• the preparatory stage of a concentration there is an access to  meditative
  stabilization and
• the actual level of a concentration
• there is an actual meditative stabilization

There are two kinds of preparatory stage of a concentration:
1. There is the preparatory stage that is calm abiding.
2. There is the preparatory stage that is special insight.

For the access itself:
    • there are access that is calm-abiding and
    • there is an access that is special insight
You must understand this first. Then hHow do you explain this qualm?

Here it stated  that  Tthe  opponent  here  quoted  Asanga's  Compendium  of
Knowledge that which states, : "Some have attained special  attain  insight,
but have not attained do not attain calm abiding. serenity”.

What this quotation means is that t: The actual level  of  concentration  is
meditative stabilization is  attained  in  dependence  on  actualiszing  the
preparatory stage access which that is a special insight.
So Bby depending on the preparatory stage that an access  which  is  special
insight, one attains a calm -abiding that which is included  in  the  actual
level of a concentration. actual meditative stabilization.
This is the meaning of the quotation. Therefore this The quotation does  not
mean that special insight can  be  achieved  without  having  achieved  calm
-abiding first.

Khen Rinpoche (English): All  right.  Okay,  This  is  just  to  leave  some
imprints there.

As I have mentioned before, in one way the  material  in  the  lamrim  genre
Stages of the Path to Enlightenment literature is not easy material  because
it condenses the subject matter of the five ggreat treatises.   -  the  five
big areas of study. In  Rregarding  s  to  this  particular  topic,  without
having learnt or understood anding or  without  learning  the  Ornaments  of
Clear Realiszations—eight , of which there are eight categories are  covered
there , and,   in the first category,  there is the a discussion  about  the
minds of the higher realms (, tthe form  and  formless  realms  and  the  ),
different levels of concentrations,  - what  they  are,   and  the  ways  to
achieve them and so forth—. So without understanding that, it  is  going  to
be difficult to understand this such a  discussion  here.  This  is  because
many great meanings from many topics are  condensed  packed  into  just  one
short paragraph.

HOW TO TRAIN IN CALM ABIDING Preparing For Meditative Serenity



      1        Attending to the prerequisites of calm abiding
      2        How to cultivate calm abiding in dependence on the
        prerequisites
      3        The measure for the accomplishment of calm abiding through
        meditation (Page 204)[11]

Attending to the prerequisites of calm abiding
You must be in a good place for cultivating calm abiding. How  to  train  in
meditative serenity
1. Relying on the preconditions for calm abiding*
2. How to cultivate serenity on that basis
3. The measure of successful cultivation of calm abiding
*Calm abiding is also translated as meditative serenity
1. Relying on the preconditions for calm abiding
[LRCM Vol3 page 28]  (1') Dwelling in an appropriate area
The area should have five attributes: (a) easy access, so  that  necessities
such as food and clothing may be readily obtained; (b) being  a  good  place
to live, where there are no wild  beasts  such  as  predators,  no  enemies,
etc.; (c) being on a good piece  of  ground,  in  that  it  does  not  breed
sickness; (d) offering good companionship insofar  as  your  companions  are
ethically disciplined and like-minded; and (e) being well-situated  inasmuch
as there are not many people about in the day and little noise at night.
1. Dwelling in an appropriate area

Basically the place where you are cultivating calm-abiding must  be  a  good
one.


      In Ornament for the Mahāyāna Sūtras it says:
          A place for intelligent people’s attainments
          Has good access, a good location,
          Good ground as well as good companions,
          And conveniences[12] for yoga. (Page 204)[13]

[LRCM Vol3 page 28]  Maitreya's Ornament for the Mahayana Sutras states:
The intelligent practice in a place
Which is accessible, is a good place to live,
Offers good ground and good companions,
And has the requisites for comfortable yogic practice.
This is quite straightforward. If you read the text you should  be  able  to
understand this easily.

One of the biggest hindrances to cultivating calm- abiding is noise.  sound.
So Tthe place where in which you are living or  abiding  to  cultivate  calm
-abiding has to be very quiet.
The six preconditions for cultivating calm-abiding are:
1. to stay in a favourable placeDwelling in an appropriate area
2. to have few desires.You must be someone who has little desire.
3. to have contentmentYou have to be contented.
4. You have to completely abandon many activitiesgive up many activities  or
   a busy life.
5. You to have need pure ethicsal discipline.
6. You have  to  completely  abandon  discursive  thoughts  of  get  rid  of
   thoughts of desire.
So these are the six preconditions for developing calm-abiding.
[LRCM Vol3 page 29]
(2') Having little desire
You do not strongly crave more or better robes, etc.
(3') Being content
You are always content to have even the poorest robes, etc.
(4') Completely giving up many activities
You give up base activities such as buying and  selling;  you  also  abandon
excessive  socializing  with  householders  and  renunciates,  as  well   as
pursuits such as medicine and astrology.
(5') Pure ethical discipline
You do not violate precepts, doing deeds that are wrong by nature  or  wrong
by prohibition, either in the case of vows of individual  liberation  or  in
the case of bodhisattva vows. If you do violate them  through  carelessness,
you restore them promptly with regret in accordance with the teaching.
In order to cultivate calm -abiding, you one must get rid of   the  thoughts
of desire. Without getting rid  of   the  thoughts  of  desire,  it  is  not
possible there is no way tto develop calm -abiding. On  top  of  that,   you
need pure ethicsal di and scipline. You need to guard yourself  against  the
causes of misdeeds of the body and speech.

      To completely abandon discursive thoughts of desire and the like:  you
      should abandon all discursive thoughts  of  desire  by  meditating  on
      their disadvantages for this life, such as being killed  or  arrested,
      and for future lives such as going to the lower realms. Or you  should
      meditate thinking “All the pleasant and unpleasant  things  of  cyclic
      existence are impermanent  and  subject  to  destruction.  If  I  will
      certainly be separated from all of them before  long,  why  do  I  get
      overly attached and so on?” (Page 205)[14]
[LRCM Vol3 page 29] (6') Completely getting rid of thoughts of desire, etc.
 In the case of desires, contemplate their disadvantages in  this  lifetime,
such as  their  leading  to  being  killed  or  imprisoned,  as  well  their
disadvantages for the future, such as their leading to rebirth in  miserable
realms.  Alternatively,  eliminate  all  thoughts  of  desire  and  such  by
meditating with the thought that "Everything in cyclic  existence,  pleasant
or unpleasant, is ephemeral and impermanent. Since  it  is  certain  that  I
will shortly be separated from all of  these  things,  why  should  I  crave
them?"

In short, Tthe meditation on  impermanence  is  crucial;   by  thinking  how
everything in life, whether pleasant or unpleasant, are all  in  the  nature
of disintegrating moment by moment. It is this  meditation  on  impermanence
that is very very helpful in stopping thoughts of desire.

      In Lamp for the Path to Enlightenment it says:

          Even if you exert yourself greatly,
          Even for a thousand years, if
          Calm abiding’s limbs[15] are  impaired,
          Stabilization[16] will not be accomplished.

      For those  with  the  heartfelt  wish  to  accomplish  the  meditative
      stabilization of calm abiding and special  insight,  it  is  therefore
      essential to put effort into the thirteen  prerequisites[17]  and  the
      like set forth in Śrāvaka Levels. (Page 205)[18]
[LRCM Vol3 page 30] Atisha's Lamp for the Path to Enlightenment states:
When you lack the elements of serenity,
Even if you meditate assiduously,
You will not achieve concentration
Even in thousands of years.
Therefore, it is very important for those who sincerely wish to achieve  the
concentrations  of  serenity  and  insight  to  work  on  the  elements   or
preconditions for serenity, such as the thirteen* which  are  set  forth  in
Asanga's Sravaka Levels.

The quotation from the Lamp for of the Path to Enlightenment is saying  that
it is  very  important  to  have  the  preconditions  for  cultivating  calm
-abiding before  you  cultivate  calm-  abiding.  Their  Its  importance  is
emphasiszed, because when if you do not n’t have the preconditions,  nothing
will happen even if you try to  meditate  for  a  long  time.  thousands  of
years.  This  particular  advice  is  directed  particularly  at  those  who
sincerely wish to achieve  the  meditative  stabilisation  concentration  of
calm- abiding and special insight.

As for what are the thirteen preconditions that are stated  in  the  Sravaka
Levels, I didn’t get time to read them but in the  Lamrim  Chenmo  they  are
included in the end notes.
*LRCM Vol3 Note 51: The thirteen are:  (1)  the  chief  prerequisites,  i.e.
familiarity with the teaching and inner discipline; and,  additionally,  (2)
excellence of one’s own aims; (3) excellence of  others’  aims;  (4)  desire
for the teaching; (5) renunciation; (6)  vows  of  ethical  discipline;  (7)
restraint of the senses; (8) moderation  in  eating;  (9)  the  practice  of
wakefulness; (10) dwelling vigilantly;  (11)  solitude;  (12)  cleansing  of
obscurations; and (13) proper basis of concentration.
How to cultivate calm abiding in dependence on the prerequisitesserenity  on
that basis
         A  The preparation
         B  The actual practice


    2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6A2A      The preparation
    You should long  cultivate  the  six  preparatory  practices  explained
    earlier as well as the mind of enlightenment and, as part of that, also
    train in the core meditation topics shared with lesser and intermediate
    beings.


    2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6A2B      The actual practice
    This has two points:

         1  What body posture to meditate in
         2  Explanation of the stages of meditation themselves (Page
           205)[19]

   Preparation
   1) Actual practice.
(1) Preparation
[LRCM Vol3 page 30] Practice the six preparatory teachings  explained  above
and especially cultivate bodhicitta for a long time;  also,  in  support  of
that you should do the meditative practices that are shared with persons  of
small and medium capacities.
(2) Actual practice
(a) Meditative posture
(b) Meditative process itself.
(a) Meditative posture
We will not go through the body posture as this as this  is  quite  straight
forward. If you read the text, it you should be able  to  understandget  it.
Anyway, many of you already know this.
In short, the meditative meditative posture to be adopted  when  cultivating
calm abiding is adopting the seven-fold Vairocana posture. When If  you  add
the aspect of breathing,   then  you  have  the  eight  points  of  physical
conduct. For Tthose  who  are  actual  meditators  should  ,  they  have  to
meditate while adopting this posture.

The main purpose of for teaching the meditativeng  posture  for  cultivating
calm abiding is to be so that you can able to sustain the practice for  over
a long period of time. Calm abiding is cultivated  over  a  long  period  of
time. Therefore As such you need to have a good  posture.  If  you  were  to
adopt a posture that which is incorrect or  unnot  suitable,   –moving  here
and there, fidgeting, cannot sit still – it would be impossible  then  there
is no way to actualisze calm  abiding.  For  that  reason,   the  seven-fold
Vairocana posture is  taught  and  emphasiszed.  Those  who  are  meditators
should would have to train in adopting this seven-fold Vairocana posture.

Explanation of the stages of meditation themselves
      This has two points:

          A    Transition
          B    The actual explanation

      2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6A2B-2A  Transition
      In most expositions of the stages  of  the  path  it  says  that  calm
      abiding is accomplished by way of the eight factors[20] set  forth  in
      Separation of the Middle from  the  Extremes  (Madhyāntavibhāga)  that
      abandon the  five  faults.  The  instructions  from  Geshe  Lagsorwa’s
      lineage explain that  on  top  of  that,  the  six  powers,  the  four
      attentions, and the nine minds explained in Śrāvaka Levels need to  be
      accomplished. In his Ornament for the Mahāyāna Sūtras  and  Separation
      of the Middle from the Extremes the venerable Maitreya also sets forth
      the nine methods  for  mental  abiding   and  the  eight  factors  for
      abandoning  the  faults.  Following  them,  Indian  scholars  such  as
      Haribhadra, Kamalaśīla, and Śāntipa also  set  forth  many  stages  of
      accomplishing meditative stabilization. In  the  Mantrayāna  you  also
      need  to  know  them.  In   particular,   faults[21]   of   meditative
      stabilization such as the five faults[22] and  the  way  to  eliminate
      them are presented extensively in scriptures from  the  collection  of
      sūtras.


      2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6A2B-2B  The actual explanation
      This has two points [250]:

          1    How to generate flawless meditative stabilization
          2    The stages of quiescence that arise in dependence on it


HOW TO GENERATE FLAWLESS MEDITATIVE STABILISATION

      This has three points:
          A    What to do before focusing the mind on the object
          B    What to do while focusing the mind on the object
          C  What to do after focusing the mind on the object (Page
            206)[23]

What to do before focusing the mind on the object
[LRCM Vol3 page 31] (a) Meditative posture
Kamalasila's second and third Stages of Meditation say that you should  take
up an eight-point posture on a very soft and comfortable seat:
(1) Cross your legs in the manner of the venerable Vairocana,  using  either
the full-lotus posture or the half-lotus posture as appropriate.
(2) Your eyes should be neither wide open  nor  too  far  closed,  and  they
should be fixed on the tip of your nose.
(3) Sit with your awareness directed  inward,  keeping  your  body  straight
without leaning too far back or being bent too far forward.
(4) Keep your shoulders straight and even.
(5) Do not raise or lower your head nor turn it to one side; set it so  that
your nose and navel are aligned.
(6) Set your teeth and lips in their usual, natural positions.
(7) Draw your tongue up close to your upper teeth.
(8) Your inhalation and exhalation should not be noisy, forced,  or  uneven;
let it flow effortlessly, ever so gently, without any  sense  that  you  are
moving it here or there.
Asanga's Sravaka Levels  gives  five  reasons  for  sitting  as  the  Buddha
taught, cross-legged on a seat, stool, or grass mat:
(1) This posture in which the body is pulled together well is  conducive  to
the arising of pliancy, so you will develop pliancy very quickly.
(2) Sitting in this way makes it possible to  maintain  the  posture  for  a
long time; the posture does not lead to physical exhaustion.
(3) This posture is not common to non-Buddhists and our opponents.
(4) When others see you sitting in this posture, they are inspired.
(5) The Buddha and his disciples used this posture and bestowed it upon  us.

Asanga's Sravaka Levels says that, in light of  these  reasons,  you  should
sit cross-legged. It also says that you keep  your  body  straight  so  that
lethargy and sleepiness will not occur.
Thus, at the outset  you  have  to  meet  these  eight  points  of  physical
conduct, particularly the calming of breathing  just  as  I  have  described
above.
[LRCM Vol3 page 31] (b) The meditative process
Broadly speaking, the "stages of the  path"  tradition  indicates  that  you
achieve calm abiding by means of the eight  antidotes  which  eliminate  the
five  faults  listed  in  Maitreya's  Separation  of  the  Middle  from  the
Extremes. Personal instructions passed down from  Geshe  Lak-sor-wa  explain
that in addition to that you have to achieve calm abiding  through  the  six
powers, the four types of  attention,  and  the  nine  mental  states  which
Asanga’s Sravaka Levels explains.
[LRCM Vol3 page 32] Also, the venerable Maitreya discusses  the  methods  of
the nine mental states and the eight  antidotes  in  his  Ornament  for  the
Mahayana Sutras and Separation of the Middle from  the  Extremes.  Following
them,  such  learned  Indian  masters   as   Haribhadra,   Kamalasila,   and
Ratnakarasanti wrote much about the process of achieving concentration.
In addition, you also need to know  the  methods  that  are  taught  in  the
Mantrayana.
[LRCM Vol3 page 32] In particular, texts in the  sutra  class  provide  very
extensive   discussions   of   problems—such   as   the   five   faults   of
concentration—and ways of clearing them away.
[LRCM Vol 3 pg 31] Broadly speaking, the  "stages  of  the  path"  tradition
indicates that you achieve calm abiding by  means  of  the  eight  antidotes
which eliminate the five faults  listed  in  Maitreya's  Separation  of  the
Middle from the Extremes. Personal instructions passed down from Geshe  Lak-
sor-wa explain that in addition to that you have  to  achieve  calm  abiding
through the six powers, the four types of attention,  and  the  nine  mental
states which Asanga’s Sravaka Levels explains.
The scholar Yon-den-drak says:
The methods of the nine mental states are included in the  four  attentions,
and the six faults and the eight applications which are their antidotes  are
the method [for achieving] all concentrations. This is agreed  upon  in  all
teachings about the techniques for meditative stabilization—including  those
in most sutras, Maitreya's Ornament for the Mahayana Sutras  and  Separation
of the  Middle  from  the  Extremes,  Asanga's  texts  on  the  levels,  and
Kamalasila's  three  Stages  of  Meditation.  Those  who  first   have   the
preconditions for concentration  will  definitely  attain  concentration  if
they use these methods to work at it.  Nowadays,  supposedly  profound  oral
traditions  on  meditative  stabilization  lack  even  the  names  of  these
techniques. These texts do not indicate that you will achieve  concentration
without the preconditions for concentration and these  techniques,  even  if
you work at it for a long time.
This is stated in his text on the stages of the path; it speaks of  reaching
pure certainty about how the  classic  texts  present  the  way  to  achieve
concentration. In that regard, since the general way of teaching the  stages
of the paths of the three vehicles is demonstrated at length  in  the  noble
Asanga's five texts on the levels, the texts that teach these practices  are
very extensive. Among these five, one text  gives  a  detailed  explanation,
while the others do not. Asanga's Compendium  of  Determinations  says  that
his Sravaka Levels should be used to understand serenity and insight, so  it
is the Sravaka Levels that is most extensive.
Also, the venerable Maitreya  discusses  the  methods  of  the  nine  mental
states and the eight antidotes in his Ornament for the Mahayana  Sutras  and
Separation of the Middle from the Extremes.  Following  them,  such  learned
Indian masters as Haribhadra,  Kamalasila,  and  Ratnakarasanti  wrote  much
about the process of  achieving  concentration.  On  the  general  sense  of
concentration the tantras are  very  consistent  with  the  explanations  in
these classic texts, except that they use different objects  of  meditation,
such as divine bodies, drops, and syllables. In  particular,  texts  in  the
sutra class provide very extensive discussions of problems—such as the  five
faults of concentration—and ways of clearing them away.
(b) Meditative process itself.
A. How to develop flawless concentration
B. The stages in which the mental states are thereby developed
(A) How to develop flawless concentration
1. What to do prior to focusing the attention on an object of meditation
2.  What to do while focusing on an object of meditation
3.  What to do after you focus on an object of meditation
1. What to do prior to focusing the attention on an object of meditation
Laziness  is  said  to  stated  as  one  of  the  obstacles  for  developing
concentration. alm abiding.  If  you  want  to  develop  concentration,  alm
abiding, first you first must eliminate laziness. As  with  many  things  in
life, prior to cultivating concentration,  calm  abiding,  first  you  first
must have a very strong yearning to be able to do so.  for  calm  abidingYou
i.e. you must really want to  achieve  concentrationcalm  abiding  from  the
depths of your heart. Such a yearning must is not not be jujust  a  fleeting
one but . Such a yearning haves to be sustained over a long period of  time.
;  it  is  always  there.  So  bBeefore  you  can  even  start  to   develop
concentrationcalm abiding you have to overcome laziness.

How do   you  generate  have  such  athis   strong  sustained  yearning  for
achieving concentrationalm abiding?
By You first seeing must see for yourself the benefits of  achieving  having
cconcentration alm abiding.
In order to have a very strong and  sustained  yearning  for  concentration,
you must see what the benefits of having calm  abiding  are,  and  what  the
qualities of concentration.  calm  abiding  are.  You  must  see  this  very
strongly. It is Oonly when you  see  the  benefits  and  qualities  and  the
benefits of concentrationconcentration  will  only  then  you  have  a  very
strong and stable faith in it.


In order Tto have this a strong stable  faith  in  concentration,  you  must
sustain in the reflection,  over and over again,   about  the  benefits  and
the qualities of concentrationalm abiding/concentration. You  must  gain  an
understanding of the benefits and the  qualities  of  concentration  through
learning, studying and reflection. Through  this  a  constant  process  like
this, you will develop a stable faith in the benefits and qualities and  the
benefits of concentration. On thate basis,  of this strong and stable  faith
in the qualities and the benefits of concentration, you will  then  be  able
to develop a strong sustained yearning to achieve for concentration.

When you have a the strong sustained yearning to  achievefor  concentration,
then  you  will  be  able  to  apply  joyous  effort.  perseverance.   YYour
application of joyous effort perseverance in  achieving  concentration  will
not be intermittent , but it will be sustainable. ed as well. YYou  will  be
able to continuously e  jexert  joyously  effort  persevere  in  cultivating
concentrationalm abiding until it is achieved.

When you have achieved pliancy, your body and  mind  become  serviceable  so
such  that  you  will  not  experience   any   difficulty   in   cultivating
concentration. When pliancy is achieved,  then laziness is stopped.


           3     The scriptural source for this
       In Separation of the Middle from the Extremes it says:

           The basis and that which is based on it,
           The cause and the effect itself.

       Here the basis is aspiration, the basis of endeavor.  That  which  is
       based on it is endeavor or joyous effort. The cause of aspiration  is
       the faith of conviction with regard to the  positive  qualities.  The
       effect of endeavor is pliancy.


           4     How to reflect on the positive qualities of meditative
             stabilization
       The  positive  qualities  of  the  meditative  stabilization  to   be
       cultivated here are as follows.  Once  meditative  stabilization  has
       been accomplished, mental  happiness  and  physical  comfort  greatly
       increase, so that you  stay  happy  in  this  lifetime.  Due  to  the
       acquisition of physical and mental pliancy, the mind is fit  to  make
       use of any virtuous object at will.  Since  uncontrolled  distraction
       [251] toward mistaken objects has subsided, faulty conduct  does  not
       occur much while whatever  virtue  you  do  has  great  strength.  In
       dependence on calm abiding, positive qualities such  as  clairvoyance
       and miraculous powers can also be achieved, and  in  particular,  the
       realization of special insight  that  realizes  emptiness  arises  in
       dependence on it so that the root of  cyclic  existence  can  be  cut
       quickly. If you consider any of these and other  positive  qualities,
       the  power   of   your   enthusiasm   for    cultivating   meditative
       stabilization will increase. You should get to know them and meditate
       on them. Once this has arisen, it  will  constantly  urge  you,  from
       within, to cultivate meditative stabilization so that you will easily
       attain it,  and,  upon  its  attainment,  since  you  engage  in  the
       meditation again and again, it will  be  very  difficult  for  it  to
       degenerate. (Page 207)[24]

[LRCM Vol 3 pg 33] What to do prior to focusing the attention on  an  object
of meditation
If  you  cannot  stop  the  laziness  of  being  disinclined  to   cultivate
concentration and of enjoying things that are not conducive to it, from  the
outset you will not gain entry into concentration; even if you do attain  it
once, you will be unable to sustain it,  so  it  will  quickly  deteriorate.
Therefore, it is most crucial to stop laziness in the  beginning.  When  you
attain pliancy in which your mind and body are full of  delight  and  bliss,
you will stop laziness inasmuch as you will be able to cultivate virtue  all
day and night without weariness. To develop this pliancy, you must  be  able
to have continuous enthusiasm for the concentration that causes pliancy.  To
develop this enthusiasm, you need a continuous,  intense  yearning  that  is
intent on concentration. As a cause for this  yearning  you  need  steadfast
confidence in and fascination with the good qualities of  concentration.  So
to start with, cultivate again and again a confidence that is aware  of  the
good qualities of concentration. When you see this process in practice,  you
will understand this most vital point with the clearest sense of certainty.
[LRCM Vol 3 pg 34] Maitreya's Separation of the  Middle  from  the  Extremes
states:
The basis and what is based upon it
Are the cause and its result.
Here, the "basis" is yearning, which is the  basis  of  endeavor;  "what  is
based upon it" is the endeavor or  enthusiasm.  The  cause  of  yearning  is
confident faith in the  good  qualities  of  concentration.  The  result  of
endeavor is pliancy.
In this context, the good qualities of concentration are  as  follows:  When
you reach serenity, your mind is filled with delight and  your  body  filled
with bliss, so you  are  happy  in  this  lifetime.  Also,  since  you  have
attained physical and mental pliancy, you can turn  your  attention  to  any
virtuous  object  of  meditation  you  choose.  Since   you   have   quelled
uncontrolled distraction toward the wrong  sort  of  objects,  you  are  not
constantly involved in wrongdoing and any virtue you do  is  very  powerful.
Based  on  serenity,  you  can  achieve   good   qualities   such   as   the
superknowledges and supernormal powers. In particular, it is  on  the  basis
of serenity that you develop the knowledge of insight that  knows  the  real
nature, whereby you can quickly cut the root of  cyclic  existence.  If  you
reflect on any of these good  qualities,  you  will  become  aware  of,  and
meditate  upon,  things  that  strengthen  your  inclination  to   cultivate
concentration.  When  this  inclination  arises,  you  will  be  continually
prompted from within to cultivate concentration,  so  it  will  be  easy  to
attain concentration. Also, since you  will  cultivate  it  repeatedly  even
after attaining it, you will be unlikely to lose it.
Because we don’t have single-pointedness of  mind,  therefore  the  mind  is
always running here and there. As such it is always  accumulating  karma.  A
lot of time is accumulating non-virtuous karma. Once we move, the mind  just
goes to all kinds of different objects. Without having the ability to  place
our mind single-pointedly on a the chosen object, the mind  moves  here  and
there powerlessly. This at is what karma is— - the  mind  moving  about  and
always  engaging  in  something.  ,  thereby  Wwe  are  calways   constantly
accumulating karma. Of course that is non-virtue. When you Tthink about  how
much non-virtue is accumulated all the time. And , and if  you  think  about
their  ripening effects as mentioned in  the  earlier  discussion  on  about
karma; , not just karma in general but each specific  particular  karma  has
four results. So we accumulate There is nunummberless karma  all  the  time,
and all of them haveing their own respective  results.  When  If  you  think
about this, it it, it is quite unbearable. difficult  to  put  up  with  it.
Until we have single-pointedness of mind, there is really no  way  for  non-
virtue and the accumulation of karma to just stop on their own accord.

Without single-pointedness of mind, all of us  are  powerlessly  drawn  into
accumulating all kinds  of  karma,  in  particular  non-virtuous  karma.  In
addition, we have seen over  time  how  the  root  of  cyclic  existence  is
ignorance. In order to destroy ignorance, we must develop  special  insight.
Without special insight, there is no way  to  overcome  we  can  even  touch
ignorance. Knowing that Now you know that,  so  in  order  to  have  special
insight, first you first must have  calm  abiding.  This  is  how  important
achieving concentration and having calm abiding /concentration is.

YYou have to think about the benefits of concentration over and  over  again
to develop this interest and yearning. You We hhave to think over  and  over
again about the purpose and benefits of concentration.

When  If  your  mind  is  captivated  by  this  such  kind   of   faith   in
concentration, , and when you see from your heart that  there  is  no  other
choice, you feel that there is really no way out, “I really have to  develop
concentration.  I will do it no matter how long it takes,” i.e.,   when  you
have this kind of captivating faith and intention from the heart, only  then
does it makes sense and it will be alright to go into  isolation.  When  you
go into isolation, you lead a simple life where . It is a simple  life  when
you  cultivate  all  those  pre-conditions  for  generating   calm   abiding
mentioned above. When all these factors  come  together,  maybe  then  there
may be is a chance of for you to actualising ze calm abiding.

Khen Rinpoche (in English): At that time, you pPack your luggage and ,  then
go. Otherwise, it is not possible.

You can see how Lama Tsongkhapa explains how important this isit is. In  the
root text, MLLR, he says in order to cultivate calm abiding:
• Yyou need to have very strong faith.
• Yyou need to have very strong sustained yearning.
• Oon that basis, you generate  comes strong joyous effort. perseverance.

When you cultivate calm abiding with have these  three  factors   from  your
own side, you have your very strong determination , and you want  to  do  it
because of these different mindsets. cCombined with the coming  together  of
the external conditions such as being able to find a suitable place  and  so
forth, and if you do cultivate calm abiding, as said in  the  teaching,  you
will attain calm abiding calm abiding will be attained  without  taking  too
long a time.

This is This is difficult for us, is it not, isn’t it? We do study,  and  we
do talk about these things. I mean tThis ese areis  all good  advices.   and
Wwe are said to be practiscing the Ddharma. But it  is  extremely  difficult
to produce this heartfelt faith and yearning. In the teachings,  it is  said
that faith is the root of and precedes all qualities. When you  have  faith,
everything comes. All good qualities are preceded by faith.  So  whether  it
is developing concentration or some other quality, thing  else,  fafaith  is
said to be the root.

      2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6A2B-2B1B     What to do while focusing the mind
          on the object
      This has two points:

          1    Identifying the basis which the mind is placed on, the
            object
          2    How to direct the mind toward it


      2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6A2B-2B1B-1   Identifying the basis which the mind
          is placed on, the object
      This has two points:

          A    General presentation of objects
          B   Identification of objects for given situations


      2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6A2B-2B1B-1A  General presentation of objects
      This has two points:

          1      Indication of the actual objects
          2      Indication of what person should make what his object
            (Page 207)[25]

What to do while focusing on an object of meditation
1. Identifying the object of meditation upon which your attention is set
2. How to focus your mind on the object of meditation
1. Identifying the object of meditation upon which your attention is set
a. A general presentation of objects of meditation
b. Identifying objects of meditation for this context
a. A general presentation of objects of meditation
i. The objects of meditation themselves
ii. Who should meditate on which objects
We will look at this in the next lesson.

In general there are four objects of meditation.
It is stated in the sutra that there are:
• universal objects of meditation,
• objects of meditation for purifying one’s your behaviour,
• objects of meditation for the skilful expertise, and
• objects of meditation for purifying mental afflictions.
As much as possible, please try your best  to  read  the  root  text  before
coming to class.

                                ~~~~~~~~~~~~

Question: It was mentioned that the preparatory stage and the  actual  level
of  the  first  concentration  apply  Student:  In  the   first   meditative
stabilization, about the access and the actual, it  was  mentioned  that  it
applied tto the higher realms. Does that mean they do it doesn’not t  hoccur
appen in the human realm?

Answer: There are three realms: the  – desire realm,  the  form  realm  aand
the formless realms.

When we talked about the  mind, there y are
the mind of the desire realm and
the mind of the higher realms.
For the mind of the higher realms, there are it is basically:
tthe mind of the form realm and
the mind of  the formless realm.

With regard to concentration, We talked about meditative stabilization.  the
preparatory    stage    of    Access     to     concentration     meditative
stabilization/concentration is necessarily a mind of the higher realms,  not
a mind of the desire realm.


In achieving calm abiding,  there are nine mental  states  that  are  .  The
nine states are called the single-pointed minds of the desire  realm.  These
nine mental states areis not the actual calm abiding.  Actual  calm  abiding
comes after the nine states. When one achieves calm abiding,  that  mind  no
longer does not belongs to the desire realm.

QuestionWhen   we   talked   about   access   to    concentration/meditative
stabilization, it is necessarily the mind of the higher  realm;  it  is  not
the mind of the desire realm.  After  the  nine  states,  one  achieves  the
actual calm abiding. The actual calm abiding is not a  mind  of  the  desire
realm.
: Student: If it is not athe mind of the desire realm and human  beings  are
is part of the desire realm, does that mean it seems  to  say  that  it  can
only has to be achieved by one being reborn in the higher realms??

Answer: What is the mind of the desire realm? Is the mind  of  a  person  in
the desire realm necessarily a mind of  the  desire  realm?  The  answer  is
n“No”. The mind of a person in the desire realm is not  necessarily  a  mind
of the desire realm.

We have a human body. , and That is the basis is human body.  We  are  still
in the desire realm, but the mind of calm abiding is not  the  mind  of  the
desire realm. As a human being, we are all are in  the  desire  realm.  When
you achieved calm abiding,  your mind is not included in   in  the  mind  of
the desire realm but . It is not the mind of desire realm,  but  it  is  the
mind of the higher realms. On the basis of the  calm  abiding,  preceded  by
the preparatory  stageaccess,  then  you  actualisze  the  actual  level  of
concentration/meditative stabilization. Only then  is  ,  there  is  rebirth
into the higher realms, i.e, the  – form and formless realms.

Question:  Student:  With  regard  to  cultivating  special   insight   with
investigation/examination and analysis,  the  two  from  the  definition  it
seems similar. , but Wwhat is the distinction between them?  In  cultivating
special insight, is there an order such as  investigation  coming  e  ffirst
then followed by analysis?

Ven Gyurme:  There  are  these  two  mental  factors,  and  in  LRCM  it  is
translated as examination and analysis.  In  the  Mind  and  Mental  Factors
module it was translated slightly differently.  I  can’t  remember  what  it
was.  If  we  translate  as  investigation  then  the   whole   process   of
investigating with examination and analysis  have  to  be  substituted  with
another verb. That is why we stick to examination and analysis.
Answer: I mentioned thThe difference between investigation  examination  and
analysis is what I have mentioned  before. Investigation  Examination  is  a
rough  analysis  investigation  of  the  object.  Analysis  is  a   detailed
examination analysis of the object.

Student: Is it together, like no first or second since you mentioned  it  is
one term?
Khen Rinpoche (in English): It is different.
Answer: These are two separate mental factors. b But I would think  that  it
is possible for themse two tto operate simultaneously.


Interpreted by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme; transcribed by Phuah  Soon  Ek,  Patricia
Lee and Julia Koh; edited by Cecilia Tsong.

-----------------------
[1] LRCM, 23.
[2] Ibid., 23-24.
[3] “The mind of enlightenment” is also translated as bodhicitta.
[4] Ibid., 24.
[5] The implication here is that analytical meditation generates a level  of
pliancy exceeding that of calm abiding, which, however, does not come  about
without the latter. Cf. Wallace 1998: 125 as well as Thurman 1993:  114  and
235. (Footnote in LRCM, 203).
[6] Ibid., 25.
[7] Ibid., 25.
[8] Ibid.
[9] Investigation of phenomena from the  point  of  view  of  their  nature,
their performance of functions, dependence, and logical establishment.
[10] Ibid., 25-26.
[11] Ibid., 28.
[12] Tib. bde ba’i yo byad
[13] Ibid., 29.
[14] Ibid., 29.
[15] Tib. yan lag is usually translated as here as “limb,” but it can also
be translated as “prerequisite,” like the word Tib. tshogs in the following
sentence.
[16] Tib. ting nge ‘dzin, usually translated here as “meditative
stabilization.”
[17] The thirteen are: (1) the chief prerequisites,  i.e.  familiarity  with
the teaching and inner discipline;  and,  additionally,  (2)  excellence  of
one’s own  aims;  (3)  excellence  of  others’  aims;  (4)  desire  for  the
teaching; (5) renunciation; (6) vows of ethical  discipline;  (7)  restraint
of the senses; (8) moderation in eating; (9) the  practice  of  wakefulness;
(10) dwelling vigilantly; (11) solitude;  (12)  cleansing  of  obscurations;
and (13) proper basis of concentration. (LRCM: Chapter 2, Note 51, 396).
[18] Ibid., 30.
[19] Ibid., 30-31.
[20] Tib. ‘du byed brgyad,’ i.e. “the eight antidotes.”
[21] Tib. skyon
[22] Tib. nyes
[23] Ibid., 31-33.
[24] Ibid., 34.
[25] Ibid., 34-35.

