Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/SixPerfections/BP2 M4 L26 (final).doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:02.699459
================================================================================


Transcript of teachings by Khen Rinpoche Geshe Chonyi  on  the  Heart  Sutra
and Stages of the Path (the Six Perfections)

The root text, Middle Length Lam-Rim,  by  Lama  Tsongkhapa,  translated  by
Philip Quarcoo, © FPMT, Inc., May 2012, is  indented.  All  page  references
refer to the root text, unless otherwise stated.

Where applicable, page numbers of corresponding  sections  in  the  Lam  Rim
Chen Mo (LRCM) are indicated in footnotes; they refer to The Great  Treatise
on the Stages of the Path  to  Enlightenment,  Volume  3,  by  Tsong-kha-pa,
translated  by  The  Lamrim  Chenmo   Translation   Committee,   Snow   Lion
Publications, 2004.

Lesson                                                                    26
  1 October 2013


Continuation on how to generate flawless meditative stabilisation. How to
stop laxity and excitement. Identifying their underlying causes. What to do
when they are absent. Cultivating equanimity. The five faults. (From root
text, pages 222- 225).



In the last lesson, we saw how we must rely on  introspection  in  order  to
recognisze   laxity  and  excitement  when  they  arise  in  the  course  of
developing  our  one’s  concentration.  When  our  introspection   vigilance
notices the arising of laxity and excitement arising, we  must   immediately
must apply their respective antidotes.

The text says that in order to develop  powerful  introspection,  vigilance,
one must have powerful mindfulness. The text also says that  when  the  mind
is  excessively  withdrawn  inwards,  mental  laxity  arises.  In  order  to
eliminate mental laxity, we must uplift the mind by turning its  the  mind’s
attention to something that brings joy and delight such as the image of  the
Buddha. The text also says that we should bring to mind the  image  or  Tthe
appearance of brightness also helps.

HOW TO STOP LAXITY

Next is an explanation of Tthe differences in the antidotes against  between
coarse laxity and subtle laxity.
      Furthermore, if the mental laxity is very slight and  does  not  occur
      more than once in a while, you should tighten the mode of apprehension
      of the mind as you meditate. (Page 222)[1]

Earlier on we did talk about coarse and subtle laxity.
[LRCM Vol 3, page 64] Also,  if  laxity  is  very  slight  and  occurs  only
infrequently, tighten up  your  apprehension  of  the  object  and  continue
meditating.
The laxity that is mentioned here is subtle laxity.  When  there  is  subtle
laxity  is  present,  the  antidote  is  to  to  that  is  tightening  one’s
apprehension of the object. In the previous lesson, Wwe talked about  subtle
laxity in the previous lesson. When there is hen subtle laxity  is  present,
there is clarity and stability, and the mind is abiding in  the  object  but
the mind is slightly a bit too  relaxed.  Its  manner  of  apprehending  the
object of meditation is  too  loose  and  lacks  intensity.  .  There  isn’t
intensity behind the mind’s way of apprehending the object.  That  basically
is subtle laxity.
Therefore inIn order to eliminate subtle laxity,  the  way  is  one  has  to
tighten one’sour apprehension of the object of meditation.

      However, when dense laxity recurs again and again, [270]  suspend  the
      meditation,  apply  the  antidotes  as  appropriate  and  continue  to
      meditate as soon as the laxity has been cleared away. (Page 222)[2]
[LRCM Vol 3, page 64] But if laxity is dense and seems to occur  repeatedly,
suspend your cultivation of concentration, clear away laxity  using  any  of
those remedies, and then resumes your meditation.
“Dense laxity is dense”:  -   I  wonder  if  this  is  referring  to  coarse
laxity.
The text says that when if laxity is dense and recurring if it seems  to  be
occurring repeatedly, then you should stop the meditation session and  clear
away that laxity.

HOW TO STOP EXCITEMENT
[LRCM Vol 3, page 64] Whether your object of  meditation  entails  directing
your mind inward or outward, if the object  is  unclear  and  you  have  the
sense of darkness -slight or dense- descending on your mind,  then  it  will
be  hard  to  cut  through  laxity  if  you  continue  to  meditate  without
eliminating it. Therefore, as a remedy for that, repeatedly meditate on  the
appearance of light.

      When it comes to excitement, the mind runs after  forms,  sounds,  and
      other objects due to attachment, so for  that  you  should  attend  to
      something depressing,  a  cause  for  the  mind  to  withdraw  inward.
      However, as soon as the excitement has subsided because of  that,  you
      rest in equipoise. (Page 222)[3]

Next is the way to eliminate excitement.
[LRCM Vol 3, page 65] In the case of  excitement,  out  of  attachment  your
attention pursues objects such as forms and sounds; so in response to  that,
bring to mind disillusioning things that cause your attention  to  be  drawn
inward. As soon as this calms  the  excitement,  settle  your  mind  on  the
earlier object of meditation.
We saw have seen how excitement is a  derivative of attachment. In order  to
eliminate excitement, we have to bring to mind disillusioning  isillusioning
things,  i.e.,  things that will bring about a sense of disenchantment.
The antidote here is reflecting on impermanence.


      In Essence of the Middle Way it says:
          Pacify excitement by
          Attending, for instance, to impermanence

      And:

          You should collect the distracted mind
          By seeing the faults of the signs of distraction. (Page 222)[4]
[LRCM Vol 3, page 65] And Bhavaviveka's Heart of the Middle Way states:
Calm excitement by bringing to mind Impermanence and so forth.
And:
Pull your mind back from distraction by noting
The faults of the distracting objects.

Bhāavaviveka says in his Essence of the Middle Way is saying that we  should
meditate on impermanence and also reflect on the faults of distraction.
Just like laxity, excitement also has coarse and subtle forms.
When they arise what should we do about it?
Antidotes against coarse and subtle excitement
Just like laxity, excitement also has its  coarse  and  subtle  forms.  When
they arise what should we do about them?

      When intense or long-lasting excitement occurs,  it  is  effective  to
      loosen  the  meditation  for  a  while  and  meditate   on   something
      disillusioning, whereas collecting the  mind  inward  and  placing  it
      every time it scatters is not. (Page 222)[5]

[LRCM Vol 3, page 65] So, if very strong or prolonged excitement arises,  it
is crucial that you relax the meditation for a while and cultivate  a  sense
of disenchantment, rather than attempting to pull in your  mind  and  direct
it back to the object of meditation every time it becomes scattered.
I think this is talking about coarse excitement. The  text  is  saying  that
when if the excitement is very strong or if  it  persists  for  a  prolonged
period of time, rather than trying to bring pulling your mind  back  to  the
object of meditation and making it abide there,  trying  to  put  it  there,
then it goes away again and you repeat this, it  is  better  to  first  deal
with the excitement.

      Whenever the excitement is not that strong,  you  should  collect  the
      distracted mind inward and tie it to the object. (Page 222)[6]
[LRCM Vol 3, page 65] For excitement that is not so dominant,  draw  in  the
scattered attention, and fix your attention upon the object of meditation.

I think this  is  talking  about  subtle  excitement.  In  the  cases  where
excitement is not so dominant, upon noticing the arising of such  excitement
with mindfulness and introspectionvigilance,  then  just  bring  the  mind’s
attention back to the object of meditation and place it there.


      In the Compendium of the Perfections  it says:


          Whenever your mind has got excited
          Avert this by means of calm abiding.

      With an excited mind, you should not attend to inspiring or delightful
      objects, for they cause the  mind  to  be  distracted  outward.  (Page
      222)[7]


IDENTIFYING THE UNDERLYING CAUSES OF LAXITY  AND  EXCITEMENT  [LRCM  Vol  3,
page 65] Aryasura's Compendium of the Perfections states:
When your mind becomes excited stop this disturbance
By calming it and stabilizing your attention.
[LRCM Vol 3, page 65] It is generally said that if  your  mind  is  excited,
you should focus on the object of  meditation,  while  if  it  is  lax,  you
should think about a delightful object.
[LRCM Vol 3, page 66] When your mind  is  excited,  do  not  bring  to  mind
inspiring and delightful objects because this will cause  your  mind  to  be
distracted outward.
Next is the explanation of the underlying causes of laxity and excitement.

Common causes of laxity and excitement
      The common causes of the two, laxity and excitement, are not  guarding
      one’s sense doors, not eating the right  amount,  not  putting  effort
      into one’s practice without sleeping during the first and  last  parts
      of the night, and remaining without introspection. (Page 222)[8]

~ Not guarding one’s sense doors
“(2) The underlying causes of laxity and excitement
The common causes of both laxity and excitement are:
• not restraining the sensory faculties
• not eating in moderation
• not making an effort to practice rather than sleeping during the early
  and later parts of the night
• ongoing lack of vigilance;
Not guarding one’s restraining the senseory doors”  faculties  is  a  common
cause for both laxity and excitement so one needs to . So there  is  a  need
to restrain one’s sensory faculties. In short, you have  to  restrain  one’s
your body and mind from inappropriate behaviour.

If you remember our earlier lessons discussion when we were looking  at  the
preconditions  for  developing  calm-   abiding,   keeping   pure   ethicsal
discipline is one of the most important preconditions, i.e., .  Essentially,
that is restraining one’s body and mind from non-virtuous  or  inappropriate
behaviour.  It  is  the   same   here.    in   Rrestraining   the   senseory
doorsfaculties. This  is a very important precondition for  developing  calm
-abiding.

~ Not eating in moderation
Not eating in moderation  is  also  a  common  cause  for  both  laxity  and
excitement. Therefore, one has to eat in moderation. When one’s food  intake
is excessive, that will probably lead to laxity.
[LRCM Vol 3, page 66] Asariga's Levels of Yogic Deeds states:
What are the signs of laxity? Not restraining  the  sensory  faculties;  not
eating in moderation; not making an effort to practice rather than  sleeping
during the early and later parts of the night; ongoing  lack  of  vigilance;
deluded behavior; over-sleeping;  being  unskillful;  being  lazy  in  one's
aspirations, joyous  perseverance,  intention,  and  analysis;  giving  only
partial attention to serenity without accustoming yourself to it  and  fully
refining  it-letting  your  mind  stay  as  though  in  darkness;  and   not
delighting in focusing on the object of meditation.
Here, "signs of laxity" should be understood as the causes  of  laxity.  The
word "lazy" applies to joyous  perseverance,  intention,  and  analysis,  as
well as to aspirations. The same text also states:
What are the signs of excitement? The first four  points  listed  above  for
the signs of laxity—not restraining the sensory  faculties,  etc.;  behaving
with  attachment;  having  a  disquieted  manner;   lacking   a   sense   of
disenchantment; being unskillful; having a great sense of grasping  in  your
aspiration, etc.; failing  to  accustom  yourself  to  joyous  perseverance;
meditating in an unbalanced way without refining your  apprehension  of  the
object of meditation; and being distracted by any sort  of  exciting  topic,
such as thoughts about relatives.
The "signs of excitement" are the causes of excitement. "Great grasping"  is
an excessive mental hold on a delightful object. "Aspiration,  etc."  refers
to  the  four  points  [aspiration,  joyous  perseverance,  intention,   and
analysis] explained earlier.
Thus the four practices of which restraint of the sensory faculties  is  the
first, which were discussed earlier  in  the  section  on  practice  between
meditation sessions, are important for stopping both laxity and  excitement.
Moreover, if you recognize those causes  and  try  to  stop  them,  this  is
obviously very helpful for interrupting laxity and excitement.

Khen Rinpoche (spoke in English): Is there any possibility of the danger  of
excitement when if you eat too  much?  Laxity,  I  have  experienced.  After
eating  too much atfter lunch, after that  I  cannot  take  it  and  I  must
sleep. Not only laxity, but lethargy, this  happens.  Excitement  I  am  not
sure. Does that hHappen or not happen?

(Students’  responsesds are  inaudible).
Essentially, An appropriate diet here refers is in terms ofto the intake  of
an  appropriate amount of intake of food. Problems arise when the amount  of
one’s food intake is too much or insufficient. not enough.  PePerrhaps  when
, if one’s food intake is not sufficient, it may also promote excitement  in
that your mind, ;  which starts to think about  many  things.  all  kind  of
stuff.

Khen Rinpoche (spoke in English): Such as  wWhat  to  eat.  ?  Remember  all
those ese things when you do  Nnyung  Nnay?.  Then  Then  excitement  arises
especially on the second day.

I think there is a text that which  says  that  you  should  just  eat  just
enough just to fill two-thirds of your stomach.

Khen Rinpoche (spoke in English): Just tTwo-thirds.  and oOne part  must  be
empty. Too much,  you cannot breathe. If you cannot breathe,   how  are  you
going to do meditation?.

~ Sleeping at the right time
The teachings advise that we break the night into three  parts.  One  should
only sleep in the second part of the night. In the first and the last  parts
of the night, the teachings advise us to strive in virtue or  to  engage  in
meditation. Generally speaking, this is very much related to the  nature  of
one’s body. If we follow go according to what is mentioned in the  teachings
where you only sleep only in the middle part of the  night,  the  timing  is
approximately between 11pm to 3am. So Tthat is the middle part of the  night
where one should be sleeping.

~ Lack of introspection[Student question inaudible]
Khen Rinpoche (spoke in English):  Yes, not 3pm. You have doubt on that?

An ongoing lack of introspection vigilance is also a common cause  for  both
laxity and excitement.

Causes of laxity
      The causes of laxity  are  great  sleepiness,  [271]  the  mind  being
      excessively loose in its  hold  on  its  object,  not  balancing  calm
      abiding and special insight but relying on calm abiding too much,  the
      mind remaining as though in darkness, and not taking joy in  directing
      the mind toward the object. (Page 222)[9]

“The causes of laxity are:
    • oversleeping,
    • the mind too lax in holding the object of meditation,
    • not balancing calm-abiding and special insight by relying too much  on
      calm-abiding,
    • letting your mind stays as though in darkness and  not  delighting  in
      focusing on the object of meditation
[MLLR page 222] 2 Causes of laxity
The causes of laxity are  great  sleepiness,   the  mind  being  excessively
loose in its hold on its object, not  balancing  calm  abiding  and  special
insight but relying on calm abiding too much, the mind remaining  as  though
in darkness, and not taking joy in directing the mind toward the object.
‘Not balancing calm- abiding and special insight  but  by  relying  on  calm
abiding too much”: this  on calm-abiding’ - here is listed here as  a  cause
of laxity. As to what it means, we have to think about that.

The other causes of laxity such as oversleeping, the mind being  too lax  in
holding its the object of meditation, letting  your  mind  remain  stays  as
though in darkness and not taking joy delighting  iin  n  focussing  on  the
object of meditation areis obvious.

Causes of excitement
      The causes of excitement are said to be  little  disillusionment,  the
      mind being excessively tense with respect to  its  object,  not  being
      used to making an effort, and the mind being distracted by thoughts of
      relatives and the like. (Page 223)[10]

The need to strive in  eliminating  even  subtle  laxity  and  excitementThe
causes of excitement are:
    • lacking a sense of disenchantment,
    • the mind being overly tight with respect to the object of meditation,
    • failing to accustom yourself to joyous perseverance,
    • being distracted by any sort of exciting topics such as thoughts about
      relatives
These are obvious causes of excitement.
[MLLR page 223] 3 Causes of excitement
The causes of excitement are said to be  little  disillusionment,  the  mind
being excessively tense with respect  to  its  object,  not  being  used  to
making an effort, and the mind being distracted  by  thoughts  of  relatives
and the like.
Next is an explanation of the need to strive in eliminating even the  subtle

excitement and subtle laxity, for When one if one does  not  n’t  strive  to
overcome even subtle laxity and excitement, do that, it is not  possible  to
there is no way to ddevelop a pure concentration.


      Therefore you need to recognize, through  introspection,  even  subtle
      aspects of laxity and excitement and stop them all  entirely.  If  you
      give up, thinking “Although in the  beginning  I  cut  through  subtle
      excitement, distraction, and the like, they were never cut off,  so  I
      will not cut through them any longer” … (Page 223)[11]
[LRCM Vol 3, page 67] Therefore, use vigilance to notice even subtle  laxity
and excitement. You should stop laxity  and  excitement  in  every  possible
way, not tolerating them in any form.
Some may gradually give up, thinking,  "Slight  excitement  and  distraction
persist even though I cut them off at the outset, so I shall  not  cut  them
off."

Khen Rinpoche (spoke in English): So let it be ...

This is saying that it is not right to leave laxity and excitement  as  they
are. it is. So Wwhen laxity and excitement arise, it is incorrect to  think,
 “Anyway I can’t do anything about themit, so I will just  let  them  it  be
and let them persist.”.

      … or if you think “Unless they are intense  and  come  in  excessively
      long chains, there is no need to cut through  them  because  they  are
      brief and weak so that no karma will be accumulated,” you do not  know
      how to accomplish pure meditative stabilization. That is  because  you
      depart from the conclusions by venerable Maitreya and others on how to
      accomplish meditative stabilization. (Page 223)[12]

[LRCM Vol 3, page 67] Or if laxity and excitement are not strong and do  not
persist for long periods, they may think, "Since they are weak and of  brief
duration, I do not accumulate karmic obstructions. So I do not need  to  cut
them off." Those who think this way and fail  to  apply  themselves  to  the
elimination of these hindrances  do  not  know  the  right  way  to  achieve
concentration, yet pretend that they do. They deceive those  who  aspire  to
concentration, for their approach  places  them  outside  the  tradition  of
methods for attaining concentration  laid  down  by  teachers  such  as  the
venerable Maitreya.
Even if the laxity and excitement that arises are  is  subtle  and  may  not
persist  for  a  long  time,  one  must  still  strive  to  eliminate   them
immediately. You should not leave it and let them persist . fFor if you  do,
  so  yyou  will  not  achieve  pure  or  perfect  concentration.  So   with
mindfulness and introspection, vigilance, upon noticing their  arising,  one
must strive to eliminatecut them themoff immediately.

Next Ddo not hope for a concentration that  merely  has  the  factors  r  of
stability and limpidity limpidity without vivid  intense clarityity.
      Therefore summon your mind from its wandering and excitement  so  that
      it is tied to the  object  within,  and  seek  the  stability  factor.
      Whenever the stability factor has arisen, beware of laxity  and  bring
      forth intense clarity.  You  should  accomplish  faultless  meditative
      stabilization by alternating between those  two.  Do  not  trust  mere
      limpidity that lacks the factor of clarity together with intensity  of
      the mode of apprehension. (Page 223)[13]

[LRCM Vol 3, page 67] In summary, withdraw your  mind  from  scattering  and
excitement, inwardly fixing it upon  the  object  of  meditation,  and  seek
stability. Each  time  stability  occurs,  take  great  precautions  against
laxity and  bring  forth  a  vivid  intensity.  You  will  achieve  flawless
concentration by alternating between these two.  Do  not  expect  to  attain
stability by means of mere limpidity, which lacks the  vividness  that  goes
along with an intense way of apprehending the object.
In order to achieve flawless or perfect concentration,  you  must  have  the
factor of stability and the factor of clarity. On top of  that,  there  must
be vividness/intense  clarity.  ity.  With  mindfulness  and  introspection,
vigilance, one will be able to detect the arising of laxity and  excitement.
When you do detect them arising, it is  important  to  apply  the  antidotes
immediately. You must apply the mental factor of intention which  is  called
application that . This was described in the last lesson.
WHAT TO DO WHEN LAXITY AND EXCITEMENT ARE ABSENT

When laxity and excitement are absent, you one should  engage  in  the  non-
application of antidotes. You One should not apply any antidotes but  rather
cultivateleave it in equanimity.

      When even subtle laxity and excitement have been cut off as  explained
      earlier and the mind enters into equanimity without the imbalances  of
      becoming either lax or excited through the meditation, at that time it
      would be a mistake for your meditative stabilization  if  you  applied
      antidotes or endeavored, so you should  cultivate  equanimity  as  the
      antidote to that. (Page 223)[14]
(2) What to do when laxity and excitement are absent
[LRCM Vol 3, page 67] By  continuing  to  meditate  after  eliminating  even
subtle laxity and excitement, as explained above, your  mind  will  enter  a
state of equipoise that is free from the  imbalances  of  either  laxity  or
excitement. At this point, it is a fault of concentration to apply or  exert
yourself, so cultivate equanimity as a remedy for this.
[LRCM Vol 3, page 68] Question: How can it be  that  applying  yourself,  or
making an effort, turns into a problem?
Reply: Through meditation, turning your attention inward when your  mind  is
excited and stimulating your mind when it is lax, you gain  confidence  that
laxity and  excitement  will  not  occur  during  each  suitable  meditation
session.  At  this  point  you  are  still  extremely  wary  of  laxity  and
excitement, just as at the outset. Sustaining  this  is  the  problem.  Your
mind will become distracted, so at that time you must know to relax.
[LRCM Vol 3, page 68] As stated in Kamalasila's second and third  Stages  of
Meditation "If you exert yourself when your mind  has  entered  a  state  of
equipoise, then your mind will be distracted.
[LRCM Vol 3, page 68] This entails relaxing the effort, but not  sacrificing
the intensity of the way you apprehend your object.

When laxity and excitement are absent, one should not  make  any  effort  to
apply the antidotes. When there is no laxity and excitement,  let  the  mind
stays nnatural atural and relaxed in that state.

      This is how your meditation becomes  faulty  through  application  and
      endeavor: by bringing the mind back inward and uplifting  it  whenever
      it is lax, you grow confident that laxity and excitement do not  arise
      in every session. At that stage, it would be a mistake  to  beware  of
      laxity and excitement very much as in the beginning. If you did,  your
      mind would become distracted, so you need to know how  to  loosen  up.
      That is to say loosen the endeavor  rather  than  letting  go  of  the
      intensity of your mode of apprehension. (Page 223)[15]

Here we have to make a distinction between not making an effort in  applying
the antidotes  when laxity and excitement are  absent  versus  relaxing  the
intensity of the mind.  When there is no  laxity  and  excitement  in  one’s
concentration, one  should  not  be  making  any  effort  to  applying   the
antidotes.   i.e.  one  should  not  be  making  any  effort  to  apply  the
antidotes.
But tThe text states clearly states,  that “Thatis  is  to  say  loosen  the
endeavour  rather  than  letting  go  of  the  intensity  of  your  mode  of
apprehension.”   entails  relaxing  the  effort  but  not  sacrificing   the
intensity of the way you apprehend the object.” Although you  relax  yourthe
effort in that respect, i.e., you do not applying the antidotes,  this  does
not mean that you relax in the way your mind mind’s way is  of  apprehending
the object. The way the  mind  mind’s  way  ofis   apprehending  the  object
should   be   remain   tight   and   there   must   be   intense    clarity.
vividness/intensity.

When to cultivate equanimity
      Therefore this cultivation of equanimity  is  not  performed  whenever
      laxity and excitement do not occur but from the time you are past  the
      peak of laxity and excitement because as long as you have  not  passed
      the peak for laxity and excitement,  there  is  no  equanimity.  (Page
      223)[16]

[LRCM Vol 3, page 68] Therefore, this cultivation of equanimity  is  not  to
be done every time laxity and excitement  are  absent,  but  once  you  have
reduced the force of laxity and excitement; for when you have not  done  so,
there is no equanimity.
Here, Tthis cultivation of equanimity is not to be done  every  time  laxity
and excitement are absent. This will become clearer  when  we  look  at  the
nine mental stages in one’s  placements. There  are  nine  stages  where  in
one’s cultivation of calm -abiding. There is no laxity  and  excitement  oOn
the ninth 9th mental stage, there is no laxity and excitement.  It  is  said
in the teachings that one does not need to apply any effort to  be  able  to
stay in that experience when one has reached the ninth 9th  stage.  This  at
is the time one you stays in equanimity where one you  does  not  apply  any
antidotes. This is applies only atfor the ninth9th mental stage.
Although there is no laxity and excitement when one is  on  the  eighth  8th
mental stage,  one  still  needs  to  put  in   effort  to  remain  in  that
experience. Therefore, theis cultivation of equanimity  is  not  done  every
time laxity and excitement are  absent,  but  rather  theis  application  or
cultivation of equanimity that is mentioned here is only  applicable  at  es
to the ninth9th mental stage.

This is one of the antidotes. Identifying that equanimity
      So what kind of equanimity are we talking about?
      Well  then,  what  is  this  equanimity?  Among  the  three  types  of
      equanimity—equanimity feeling, immeasurable equanimity, and equanimity
      of application—it is the last one. Its entity is just as explained  in
      Śrāvaka Levels: it is the mind resting even and at ease[17]  upon  its
      object from the class of calm abiding or  special  insight,  operating
      naturally, and achieving serviceability. When you have  achieved  such
      equanimity, you  should  actualize  it  while  cultivating  meditative
      stabilization,  without  strong  endeavor  as  long  as   laxity   and
      excitement do not arise. (Page 223-224)[18]

[LRCM Vol 3, page 68] Question: What sort of equanimity is this?
Reply: Generally, three types of equanimity are taught:
(1) the feeling of impartiality,
(2) the impartiality that is one among the four immeasurables, and
(3) equanimity with respect to application. This is equanimity with  respect
to application.
According to Asanga's Sravaka Levels; it is a mental balance  focusing  with
calm  settling,  spontaneous  mental  engagement  and  an   achievement   of
serviceability as the mind attends to the object  of  meditation  associated
with calm-abiding and insight.
[LRCM Vol 3, page 68]. Its nature is to be  understood  in  accordance  with
this passage from Asanga's Sravaka Levels: What is equanimity? As your  mind
attends to objects of meditation associated with serenity  and  insight,  it
is focusing with calm settling, spontaneous mental engagement,  a  sense  of
mental   well-being,   effortless   mental   functioning   after    becoming
serviceable, and a mental balance free from the afflictions.
[LRCM Vol 3, page 68] When you achieve such equanimity, on  those  occasions
when laxity and excitement are absent as you cultivate  concentration,  stay
with this equanimity and let your mind rest without exerting strong effort.
On this application of equanimity, Tthe  equanimity  we  are  talking  about
here, which is one of the antidotes,  is a natural settling of the mind,   -
is a spontaneous engagement and  is  a  serviceability  of  the  mind.  This
equanimity of with respect to application  arises  on  the  ninth9th  mental
stage.

Presenting the source
Therey are instructions for developing  calm-  abiding  in  from  Maitreya’s
texts such as The Ornament sfor of the Mahayana Sutras  and  the  Separation
of the Middle from the Extremes. The explanations  here here  are  is  based
on Maitreya’s explanation in the latter text. his “Separation of the  Middle
from the Extremes.”


Five faults to be abandoned
In the process of developing concentration, there  are  five  faults  to  be
abandoned.

~ 1 Fault of laziness
In the process of cultivating or developing concentration,  there  are  five
faults to be abandoned. One of the major big  obstacles  or  impediments  to
for developing concentration is the  fault  of  laziness.  Without  stopping
laziness there is no way to even begin to  start  developing  concentration.
As we hadve  seen  in  our  earlier  discussions,  in  order  to  stop  such
laziness, we need the the single-pointed faith in concentration that .  This
single-pointed faith in  concentration  arises  through  reflecting  on  and
ascertaining the good qualities of concentration and its the  benefits.   of
having such a concentration. Through such reflection and ascertainment,  one
develops this single-pointed faith in  concentration  that  .  This  single-
pointed faith  in  concentration  will  enable  us  to  stop  the  fault  of
laziness.

One develops an aspiration by By reflecting on  and  ascertaining  the  good
qualities and benefits of concentration, one develops an  aspiration,  i.e.,
. Rather, a yearning to achieve for concentration. When one you  hasve  such
a strong yearning to achieve for concentration, naturally one  will  put  in
the effort to do so. achieve this.

In short,  you need yearning or aspiration, belief and effort. On the  basis
of  having  a  single-pointed  faith  in  concentration,  then   aspiration,
yearning, belief and effort would arise and . With  these  three,  one  will
begin to overcome one’s laziness. Through actualiszing concentration,  there
will  come  athe  time  when  one  will   experiences  pliancy.   When   one
actualiszes pliancy, this is the actual  point  of  time  when  laziness  is
eliminated.
We had Earlier on we  did  talked  earlier   a  little  bit  about  pliancy.
Pliancy is essentially a serviceability of the body and mind.  Once  pliancy
is obtained or achieved, one can employ one’s body and  mind  in  virtue  as
much as one likes without any sense of difficulty.

~ 2 Fault of forgetting the instructions
Not forgetting the object of meditation,  and  placing  one’s  attention  on
the object and having the object of meditation and having  the  mind  abides
on  it  are  is  an  essential  parts  of   the   process   for   developing
concentration. When If one forgets the object of meditation,  then one  will
not be able to develop concentration. As  such,  forgetting  the  object  of
meditation, i.e., forgetfulness, is a fault. The remedy  for  the  fault  of
forgetting the object of meditation is mindfulness.

~ 3 Fault of laxity and excitement
In that process when laxity and excitement  arises  When  one  is  when  you
holding  the object of meditation  with  mindfulness  and  in  the  process,
laxity and excitement arise, , thisthey  becomes a fault or impediments  for
one’s development of ing concentration.
 It is very important to notice when these two impediments  arise.  What  is
it that will enable oneus to notice the arising of  laxity  and  excitement?
It is introspection.

~ 4 Fault of non-application
vigilance. When one’s introspection vigilance notices the arising of  laxity
and excitement and laxity, and one if you does  not  immediately  apply  the
antidotes to them, then that it is a fault of not  applying  the  antidotes,
i.e., the fault of non-application. .
The remedy to that is the intention  of  application,  i.e.,   -  generating
having the intention to apply the respective antidotes.
remedy.
~ 5 Fault of application
There will cCome the time when the mind is able to abide in  its  object  of
meditation naturally and effortlessly  without any laxity and excitement.  ,
thenThe  application of antidotes remedy at such a  time  is  a  fault.  The
remedy to that is non-application.

According to Maitreya's Separation of the Middle from  the  Extremes,  there
are these five faults to be abandoned and eight antidotes to be applied.

How these instructions for cultivating  concentration  are  common  to  both
sutra and tantra [LRCM Vol 3, page 68] The above explanations of the  method
for developing flawless concentration  are  in  accord  with  the  venerable
Maitreya's teachings in the Separation of the Middle from the Extremes:
Staying with that joyous perseverance,
Your mind becomes serviceable, and you attain all goals.
This occurs as a result of eliminating the five faults
And relying on the eight antidotes.
The five faults are laziness,
Forgetting the instructions,
Laxity and excitement,
Non-application, and application.
The eight antidotes are the basis [yearning], that based on it [effort],
The cause [confidence], the effect [pliancy],
Not forgetting the object of meditation,
Recognizing laxity and excitement,
Application to eliminate them,
And calmly stabilizing your mind when they have been quelled.
In those verses, "Staying with that" refers to  keeping  up  the  output  of
joyous perseverance for the sake of dispelling unfavorable conditions.  With
this, a concentration in which your mind is  serviceable  arises.  Moreover,
since this is the foundation, or basis, of supernormal powers which  achieve
all goals—superknowledge and so forth—you attain all goals.
What do you do to develop such concentration? It develops  as  a  result  of
using the eight antidotes in order to eliminate the five faults.  These  are
the five faults: at the time of preparation, laziness  is  a  fault  because
you do not  apply  yourself  at  concentration.  When  you  are  working  at
concentration, forgetting the instructions  is  a  fault  because  when  you
forget the object upon which you were instructed to meditate; your  mind  is
not set in equipoise upon the object  of  meditation.  When  it  is  set  in
meditative equipoise, laxity and excitement are  faults  because  they  make
your mind unserviceable. When laxity and excitement occur,  lack  of  effort
[non-application] is a fault because it  does  not  quell  those  two.  When
laxity  and  excitement  are  absent,  the  fault  is   the   intention   of
application.
Among the remedies for those faults, the eight  antidotes,  there  are  four
remedies for laziness—confidence, yearning, effort, and  pliancy.  Then  the
remedies for forgetfulness,  laxity  and  excitement,  non-application,  and
application  are,  respectively,  mindfulness,  vigilance  that   recognizes
laxity and excitement, the intention of application, and calmly  established
equanimity. I explained these extensively above.

      This freeing of the single-pointed  meditative  stabilization  of  the
      mind  from  laxity  and  excitement  by  means  of   mindfulness   and
      introspection is common to all the instructions on  how  to  practice.
      Therefore you should not hold it  to  be  a  specific  detail  of  the
      Lakṣanayāna[19] which, however, is unnecessary in mantra. [274] It  is
      also taught in many Highest Yoga Tantras. (Page 224-225)[20]

Next is explaining how such an instruction for cultivating concentration  is
common to both sutra and tantra.
[LRCM Vol 3 Page 70]  That  mindfulness  and  vigilance  remove  laxity  and
excitement from your mind's one-pointed concentration is a common  theme  to
all personal instructions on this practice. So do  not  think,  "This  is  a
teaching particular to the vehicle of dialectics, but it  is  not  necessary
in the mantra vehicle." For it is common to  the  mantra  vehicle  as  well,
since this is also stated in the class of the highest yoga tantras.
The instructions on the need  to  abandon  laziness,  the  need  to  develop
mindfulness and the , the need to develop the concentration that is free  of
laxity and excitement and so forth etc. are topics themes  that  are  common
to both sutra and tantra.

This explanation of developing calm  abiding  through  abandoning  the  five
faults and cultivating the eight antidotes is  is  according  to  Maitreya's
Separation of the Middle from the Extremes. But in another of his text,  the
in his Ornament for the Mahayana Sutras, Maitreya discusses the  development
of calm abiding through the nine mental states, the four  mental  attentions
and the six powers or six forces.

You should read up on this up as much as possible before coming to the  next
class. I will not have time to go through each of  them  and  everything  in
detail. What I will do in the next class is to  summarisze  these  different
things— – the nine mental states, the four mental  attentions  and  the  six
powers. Try as much as possible to read the text before coming to  the  next
class. If not, it may be a bit difficult for you.
[LRCM Vol 3,  page  70]  It  also  describes  the  three  concentrations  of
enthusiasm, of analysis, and of  the  mind  in  the  same  way.  Serviceable
concentration, as explained above, is  the  basis  for  attaining  qualities
such as supernormal abilities. Therefore, since it is like a foundation,  it
is  called  the  foundation  of  supernormal  abilities.   Texts   such   as
Sthiramati's  Explanation  of  the  "Separation  of  the  Middle  from   the
Extremes" explain that there  are  four  avenues  to  accomplish  this:  (1)
achieving it through fierce yearning, (2)  achieving  it  through  prolonged
joyous  perseverance,  (3)   achieving   concentration   by   discriminating
examination of the  object  of  meditation—these  first  three  are  called,
respectively,  yearning  concentration,  enthusiastic   concentration,   and
analytical concentration—and (4) achieving one-pointedness of mind based  on
having in your mind seeds of earlier concentration; this  is  called  mental
concentration. "Very  slack"  refers  to  excessive  relaxation,  and  "very
elated" refers to excessive tightness. The point is that you should  sustain
a meditation which lacks these two.

Those  who  are  sincerely  wishing  and  yearning   to   develop   flawless
concentration should really rely on the such  instructions  that  are  found
here in the Stages of the Path  to  Enlightenment  literature  such  as  the
Middle  Length  Lam  Rim.  If  you  are   yearning   to   develop   flawless
concentration,  you should know these instructions like in the back of  your
hand,  and studying  them and understanding  them well. You  are  not  going
to find any other hmore higher  or  more  better  exalted  instructions  for
developing flawless concentration apart from what we have covered  than  the
ones we have been looking at over this period of time.

                                ~~~~~~~~~~~~

Lamrim Meditation ProgrammeRegime
I made  this  an  announcement  during  the  discussion  class  last  Sunday
discussion class when many of a lot of you were around. Anyway, I  am  going
to say this again.

All of you have done quite a fair bit of  studying   up  to  this  point  in
time. This at is a very good thing. All of you are very  fortunate  to  have
this opportunity to so far in  learning  and  study  the  teachings  of  the
Buddha’s teachings and studying  them.  You  will  be   are  able  to  plant
positive imprints in your mind.

Our spiritual director Lama Zopa Rinpoche has been  emphasiszing  the  great
importance and need to meditate on whatever we have learnted. He has  always
emphasiszeds the great importance of  miximixing  and  integrating  whatever
weone knows  about  the  Buddhadharma  into  our  one’s  experience  through
meditation. When we are able to do that, it will then  that  makes  us  even
much more fortunate. We accumulate much more merit and there  is   and  tthe
potential to make our lives even more meaningful is there.

When we study or hear the teachings of the Buddha’s teachings, we  do  plant
imprints  of the from hearing the Buddha’s teachings  in  our  mind.  It  is
evident from our own experience that the  imprints  that  we  plant  in  our
minds that comes from reflection and understanding are is even stronger  and
more powerful. So it is important to hold on to whatever  we  have  learnted
and then reflect on them over and  over  again.  That  way  en  the  ensuing
imprints that are will be placed inon our minds will be much stronger.

It is clear from our own experience that we remember for  a  long  time  the
things that that we have understand ood and the things that we  think  about
regularly. The things that we reflect on on a regular basis are  the  things
we tend to remember and  and we can remember them forever. So  the  imprints
that areis planted on the mind through reflection  and  analysis  areis  far
much more stable and stronger. Then As such, there is  hope.  We  could  say
that such imprints from reflection will see us through  to  the  next  life.
They ; it will ripen in the next life. Otherwise, when  if  we  cannot  even
remember the things in this life, then it is very difficult  to  claim  that
we will remember them se in the future lives.

Khen  Rinpoche  (in  English):  Are  you  clear  about   this?   Don’t   get
discouraged.

Here I’m talking about doing meditation. We call it meditation.  Whether  we
call it meditation or not, the meditation I’m  talking  about  here  is  the
constantly reflection ng and analysis zing ofn the meaning of the  teachings
that we haveve heard. Whether we call it meditation or  not,  I’m  referring
to constantly reflecting and analyzing the meaning of the teachings that  we
have heard. The imprints  that  areis  planted  on  the  mind  through  such
analysis is much more powerful and will have has a stronger  impact  on  the
mind. This is what gives us hope for our in  the  future  lives,;  not  just
next life but in all the future lives to come. , from life to life.

It will make a difference in our chances of meeting  the  teachings  of  the
Buddha’s teachings again in the future and also meeting with  the  qualified
Mahayana virtuous friends or / gurus  in  our  the  future  lives.  On  that
basis, slowly then there is some hope that slowly we  will  be  able  to  in
achieveing the state  of  omniscience/full  enlightenment  sometime  in  the
future.

With regards to what we need to meditate on, there is absolutely no lack  of
material .that we can meditate on. Everything that we need  to  meditate  on
is something thatwhat  we already know. There is  no  lack  of  material  or
subject matter. What we need to do is to just act  on  it;  ,  analysze  and
reflect on the meaning of the teachings that we hadve heard. What is  needed
now is analysis, critical thinking, and reflection on  the  meaning  of  the
teachings we hadve heard.

As such, Tthose  of  you  who  are  interested  can  voluntarily  join  this
meditation regime or programme that  which will be starting  next  year.  In
order to join this voluntary meditation programme:
• Yregime which  is  entirely  voluntary,  you  must  make  sure  to  commit
  yourself for to a minimum of one year.
• You must commit Wto e are  talking  about  doing  doing  such  reflection,
  critical thinking and analysis for a  minimum  of  15  minutes  every  day
  without fail for one year starting from next year..
 We are talking  about  a  commitment  of  minimum  reflection  or  critical
analysis of 15 minutes every day for one year without fail.
Joining this meditation programme  regime  and  committing  to  a  one  year
meditation regime with daily analytical  meditation  of  not  less  than  15
minutes is something to be done on your own at home. We  are  not  going  to
come together and do this every day. That is not the plan. It is to be  done
on your own at home. Next  year,  when  we  come  back  again  for  classes,
sometime from now till then, there will come a  time  when  wwe  will  start
open up the registration and taking in names.

Rinpoche emphasiszed  this  many  times:  the  importance  of  starting  and
implementing this,  – to really start to think  about  and  reflect  on  the
lLamrim. You must understand that this becomes an offering of  practice.  It
is the best offering and the best way of it is the supreme and  the  highest
way of pleasing the virtuous friend/  the  guru.  This  at  is  the  highest
offering and  the  best  way  of  pleasing  Lama  Zopa  Rinpoche.  Also  for
yourself,  it is the besthighest way of benefitting yourself.

KKeeping this in mind, go and think about it and see  whether  you  want  to
join and whether you can commit to thi this  particular  meditation  regime.
and whether you can commit to it.

By obtainBy putting into practice, by obtaining the advice of  the  virtuous
friend,  by putting it into practice and by implementing  it,  this  becomes
the highest offering to the virtuous friend/the guru, and the  best  way  of
pleasing the guru. When the guru is really  pleased,  that  becomes  a  real
cause for the guru to live long, for his ’s long life. Of all the  different
kinds of long life pujas, pleasing the guru’s mind, doing  what  he  or  she
advises, is the ultimate and is the highest long life puja.

Please keep this in mind and think about this. If you really have  faith  in
the guru, in Rinpoche, if you are thinking of how to please him and how  you
really want to contribute to his long life, please keep all these points  in
mind and think about it.

The plan is that after we start this meditation programmeregime,  from  time
to time, every now and then at certain intervals, let’s say,   every two  to
three months, participants people who have signed up and committed  to  this
meditation regime perhaps can come together and share their our  experiences
such as what were your  experiences  when  you  were  of  doing  this  daily
practice and the kind  of  problems  they  encounter  and  ,  what  kind  of
experiences you have and what kind of problems and sso forth. In  this  way,
wWe can will share and help one another.

There is time to think about this between now and next  year  when  we  come
back again for classes. There areis still some time, a few couple of  months
for you , to think about thisit. Consider  this  carefully.  If  you  really
want to join, you  must  fulfil  the  commitment.  Commitment  is  the  most
important element. Think carefully first before you commit.

Khen Rinpoche (in English): There will be cctv in your place. Next year  I’m
going to order the cctv cameras. I can’t see your mind but at  least  I  can
must make sure you sit for 15 minutes. Don’t worry.  T,  this  is  a  joke!.
(Laughter).

Care Group
Benny Soh And Wee Geok  Hua  gave  iving  details  of  the  new  recruitment
aboudrive t for the ABC Care Group.
                          ~~~~~~~~~~ . (89 ~107.55)

Khen Rinpoche (in English): Today there are two  announcements.  One  is  to
help ABC members who are sick. The whole idea is to makeing  as  one  family
in ABC. It is extremely important to care for each other. We want to  create
this environment. Once you are an ABC member, then ABC will look  after  you
when you have difficult times. Thisat is the idea.  Wwe want to create  this
kind of cultureat. Hopefully more people come  forward,  and   then  we  can
benefit more people. This at is the idea.  As  they  (Benny  and  Geok  Hua)
mentioned, you do not  n’t  have  to  feel  pressurized.  You  can  sign  up
whenever you are free. If you wish to help, they go they will call  you.  If
you are very busy and cannot make it, you just tell  them  you  cannot  make
it. So  That it is not so much so difficult part.

What is vVery important is your mind, your wish  is there to  help.  So  Iit
is important that you want to help. Definitely we  will  all  get  sick  and
die, so they will look after us. So Tthis is cause and  effect.  Please  try
to help. It is not every day, not every year.  Hopefully   there  is  nobody
will fall sick this year. We cannot  avoid  sickness  and  death.  Everybody
will get sick and die. Especially there are many people who  live  alone  so
we need to create this group to help them. So keep that in mind that.


Examination – 12 Oct 2013 at 10am

|Vigilance - to catch laxity and excitement when they arise in the    |
|course of developing one’s concentration.                            |
|To develop powerful vigilance, one must have powerful mindfulness.   |
|Mental laxity arises when the mind is excessively withdrawn inward.  |
|To eliminate mental laxity, uplift the mind by turning the mind’s    |
|attention to something that brings joy and delight. We should bring  |
|to mind the image or the appearance of brightness.                   |
|Subtle laxity – laxity that is very slight and occurs only           |
|infrequently                                                         |
|When subtle laxity is present, there is clarity and stability, and   |
|the mind is abiding in the object but the mind is a bit too relax.   |
|Its manner of apprehending the object of meditation is loose. There  |
|isn’t intensity behind the mind’s way of apprehending the object.    |
|Antidote - tighten up your apprehension of the object of meditation  |
|and continue meditating                                              |
|Coarse laxity is dense and seems to occur repeatedly, suspend your   |
|cultivation of concentration, clear away laxity using any of those   |
|remedies, and then resume your meditation.                           |
|Excitement is derivative of attachment. In order to eliminate        |
|excitement, we have to bring to mind disillusioning things i.e.      |
|things that will bring about a sense of disenchantment.              |
|Antidote - reflecting on impermanence.                               |
|Coarse excitement - if very strong or prolonged excitement arises, it|
|is crucial that you relax the meditation for a while and cultivate a |
|sense of disenchantment, rather than attempting to pull in your mind |
|and direct it back to the object of meditation every time it becomes |
|scattered.                                                           |
|Subtle excitement - excitement that is not so dominant. Upon noticing|
|the arising of such excitement with mindfulness and vigilance, bring |
|the mind’s attention back to the object of meditation and place it   |
|there.                                                               |




Interpreted by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme; transcribed by Phuah  Soon  Ek,  Patricia
Lee and Julia Koh; edited by Cecilia Tsong.




-----------------------
[1] LRCM, 64.
[2] Ibid., 64.
[3] Ibid., 65.
[4] Ibid.
[5] Ibid.
[6] Ibid., 65.
[7] Ibid. 65-66.
[8] Ibid., 66.
[9] Ibid., 66.
[10] Ibid.
[11] Ibid., 67.
[12] Ibid.
[13] Ibid.
[14] Ibid., 67.
[15] Ibid., 68.
[16] Ibid.
[17] Tib. rnal du, usually translated here as  “in  its  natural  state”  or
“naturally.”
[18] Ibid., 68.
[19] Tib. mtshan nyid theg, “vehicle  of  characteristics”  or  “vehicle  of
metaphysical dialetics.”
[20] Ibid., 70.

