Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/SixPerfections/BP2 M4 L06 (final-new).doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:02.793651
================================================================================


Transcript of teachings by Khen Rinpoche Geshe Chonyi  on  the  Heart  Sutra
and Stages of the Path (the Six Perfections)

Root text: The Heart of  Wisdom  Sutra  by  Shakyamuni  Buddha,  translation
Gelong  Thubten  Tsultrim  (George  Churinoff).  Extracted  from   Essential
Buddhist Prayers: An FPMT Prayer  Book,  Volume  1.  Copyright:  FPMT,  Inc.
2008.

Lesson                                                                     6
                                                     11 July 2013


Review of the prologue. The cause of Shariputra’s question & the question
itself. The transition. The actual explanation. The assertions of the CMWS.
Phenomena are merely imputed by & are mere appearances to the mind. Object
of negation. Apprehension of true existence. Dependent origination.

Transcript of teachings by Khen Rinpoche Geshe Chonyi on the  Heart  of  the
Perfection of Wisdom Sutra and the Six Perfections

Lesson No: 6                             Date: 11th July 2013


Question: Why one must take the engaged bodhisattva  vows  in  order  to  be
enlightened? Why can’t the bodhisattva just trains in  the  six  perfections
alone?  to get enlightened?


Answer: If one is able to practisce the six perfections, then  I  personally
I do not think that it doesn’t hasve to be preceded by making  a  pledge  or
vow. After all, t, which essentially is the vow. What  the  bodhisattva  vow
is making a pledge to practisce the  six  perfections,   is  it  notn’t  it?
Before one engages in the six perfections, one must really want  to  do  so.
That is engage in them, akin to making a pledge.

Imagine that you are heading ed to an important destination. Before you  set
your foot for that important destination, first  you  must  first  have  the
idea and the wish to of going there. , and then you kind of want to  go.  It
is just like a pledge or aa  commitment, “ ‘I will  go  there.”.’  Based  on
that, you then actually set out. -forth. But Tthere are  cases  that  people
who just just go anywhere wherever it  takes  them;  they  just  go  without
thinking.

Khen Rinpoche (in English): But Tthese people  do  not  reach  that  special
place. They rReach a different place.

I think if it is an important task, that important task probably has  to  be
preceded by a commitment to do it and to accomplish theat task.

Khen Rinpoche (in English): Maybe it is like that.

In  Lama  Tsongkhapa’s  Dependent  Arising:  A  Praise  of  the  praise   to
Shakyamuni Buddha, he  through his teaching on dependent  origination,  Lama
Tsongkhapa mentioned that he was indeed he is so  fortunate  to  have  found
even even just a little faith in the Buddha before  his  life  caome  to  an
end. Likewise, we have the opportunity to study the teachings of  look  into
tthe Buddha’s teachings now. It is challenging wWhen you  study  these  such
philosophical  teachings,  they  are  challenging.  But   through   whatever
learning and reflection on the teaching of the Buddha, if  you  do  come  to
gain some faith in the Buddha, that will make you very  fortunate.  Even  if
you do not n’t managed  to  achieve  any  experiences  or  realiszations  or
experiences, , but if you are able to  develop  some  faith  in  the  Buddha
through based on your learning and  reflecting  on  the  teachingsons,  then
tthat makes you a very fortunate person indeed.

. This is something that you should remember, to  keep  in  your  mind,   to
remember them and then just feel happy about all  the  time.  In  particular
you  need  to  realisze  that  you  are  very  fortunate  to   hhaveing   an
opportunity to study and to learn the Buddha’s teachings of  the  Buddha  on
emptiness.  is really so fortunate. This is something  you  should  keep  in
mind all the time.

Now you have the opportunity to learn together with many other people. ,  so
the presence of other people in the same  class  is  a  condition  for  your
studies. Generally, it is difficult if you are to study or to listen to  the
teachings on your own.ing alone That , or you are just listening  alone.  It
is much more challenging than if you were  areto  doing the same thing  with
a group of like-minded people. The presence of other people in the class  is
a helpful condition for your own studies. As such, you should  can  consider
everyone  in this class to be as precious, and as helpful. Therefore, it  is
good to have mutual consideration and respect for one another.  Thinking  in
such a way is helpful.

A monastery is a great seat of learning. In the monastery,  students  People
of the same class and people who share the same teacher are  generally  very
close-knit people, and are very harmonious. They have  athe  strong  feeling
of togetherness. Of course, at times  there will be disagreements at  times,
but,  in general, the overall feeling is,  “We  are  together  in  the  same
class,”, or “We have the same  teacher”.   The  feeling  of  unity  is  very
strong. This is the culture in the great seat of learning in the  monastery.


Likewise, we can ould adopt the same kind of thinking here. You all are  all
 together in the same  class.  You  should  cultivate  this   and  have  the
feeling of unity. , Ttherefore practisce  pure  perception  in  relation  to
with one another. When If there is this kind of feeling of unity or  oneness
in the class, then when it comes to activities y such as discussions,  there
should not be any problems in  conducting  them  discussion  and  so  forth.
Without such unity, this, even holding to  be  able  to  do  discussions  is
would  be  difficult.  It  is  possible  that  at  times   there   will   be
disagreements from time to time. between people. This is  just  normal.  But
yYou should always just have to  keep  in  mind  the  idea  of  that  coming
together in unity and in harmony.

Basically Aalll of you are studying looking at the  same  material  at   and
studying the same thing. So Wwhen it comes to learning, you should not  have
the thought, is idea and feeling; “This is terrible. ! It is so  difficult!”
 Rather, you should learn willingly, voluntarily  and  happily.  It  is  the
same with regard to coming to class. You should  come  to  class  willingly,
voluntarily and happily. Whether it is coming to class or engaging  in  your
studies, iIn order for you to do so it willingly, voluntarily  and  happily,
whether it is coming to class or studying or learning, that  it  must  comes
from knowing on a basis of you knowing what is in  it is in there  for  you,
e.g.,  such as the benefits of  pertaining to studying  emptiness.  We  have
talked a little bit about those e benefits and the merit it generates.

. Willingness is a happy feeling of doing something  voluntarily.   and  Iit
comes about based on has to come on the basis of  knowing  the  benefits  w.
Without which generating such willingness that, it may be really  difficult.
 You come to class after a hard day’s  work and and you feeling tired.  When
If you do not understand what is in it  for you, when you  and  do  not  see
the benefits, then of course  it  will  would  be  difficult.  You  have  to
understand that you are very fortunate even just to be able to learn even  a
little bit do a little bit  of  learning  despite  living  in  such  a  busy
country with such a busy lifestyle. Please keep this in mind at all times.

                                 ~~~~~~~~~~


The prologue

The sutra starts with:

      Thus did I hear at one time. The Bhagavan  was  dwelling  on  Mass  of
      Vultures Mountain in Rajagriha together  with  a  great  community  of
      monks and a  great  community  of  bodhisattvas.  At  that  time,  the
      Bhagavan was absorbed  in  the  concentration  on  the  categories  of
      phenomena called ““Profound Perception.”.

The section uUp to this point in of the sutra, this section constitutes  the
prologue.

The Perfection of Wisdom Sutras are is mostly classified  under  the  Ssutra
Ppitaka. This at would makes The Heart of the  Perfection  of  Wisdom  Sutra
part of the Ssutra Ppitaka as well.

The sutra starts with, “Thus did I hear at one time.”
The  ‘“I’”  indicates  the  compiler  i.e.  the  person  who  compiled  this
particular sutra.
If The Heart of the  Perfection  of  Wisdom  Sutra  falls  into  the  Ssutra
Ppitaka, that makes Ananda twould make Ananda the compiler of this sutra.

e sutra.
In the last lesson we looked at the compilation  of  the  teachings  of  the
Buddhaist  teachings.   From  a  common  perspective,  the  teachings   were
compiled during under three councils. Those  teachings  that  were  compiled
are now commonly known as the Pali Canon which . The  Pali  Cannon  consists
of the Hinayana teachings.

If you were to look at the compilation of the Buddhist  teachings  from  the
Mahayana perspective, then Vajrapani would be the compiler of this sutra.

“‘Thus did I hear at  one  time.  The  Bhagavan  was  dwelling  on  Mass  of
Vultures Mountain in Rajagriha together with a great community of monks  and
a great community of bodhisattvas.” ’ - Bby  reading  this  section  of  the
sutra, you will get the idea that the Buddha gave taught this  very  special
teaching called  The Heart of the Perfection of Wisdom Sutra at this very  e
special place,  called the Mass of Vultures Mountain.

Who were did the Buddha speaking  to?
The teachings were heard by, “ a  great  community  of  monks  and  a  great
community of bodhisattvas..” This means that the listeners consisted of  the
persons of the three lineages, or the three vehicles.

Shariputra’s question

‘At that time, the  Bhagavan  was  absorbed  in  the  concentration  on  the
categories of phenomena called “Profound Perception”’ - this  indicates  the
cause for the question that is going to come soon.
      At that time, the Bhagavan was absorbed in the  concentration  on  the
      categories of phenomena called “Profound Perception.”  Also,  at  that
      time, the bodhisattva mahasattva arya Avalokiteshvara looked upon  the
      very practice of the profound perfection of wisdom  and  beheld  those
      five aggregates also as empty of inherent nature.
 All these are put together is the cause for the  question  that  Shariputra
will ask.
“‘At that time, the Bhagavan  was  absorbed  in  the  concentration  on  the
categories of phenomena called ‘Profound Perception.’”   -  Tthis  indicates
that the Buddha, while remaining in  this  meditative  equipoise,  and  with
that concentration, he blessed Shariputra. Essentially, in  this  particular
concentration, the Buddha blessed Shariputra so that he would  initiate  the
series of questions that   which  will  be  followed  by  the  answers  from
Avalokiteshvara.

Next is the condition condition or cause for the question to be asked:

      , ‘Also, at that time, the bodhisattva mahasattva arya Avalokiteshvara
      looked upon the very practice of the profound perfection of wisdom and
      beheld those five aggregates also as empty of inherent nature.’




Following this is the question from Shariputra:

      Then, through the power of Buddha, the venerable Shariputra said  this
      to the bodhisattva mahasattva arya Avalokiteshvara:  “How  should  any
      son of the lineage train who wishes to practice the  activity  of  the
      profound perfection of wisdom?””


In Tthe Tibetan translation of the sutra, which is a  translation  from  the
Sanskrit version,, it says,  “How  should  any  son  of  the  lineage  train
...?”.  The  Chinese  translation  that  also  is  purportsed  to   be   the
translation of  the  Sanskrit  version  includes  ,  “the  daughter  of  the
lineage.”  is also there; so “ the son and daughter of the lineage”. But  in


In the Tibetan  translation,  edition,  which  is  a  translation  from  the
Sanskrit version, only ““the son of the lineage”” is mentioned.
When If only ““the son of the lineage”” is mentioned, then ““the son of  the
lineage”” refers to Avalokiteshvara to whom the question is posed.

Then who will cover the people who are not  Chenrezig  that  would  probably
include the daughter of the lineage?
In the Tibetan edition, it only has the “son  of  the  lineage”.  If  it  is
based on that, “the son of the lineage” refers to the  person  to  whom  the
question is asked, and in this case is Avalokiteshvara.
“How should any son of the lineage train who  wishes  …”:   -  Tthe  “‘who”’
would cover those who are not Avalokiteshevara,  i.e.,  both  the  sons  and
daughters of the lineage. When If you read it in such a way, then it is  all
right, because the person who is  going  to  practisce  the  pPerfection  of
wWisdom is not just Avalokiteshvara but also the ,  basically  any  sons  or
daughters of the lineage.

When If you do not know how to explain this, then  there  will  be  problems
because there will be people will ask who say, “How about the Where are  the
daughters of the lineage? Does this mean onOnly  the  sons  of  lineage  can
practisce?” One has to be careful in explaining such things.


The transition


      In some editions of the Chinese translation which is purported  to  be
      the translation from the Sanskrit version, at this point of the sutra,
      the daughter of the lineage is also mentioned.
      He said that and the bodhisattva mahasattva arya Avalokiteshvara  said
      this to the venerable Sharadvatiputra. ““Shariputra, any  son  of  the
      lineage or daughter of the lineage who wishes to practice the activity
      of the profound perfection of wisdom should look upon  it  like  this,
      correctly and repeatedly beholding those five aggregates also as empty
      of inherent nature.”.

“‘He said that and the  bodhisattva  mahasattva  arya  Avalokiteshvara  said
this to the venerable Sharadvatiputra. ‘“Shariputra, any son of the  lineage
or daughter of the lineage who  wishes  to  practice  the  activity  of  the
profound perfection of wisdom should look upon it like this’ …””’  -  up  to
thThis is when the is  point  is  the  transition  is  made  to  the  actual
explanation that is to follow.

The actual explanation: brief & detailed explanations

“… cThen the transition is made to the actual explanation:

‘Correctly and repeatedly beholding those five aggregates also as  empty  of
inherent nature.”: ’T - this is where the actual explanation begins.
Ofn the actual explanation, between the brief explanation and  the  detailed
explanation,
“… c‘Correctly and repeatedly beholding those five aggregates also as  empty
of inherent nature”’ constitutes the brief explanation.
The detailed explanation  starts  from,  “:  Form  is  empty.  Emptiness  is
form..” and so forth.

 Emptiness is form…
 ‘Correctly and repeatedly beholding those five aggregates also as empty  of
inherent nature’ - this section is Tthe brief explanation .  This  indicates
the general procedure of the practice for the Path  of  Meditation,  of  the
pPath of aAccumulation, the pPath of pPreparation, the pPath of sSeeing  and
the pPath of mMeditation.
So  this  sections  “…  c‘correctly  and  repeatedly  beholding  those  five
aggregates also as empty of inherent nature.”’  is  to  be  applied  to  all
these four paths.

      Form is empty. Emptiness is form. Emptiness is not  other  than  form.
      Form is also not other than  emptiness.  In  the  same  way,  feeling,
      discrimination, compositional factors, and consciousness are empty.


This section shows the way to meditate on emptiness while  one  is   on  the
pPath of aAccumulation and the pPath of pPreparation.

If You will you remember from our the discussion of the from the pPaths  and
gGrounds that:
• On the pPath of aAccumulation and the pPath of pPreparation, the
  meditation on emptiness is done via a meaning generality or mental image
  of emptiness.
• On the pPath of sSeeing, emptiness is perceived directly.
• On the pPath of mMeditation, one meditates on the emptiness that one has
  seen directly, basically i.e., familiariszing oneself with what one has
  seen directly while on the pPath of sSeeing.

“… c‘Correctly and repeatedly beholding those five aggregates also as  empty
of inherent nature.” ’ - Tthe ‘‘also’’ here indicates that not only is  form
and so forth are empty of inherent existence, e.  Even  the  collections  of
forms and so forth are also empty of inherent existence.

The assertions of the CMWS

According to  the  Consequence  Middle  Way  School  (CMMWS),  emptiness  of
inherent existence is synonymous with the emptyiness of  existing  from  its
own side. Basically, Tthis means that theere are are no phenomena  that  can
exist from their their own side.


According to tThe CMWS asserts that , all  phenomena  are  posited  as  mere
appearances to of the mind , which means that there are  no  phenomena  that
exist from their own side just like the appearance of a  dream  elephant  to
the dream consciousness. In the dream, there is an  appearance  of  a  dream
elephant, but that appearance of the elephant is not coming  from  the  side
of the object as . For there is no such an object. Yet , but there is  still
theis appearance of an elephant. That appearance is  an  appearance  to  the
perceiving  consciousness;    and   in   this   case,    is   the   dreaming
consciousness. This dream elephant is  essentially  an  appearance  to  this
dreaming consciousness. Likewise, all phenomena do not exist from their  own
side. They exist as are mere appearances to of the mind.

You can tNow think of the emptiness  of  inherent  existence  by  using  the
analogy of a dream elephant. In athe dream, you have  the  appearance  of  a
dream elephant. The dream elephant does not exist from its own  side,  i.e.,
t. There is nothing coming from the side of the object. I, but it is a  mere
projection of the mind, a mere . It is an appearance to to  and  a  creation
of  the  dreaming  consciousness.  It  is  a  creation   of   the   dreaming
consciousness. It  is  not  like  there  is  a  real  elephant  right  there
functioning. There is no real elephant functioning out there.

Likewise, all phenomena , anything that  exist,  that  exist  exist   aas  a
creations of the mind, as something  that  is  merely  imputed  by  thought.
Phenomena do not exist from their own side. We should use  this  analogy  to
understand that how all phenomena do not exist from  their  its  oown  side.
Rather, all phenomena are posited as mere appearances to to the mind.

According to the CMWS, all phenomena are posited as mere appearances to  the
mind. All phenomena are merely imputed by thought and are  the  creation  of
the mind. For there are just mere appearances to the mind, because there  is
nothing from the side of the object, and we understand  this  based  on  the
analogy. Of course, phenomena do exist, but how do they  exist?  They  exist
as  mere  appearances  to  a  conventional  mind   or   a   conventional   /
consciousness. This is how they exist; as mere appearances to the mind;  the
mere appearances that appear to a conventional consciousness.
When If you are not satisfied with that level  of  appearance,  and  if  you
look deeperfurther, you will not be able to point to  or  find  the  object.
out that thing. It is not findable. If you are not satisfied with  the  mere
appearance, and you poked further, at the end of the day  you  will  not  be
able to point what exactly is that thing. It exists. How does it  exist?  It
exists as mere appearances.
When you try to If you look for the imputed object, youyou cannot  find  it;
, but yet it exists. How does it exist? It exists as a mere appearance.  You
We have to be satisfied with that. This at is how  things  exists.  Anything
beyond that, you will run into problems. If you try to look for the  object,
you will not able to find, but yet it exists. How does it exist? It is  that
mere appearances to the mind. You have to satisfy with that.


Phenomena are merely imputed by the mind

Before you can have any understanding of the meaning  of  the  emptiness  of
inherent existence, As I have mentioned before, one of  the  most  important
things is to  first  understand  before  you  can  even  have  any  hope  of
understanding what emptiness of inherently existence is. One the very  first
thing that you must understand is how all phenomena are  merely  imputed  by
the mind (or imputed by thought)/thought. This at is the first step.
You have to understand how all phenomena are merely imputed by thought.  The
word ‘merely ‘ eliminates inherently existence. The word is not for fun.

Let us ’s goes back to the example of mistaking enly a coil of rope to be  a
snake.[1] This It happens at the time especially  when  the  conditions  are
gathered, there ssuch as the  weather  condition  and  so  forth.  When  the
conditions are gathered, we have mistakenly a coil of rope to  be  a  snake.
First, the coil of rope appears to be a as  snake.  Of  course,  it  has  to
appear as snake; otherwise we won’t believe there is a snake. On top  of  it
appearing as a snake, we believe there it  is  a  snake.  So  tThere  is  an
appearance of a as a snake there from the side of the rope.  and  Tthe  mind
assents to that appearance, and believesing a  that  there  is  a  snake  is
there. The mind is grasping, and believing that there is a snake there.


Believing that there is a snake, The coil of  rope  appearing  as  a  snake,
then we assent to the appearance and believe that there  is  a  snake.  This
induces fear arises  and we start to worry. Without  such  a  belief,  this,
there will be is  no  fear.  But  when  with  the  mind  assentsing  to  the
appearance, and believesing that there is a  snake,  the  fear  arises.  The
reality is that it is just only a coil of rope. There  is  no  n’t  a  snake
there. When we look at the coil of  rope,  from  one  end  to  the  otherthe
beginning to the end, we will not be able to find a snake  on  the  a  rope.
There is no snake about the rope, there is no snake in the  rope,  there  is
no snake on the rope, and the rope is not the snake. Thisat is  very  clear.
But Sstill there is the a mind that believesing that it to be is a snake.

Is this belief that there is a  snake imputed and made up by by the mind  or
not? Is it not  The coil of rope is not a snake but we believe that it is  a
snake. Is this belief that there is a snake made up by mind? It  is  imputed
by the mind or not?
From this, we can see that the appearance of the coil of rope appearing  aas
a snake is a fabrication of the mind. It is not coming from the side of  the
rope. The rope appearing as a snake is not  coming  from  the  side  of  the
rope. It is a fabrication of the mind. The mind imputes that it is a  snake.
This shows that the snake is imputed by the mind. The coil of rope being  as
a snake is completely imputed by the mind. It has nothing  to  do  with  the
coil of rope.

The coil of rope  appearing  as  a  snake  is  the  result  of  your  mind’s
fabrication or it is due to pollution or corruption from  the  side  of  the
rope? If you look for the snake in that  coil  of  rope,  there  is  nothing
about the coil of rope that there is a snake. From the  top,  bottom,  left,
right, inside and outside, there is no snake there, but  the  coil  of  rope
appearing as  a  snake.  Is  the  coil  of  rope  appearing  as  a  snake  a
fabrication of your mind or not?
You Tthink about this: it. The coil of rope appearing as a snake is  a  mere
appearance toof the mind.

Then yYou apply your understanding of thate analogy  to  an  actual  object,
for example, the sense of the ‘I’. or me.
What is theis ‘I’ in the sense of the ‘I’ or the thought apprehending ‘I’?
This ‘I’ is the same as like the appearance of the a coil of rope to  be  as
a snake in that. It is the same in that it is it is  a  mere  appearance  to
the mind.[2]

Ven Gyurme: I am not saying that it is the same.  You  have  to  be  careful
with the English.
According to  the  CMWS,  the  ‘I’  is  that  which  is  merely  imputed  in
dependence upon the bases is of designation, the aggregates.

The aggregates are the body and mind. , and Wwhen elaborated, there are  the
five aggregates:
1. fForm
2. fFeeling
3. dDiscrimination
4. cCompositional factors
5. cConsciousness
These five aggregates are the baseis of designation of the person, the  ‘I’.
The ‘I’ is merely imputed inIn dependence upon the aggregates,  the  ‘I’  is
merely imputed.

You  have  to  look  among  the  five  aggregates  which  is  the  basis  of
designation of the ‘I’. When  If  you  look  for  the  ‘I’  among  the  five
aggregates one by one—the : aggregate of form, the  aggregates  of  feeling,
discrimination, compositional factors and consciousness—, one  by  one,  you
will not be able to find the ‘I’. The ‘I’ is not the aggregate of  form,  it
is nfeeling, the ‘I’ is not the aggregate of feeling orm and so forth.

This is the same as in the analogy of mistaking enly a coil of the  rope  to
be a snake. When If you look for the a snake in that  coil  of  rope,   from
one end of the rope to the other, beginning to end,  from  this  section  to
another section, left, right,  in,  out,  you  will  not  be  able  to  find
anything that is a snake. Likewise, when if you look for the ‘I’  among  the
aggregates, which that is the basis of designation  for  the  ‘I’,  starting
from   form,   feeling,   discrimination,    compositional    factors    and
consciousness, you will not be able to point to anything something  that  is
the ‘I’.

When If you think about it, what exactly is the ‘I’? The ‘I’ is  that  which
is merely labeledlabelled or / merely imputed by thought in dependence  upon
the aggregates, that are their which is the basesis of designation, just  as
the snake which is merely imputed upon the coil of rope. Just  as  there  is
no snake on the coil of rope, in the rope, on the rope,  outside  the  rope,
likewise there is no ‘I’ on the aggregates. The ‘I’ is not  the  aggregates.
It The ‘I’ cannot be found upon the aggregates. At the end of the day,  what
is the ‘I’? The ‘I’ is that which is merely imputed in dependence  upon  the
aggregates, just as how the snake is merely imputed upon the coil of rope.

Phenomena are merely imputed  because  they  cannot  be  found  among  their
basesis of designation. The basis  of  designation  is  not  the  phenomenon
itself.  that  is  imputed.  Therefore,  phenomena  are  merely  imputed  by
thought. We can use the various analogies to help  us  to  understand  this.
The analogy of mistaking enly a coil of rope as a snake is one. There is  is
also the analogy of a dream elephant, the analogy of a mirage,  the  analogy
of an echo, and so forth.  and tThere are many such examples.

When If you look for the ‘I’ or the self among the basesis  of  designation,
the aggregate of form, feeling and so forth, the ‘I’ is  not  form,  ‘I’  is
not feeling, ‘I’ is not this and that. Tthe ‘I’ cannot be  found  among  its
the baseis of designation, and the baseis of designation is not the ‘I’.


If the ‘I’ cannot be  found  there,  is  not  there,  is  the  ‘I’  of  athe
different entity from the aggregates?  When If you look for an ‘I’  that  is
of athe different entity from the aggregates, you will also not be  able  to
find the ‘I’ either.
• Inside don’t have, outside don’t have. The ‘I’ is not the aggregates.
• The ‘I’ is also not of a different entity from the aggregates.

Are we saying then that the ‘I’ does notn’t exist? No, the ‘I’  exists.  The
‘I’ has to exist because we experience it. It is nonsense to  say  that  the
‘I’ does not exist. The ‘I’ definitely exists.

Then
Hhow then does it exist if it is not inherently one with the aggregates  and
it is not inherently different from the aggregates? Does it mean it  doesn’t
exist? No, it exists.

How does it exist? It has to exist because we experience it. It is  kind  of
nonsense to say that ‘I’ does  not  exist.  Of  course,  ‘I’  exist.  It  is
commonly known in the world that ‘I’ exist. ‘I’ has to exist. It  definitely
exists.
According to the CMWS, the highest view, pinnacle of the view, the  ultimate
reality is that the ‘I’ does not exist from the side of the aggregates:.
•   So,  Pphenomena  do  not  exist  from  the  side  of  their   basies  of
  designation.
• Phenomena are not their  basesis of designation.
• Yet Phenomena do not exist from the side of the basis of  designation  but
  yet phenomena exist.
How do phenomena they exist? At the end  of  the  day,  phenomena  are  that
which are posited by a conventional consciousness. That  is  nothing  beyond
this, and nothing lesser than this. This is about it already. It exists.  It
doesn’t exist from the side of the basis of designation, but yet it  exists.
How does it exist? They It  exists  as   merely  posited  by  the  mind  and
specifically posited by the conventional consciousness. There  is  no  other
way out already.

Both of these are the same in that they are merely imputed by the mind:
• The coil of rope appearing as a snake is essentially a fabrication of and
  is imputed by the mind. It is imputed by mind.
• What is the self orThe  ‘I’ or the self at the end of the day? It is none
  other than that which is merely imputed in dependence upon the aggregates.
  So,
both are the same in being merely imputed by mind.

But one does not exist and the other exists.  There  is  a  huge  difference
between the two:
• In the case of mistaking enly the a coil of rope to be as a snake,
  although the idea of the a snake is imputed by the mind, but in reality, t
  there is no snake. That means the coil of rope is not the snake. he snake
  does not exist.
• However, But in the case of the ‘I’, although it is also merely imputed
  by the mind, the ‘I’ does exists. , although it is the same in that it is
  merely imputed by mind but one exists and one doesn’t exist. There is a
  huge difference.

The mind  apprehending  a  coil  of  rope  to  be  asa   snake  is  a  wrong
consciousness because the coil of a rope is not athe snake.  There  was  has
never been a snake there. , there is no snake  there,  inside,  outside,  on
top, left, right, there is no  snake.  There  is  nothing  snake  about  it.
Although the snake it is merely imputed by the  mind,   but  in  this  case,
there is no snake there. the sSnake does not exist. , soTherefore this  mind
is  it is a wrong consciousness.

But  Iin  the  case  of  the  mind  thought  conceiving  of  and   ‘I’,  me,
apprehending the ‘I’, this is a  factually  concordant  mindthought  because
the ‘I’ does exist.

This is  a  potentially  very  disturbing  or  complicated  because  we  are
comparing two things:
1. the aAppearance of a coil of rope as a snake
2. the aThinking of the self or the person  (Appearance  of  the  ‘I,’)  the
   self or person

There is an appearance of a rope as  a  snake.  So,  essentially  it  is  an
appearance of a snake.
Then there is an appearance of “I”. Both of  these  appearances  are  merely
imputed by thought/the mind  but yet, in reality,  one  does  not  exist  in
reality and the another does exists in reality.  This  at  is  the  problem.
Both are imputed by the mind but how do you account for the  fact  that  one
does not exists while the and the other one doesn’t exist?

The essential point about settling the view of emptiness and  completing  it
is that while you  see  that  phenomena  things  and  events  do  not  exist
inherently,  yet,  at the same time,  you are able to can fully explain  how
they it functions. All  phenomena  are  merely  imputed,  yet  they  perform
functions. They actually work.

The first thing to really concentrate on is to figure out in your heart  and
to really understand  is  what  it  meanss  when  the  CMWS  says  that  all
phenomena are merely imputed by  the  mind.  We  have  to  use  the  various
analogies—: the  analogy of the dream elephant, the analogy of mistaking  en
a coil of rope to be as a snake, the analogy of an illusion, the analogy  of
a mirage, the  analogy of an echo and so forth. , all these  analogies.  The
first essential thing  to  understand  first  is  this:  Are  things  merely
imputed by the mind? If so, how are phenomena  are  merely  imputed  by  the
mind? This at is the first thing to settle.




Object of negation

According  to  the  CMWS,  all  phenomena  are   merely   imputed   by   the
mind/thought. Anything that is not merely imputed by the  mind  thought  but
existsing from its own side,  i.e.,   or  inherently   existentce,   is  the
object of negation (or the object of refutation). This is what  we  need  to
refute and negate on the basis of  knowing  how  all  phenomena  are  merely
imputed by the mind.

Apprehension of true existence
d.

We have settled all phenomena are merely imputed by mind. Anything  that  is
not that is the object of negation.
The mind assenting to inherently existence, the mind  conceiving  inherently
existence or the mind apprehending things existing  inherently  is  what  we
called an apprehension of true existence.
The mind that which conceives things and events to be inherently  existentce
from their own side and to be not being  merely  imputed  by  the   mind  is
called an apprehension of true existence.
An apprehension of true existence is the mind that conceivesing  things  and
events, any phenomena, to exist inherently.

If things really existed exactly in the way according to how the mind  views
the world, then this at would shows that there is indeed that is  inherently
existence, that is true existence, and that is existence from its own  side.


The CMWS asserts says that all phenomena do not exist  inherently.  They  do
not exist from their own side. There is not n’t a single atom of  inherently
existence. There  is  no  single  atom  of  existence  from  its  own  side.
Everything is merely imputed by thought. This that includes the ‘I’,  ,  the
self or and person.

Nagarjuna said in his Precious Garland says, “A  being  is  not  earth,  not
water/ Not fire, not wind, not space,/ Not consciousness,  and  not  all  of
them. Person is not the earth, not the water, not the wind,  not  the  fire,
not space. The person is also not the collection of all  these  six  and  so
forth. What person is there other  than  these?”  The  person  is  also  not
something other than all these”.  The  different  elements  that  constitute
the persa person but on, but thea person is not each of the elements nor  is
sae. The person is not the collection of all of them. these.  Then  what  is
the person?
If the  person  is  not  the  element  individually,  it  is  also  not  the
collection of elements then what is the person? Does the  person  it  exist?
It has to exist.

SoSo  what is the answer? The person is that  which  is  merely  imputed  in
dependence upon the collection of the elements. Basically,  Yyou  can  could
think of the aggregates. When If we look for the phenomenon among its  basis
of designation, e.g., for example, the ‘I’ or the person,  if  we  look  for
the ‘I’ we cannot talk about the ‘I’ or the  person  without  talking  about
the body and the mind.

If the ‘I’ exists inherently,  then it should exist among its the  basis  of
designation, but the ‘I’ is not thise  aggregates. , the  ‘I’  is  not  that
aggregate and so forth. WIhen f we look for the ‘I’  among  the  aggregates,
we will not be able to find the ‘I’. , but Tthis does not n’t mean  that  we
have found the non-existence of the ‘I’. The correct analysis  should  would
lead us in the direction whereby we are beginning to feel that  we  are  not
finding the inherently existentce ‘I’. This at is the correct direction.  It
is not about finding the non-existence of the ‘I’.
The wrong conclusion is that the ‘I’ doesn’t exist ‘I’  does  not  exist.  .
TThis hat is wrong, cis coompletely  wrong.  Instead  tThe  analysis  should
conclude  with  the  understanding  that  indeed   the  ‘I’  indeed  is  not
inherently existent,  that  there  is  no  ce.  There  isn’t  an  inherently
existentce ‘I’.

Of course, Tthe inherently existentce ‘I’ does not n’t  exist.  We  have  to
look for it among the aggregates in order  to  convince  ourselves  of  this
fact. When If we look for it, what should we find in the at the end  of  the
day? We should find the non-existence  of  the  inherently  existentce  ‘I’,
.i.e., you  What you should  find  at  the  end  of  the  day  is  that  the
inherently existentce ‘I’ does not n’t exist.

Finding that the inherently existentce ‘I’ does not exist is  not  the  same
as finding that the ‘I’ does not exist.
According to the CMWS, just because we have  discovered  that  a  particular
object in question does not exist inherently,  it does not n’t mean that  we
have found its non-existence. When things do not n’t exist  inherently,   it
does not mean that they cannot exist. All phenomena do not exist  inherently
but they exist as merely imputed by thought.

Dependent origination

Phenomena  that  are  existentsce  obviously  exist.   But   existence   and
inherently existence are not the same thing. Things  that  eExist  ing  does
not  n’t  mean  that   things  exist  inherently.   Things  are  dependently
originated/ dependently arisen. There  are  phenomena  that  come  about  by
depending on causes and conditions. That  is  talking  about  the  dependent
arising at the level of causality. So there are phenomena  that  come  about
through causes and conditions. Those  phenomena  came  about  in  dependence
upon causes and conditions. They are coming  into  being  in  dependence  on
causes and conditions.
Because things are dependently arisen,  things  are  dependently  originated
therefore things do not exist inherently. That is the essence.
A pPhenomenon a comes into being are created in  dependence  on  causes  and
conditions. some other factors, whatever the factors may it  be.  Therefore,
Tthis at makes that particular phenomenon dependently originated arisen  (or
dependently  arisen).  This  is  dependent  origination  at  the  level   of
causality.  A  dand  dependently  originated  arisen   phenomenon   is   not
inherently existentce. This is the essence. Something which  is  dependently
originated is not inherently existence.

Dependently  originationaris  en  and  inherently  existence  are   mutually
exclusive. They contradict one another. If something exists by depending  on
something  else,  it  cannot  be  inherently  existentce.  It  is  an  auto-
cancellation.


To gain an understanding of inherent existence, oOne of the  best  lines  of
reasoning to gain an understanding on inherently existence  is  to  use  the
logic of dependently originationarising. By using the logic  of  dependently
originationarising,  one  comes  to  understand  how  things  are  empty  of
existing inherently and also you  have  to  account  hhow  things  exist  as
merely imputed by thought/the mind.

We return Go back to the analogy of mistaking enly a coil of rope to  be  as
a snake. There is the an appearance of a snake right there from the side  of
the coil of the rope. Now wNow we have concluded that that  appearance is  a
fabrication and creation of the mind and does not , and is the  creation  of
the mind. That appearance is not comeing from the side of  the  rope.  Theat
snake is just a mere imputation by thought. This at is the reality about  it
but this at is not how it appears.

The Although the snake is just merely  imputed by the mind on  to  the  coil
of rope. At the time , during that scenario when the mind does not  realisze
that the snake it is not imputed by the mind, t. There is an  appearance  of
a snake right there, being projecteding itself from the side of the coil  of
the rope. Although this is that is not the  the reality,  but  this  is  how
it appears. The reality is that the snake it is merely imputed by the  mind.
 but Nnevertheless theat appearance of a snake  is  comes  ing  right  there
completely from the side of the coil of the rope.

Likewise,  although,  in  reality,   the  ‘I’  is  in  reality,   what   the
‘I’/person/self  is  none  other  than  that  which  is  merely  imputed  in
dependence  upon  the  aggregates,  that  arewhich  is  its  the  baseis  of
designation, our experience of the .
When we have the sense of ‘I’ is , itthat it  does not n’t appear to  be  as
merely imputed in this way. . No way, never ever for us. The  ‘I’  It  never
appears to us to be  as merely imputed. The ‘I’ seems  to  exist  among  the
body and mind. We think that the ‘I’ it is coming completely from  the  side
of the body and mind,  that  it  exists  from  the  side  of  the  basis  of
designation.. This is
While that is the reality of the ‘I’ and all other phenomena, they are  just
merely imputed in dependence upon their basis of designation.  In  the  case
of the person, the ‘I’, the self, it is just that which  is  merely  imputed
in dependence upon the  aggregates,  which  is  the  basis  of  designation.
Although that is the reality but that is not how ‘I’  and  phenomena  appear
to us. They don’t appear to us as merely  imputed,  they  appear  to  us  as
existing right from the side of the basis of imputation.  That  is  not  the
real problem yet .

The real problem is that wWe completely assent  to  thateir  appearance.  We
believe completely in that appearance. This is how it is—it.  It  exists  in
the way it appears. This is the ultimate root of our  circling  in  samsara.
This is the root, the final root, the ultimate root.

Returning to the Going back to the analogy of mistaking  enly  the  coil  of
the rope to be as a snake, although there is no snake from the side  of  the
rope and t, the snake is just a mere imputation by the mind,  but  there  is
the appearance of the snake right there from the side of the rope. Not  only
is there that this e appearance but , we assent to thate   appearance.   and
We believe that there is a snake there. Because of this belief,  then  there
is fear and other problems follow. . Although there is no  snake  there  but
yet our belief that there is a snake there  causes  the  fear  and  all  the
problems to come.

Likewise, all our problems and sufferings come from  our  assenting  to  the
appearance of the the inherently existentce ‘I’, ourand beliefving that  the
‘I’ indeed is is inherently existentce.

                                 ~~~~~~~~~~

So, “… correctly and repeatedly beholding  those  five  aggregates  also  as
empty of inherent nature.” This is the brief explanation  of  the  emptiness
of inherent existence.

The extensive explanation follows with the  presentation  of  the  four-fold
emptiness.



Interpreted by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme; transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek,  Vivien  Ng
and Aki Yeo; edited by Cecilia Tsong.



So, inthe  section  of  the  sutra  that  says:  “correctly  and  repeatedly
beholding those five aggregates also as empty of inherent nature”,  that  is
the brief explanation of the emptiness of inherently existence.
The extensive explanation comes  after  that  starting  with  the  four-fold
emptiness.

(For reference only, need to verify further)
|Thus did I hear                 |The teaching was heard directly from      |
|                                |Buddha Shakyamuni himself, and not from   |
|                                |the third party.                          |
|At one time                     |This teaching was only heard once,        |
|                                |indicates how rare it is to be able to    |
|                                |hear the teaching on the Perfection of    |
|                                |Wisdom Sutra                              |
|                                |It can also mean that the listener is of  |
|                                |very sharp wisdom, because just by hearing|
|                                |it once he remembered everything          |
|Thus did I hear at one time     |The perfect time                      |Pro|
|                                |                                      |log|
|                                |                                      |ue |
|The Bhagavan                    |The perfect teacher                   |   |
|Mass of Vultures Mountain       |The perfect place                     |   |
|Together with a great community |The perfect entourage or the perfect  |   |
|of monks and a great community  |congregation                          |   |
|of bodhisattvas                 |                                      |   |
|A great community of monks      |The hearer and the solitary realizer  |   |
|                                |foe destroyers                        |   |
|A great community of            |The bodhisattvas                      |   |
|bodhisattvas                    |                                      |   |
|At that time, the Bhagavan was  |The Buddha conferred blessing to          |
|absorbed in the concentration on|Shariputra, while remaining in meditative |
|the categories of phenomena     |equipoise focusing on emptiness, and with |
|called “Profound Perception     |the concentration on the categories of    |
|                                |phenomena called “Profound Perception”.   |
|                                |The blessing caused Shariputra to engage  |
|                                |in question and answer session with       |
|                                |Avalokiteshvara.                          |
|Also, at that time, the         |Here it shows the condition for           |
|bodhisattva mahasattva arya     |Shariputra’s questions. While Buddha was  |
|Avalokiteshvara looked upon the |in meditative equipoise, Avalokiteshvara  |
|very practice of the profound   |was also in meditative equipoise looking  |
|perfection of wisdom and beheld |upon the very practice of the profound    |
|those five aggregates also as   |perfection of wisdom and beheld those five|
|empty of inherent existence.    |aggregates also as empty of inherent      |
|                                |existence.                                |
|                                |After this, Shariputra begin his          |
|                                |questions.                                |
|Then, through the power of      |Shariputra did not ask the question merely|
|Buddha, the venerable Shariputra|through his own volition, but rather he   |
|said this to the bodhisattva    |asked the question to Avalokiteshvara due |
|mahasattva arya Avalokiteshvara:|to the power of Buddha.                   |
|“How should any son of the      |The Chinese translation that is purported |
|lineage train who wishes to     |to be the translation of the Sanskrit     |
|practice the activity of the    |version, the “daughter of the lineage” is |
|profound perfection of wisdom?” |also mentioned.                           |
|                                |In the Tibetan translation from the       |
|                                |Sanskrit version, only “son of the        |
|                                |lineage” is mentioned.                    |
|                                |If only the “son of the lineage” is       |
|                                |mentioned, then this refers to the person |
|                                |to whom the question is asked. In this    |
|                                |case is Avalokiteshvara.                  |
|                                |The ‘who’ would cover both the sons and   |
|                                |daughters of the lineage, because the     |
|                                |person who is going to practice the       |
|                                |Perfection of Wisdom is not just          |
|                                |Avalokiteshvara, basically any sons or    |
|                                |daughters of the lineage.                 |
|He said that and bodhisattva    |                                      |Tra|
|mahasattva arya Avalokiteshvara |                                      |nsi|
|said this to the venerable      |                                      |tio|
|Sharadvatiputra: “ Shariputra,  |                                      |n  |
|any son of the lineage or       |                                      |   |
|daughter of the lineage who     |                                      |   |
|wishes to practice the activity |                                      |   |
|of the profound perfection of   |                                      |   |
|wisdom should look upon it like |                                      |   |
|this,                           |                                      |   |
|, correctly and repeatedly      |                            |Brief    |Act|
|beholding those five aggregates |                            |explanati|ual|
|also as empty of inherent       |                            |on       |Exp|
|nature.                         |                            |         |lan|
|                                |                            |         |ati|
|                                |                            |         |on |
|“Form is empty.  Emptiness is   |The way to meditate on      |Detailed |   |
|form.  Emptiness is not other   |emptiness while on the Path |explanati|   |
|than form; form is also not     |of Accumulation and the Path|on       |   |
|other than emptiness. In the    |of Preparation.             |         |   |
|same way, feeling,              |                            |         |   |
|discrimination, compositional   |                            |         |   |
|factors, and consciousness are  |                            |         |   |
|empty.                          |                            |         |   |

Summary:
According to  CMWS,  no  phenomena  exist  from  their  own  side,  but  all
phenomena are posited as  mere  appearances  of  the  mind,  just  like  the
appearance of a dream  elephant  to  the  dream  consciousness.  Of  course,
phenomena do exist. How do they exist?  All  phenomena  exist  as  something
that is merely imputed by thought. They  exist  as  mere  appearances  to  a
conventional  consciousness.  The  word   ‘merely   ‘eliminates   inherently
existence.
In the example of mistakenly a coil of rope to be a  snake  due  to  certain
conditions, the coil of rope appearing as a snake is  not  coming  from  the
side of the rope. It is a fabrication of the  mind.  The  mind  imputes  the
snake. This shows that the snake is imputed by mind. It has  nothing  to  do
with the coil of rope.
What is this ‘I’ in the thought apprehending ‘I’?  Just like the  appearance
of a coil of rope as a snake, the ‘I’ is the same  in  that  it  is  a  mere
appearance to the mind.
According to  the  CMWS,  the  ‘I’  is  that  which  is  merely  imputed  in
dependence  upon  the  basis  of  designation,  the  aggregates.  The   five
aggregates  (form,  feeling,  discrimination,  compositional   factors   and
consciousness) are the basis of designation of  the  person.  In  dependence
upon the aggregates, the ‘I’ is merely imputed.
The ‘I’ is not one  with  the  aggregate  and  the  ‘I’  is  not  inherently
different from the aggregates. The ‘I’ does exists but  I’  does  not  exist
from the side of the aggregates. The ‘I’ is that which is merely imputed  in
dependence upon the aggregates, just as how  the  snake  is  merely  imputed
upon the coil of rope.
So, phenomena do not exist from  the  side  of  the  basis  of  designation.
Phenomena are not the basis of designation. Phenomena  are  that  which  are
posited by a conventional consciousness.
The mind apprehending a coil of rope  as  snake  is  a  wrong  consciousness
because the coil of a rope is not the snake.
The thought conceiving  ‘I’  apprehending  ‘I’  is  a  factually  concordant
thought because the ‘I’ does exist.
According to  the  CMWS,  all  phenomena  are  merely  imputed  by  thought.
Anything that is not merely imputed by thought but  existing  from  its  own
side or inherent existence is the object of negation.
The mind which conceives phenomena to be  inherently  existence  from  their
own side and not being merely imputed by mind is called an  apprehension  of
true existence.
CMWS says that all phenomena do not exist  inherently.  They  do  not  exist
from their own side. There isn’t a  single  atom  of  inherently  existence.
Everything is merely imputed by thought that includes the ‘I’, the self  and
person. If we look for the ‘I’ among the aggregates, we will not be able  to
find the ‘I’, but this doesn’t mean that we have found the non-existence  of
the ‘I’. The analysis should conclude with the understanding  that  the  ‘I’
indeed is not inherently existence.  We should  find  the  non-existence  of
the inherently existence ‘I’.
Note that finding that the inherently existence ‘I’ does not  exist  is  not
the same as finding that the ‘I’ does not exist.





Translated by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme

Transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek, Vivien Ng and Aki Yeo

Edited by Cecilia Tsong


-----------------------
[1] This was discussed in Pages 8 – 10 of Lesson 25 of Module 3 on Tenets.
The transcripts can be downloaded from this link:
http://www.fpmtabc.org/teachings_files/bp2ndM3.php.
[2] Ven Gyurme: I am not saying that it is the same. You have to be  careful
with the English.

