Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/SixPerfections/BP2 M4 L25 (final).doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:02.677827
================================================================================


Transcript of teachings by Khen Rinpoche Geshe Chonyi  on  the  Heart  Sutra
and Stages of the Path (the Six Perfections)

The root text, Middle Length Lam-Rim,  by  Lama  Tsongkhapa,  translated  by
Philip Quarcoo, © FPMT, Inc., May 2012, is  indented.  All  page  references
refer to the root text, unless otherwise stated.

Where applicable, page numbers of corresponding  sections  in  the  Lam  Rim
Chen Mo (LRCM) are indicated in footnotes; they refer to The Great  Treatise
on the Stages of the Path  to  Enlightenment,  Volume  3,  by  Tsong-kha-pa,
translated  by  The  Lamrim  Chenmo   Translation   Committee,   Snow   Lion
Publications, 2004.

Lesson   25                                                               26
September 2013


Continuation of how to generate flawless meditative stabilization. What to
do after you focussing the mind on the object. Characteristics of laxity
and excitement. Generating introspection. Applying the antidotes to laxity
and excitement. (From root text, pages 217-221).


WHAT TO DO AFTER FOCUSSING THE MIND ON THE OBJECT

      This has two points:
          1      What to do when excitement or laxity occur
          2      What to do while free from laxity and excitement


      2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6A2B-2B1C-1   What to do when excitement or laxity
          occur
      This has two points:

          A      Applying the antidote to non-identification of laxity and
            excitement
          B      Applying the antidote to not endeavoring to abandon laxity
            and excitement even though they have been identified

      2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6A2B-2B1C-1A  Applying the antidote to non-
          identification of laxity and excitement
      This has two points:

          1      Settling the characteristics of laxity and excitement
          2      The method for generating introspection that realizes them
            during meditation (Page 217)[1]

THE CHARACTERISTICS OF EXCITEMENT AND LAXITY and excitement

In order to use the  remediesy  against  failing  to  recognise  laxity  and
excitement, first you must identify what laxity and excitement are.

Excitement
      Excitement is just as it is stated in the Compendium of Knowledge:

          What is excitement? It is a very  unpacified  mind  that  pursues
          pleasant signs and belongs to attachment. It has the function

          of disrupting calm abiding. (Page 217)[2]

The explanation of the definition of excitement is done by looking at:
1. its object
2. its subjective aspect
3. its function

      It  has  three  features.  Its  object  is  something  attractive  and
      pleasant. Its aspect  is  the  mind  being  unpeaceful  and  scattered
      outward. Since it is part of  attachment,  it  gets  involved  in  its
      object through the aspect of craving. Its function is to  disrupt  the
      mind abiding on its object. (Page 217)[3]

Excitement,  a derivative of attachment,  and is a mind that is attached  to
a pleasant object. Because of attachment, that mind becomes unquiet  and  is
not a peaceful mind. Therefore it is distracted.

~ The manner in which excitement disrupts the mind abiding on its object
How does excitement impede one from placing one’s attention on the object?

      While the mind is tied to an object within, through the excitement  of
      attachment to forms  such as sounds the mind is drawn without  control
      toward those objects and becomes distracted. (Page 217)[4]

In general, excitement is a derivative of attachment  while  distraction  is
not  necessarily  a  derivative  of  attachment.  Therefore  excitement  and
distraction are different. Distraction can happen due to other  afflictions.
One can also be distracted to virtuous objects.

Laxity
Here the teachings state that laxity and lethargy are different.

~ Putting laxity and lethargy together goes against the scriptures
      In many translations laxity is also rendered as sinking.  Some  people
      assert a lethargy in which the mind lacks clarity  and  limpidity  and
      abides without scattering to other objects  to  be  laxity,  which  is
      incorrect, for it says in Stages of Meditation II  and  in  the  Sūtra
      Unraveling the Intended Meaning that laxity arises from  lethargy.  In
      the Compendium of Knowledge laxity is indeed explained in the  context
      of the secondary  affliction,  distraction.  However,  when  there  is
      distraction as explained there, virtue may also arise, so  it  is  not
      necessarily afflicted.[5] (Page 218)[6]

Laxity and lethargy are different. It is mentioned here that lethargy  is  a
cause of laxity. Lethargy is explained here as a derivative  of  the  mental
factor of delusion, ti muk. or the mental factor gti-mug. Depending  on  the
context, ti muk sometimes this  is  sometimes  translated  as  ignorance  or
bewilderment. HBut here it is translated as delusion but  .  tThis  delusion
is not the generic delusion.  but Iit  is  the  specific  mental  factor  of
delusion. gti-mug. Lethargy  is  a  derivative  of  this  mental  factor  of
delusion and is essentially an unserviceable state of mind.

This is not the case for laxity because there could be instances  of  laxity
that are virtuous. As such, it is then difficult to say  that  laxity  is  a
derivative of delusion. If you remember our earlier discussions,  even  when
there is laxity in the mind, there are instances where  there  stability  is
present, i.e., the mind  is  abiding  on  the  object  albeit  without  much
clarity. That being the case, laxity then is not lethargy.

It is possible to confuse laxity for lethargy  especially  during  the  time
when there is coarse laxity where the object is not  appearing  clearly  and
the perceiving mind is also not clear. At those times,  it  is  possible  to
mistake laxity for lethargy. Here Lama Tsongkhapa is saying that  these  two
are different.

~ How the identification of lethargy and laxity differs  and  a  source  for
that
      Consequently,  in  the  Compendium  of  Knowledge  and  in  the  auto-
      commentary on Treasury of Manifest Knowledge, lethargy is said to be a
      heaviness, an unserviceability of the body and  the  mind  that  forms
      part of delusion. With laxity, the mode of apprehension  of  the  mind
      holding its object is slack, and the object is  not  held  clearly  or
      tightly. Therefore, even if there is the factor of limpidity, when the
      mode of apprehending the object lacks clarity, there is  laxity.  From
      Stages of Meditation II:

          You should understand that at times when the mind  does  not  see
          the  object  clearly—like  someone  blind  or  someone   entering
          darkness or someone closing his  eyes—at  those  times  there  is
          laxity.

      In the other great  texts  I  have  not  seen  a  clear  take  on  the
      characteristics of laxity.

~ The two are different because in laxity there is also virtue
      With regard to laxity there is either virtue  or  neutrality,  whereas
      lethargy is only a non-virtue or a neutral obscuration[7] and part  of
      delusion. (Page 218)[8]

This is saying that laxity and lethargy are not the same for laxity  can  be
virtuous whereas lethargy is either non-virtuous or it  has  the  entity  of
being a mental obstruction. Therefore these two are not the same.



~ The two factors of mental clarity and tightness are  needed  to  eliminate
laxity
      In the great texts it says that in  order  to  eliminate  laxity,  you
      should uplift the mind, meditating on a joyful object such as a buddha
      image or light. Thereby you prevent  the  object’s  lack  of  clarity,
      which is like darkness having fallen on the mind, and the  decline  in
      the mind’s mode of apprehension. Then you need both a clear object and
      tightness in your mode of apprehension.(Page 218)[9]

In one of the previous lessons, we looked at the difference  between  coarse
laxity and subtle laxity:
• When there is coarse laxity, there may be some stability  with  regard  to
  the mind abiding on the object but there is no clarity, i.e.,  the  object
  is not appearing clearly. The object is unnot clear and your mind is unnot
  clear. You feel as if darkness has descended on your mind. This is what it
  is like when there is coarse laxity.
• When subtle laxity is present in the mind, there  is  stability  and  also
  some clarity of both  the  mind  and  the  object.  However  there  is  no
  intensity behind the way the mind is apprehending its object.

Therefore in order to eliminate laxity,  you  must  increase  both  (1)  the
factor of clarity and (2) the tightness in the way the mind is  apprehending
the  object.   There  must  be  intensity  behind  the  way  the   mind   is
apprehending the object.

~ The need to ascertain laxity  in  accordance  with  Stages  of  Meditation
because it is a major area of mistake
      Excitement is easy to recognize but laxity is not  clearly  identified
      in the great texts, which is why it is difficult to understand. Yet it
      is essential because this  is  a  major  ground  for  mistaking  one’s
      meditative  stabilization  to  be  faultless.  Therefore  you   should
      investigate and identify it well with mental subtlety  based  on  your
      experience  and  in  accordance  with  the  statements  in  Stages  of
      Meditation. (Page 218)[10]

I think what tThis is saying is that it is  difficult  to  identify  exactly
what laxity is and there is the danger of confusing laxity for lethargy  and
vice versa. For that reason, in order to be  completely  clear  as  to  what
exactly laxity is, Lama Tsongkhapa said that we should  identify  laxity  in
accordance with what Master Kamalasila wrote in the Stages of Meditation.

Lama Tsongkhapa is once again  emphasising  the  need  to  recognise  laxity
correctly by (1) depending  on  the  explanation  of  authoritative  classic
texts such as like Kamalasila’s Stages of Meditation and (2) looking  inward
through your own experience.  Bby combining these two approaches,  you  then
and come to identify laxity correctly. This is very  much  emphasized.  When
If one makes a mistake in identifying laxity,  one  may  end  up  meditating
with laxity and  then  runs  into  the  a  danger  of  developing  a  flawed
concentration.


As we  had  seen  in  the  previous  lesson,  the  purpose  whole  point  of
developing the concentration that has the correct qualities is  to  be  able
to develop the mind, to  develop  the  intellect,  and  the  differentiating
wisdom that differentiates. This That kind of wisdom has to be developed  on
the basis of the correct  concentration.  When  If  one  develops  a  flawed
concentration that is flawed, setting put  aside  increasing  one’s  wisdom,
one runs into the danger of dullingmaking  one’s  wisdom  dull.  as  it  was
explained before.

THE METHOD FOR GENERATING  THE  INTROSPECTION  THAT  RECOGNISES  LAXITY  AND
EXCITEMENT DURING MEDITATION

The need to generate introspection that realises whether or  not  laxity  or
excitement has arisen
      Next is explaining how to  recognize  laxity  and  excitement  through
      developing vigilance.
      (2') The method for developing vigilance that  recognizes  laxity  and
      excitement during meditation It  is  not  enough  merely  to  have  an
      understanding of laxity and excitement. Rather, you need  the  ability
      to generate introspection that knows exactly whether or not laxity  or
      excitement has arisen during your meditation. In fact, not only do you
      need the ability to generate introspection that identifies laxity  and
      excitement as soon as they arise due  to  the  gradual  generation  of
      powerful  introspection.  You  also  need   the   introspection   that
      recognizes them when they  are  just  about  to  arise  but  have  not
      actually arisen, …(Page 219)[11]
(LRCM Vol 3, page 60) It is not enough just  to  have  an  understanding  of
laxity and excitement; you  have  to  be  able  to  develop  vigilance  that
accurately  detects  whether  laxity  or  excitement   is   present   during
meditation. Moreover, by gradually developing powerful vigilance,  not  only
must you develop vigilance that recognizes laxity and excitement as soon  as
they occur, you must also develop a  vigilance  that  recognizes  them  when
they are on the verge of occurring, before they have actually arisen

Essentially  this  paragraph  is  saying  Yyou  need  to  develop   powerful
introspection    for    vigilance.    For    when    there    is    powerful
introspectionvigilance,  you  will  be  able  to   recognisze   laxity   and
excitement as soon as they arise. On top of that, you need an  introspection
that vigilanceis  powerful enough such that one canto  recognisze them  when
they are on the verge of occurring,  i.e., even before they arise,  you  are
able to detect that they are about  you are able to recognize that they  are
about to arise. This is the kind of  powerful  introspection  you  vigilance
that needs to be develop and cultivate. ed.

      … for in Stages of Meditation II and III it says:


          If you notice[12] laxity of the mind or a suspicion  that  it  is
          lax...
      And:
          If you notice excitement of the mind or a suspicion  that  it  is
          excited... (Page 219)[13]

If you do not rely on introspection, your meditation  will  come  under  the
influence of laxity and excitement
This is the kind of powerful vigilance that the text is talking  about.  The
kind of powerful vigilance you need to develop. It is a  powerful  vigilance
that can detect laxity  and  excitement  when  they  are  on  the  verge  of
occurring. Even before they arise, one has detected that they are  about  to
arise. So the text says; “This is what needs to be cultivated”.
(LRCM Vol 3, page 60) This is demonstrated  by  statements  in  Kamalasila's
last two Stages of Meditation:
If you see your mind become lax, or in danger of laxity...
And:
You see your mind become excited or in danger of becoming excited.
Here basically Yyou have to develop  the  introspection  vigilance  that  is
recognizes whether it able to detect or recognisze whether  the  laxity  and
excitement haves  arisen or not. When If one does not cultivate  or  develop
such introspection, vigilance, then one’s meditation  will  come  under  the
influence of laxity and excitement.

      As long as this kind of introspection has  not  arisen,  although  you
      decide that from  this  point  till  that  point  there  was  flawless
      meditation without laxity or excitement, this is baseless, for even if
      laxity or excitement were to arise, you would not be able to ascertain
      them given that powerful introspection has not arisen.  In  accordance
      with that, it also says in Separation of the Middle from the Extremes:

          Once laxity and excitement are realized...

      In order to realize laxity and excitement you need introspection.

      Therefore, if the introspection that cannot fail to  recognize  laxity
      and excitement has not arisen, you may  meditate  for  long  and  even
      while away years with subtle laxity  and  excitement  without  sensing
      them as they occur. (Page 219)[14]

The  method  for  sustaining  mindfulness  is  essential  as  a   cause   of
introspection
      (LRCM Vol 3, page 60) Until you develop  such  vigilance,  you  cannot
      reliably conclude that you have had flawless meditation—free of laxity
      and excitement— during a given period of time. This  is  because,  not
      having developed powerful vigilance, you cannot be sure whether laxity
      and excitement have occurred.
      Likewise, in a passage that begins, "There is  recognition  of  laxity
      and excitement...," Maitreya's  Separation  of  the  Middle  from  the
      Extremes says that you need vigilance in order to recognize laxity and
      excitement. Accordingly, if you have not developed vigilance  such  as
      would preclude any failure to recognize  the  presence  of  laxity  or
      excitement, then even if you try to meditate for a long time you  will
      pass the time under the influence of  subtle  laxity  and  excitement,
      failing to sense laxity and excitement while they are occurring.
      Well then, how do you generate introspection? A most  essential  cause
      is the method for sustaining mindfulness presented earlier.  [267]  If
      you can generate continuous mindfulness in that manner,  you  will  be
      able to stop forgetting the object and wandering off. (Page 219)[15]
Next is an explanation of how the development of vigilance is  dependent  on
the development of mindfulness.
(LRCM Vol 3, page 61) Question: How do you develop this vigilance?
Reply: Its most important cause is the process  of  maintaining  mindfulness
which I explained above. If you can develop continual mindfulness, you  will
be  able  to  avoid  forgetting  the  object  of  meditation  and   becoming
distracted.
(LRCM Vol 3, page 61) Thus, since  this  prevents  a  prolonged  failure  to
sense the presence of  laxity  and  excitement,  you  can  easily  recognize
laxity and excitement.

If you remember from our previous earlier  discussionlessons,  after  having
found the object of meditation, you are supposed to hold on  to  the  object
of meditation without forgetting it, i.e., . One holds onto  the  object  of
meditation with mindfulness. So When if your mindfulness is  holding  on  to
the object of meditation, then your mind will not  be  distracted  from  the
object of meditation.

Holding on to the object wWith mindfulness,   holding  onto  the  object  of
meditation and ffrom within theat perspective of that awareness,  one  would
know when you are holding onto the object of  meditation  with  mindfulness,
when laxity and excitement arises, one would know. This is what the text  is
saying. So when if one has powerful mindfulness that and  one’s  mindfulness
is holding on to the object of meditation, then  this  mindfulness  acts  as
the a cause for introspectionvigilance.
For when you have mindfulness of the object i.e. when you are holding on  to
the object,  for as soon as laxity and excitement arises, one would be  able
to spot them it right away.

When one If one is not mindful,  i.e.,  if one is  not  holding  on  to  the
object of meditation with mindfulness, particularly when one  is  distracted
and have loste the object of meditation, one is sitting there for long  time
being distracted and the mind has gone off somewhere and losing  the  object
of meditation, one will is not even  be  aware  that  there  is  laxity  and
excitement and laxity. Then Iit will take one a long time to be  even  aware
of this. This at is why it is said says that one  needs  strong  mindfulness
in order to have introspection. vigilance.

Khen Rinpoche (in English): Sometimes thThis sometimes happens when you  are
not mindfulness: . fFirst you are chanting Om Mani Padme Hhum for one  mala.
, Tthen after that,   as  you  are  not  mindfulness,  you  are  chanting  a
different mantra. Only aAfter half a mala do , then you recognisze you  that
you are chanting a different mantra.  only after a while.  You  do  not  n’t
recognisze this immediately. (Students nod).

Everybody has that realiszation, I think. Sometimes this happensed   because
you are not really thinking. You are , then chanting, chanting  ,  and  then
you are chanting different things.

      This is very clear when you look at it from the  perspective  of  your
      own experience, the amount of time it takes you  to  recognize  laxity
      and excitement when mindfulness has deteriorated, and  the  amount  of
      time it takes you when it has not. (Page 219)[16]
(LRCM Vol 3, page 61) This will be  perfectly  evident  if  you  examine  in
terms of your own experience how long  it  takes  to  recognize  laxity  and
excitement when mindfulness is impaired and how quickly you  recognize  them
when it is not impaired.
When there is mindfulness, one has the introspection that enables  vigilance
and oone  would  be  able  to  recogniszee  quickly  laxity  and  excitement
quickly. When If one does not n’t  have  mindfulness,  when  one’s  mind  is
distracted, then it takes a long time to recognisze laxity  and  excitement.
The essence here is Iin order to have strong introspection,  vigilance,  one
must have mindfulness.

      With this understanding Engaging in the Bodhisattva Conduct says:

          Once mindfulness is there to stay at the
          Gate of the mind in order to guard it,
          At that point introspection will come…

      Explanation of the “Separation of the Middle from the  Extremes”  also
      speaks of mindfulness as the cause of introspection. (Page 219)[17]

      … then, while applying mindfulness  as  explained  earlier,  hold  the
      mind, watching continuously whether or not there is  scattering.  This
      should  be  understood  as  the   essential   point   for   sustaining
      introspection. In accordance with that, Engaging  in  the  Bodhisattva
      Conduct also says:

          Investigating again and again
          The state of body and mind, in brief,
          Just that alone is the characteristic
          Of the guarding of introspection. (Pages 219-220)[18]

The  need  to  differentiate  well  between  the  methods   for   sustaining
mindfulness and introspection
(LRCM Vol 3, page 61)  With  this  in  mind,  Santideva's  Engaging  in  the
Bodhisattva Deeds states:
When mindfulness dwells
At the gate of your mind for its protection,
Then vigilance will appear.
And Sthiramati's The Explanation of the "Separation of the Middle  from  the
Extremes" also states that mindfulness is the cause of vigilance.
(LRCM Vol 3, page 61) And Sthiramati's Explanation  of  the  "Separation  of
the Middle from the Extremes" states:
The statement, "There is recognition of laxity and excitement  by  vigilance
if mindfulness does not  lapse,"  indicates  that  mindfulness,  when  fully
present, is accompanied by vigilance. That is why it says,  "if  mindfulness
does not lapse...."
The following cause of vigilance is  distinctive  to  the  way  to  maintain
vigilance. Focus your mind on a visualized image of the  body  of  a  deity,
etc., or focus on a subjective aspect such  as  the  quality  of  experience
being simply luminous and aware.
(LRCM Vol 3, page 61) Then, while you stay mindful as explained above,  hold
your attention on the object while continuously  monitoring  whether  it  is
scattering elsewhere. Know that this is  critical  for  the  maintenance  of
vigilance.
As Santideva's Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds says:
Examining again and again
The states of the body and the mind—
Just that, in brief,
Is what it means to preserve vigilance.
Next is the importance of correctly distinguishing  or  differentiating  the
way to sustain mindfulness and vigilance.
It is important to properly distinguish  the  methods  or  the  way  for  of
sustaining mindfulness and introspection.
vigilance.
      By doing this, you therefore generate  introspection  that  recognizes
      any laxity and excitement as soon as they are about to arise. By means
      of applying mindfulness on the other hand, the forgetfulness  of  your
      mind being distracted and wandering off is stopped so that you observe
      well. You need to distinguish between them. (Page 220)[19]

(LRCM Vol 3, page 61) Thus, with this  method  you  develop  vigilance  that
notices laxity and excitement when they are on the verge of  arising,  while
with the method for maintaining mindfulness  you  prevent  forgetfulness  in
which attention is distracted and slips away. Hence, you  have  to  properly
distinguish these two.
The function of mindfulness and the function of vigilance are different:.
• The function of What mindfulness does is non-forgetfulness of the object
  of meditation. When mindfulness is holding on to the object, it benefits
  and helps the mind not to be not distracted. Then you will not You don’t
  lose the object of meditation. . You are not distracted. So that is the
  function of mindfulness.
• The function of introspection is to be on the look out to see, for
  example, What vigilance does is it just owhether the n the look up to see,
  for example, if the mind is already distracted or not, or whether the mind
  has come under the influence of laxity.

Question:  It  seems  here  that  for  powerful  introspection,  it  is   So
mindfulness and vigilance have different functions.
Student 1: The frequency of using vigilance here in the  powerful  vigilance
seems like it is  constantly  monitoring  whether  the  mind  is  under  the
influence of laxity and excitement  or  not,  whereas  .  cCompared  to  the
earlier part where the analogy of the trainer taming the elephant  is  used,
where the trainer only comes in at moderate intervals to check. Is this  the
case?
Answer:  Checking with introspection vigilance  is  only  done  at  moderate
intervals as we hadve seen in the previous lesson. It is not to be done  all
the time. b But nevertheless, the force of  that  vigilance  is  there.  The
continuum oof the force or energy of r the  force  of  thate   introspection
vigilance is always there  flows  just  like  the  continuum  force  of  the
mindfulness  which  is  there  continuously.  But  But  wwith   regards   to
introspection, vigilance, there is no need to check up   all  the  time  but
rather only at certain intervals.

(Student 1responded – inaudible)
Answer:   Of   course,   first   we   have   to   develop   the   power   of
introspectionvigilance. At the beginning we have to  develop  the  power  of
vigilance. Once introspection vigilance is developed,  then it stays in  the
mind. There is a force or energy  behind it.  There  is  energy  behind  it.
This at has to be maintained but . wWhile it ithat is maintained, it is  not
necessarily for one that one to is always be  checking up. This at  is  what
this at passage means.

What the text is saying is that there is a force or  power  or  strength  or
potential behind that introspection. vigilance. When you cultivate it,  this
at potential or that force or power  is there. This  at  isis   what  allows
one to be aware of catch laxity and  excitement  when  they  arise.  In  the
initial stages, one has to cultivate or develop over  and  over  again  such
mindfulness and introspection vigilancebut . But  as  the  mind  developsed,
then there is less needs to do so. for that.

THE NEED TO APPLY THE ANTIDOTE ONCE LAXITY AND EXCITEMENT ARE RECOGNISED

The intention that is the application of the antidote
      Through doing well  at  the  method  for  sustaining  mindfulness  and
      introspection as explained earlier, strong mindfulness will  arise  so
      that even subtle laxity and excitement can be recognized by  means  of
      introspection. Hence there will be no fault of not identifying  laxity
      and excitement. However, non-application  or  the  accepting  lack  of
      endeavor, a failure to cultivate the endeavor to stop the two as  soon
      as they arise, [268] is a great  fault  of  meditative  stabilization.
      That is  why  you  should  cultivate  the  intention  referred  to  as
      application or endeavor as its antidote. (Page 220)[20]

FNext is the explanation of the need  to  use  the  remedy  after  you  have
recognized laxity and excitement.
(b) Using the remedy for failing to try to eliminate  them  even  when  they
are recognized
[LRCM  Vol3  page  62]  As  explained  above,  you  develop  very   powerful
mindfulness and vigilance through proper use of the methods for  maintaining
mindfulness and vigilance. Vigilance  is  then  able  to  notice  even  very
subtle laxity and  excitement,  so  there  is  no  problem  recognizing  the
occurrence of laxity and excitement. However, when you  make  no  effort  to
stop those two as soon as they arise, your complacency or failure  to  apply
yourself constitutes an extremely serious problem  for  your  concentration.
For, if you practice in this way, your mind will form bad  habits  and  then
it will be extremely difficult to develop a  concentration  free  of  laxity
and excitement. Therefore, to remedy a failure  to  apply  yourself  to  the
elimination  of  laxity  and  excitement,  cultivate  the  intention  called
application, or effort.
What this paragraph is saying is that first you  have  to  hold  on  to  the
object of meditation with mindfulness.  Then  you  seek  to  strengthen  the
power of  that  mindfulness  until  it  becomes  powerful.  For  Oonce  your
mindfulness becomes powerful,  then tthe  introspection  vigilance  that  is
developeded  will also be powerful. When you  have  powerful  introspection,
vigilance there will not  be  the  fault  of  not  recogniszing  laxity  and
excitement quickly  when  they  arise.  So,  Wwith  powerful  introspection,
vigilance, one will be able to recognisze  laxity  and  excitement  quickly.
Once laxity and excitement are recogniszed, it is  important  to  apply  the
remedy right away without any delay.

      2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6A2B-2B1C-1B2 The actual manner of application
      This has two points:

          A      Identifying the intention and how to stop laxity and
            excitement
          B      Identifying the causes in dependence on which laxity and
            excitement arise (Page 220)

Identifying (b) Using the remedy for failing to try to eliminate  them  even
when they are recognized
(1) Intention and the way that it stops laxity and excitement
(2) The underlying causes of laxity and excitement
This section ‘Using the remedy for failing to try  to  eliminate  them  even
when they are recognized’ has two parts:
   1) Identifying the intention (called application or effort) and  the  way
      that it stops laxity and excitement
   2) The underlying causes of laxity and excitement
(1) Identifying  the  intention  and  the  way  that  it  stops  laxity  and
excitement
      In the Compendium of Knowledge it says:

          What is intention? It is the mind creating compositional factors,
          action of the mind that has the function of causing the  mind  to
          get involved in virtue, non-virtue, or something neutral.

      That means the mental factor that moves the  mind  and  impels  it  to
      something virtuous, non-virtuous or neutral, any of those three,  like
      iron moving without control under the power of a magnet, is intention.
      Here  you  should  therefore  understand  it  as  the  intention  that
      motivates the mind to abandon either laxity or  excitement  when  they
      occur. (Page 220)[21]

Here t[LRCM Vol3 page 62] Asahga's Compendium of Knowledge:
What is intention? It is the mental activity of applying your  mind,  having
the function of drawing your mind to virtue, non-virtue,  or  the  ethically
neutral.
This is how  you  should  understand  it.  For  example,  iron  filings  are
compelled to move under the influence of a  magnet.  Similarly,  the  mental
process* of intention moves and stimulates your  mind  toward  virtue,  non-
virtue, or the ethically neutral. So it here refers  to  an  intention  that
applies your mind to the elimination of laxity or  excitement  when  one  of
them occurs.
Note: Mental process – mental factor
Here the intention called application is  the  mental  factor  of  intention
that wishes to abandon, in this case, laxity and excitement as soon  as  you
recogniszed that they have arisen .
So, here the intention called application is the mental factor of  intention
that wishes to abandon the laxity and excitement as soon  as  you  recognize
that they have arisen; instead of letting them to just persist. It  is  this
mental factor of intention.  It is the intention that wants to  abandon  the
laxity and excitement right away when they  arisewhen  they  arise   through
seeing  that  these  two   are   obstacles   for   developing   a   flawless
concentration.

How to stop laxity Then how do you stop laxity and excitement?

~ Counteracting it be attending  to  something  joyful,  using  features  of
light and so forth
      Now how do you stop laxity and excitement? A  mind  that  is  lax  has
      withdrawn inward too much  and  lost  its  mode  of  apprehending  the
      object. For that reason it says in Stages of  Meditation  I  that  you
      should attend to a cause for the mind to move outward again, something
      joyful. In fact it should be something like the Buddha’s  body  rather
      than  something  joyful  giving  rise  to  mental  afflictions.  (Page
      221)[22]
[LRCM Vol3 page 62] Question: After you  have  thus  aroused  your  mind  to
eliminate laxity and excitement, how do you stop laxity and excitement?
[LRCM Vol3 page 63] Reply: Mental laxity involves a  very  excessive  inward
withdrawal, leading to a slippage in the way you  apprehend  the  object  of
meditation; so you should direct your mind to delightful things  that  cause
it to expand outward. This should be something like a very  beautiful  image
of the Buddha, not something delightful that gives rise to afflictions.

When the mind is excessively withdrawn inward,  then there is the  a  danger
of laxity arising. In order to eliminate that, the teachings advises  us  to
bring to mind delightful objects such as a beautiful image of the Buddha  in
order . The point of doing so is to bring joy and delight to the mind.

      Alternatively, if you attend to a sign of light, such as sunshine, and
      clear away the laxity, you should immediately  tighten  your  mode  of
      apprehending the object and sustain it. (Page 221)[23]
[LRCM Vol3 page 63] Or bring to mind an image of light,  such  as  sunlight.
When this clears away laxity, immediately tighten the way you apprehend  the
object and sustain that in meditation.

This is mentioned in Kamalasila’s the first Stages of Meditation.

      At this point, do not meditate  on  a  disenchanting  object,  because
      disillusionment is a cause for the mind to withdraw  inward.  However,
      if you examine any object you wish  to  examine  with  the  wisdom  of
      individual investigation and feel  enthusiasm,  this  will  counteract
      laxity. From the Compendium of the Perfections:

          When there is sinking uplift the mind through the
          Power of striving for special insight. (Page 221)[24]


~ Counteracting laxity by heightening the mind’s mode of apprehension

      The most important antidote for stopping  laxity  is  this:  When  you
      consider the benefit of the Three Jewels and the mind of enlightenment
      as well as the positive qualities of the  precious  leisure  you  have
      gained and the like, it should be as  effective  for  refreshing  your
      awareness as cold water when it is splashed into the face  of  someone
      asleep. This depends on the experience you have  gained  through  your
      analytical  meditation  of  individual  investigation  on   beneficial
      topics. (Page 221)[25]

[LRCM Vol3 page 63] As Kamalasila's first Stages of Meditation explains:
How? When you are overcome with lethargy and sleepiness,  when  there  is  a
lack of clarity in your apprehension of the object of  meditation  and  your
mind has become lax, then meditate on the idea of light  or  bring  to  mind
the most delightful things, such as the  qualities  of  the  Buddha.  Dispel
laxity in this way and firmly hold on to the object of meditation.
[LRCM Vol3 page 63] In this situation, do not meditate  on  a  disenchanting
object because disenchantment causes your mind to withdraw inward.
When you expand your mind by using discerning wisdom to  analyze  an  object
of your choice,  this  also  stops  laxity.  Aryasura's  Compendium  of  the
Perfections says:
When slack, your mind is stimulated and inspired
By virtue of the energy of striving for insight.
[LRCM Vol3 page 63] So here  is  the  most  important  remedy  for  stopping
laxity: When you reflect on the good qualities of such things as  the  three
jewels, the benefits  of  the  spirit  of  enlightenment*1,  and  the  great
significance of attaining leisure*2, it should  have  a  bracing  effect  on
your mind, just as cold water is thrown in the face of  a  sleeping  person.
This depends on  your  having  had  experience  with  discerning  analytical
meditation on these beneficial topics
*1 the spirit of enlightenment – bodhicitta
*2 leisure - human life of freedom

When the mind is excessively withdrawn inwards,  there  is  no  n’t  clarity
even though . yYou may have stability with , your mind maybe abiding on  the
object.  but there isn’t clarity in that experience. What you need to do  is
to raise the intensity of the mind, i.e., uplift theat  mind.  You  need  to
lift the mind. This  at  iis  done  by  reflecting  on,  for  example,   the
qualities of the Three Jewels.  You can also , for  example,  and  then  one
uplifts the mind by also recalling the benefits ofn bodhicitta.

Here you can see the great importance of analytical meditation. This at  has
to be done prior to attaining calm abiding. When  the  mind  is  excessively
withdrawn,  that which leads to the lack of  mental  un  clarity,  then  you
need to uplift the mind and make it expansive. .  You  need  to  expand  the
mind. In order to lift the mind you have to reflect on something  that  will
uplift your mind. Here, we are advised asked to think  about,  for  example,
about how wthe wonderful the  advantages  of  having  theis  human  life  of
freedoms and endowments. In order to uplift the mind, you  must  reflect  on
these qualities. This requires some a prior experience i.e.   somewhat  some
experience of having reflected on these topics  earlier.  Otherwise,  it  is
not possible if nothing to uplift the mind in this  way.  Just  because  you
want to uplift your mind, you sit there and  you  think  without  any  prior
experience it is not going to happen.


The text also gives Here, they give the example of splashing cold  water  on
the face of a sleepy person. You are being sleepy and Wwhen  someone  throws
cold water at you when you are feeling sleepy, you  will  probably  wake  up
and feel reafreshed and freshen up. You will feel fresh. Likewise, you  need
in order to uplift the mind when  the  mind  is  down  or   or  when  it  is
excessively withdrawn inwards  without  any  mental  clarity.when  there  is
mental unclarity, you need to lift the mind.  This at can has to be done  by
reflecting on objects such as the benefit of bodhicitta,  or the  advantages
of having this human life of freedoms and endowments and  or  the  wonderful
qualities of the Three Jewels.

Khen Rinpoche (in English): This is about splashing water About  that,  when
you are sleepy. In the monastery w, throwing of water.  When  I  was  young,
in the monastery, early morning w we hadve  to wake up at  five  o’clock  in
the early morning as we have to go to puja.  Of course we fell  all  asleep.
Sometimes At that time, Lama Yeshe would sometimes  he  come.  s,  He  would
then he then get a goes to the water bowl from the at the altar and pour  it
on our heads. , brings and put on the head. One whole bowl of water! When  I
read this, I just remembered this.  that. It  is  winterIn  ,  November  and
December, it is winter time and is cold,  it  is  extremely  cold.  ,  early
morning. You wWokeake up, you feall asleep.  T  then  sometimes  Lama  Yeshe
would come and he would pour not one drop but a whole bowl of water on  us.s
then he put, not one drop but one bowl of water.  After that there  wais  no
chance of time to falling  asleep again.

~ Countering the object being unclear as if darkness  had  fallen  upon  the
mind
What do you do when happen if the object of meditation is  unclear  and  you
feel as if darkness is kind has of descended on your mind? . What do you  do
in such a situation?


      When you apply the antidote, meditation on light, to the  causes  that
      reinforce the development of laxity—lethargy, sleepiness,  and  mental
      states with an aspect of darkness that induce those  two—laxity  which
      depends on them does not arise, and that which has already  arisen  is
      counteracted. (Page 221)[26]

[LRCM Vol3 page 64] If you cultivate a remedy for being  accustomed  to  the
underlying causes of  laxity—namely,  lethargy,  sleepiness,  and  something
that induces these two wherein your  mind  takes  on  a  gloomy  aspect—then
laxity resulting from these causes will not arise  or,  if  it  has  arisen,
will stop.
Basically, iThis t is saying that when you have the experience  of  darkness
has descending ed oon your mind and then the object  of  meditation  is  not
clear, you have to literally brighten up, i.e.,  bring  brightness  to   the
mind. Bring to mind brightness.

      Śrāvaka Levels also talks about having a  break  from  this  activity,
      taking to mind the characteristics of light and familiarizing  oneself
      with them again and again, … (Page 221)[27]

[LRCM Vol3 page 64] In this regard, Asanga's Sravaka  Levels  suggests  such
activities as going for a walk; holding an image of brightness in your  mind
and familiarizing yourself with it repeatedly.
Sometimes this happens. , it happens no matter how many times  you  try.  No
matter what you do,  you are just unable to get rid of  that  gloominess  or
that darkness enveloping the mind. At that time,,  rrather  than  persisting
and forcing the mind, or persisting,  the  text  here  recommends  that  you
perhaps one just stand up and goes for a walk to freshen up your body or  it
says bring to mind an image of brightness in the mind and then  familiarisze
yourself with it repeatedly.

Khen Rinpoche (in English): I think there is  the  that  need  to  do  that.
Sometimes we meditate and then the mind is a little bit  dull  and  you  are
falling asleep. own, falling asleep. Then you think,  ought  “I  will  try,”
but it is not improving. Instead of that,you  fall asleep.  Sometimes,   you
try. Yied and you are tired and you then  just  let  yourself  fall  asleep.
This happens so the best thing to do then is …it sleep. So, happen that.
So, in such a situation when there is gloominess in the mind and  you  tried
to eliminate but it doesn’t succeed, rather than persisting the advice  here
is to take a break and stand up and have a walk,  freshen  up  or  bring  an
image of brightness to the mind.
There are methods like:

      … uplifting the mind with any of the six  recollections—of  the  Three
      Jewels, ethics, giving, and deities—or  other  purifying  objects,  as
      well as  reciting  teachings  that  point  out  the  disadvantages  of
      lethargy and sleepiness, looking to the side or at the  moon  and  the
      stars, washing one’s face with water, and so forth. (Page 221)[28]

[LRCM Vol3 page 64] pursuing any of the six  recollections—the  Buddha,  the
teaching, the community*, ethical discipline, generosity, and  the  deities;
stimulating your mind by means of other  inspiring  objects  of  meditation;
orally  reciting  teachings  that  discuss  the  faults  of   lethargy   and
sleepiness; gazing in different directions and at the moon  and  stars;  and
washing your face with water.
Note: community - sangha

Khen Rinpoche (in English): Even if that doesn’t  help,  huh?  Sometimes  it
can be very tough. E, even washing  your  face,  sometimes,  if  it  doesn’t
help. W what is next?

(Inaudible from students)
Khen Rinpoche (in English): I saw on  Youtube   a  There  is  what  the  Zen
master meditating, which I saw in one of the Youtube. They  are  facing  the
wall. , You must sit be straight. If If you are lean a  little  bit  to  the
right, there is this you are behind the stick behind  you  that  whacks  you
thenin  at the head, it hit you. That really wakes you up.  I  think  it  is
not painful but there is some noise. It is sSome kinds of bamboo that  there
which makes a  very loud  strong noise, but maybe it is  not so  painful.  ,
I don’t know. It lLooks very painful. I don’t  know.  I  hadn’t  Hasn’t  had
experienced that before.

So far this is the discussion on  what  to  do  when  lethargy  arises.  For
lethargy is the cause of laxity. In the text, there  will  be  a  discussion
later  on the antidotes for dealing with coarse  laxity  and  subtle  laxity
and the differences  between  them.  Both  lethargy  and  sleepiness  causes
laxity. Therefore there is is this e discussion here about  the  methods  of
dealing with them when there is gloominess in the mind,  such as  going  for
a walk, freshening up and , thinking about something bright.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): It is still a lot to cover.
[LRCM Vol3 page  64]  Also,  if  laxity  is  very  slight  and  occurs  only
infrequently, tighten up  your  apprehension  of  the  object  and  continue
meditating; but if laxity is dense and seems to  occur  repeatedly,  suspend
your cultivation of concentration, clear away  laxity  using  any  of  those
remedies, and then resume your meditation.
Whether your object of meditation entails  directing  your  mind  inward  or
outward, if the object is unclear and you have the sense of  darkness—slight
or dense—descending on your mind, then  it  will  be  hard  to  cut  through
laxity if you continue to meditate without eliminating it. Therefore,  as  a
remedy for that, repeatedly meditate on the appearance of light.
|Excitement is an unquiet state of mind, considered a derivative of   |
|attachment, which pursues pleasant objects and acts as an impediment |
|to calm abiding.                                                     |
|Its object is an attractive and pleasant one.                        |
|Its subjective aspect is that one’s mind is unquiet and scattered    |
|outward.                                                             |
|Its function is to impede stabilization of your mind on its object   |
|It is a derivative of attachment.                                    |
|Therefore excitement is a mind that is attached to a pleasant object.|
|                                                                     |
|Because of attachment, that mind becomes unquiet. The mind is not a  |
|peaceful mind, therefore it is distracted.                           |
|When your attention is inwardly fixed upon its object, excitement –  |
|which is attached to form, sound, and so on – pulls your attention   |
|helplessly toward these objects and causes distraction.              |
|Excitement is different from distraction. Distraction is not         |
|necessarily a derivative of attachment, but is due to other          |
|afflictions and also can also move towards virtuous object           |


Interpreted by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme; transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek,  Vivien  Ng
and Aki Yeo; edited by Cecilia Tsong.
|                                  |Lethargy                          |
|Laxity                            |                                  |
|Laxity means that your mind's way |Lethargy a derivative of delusion,|
|of apprehending the object of     |the heaviness and unserviceability|
|meditation is slack.              |of body and mind                  |
|It does not apprehend the object  |                                  |
|with much vividness or firmness.  |                                  |
|Even if it is limpid, if your     |                                  |
|mind's way of apprehending the    |                                  |
|object is not highly vivid, then  |Lethargy is either a non-virtuous |
|laxity has set in.                |or ethically neutral mental       |
|Laxity may be virtuous or         |obstruction                       |
|ethically neutral                 |                                  |
|Lethargy is a cause of  laxity                                       |



Interpreted by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme; transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek,  Vivien  Ng
and Aki Yeo; edited by Cecilia Tsong.

-----------------------
[1] LRCM, 57.
[2] Ibid., 58.
[3] Ibid..
[4] Ibid.
[5] That does not mean distraction is  a  totally  pure  state  without  any
mental affliction but rather that it does not necessarily come under the  20
secondary afflictions because there  are  also  wholesome  varieties.  (Oral
explanation by Geshe Thubten Soepa)
[6] Ibid., 58-59.
[7] Although in the latter case it is not non-virtuous, it  is  nevertheless
a mental affliction. Another example of such a neutral mental affliction  is
the  attachment  of  beings  in  higher  realms.  It  also  belongs  to  the
afflictive obscurations, but it is  not  classified  as  unwholesome.  (Oral
explanation by Geshe Thubten Soepa)
[8] Ibid., 59.
[9] Ibid., 59-60.
[10] Ibid., 60.
[11] Ibid., 60.
[12] Tib. mthong, usually translated here as “see.”
[13] Ibid.
[14] Ibid., 60.
[15] Ibid., 61.
[16] Ibid.
[17] Ibid., 61.
[18] Ibid.
[19] Ibid.
[20] Ibid., 62.
[21] Ibid., 62.
[22] Ibid., 63.
[23]9:=HM_itvwx‡œãÊ®?ãrÊãÊãÊW;7h+A­h?Ab6?CJOJPJQJ_HQaJmH   HnHsH        HtH4
Ibid.
[24] Ibid.
[25] Ibid., 63-64.
[26] Ibid. 64.
[27] Ibid.
[28] Ibid.

