Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/SixPerfections/BP2 M4 L22 (final).doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:53:57.362891
================================================================================


Transcript of teachings by Khen Rinpoche Geshe Chonyi  on  the  Heart  Sutra
and Stages of the Path (the Six Perfections)

The root text, Middle Length Lam-Rim,  by  Lama  Tsongkhapa,  translated  by
Philip Quarcoo, © FPMT, Inc., May 2012, is  indented.  All  page  references
refer to the root text, unless otherwise stated.

Where applicable, page numbers of corresponding  sections  in  the  Lam  Rim
Chen Mo (LRCM) are indicated in footnotes; they refer to The Great  Treatise
on the Stages of the Path  to  Enlightenment,  Volume  3,  by  Tsong-kha-pa,
translated  by  The  Lamrim  Chenmo   Translation   Committee,   Snow   Lion
Publications, 2004.

Lesson   22                                                               12
September 2013


Continuation of how to generate flawless meditative stabilisation:  what  to
do while focusing the mind on the object. General presentation  of  objects.
Identification  of  objects  for  given  situations.  Presentation  of   the
faultless approach. (From root text, pages 207-211).





Question: What is the difference between the Lam Rim Chen Mo (LRCM) and  the
Middle Length Lam Rim (MLLR)?

Answer:  When tThe Buddha taught the Perfection of Wisdom  Sutras,  it  came
in different lengths. There is the Extensive  Perfection  of  Wisdom  Sutra,
the Middling Perfection of Wisdom Sutra and the Short Perfection  of  Wisdom
Sutra.  They  consist  of  12  volumes,  four   volumes   and   one   volume
respectively. These are further condensed into the Heart of  the  Perfection
of Wisdom Sutra.

Generally, when we talk about the lamrim, we talk  about  the  big  and  the
small lLamrim. In the context of that expression, the  small  lamrim  refers
to the MLLR.

When we talk about the three lamrim texts—the extensive,  the  middling  and
the abbreviated—that Lama Tsongkhapa  had  composed,  the  middling  version
would be theis MLLR  and the abbreviated or the short  ;  lLamrim  would  be
Lama Tsongkhapa’s  ’s  Lamrim,  which  is  also  called  the  Songs  of  the
Experience.
Lama Tsongkhapa’s lLamrim texts were based on has Lama  Atisha’s   Lamp  for
the Path to Enlightenment as its basis. So Lama Tsongkhapa’s  Lamrim  is  an
explanation or the so essentially they were commentaries  y  essentially  on
the Lamp for the Path to Enlightenment.

In the Great Treatise of the Stages of the Path to Enlightenment,  which  is
the LRCM, you can find very eextensive information with ,  and  citing  many
quotations of the Buddha’s own words and the positions of various masters.
 of and commentaries by the various Indian masters.  You do not see so  many
citations  iSo  in  the  Great  Treatise  of  the  Stages  of  the  Path  to
Enlightenment or the LRCM, there is an extensive  citation  of  quotes  from
Buddha’s own words and the commentaries by the various  Indian  masters.  In
the MLLR, which is like you don’t see as  many  citations.  Rather,  in  the
MLLR, it is like a  collection  of  the  essence  of  the  main  points  and
advices.

In Mmany treatises, whether extensive or  abbreviated,  many  a  times  they
awere re composed in order to benefit specific disciples. Often a  text  was
composed A lot of times at the request of certain disciples or  individuals.
A request might  be  made,   a  text  is  composed.  Sometimes  people  made
request; “Could you please condense this particular topic? Could anyou  just
 you just tell us the essence of this advice?  Could  you  Maybe  summarisze
it?” and often this becomes a condition for the author to  compose  a  short
explanation or an abbreviated commentary.


Lama Tsongkhapa  composed  the  LRCM  first.  The  MLLR  and  the  Songs  of
Experience condensed Lam  Rim  were  composed  later  on.  As  such,  it  is
possible that to the common karmic appearance of the disciples and  sentient
beings,  Lama  Tsongkhapa  composed  the  LRCM  at  the  time  when  he  was
engageding in learning and reflecting on on the teachings  of  the  Buddha’s
teachings. When we talk about the MLLR, which is an  abbreviation,  at  that
is the time in the later part of  his  life,  he  was  condensing  and  just
giving  the essence and the main points.  and just giving the essence.

Perhaps you can look at it in it in suchthis w a way. TPerhaps  there  could
be different reasons as to why Lama Tsongkhapa composed texts  of  differing
lengths on the same topic. So, When if you look  at  the  MLLR,  essentially
the topics and subject matter areis the same as the LRCM. It  is  just  that
he only puts in the essential points, which are the essence.

                                 ~~~~~~~~~~~

GENERAL PRESENTATION OF OBJECTS
Now continue with the text, we  will  look  at  the  objects  of  meditation
themselves.

    1 Indication of the actual objects
    2 Indication of what person should make what his object (Page 207)[1]

Indication of the actual objects and their divisions
a. A general presentation of objects of meditation
1. The objects of meditation themselves
2. Who should meditate on which objects
1 The objects of meditation themselves
[LRCM Vol 3 pg. 35]  The Bhagavan stated  that  yogis  have  four  types  of
objects of meditation, these being:
(a) universal objects of meditation,
(b) objects of meditation for purifying your behavior,
(c) objects of meditation for expertise, and
(d) objects of meditation for purifying afflictions.
(a) Universal objects of meditation
The  Bhagavan  stated  that  the  yogis  have  four  types  of  objects   of
meditation. [2]


The first type are the pervasive (or universal)  objects  one  is  universal
objects of meditation. There are four universal objects of meditation  which
is a category that includes all objects of meditation from  the  perspective
of the observed and the observer, i.e., all objects of  meditation  and  the
consciousnesses (the subjects) that meditate on them.:
1. objects which you stabilize your mind without analysis
2. objects of analysis
3. the limits of existence for the real nature of phenomena,  and  diversity
   of phenomena
4.  achievement  of  purpose  -  achieving  the  fundamental  transformation
   through meditation by  observing  the  meaning  of  the  real  nature  of
   phenomena and diversity of phenomena through the  previous  two  ways  of
   meditation.
What are the universal objects of meditation?
Universal object  of  meditation  is  spoken  of  from  the  perspective  of
condensing or summarizing. Basically it  is  a  category  includes  all  the
objects of meditation. So the universal  objects  of  meditation  is  spoken
from the perspective of all the observed  and  the  observer  i.e.  all  the
objects of meditation and the consciousnesses (the subjects)  that  meditate
on them.

From the perspective of the observer (the subject):
• tThe text says there are four universal objects of meditation whereby
  that which you stabilisze the mind without analysis
• the objects of analysis
• your mind and analysis, and that is speaking from the perspective of the
  observer.
From the perspective of the observed (the object):
• Then you have the limits of phenomena exithat includes stence for the
  real nature of phenomena, and its varieties (or diversity)diversity of
  phenomena. That is talking about the observed or the object of meditation.
•
• aAccomplishment of a hievement of purpose, i.e.,  is achieving the
  fundamental transformation through meditation by means of the previous two
  meditation methods that observe the meaning of the real nature of
  phenomena and its varieties. observing the meaning of the real nature of
  phenomena and diversity of phenomena through the previous two ways of
  meditation.

“The meaning of real nature of phenomena and its varieties” means  that  the
meaning of the diversity of phenomena - when one observes the  composite  of
the two, m oone can achieve calm abiding. The calm abiding that is  achieved
in itself itself can also can become the object of meditation. .
The last thing that I have  just  said  This  is  from  the  perspective  of
someone who has already achieved calm abiding. So from  the  perspective  of
someone who has achieved calm abiding, the calm abiding  itself  can  be  an
object of meditation.

[LRCM Vol 3 pg. 35]  Universal objects of meditation are of four types:
(1) discursive images,
(2) non-discursive images,
(3) the limits of existence, and
(4) achievement of your purpose.
The two types of images  (discursive  and  non-discursive)  are  posited  in
terms of the observer: the first is the object of insight,  and  the  second
is  the  object  of  meditative  serenity.  The  image  is  not  the  actual
specifically characterized object upon  which  your  mind  is  focused,  but
rather the appearance of that object's aspect to your mind. When  you  carry
out analysis while observing an object, then the image is  discursive  since
analytical thinking  is  present.  When  you  stabilize  your  mind  without
analysis while observing an object, the image is said to  be  non-discursive
since analytical thinking is absent.
As for these images, what objects of meditation are  they  images  of?  They
are the images, or aspects, of the five objects of meditation for  purifying
behavior, the five objects of meditation for expertise, and the two  objects
of meditation for purifying afflictions.
The limits of existence are posited with reference to the  observed  object.
There are two: The limits of  existence  for  the  diversity  of  phenomena,
which are expressed in the statement, "Just this is all there is;  there  is
nothing more"; and the limits of existence for the  real  nature,  expressed
in the statement, "This alone is how things exist; they do not exist in  any
other way." In the case of the diversity of phenomena, this means  that  the
five aggregates include all composite phenomena; the  eighteen  constituents
and twelve sources include  all  phenomena;  and  the  four  truths  include
everything there is to know; there is nothing else beyond this. In the  case
of the nature, this means that reason establishes the truth  or  reality  of
those objects of meditation.
Achievement of purpose is posited  in  terms  of  the  result.  With  either
serenity or insight you  direct  your  attention  to  the  images  of  those
objects of meditation. Then you stabilize  on  them,  become  accustomed  to
them, and, by virtue  of  repeated  practice,  you  become  free  from  your
dysfunctional tendencies, undergoing a fundamental transformation.
      As regards  objects  for  purifying  one’s  conduct,  there  are  five
      meditation objects  that  serve  as  antidotes  to  one’s  predominant
      conduct in previous lives—attachment,  hatred,  delusion,  pride,  and
      discursive    thought:    respectively,    the    repulsive,     love,
      interdependence, the divisions of  the  elements,  as  well  as  one’s
      respiration.

      The objects for the skillful are also five in number: objects of skill
      with regard to the aggregates,  elements,  sense  fields,  the  twelve
      links of interdependence, [252] as well as  the  established  and  the
      unestablished.

      The objects for purifying mental afflictions are two: the peaceful and
      coarse states of the higher and lower levels and the  sixteen  aspects
      of the four truths, impermanence and so forth. (Page 208)[3]

How these objects of meditation individually serve  a  special  purpose  (b)
Objects of meditation for purifying your behavior
Objects that purify behavior  are  the  antidotes  to  (1)  attachment,  (2)
hatred,  (3)  delusion,  (4)  pride  and  (5)   discursiveness   which   are
predominant in previous lives. There are five such objects of meditation.
The antidotes to these five are:
   1. ugliness,
   2. love,
   3. dependent-arising (the twelve factors of dependent-arising),
   4. differentiation of the constituents,
   5. inhalation and exhalation.
[LRCM Vol 3 pg. 36]   Objects  of  meditation  for  purifying  behavior  are
objects that purify behavior  in  which  attachment  or  the  like  [hatred,
delusion, pride, or discursiveness] is  predominant.  There  are  five  such
objects of meditation. Respectively they are: (a) ugliness,  (b)  love,  (c)
dependent-arising, (d) differentiation of constituents, and  (e)  inhalation
and exhalation,
(a) Of these, the objects of meditation on ugliness consist of  the  thirty-
six uglinesses pertaining to the body, such  as  head  and  body  hair,  and
external uglinesses such as a corpse's  turning  blue.  When  an  aspect  of
impurity and ugliness arises in your mind, you keep your attention on it.
(b) Love involves focusing on friends, enemies, and persons toward whom  you
have neutral feelings, and having an attitude—at  the  level  of  meditative
equipoise—of providing them with help and happiness. Keeping your  attention
on these objects of meditation with a loving attitude is called  "meditation
on love"; love refers both to the subjective attitude and to the object,
(c) Regarding the object of meditation on dependent-arising:  All  there  is
in the past, the present, and  the  future  is  dependent-arising  in  which
effects that  are  mere  phenomenal  factors  simply  arise  based  on  mere
phenomenal factors. Apart from these, there is no performer  of  actions  or
experiencer of their effects. You focus your attention  on  this  fact,  and
hold it there,
(d)  As  for  the  object  of  meditation  on  the  differentiation  of  the
constituents: You differentiate the factors of the  six  constituents—earth,
water, fire, air, space, and consciousness.  You  focus  your  attention  on
them and hold it there,
(e) Regarding the object of meditation on  inhalation  and  exhalation:  You
focus your attention  without  distraction  by  counting  and  watching  the
breath move in and out.
(c) Objects of meditation for expertise
There are also five objects of meditation for  expertise,  namely  expertise
in:
(a) the aggregates,
(b) the constituents,
(c) the sources,
(d) twelve factors of dependent-arising,
(e) what is and is not possible.
[LRCM Vol  3  pg.  36]  There  are  also  five  objects  of  meditation  for
expertise, namely expertise in (a) the  aggregates,  (b)  the  constituents,
(c) the sources,(d) dependent-arising, and (e) what is and is not possible,
(a) The aggregates are the five aggregates of form and the others  [feeling,
discrimination, compositional  factors,  and  consciousness].  Expertise  in
these is knowing that, apart  from  these  aggregates,  the  self  and  what
pertains to the self do not exist,
(b)  The  constituents  are  the  eye  and  the  others  of   the   eighteen
constituents. Expertise in them is knowing the causal  conditions  by  which
those constituents arise from their own seeds.
(c) The sources are the eye and the others of the twelve sources.  Expertise
in these  is  knowing  that  the  six  internal  sources  are  the  dominant
conditions for the six consciousnesses, that the six  external  sources  are
the object-conditions, and that the  mind  which  has  just  ceased  is  the
immediately preceding condition,
(d) Dependent-arising is the twelve factors. Expertise in  them  is  knowing
that they are impermanent, suffering, and devoid of self,
(e) What is and is not possible refers to such things as it  being  possible
for a pleasant fruition to arise from a virtuous action,  but  not  possible
for a pleasant fruition to arise from a non-virtuous  action.  Expertise  in
this is knowing that things are this way.  This  is  a  particular  case  of
expertise in  dependent-arising;  the  difference  is  that  you  understand
diverse causes.
When you use these as objects of meditation for  cultivating  serenity,  you
keep  your  attention  on  just  one  of  the  perspectives  in  which   the
aggregates, etc. may be known.
(d) Objects of meditation for purifying afflictions
There are two objects of meditation for purifying afflictions:
    • the calmness and coarseness of the higher and lower stage
    • the impermanence and the other of the  sixteen  aspects  of  the  four
      noble truths
[LRCM Vol 3 pg. 37]  Purifying afflictions means either merely reducing  the
strength of the seeds of the afflictions or  else  utterly  eradicating  the
seeds. In the former case, the objects of  meditation  are  the  comparative
coarseness of each lower stage  and  comparative  calmness  of  each  higher
stage, proceeding from the level of the desire realm  up  to  the  level  of
Nothingness. In the latter case, the objects of meditation are  impermanence
and the other of the sixteen aspects of the four noble truths. When you  use
these as  objects  of  meditation  for  cultivating  serenity,  you  do  not
analyze, but instead keep your attention on any one cognition of  an  aspect
of those objects that appears to it.
Next is talking about the purpose of having these objects of meditation.
      [LRCM Vol 3 pg. 38]  Among these four types of objects of  meditation,
      objects of meditation for purifying behavior, as explained, facilitate
      the stopping of  attachment  and  such  in  those  whose  behavior  is
      dominated by attachment and such.
      In this regard, the objects for purifying one’s conduct are special in
      that the attachment and so forth of those who act with attachment  and
      so  forth  more  than  usual  is   easily   stopped   and   meditative
      stabilization is easily achieved in dependence on them. (Page 208)[4]

As I have mentioned earlier under the objects of  meditation  for  purifying
one’s  conductbehavior,  in  the  case   of   someone   who   is   dominated
predominantly affected by attachment, then  the  object  of  meditation  for
purifying behavior for that individual would be  ugliness.  UHere  the  word
“ugliness” here  as the objects of meditation for purifying behavior  should
not be taken literally. It is not about meditating on how ugly  athe  person
is but rather . “Ugliness” hereit  refers to meditating on  the  the  nature
of the aggregates of the body. So meditation on ugliness  is  meditating  on
the nature of the body as basically being , which is  basically  filthy  and
dirty. Its nature i is filthy and dirty  because  its  cause  is  dirty  and
filthy and dirty.  and itself by nature is also dirty.

      The objects for the skillful are good objects for calm abiding because
      they negate a self of persons apart from those phenomena and therefore
      correspond  with  the  arising  of  special  insight  which   realizes
      selflessness.

      Meditation objects for  purifying  mental  afflictions  are  of  great
      significance  in  that  they  become  general  antidotes   to   mental
      afflictions.

      There are no pervasive objects apart from the preceding objects.

      Therefore  meditative  stabilization   should   be   accomplished   in
      dependence on the  meditation  objects  of  calm  abiding  with  their
      special purposes.  Those  who  practice  meditative  stabilization  in
      dependence on pebbles, pieces of wood, and the  like  clearly  do  not
      know the presentation of objects of  meditative  stabilization.  (page
      208)[5]

Who should meditate on which objects [LRCM Vol 3 pg. 38]  They  are  special
objects of meditation because you may  readily  attain  concentration  based
upon them.  Objects  of  meditation  for  expertise  are  conducive  to  the
development of the insight that knows emptiness in as much as they refute  a
personal self that is not included among those  phenomena.  Therefore,  they
are excellent objects of meditation for cultivating serenity*.
Objects of meditation for dispelling afflictions serve as general  antidotes
to the afflictions, so they have great significance. The  universal  objects
of meditation are not distinct from  the  aforementioned  three.  Therefore,
since you must achieve concentration using an object of meditative  serenity
that has a particular purpose, those who achieve concentration using  things
like pebbles and twigs for objects of meditation  are  clearly  ignorant  of
the teachings on objects of concentration.
*Serenity is translated as calm abiding
These are the different objects of meditation because they  have  their  own
purpose, like what we have saw earlier on when  we  talked  about  the  four
objects.
2. Who should meditate on which objects
      In accordance with what is set forth in the Sūtra Requested by Revata,
      it is taught that  persons  ranging  from  those  in  whom  attachment
      predominates to those in whom discursive thought  predominates  should
      rely on the individual objects specified, ranging from  the  repulsive
      to one’s respiration, respectively. Those with  balanced  conduct  and
      those with slight mental afflictions may concentrate on any one object
      they are happy with; they do not need a certain one. (Page 208)[6]

According to the answer to a question of Revata:

If you are a person from those with a preponderance of attachment  to  those
with a preponderance of discursiveness, it is said that you should focus  on
ugliness up to the exhalation and inhalation of the breath respectively.
If you are a person whose behavior is balanced or one whose afflictions  are
slight, then it  suffices  to  keep  your  attention  on  whichever  of  the
aforementioned objects of meditation you like; it is not necessary  to  have
a particular one.
• For Tthose who are predominantedly by   very  strong  aattachmented,  they
  should meditate on ugliness.
• For Tthose who are dominated by have a lot of hatred, they should
  meditate on love.
• For Tthose who have much ignorance a lot of delusion in this context of
  bewilderment, they should meditate on dependent-arising.
• For Tthose who are predominanted by pride ly proud, they should meditate
  on the differentiation of constituents.[7]
• For Tthose who are dominated by have a lot of discursiveness (discursive
  thoughts), they  should focus on the inhalation and exhalation of the
  breath.

Differences between predominant and slight attachment [LRCM Vol  3  pg.  39]
As there are various kinds of people, from those  with  a  preponderance  of
attachment  to  those  with  a  preponderance  of  discursiveness,  Asanga's
Sravaka Levels cites an answer to a question of Revata:
Revata, if attachment uniquely dominates the  behavior  of  a  monk-yogi,  a
practitioner of yoga, then he focuses his mind on the object  of  meditation
of ugliness. If hatred dominates his behavior,  he  meditates  on  love;  if
ignorance dominates his  behavior,  then  he  meditates  on  the  dependent-
arising of this condition; if pride dominates his behavior, he  focuses  his
mind on the differentiation of the constituents.
And:
If discursiveness uniquely dominates his behavior, then he focuses his  mind
on an awareness of the exhalation and inhalation  of  the  breath.  In  this
way, he focuses his mind on an appropriate object of meditation.
Asanga's Sravaka Levels also states:
In this regard, persons whose behavior is dominated by  attachment,  hatred,
ignorance, pride, or discursiveness should, for a while at the outset,  just
purify those behaviors by contemplating objects of meditation for  purifying
behavior. After this they will see the stability of their  minds,  and  they
will ascertain only their objects of meditation. So they  should  definitely
persevere at using their objects of meditation.
Thus, you certainly should work with these objects  of  meditation.  If  you
are a person whose behavior  is  balanced,  or  one  whose  afflictions  are
slight, then it  suffices  to  keep  your  attention  on  whichever  of  the
aforementioned objects of meditation you like; it is not necessary  to  have
a particular one. Asanga's Sravaka Levels states:
Those whose behavior is balanced should work at whichever object  they  like
so as to attain just mental stability;  this  is  not  for  the  purpose  of
purifying behavior. Understand that the same applies to  those  with  slight
afflictions.

Next is an explanation of:
• what it means to be dominated by attachment desire or any of the other
  afflictions
• what it means to be balanced
• what it means to have small afflictions

      In this regard, predominance of one of the  five  mental  afflictions,
      attachment and so forth, means that through habituation to  attachment
      and so forth in previous lives,  long-term  attachment  and  so  forth
      arise for a long time toward small objects of attachment and so forth.
      (Page 208)[8][LRCM Vol 3 pg. 40]  Being dominated by desire—or another
      of those five afflictions— means that in  a  previous  life  you  were
      fully involved in  that  affliction,  became  accustomed  to  it,  and
      expressed it frequently, so that now even if there is a  minor  object
      of desire—or another of the five— that affliction arises in  a  strong
      and long-lasting form.

So that is This is the meaning of the predominance of a  mental  affliction.
being dominated.
For those whose minds are  predominated  by  attachment,  this  predominance
ponderance of attachment is due to being accustomed  to  attachment  in  the
past lives such that now in this life, just  when  you  think  ofn   even  a
minor object of attachment, desire, due to that  past   familiarity  ization
with attachment, desire, desireattachment  arises strongly.

      Those with balanced conduct have not got habituated to attachment  and
      so  forth  in  previous  lives  but  they   do   not   see   them   as
      disadvantageous.  Therefore,  even   though   predominant,   long-term
      attachment and so forth do not arise toward their respective  objects,
      it is not that they do not occur at all. (Page 208)[9]

Balanced conduct behavior means that one you does id not  become  accustomed
to afflictions.  them. Yet Still, you have not  recogniszed  that  they  are
faults. While attachment desire and so forth such aare  not  predominant  or
of lasting great duration, it is not the case that as  though  they  do  not
occur.

      Those with slight  mental  afflictions  have  not  got  habituated  to
      attachment and so forth in previous lives, and due to the  fact  that,
      among other things, they see them as disadvantageous,  attachment  and
      so forth only arise slowly toward many major objects of attachment and
      so forth. Toward medium and small objects they do  not  arise.  (Pages
      208-209)[10]
Balanced behavior means while you are not  accustomed  to  desire  or  other
afflictions in your previous life, but you did not recognize that  they  are
faults. So they do arise but they do not arise and stay for a long time.
While desire can arise, they are not predominant and they are not  of  great
duration. Nevertheless they still arise.
[LRCM Vol 3 pg. 40]   Balanced  behavior  means  that  you  were  not  fully
involved in desire and the others  in  your  previous  lives,  you  did  not
become accustomed to them, and you did not express them  frequently.  Still,
you have not recognized that they are faults and  you  have  not  suppressed
them, so while desire and such are not predominant or of great duration,  it
is not as though they do not occur.
[LRCM Vol 3 pg. 40]  Having slight  afflictions  means  that  you  were  not
fully involved and  so  on  in  desire—or  another  of  those  five—in  your
previous lives, and you do see their  disadvantages,  etc.  Therefore,  with
respect to objects of desire and such that  are  major,  many,  or  intense,
your desire and such arise slowly, while  for  moderate  or  minor  objects,
these afflictions do not arise at all.

So hHaving a small or slight affliction means this: that,  for  example,  in
relation to attachment, a desire, because of not having been  accustomed  to
it in previous lives, and  on top of that, having seen   if  you  don’t  see
the disadvantages of attachmentdesire, and in this life, even  when  you  do
meet with many great objects of attachment in this lifedesire and  on  great
objects of desire, although attachment desire arises, does arise  buit  only
t they arises slowly. Attachment does not arise at all  with  regard  to  If
the objects are medium oderate or small minor objects  of  attachmentdesire.
, then it is said that these afflictions such as  desire  do  not  arise  at
all.

      Moreover, those with predominant attachment or another one of the five
      take long to accomplish quiescence, those with balanced  behavior  not
      that long, and those with  slight  mental  afflictions  accomplish  it
      quickly. (Page 209)[11]


[LRCM Vol 3 pg. 40]  Also, when desire or another of those five  afflictions
is predominant, you take a long time to  realize  stability;  with  balanced
behavior, you do not take an excessively long time; with minor  afflictions,
you do so very quickly.
Here it is sayingThis is saying  that when attachment desire or any  one  of
the other five afflictions are predominant and are strong, it  will  take  a
long time to achieve calm abiding. You do not  take  very  long  to  achieve
calm abiding when your conduct is balanced and With balanced  behavior,  you
do not take a very long to achieve  calm  abiding.  fFor  those  with  minor
afflictions, calm abiding is said to be achieved quickly.

This at is why one of the six preconditions (prerequisites)  for  developing
calm abiding is completely getting rid of thoughts of desire.  When  If  you
do not n’t have thoughts of desire, then it is much easier to  achieve  calm
abiding and you will be able to do so it will tain a ke much shorter time.

IDENTIFICATION OF OBJECTS FOR GIVEN SITUATIONS
What to do while focusing on an object of meditation
(1) Identifying the object of meditation upon which your attention is set
(a) A general presentation of objects of meditation
(b) Identifying objects of meditation for this context
(b) Identifying objects of meditation for this context

       In dependence on which object is calm abiding accomplished  here?  In
       general, the meditation  objects  for  individuals[12]  are  just  as
       explained above. In particular,  it  is  important  that  those  with
       predominant discursive thought meditate on the breath.


Numerous texts state how to accomplish  meditative  stabilisation  observing
the Tathāgata’s body
       Furthermore Stages of Meditation II and III follow the Sūtra  on  the
       Concentration Which Perceives the Buddha of the Present Face to  Face
       (Pratyutpannabuddhasaṃmukhāvasthitasamādhisūtra)  and  the  King   of
       Meditative Stabilizations Sūtra in  teaching  the  accomplishment  of
       meditative  stabilization  observing  the   Tathāgata’s   body.   The
       Commentary on the Difficult Points of the “Lamp for  the  Path”  also
       quotes statements by Master Bodhibhadra that meditative stabilization
       is achieved observing the Tathāgata’s body. (Page 209)[13]



On which object of meditation should you base  yourself  so  as  to  achieve
calm abiding?
In general, as mentioned  earlier,  there  are  objects  of  meditation  for
different  persons.  In  particular,  if  you   have   a   predominance   of
discursiveness, it is important to meditate on the breath.
[LRCM Vol 3 pg. 42]  Now, from among the many objects of meditation  I  have
explained, on which object of meditation should you base yourself so  as  to
achieve serenity? As stated in the sutra passage cited above,  there  is  no
single, definite object; individuals  require  their  particular  object  of
meditation. Specifically, if you are determined to achieve serenity  at  the
least,  and  if  your  behavior  is  dominated  by  attachment  or   another
affliction, then you need to use a certain type  of  object  of  meditation.
For if you do not, then you may attain  a  concentration  that  approximates
serenity, but you will not attain actual serenity. It is said that  even  if
you train with an object of meditation for purifying behavior, you will  not
achieve serenity unless you do so for a very long time,  so  how  could  you
ever achieve it by rejecting objects of meditation for  purifying  behavior?
In particular, if you  have  a  predominance  of  discursiveness,  then  you
definitely have to meditate on the breath.
If  you  are  a  person  of  balanced  behavior  or  a  person  with  slight
afflictions, then, as explained before, make your meditative base  whichever
of the objects of meditation explained above most appeals to you.
Alternatively, the middle and last Stages of Meditation follow the Sutra  on
the Concentration Which Perceives the Buddha of the  Present  Face  to  Face
and  the  King  of  Concentrations  Sutra  in  stating  that   you   achieve
concentration by focusing on the body of the  Tathagata.  Also,  the  master
Bodhibhadra explains the achievement of concentration  by  focusing  on  the
deity’s body. This is cited in the commentary on the Lamp for  the  Path  to
Enlightenment.
[LRCM Vol 3 pg. 42]  Alternatively, Kamalasila's middle and last  Stages  of
Meditation follow the Sutra on the Concentration Which Perceives the  Buddha
of the Present Face to Face and the King of Concentrations Sutra in  stating
that you achieve concentration by focusing on the  body  of  the  Tathagata.
Also, the master Bodhibhadra explains a multitude [of objects]:
Here, serenity is twofold: that attained by looking inward and  that  [based
on] an object of meditation viewed outwardly. Of those,  looking  inward  is
twofold: focusing on the body and focusing on what is based on the body.  Of
those, focusing on the body is threefold: focusing on  the  body  itself  in
the aspect of  a  deity;  focusing  on  ugliness,  such  as  skeletons;  and
focusing on special insignia, such as a khatvanga?
Focusing on what is based on the body is fivefold: focusing on  the  breath,
focusing on subtle divine insignia, focusing on the drops, focusing  on  the
aspects of light rays, and focusing on delight and bliss.
Serenity based on an object  of  meditation  viewed  outwardly  is  twofold:
special and common. Of those, the special is twofold: focusing on a  deity's
body and focusing on a deity's speech.
Atisha's commentary on his own Lamp  for  the  Path  to  Enlightenment  also
cites this passage.
Before developing concentration,  first  you  one  must  first  reduce  your
discursive thoughts. ness. The way to do that is to meditate on the  breath.
Once  your  discursiveness   is   reduced,   you   have   somewhat   reduced
discursiveness, and if you do decide to develop  concentration,  you  should
focus on the body of the Tathagata/ Buddha. It is said that  dFor  doing  so
serves , it is said to have many special purposes.




How making it the basis of one’s observations has a great purpose
      As for concentration on the  Buddha’s  body,  limitless  merit  arises
      through remembering the Buddha. If your image of that  body  is  clear
      and stable, it makes a great difference to your visualization  of  the
      field for accumulating merit through prostrations, offerings, prayers,
      and so forth, as well as the field for purifying obscurations  through
      confession, restraint, and so forth. [254] The positive  quality  that
      your recollection of the Buddha does not deteriorate at  the  time  of
      death, the great difference it makes to deity yoga when you  cultivate
      the path of mantra, and so forth show that it  has  a  great  purpose.
      (Page 209)[14]
[LRCM Vol 3 pg. 43]  In this regard, to keep your attention on the  physical
form of the Buddha is to recall the Buddha, so it gives  rise  to  limitless
merit. When your image of that body is clear  and  firm,  then  there  is  a
special intensification of your meditative focus on the  field  in  relation
to  which  you  amass  merit  through  prostration,  offering,  aspirational
prayer, etc., as well as on the  field  in  relation  to  which  you  purify
obscurations through confession, restraint, etc.  This  kind  of  meditation
serves many purposes. As stated earlier in the  extract  from  the  King  of
Concentrations Sutra, it  has  advantages  such  as  your  not  losing  your
mindfulness of the Buddha as you die. And  when  you  cultivate  the  mantra
path, it heightens deity yoga, etc.

If we decide to develop concentration, it is advisable to meditate or  focus
on the Buddha’s body, for which there are many purposes  for  doing  so.  In
Cchoosing the body of the Buddha’s body as as   your  object  of  meditation
will also make a difference in the future  when  one  is  practiscing  deity
yoga.
It is also the intent of the Buddha’s  intent or  at  least  it  is  Buddha’
opinion that one should to focus on body of the the  Bbuddha’s  body  as  an
object for developing concentration.

How to make that bodily form one’s object
      In the King of Meditative Stabilizations Sūtra it says:


          With his body just like the color of gold
          The Lord of the World is excessively beautiful.
          The bodhisattva whose mind is involved in this object
          Is said to be in equipoise meditation.


      You should  make  something  like  that  your  basis  of  observation.
      Moreover, between the two types of visualization,  one  in  which  the
      object is freshly created by the mind and one in which the  object  is
      naturally present, the latter has the great distinction of  generating
      faith[15] and accords with teachings[16] shared  among  the  vehicles.
      Therefore you should proceed in the latter way. (Page 209)[17]

How to research the basis of observation
[LRCM Vol 3 pg. 43]  The Sutra on  the  Concentration  Which  Perceives  the
Buddha of the  Present  Face  to  Face  gives  a  very  clear  and  detailed
treatment of these benefits, as well as the method for directing  your  mind
toward the Buddha. Therefore, you should definitely come to know  them  from
there, as Kamalasila states  in  his  last  Stages  of  Meditation.  Fearing
verbosity, I do not write of them here. Consequently, it is skill  in  means
when you seek an object of meditation by  which  you  achieve  concentration
and also fulfill, along the way, some other special purpose.
How do you use something like the bodily form of the Tathagata as an  object
of meditation? Kamalasila's last Stages of Meditation states:
In that regard, practitioners should first fix their attention  on  whatever
they may have seen and whatever they may have heard about  the  bodily  form
of the Tathagata,  and  then  achieve  serenity.  The  bodily  form  of  the
Tathagata is a golden color like that of refined gold, adorned by the  signs
and exemplary features, dwells with its retinue, and  effects  the  aims  of
living beings through various means. By continuously directing  their  minds
toward it, yogis develop a wish for its good  qualities  and  quell  laxity,
excitement, and so forth. They should continue meditative stabilization  for
as long as they can see it clearly, as though  the  Buddha  was  sitting  in
front of them.
[LRCM Vol 3 pg. 44]  The King of Concentrations Sutra  also  says  that  you
should use this kind of object of meditation:
The glorious protector of the world
With a body the color of gold -
The bodhisattva whose mind engages this object
Is said to be in equipoise.
Of the  two  ways  to  do  this,  newly  imagining  the  Buddha's  form  and
visualizing the Buddha's form as though actually present, the latter  has  a
distinct advantage in developing  faith  and  fits  within  the  context  of
practices common to both sutra and tantra vehicles.
Next is an explanation of the way to seek the object of meditation.
      As you research the basis[18] of observation, the  basis[19]  for  the
      mind to focus on, you should first find a good painted image,  statue,
      or the like of the Teacher’s body, look at it  again  and  again  and,
      having captured the features, familiarize yourself with its appearance
      as an object of the mind. Or else you should reflect on the meaning of
      a description by some spiritual master that you have  heard,  make  it
      appear to your mind, and pursue your basis  of  observation.  However,
      rather than making the basis of  observation  appear  like  a  painted
      image, statue, or something like that, you  should  train  for  it  to
      appear in the aspect of the actual Buddha. (Pages 209-210)[20]

It is inadmissible to  practise  meditative  stabilisation  looking  at  the
basis of observation with one’s eyes [LRCM Vol 3  pg.  44]   When  you  seek
your object of  meditation,  the  basis  upon  which  you  first  keep  your
attention, look for an excellent painting  or  sculpture  of  the  Teacher's
body  and  view  it  again  and  again.  Remembering  its  features,  firmly
familiarize yourself with the mental appearance  of  the  object.  Or,  seek
your object of meditation by reflecting upon the  meaning  of  the  eloquent
descriptions of the Buddha's form which you have heard from  your  guru  and
make this image appear in your mind. Furthermore, do not let the  object  of
meditation have the aspect of a painting  or  sculpture;  rather,  learn  to
have it appear in your mind with the aspect of an actual buddha.
Next is an explanation of why it is incorrect to meditate with your eyes.
      It makes perfect sense that Master Yeshé Dé refutes  the  practice  of
      some people who set up an image in front of them, look at it with  the
      eyes, and meditate by  staring  at  it.  This  is  because  meditative
      stabilization is not accomplished in a sense consciousness but  rather
      in the mental  consciousness,  so  the  actual  object  of  meditative
      stabilization is a direct object of the mental consciousness, which is
      why you must  focus  on  that.  Also,  in  accordance  with  what  was
      explained earlier, it is taught that  you  must  observe  the  meaning
      generality of the actual observed object or its  image  that  appears.
      (Page 210)[21]

[LRCM Vol 3 pg. 44]  Some set an image before them and immediately  meditate
on it while staring at  it.  The  master  Ye-shay-day's  rejection  of  this
practice is excellent. He says that concentration is  not  achieved  in  the
sensory consciousnesses, but in the mental consciousness; thus,  the  actual
object of meditation of a concentration is the actual  object  of  a  mental
consciousness. Therefore, you must keep your  attention  on  this.  He  also
states what I explained above, that you have  to  focus  your  mind  on  the
appearance of the  actual  concept,  or  mental  image,  of  the  object  of
meditation.
How do you find or seek the object of meditation? Let us  ’s  say  that  the
object of meditation is the body of the Buddha’s body. First,  you   take  a
good look at athe painting or statue of the Buddha  or  the  statue  of  the
Buddha. Then yWhat ou you are trying to reproduce in your mind is  a  mental
image of what you are lookeding at, whether it is sculpture, a statue  or  a
painting. You are trying to produce a mental image of that in your mind  and
have that mental image appears clearly to the mental consciousness.
You look clearly at the statue or painting of the Buddha  and  then  try  to
produce an aspect of that clearly in your own mind.
When you are trying  to produce clearly athat mental image of the Buddha  in
your mind, you must not have the  idea  that  you  are  just  imagining  it.
Rather, when you are trying  to  have  that  image  of  the  Buddha  appears
clearly to your mind, you must regard that image that as the actual  Buddha.
This does not means that when you meditate, the Buddha  appears  but  rather
you must have theis idea that all the while the Buddha is always  there.   .
You must have this idea that the Buddha is always there, i.e. he  is  always
there.

The need to determine just one object in the beginning
When you are focusing on him, you are trying to  have  clear  appearance  of
him appearing clearly into your mind. You must have the  idea  that  is  the
actual Buddha.
First, you have to look at an  image  of  the  Buddha  -  whether  it  is  a
painting or a statue. Based on that you reproduce that  appearance  in  your
mind, and the thing that appearing in your mind is the mental image of  what
you saw. So you reproduce that clearly in your mind.  You  should  have  the
idea that the mental image that you are focusing on  is  the  actual  Buddha
and he is always there.
If you are seeking to achieve er of calm abiding,  then first you decide  on
you must choose just one your object of meditation. Once  you  have  decided
on your object of meditation, you should stick to it until you achieve  calm
abiding. If you keep on switching your object  of  meditation,  it  will  be
very difficult to achieve calm abiding.

      Elsewhere it says that although part of the image is detailed and part
      of  it  is  rough,  you  should  first  observe  the  rough  part  and
      afterwards, when your meditation on that has stabilized,  observe  the
      details. [255] According to experience, the rough features appear very
      easily, so you should work on the basis of observation from the  rough
      outline of its image. In particular, when you practice, as long as you
      have not accomplished fully qualified meditative stabilization, it  is
      inappropriate to move between many different types of objects. This is
      because, if you practice meditative stabilization while moving between
      many dissimilar objects, it will  become  a  great  obstacle  to  your
      accomplishment of calm abiding. Āryaśūra says:

          By stabilizing on one object
          Stabilize the thoughts of the mind.
          By going through a lot of objects
          The mind is disturbed by mental afflictions.

      And Lamp  for  the  Path  to  Enlightenment  also  says  it  with  the
      determiner “on any one:”

          On any one object that is suitable—
          Place the mind on something virtuous. (Page 210)[22]

The measure for getting the basis of observation and,  having  got  it,  the
need to focus on that very object and stick with it until  calm  abiding  is
achieved.
[LRCM Vol3 page 44] Furthermore, there are both subtle  and  gross  features
of the Buddha's bodily form. It is stated elsewhere that at first you  focus
on the gross features, and later, when these are solid, you  must  focus  on
the subtle.  As experience also shows that it  is  very  easy  to  raise  an
appearance  of  the  gross  features,  you  must  develop  your  object   of
meditation in stages starting with the gross features.
An  especially  important  point  is  that,  until  you  have   accomplished
satisfactory concentration as explained below, it is never  appropriate  for
you to cultivate meditative concentration by shifting  your  focus  to  many
different  types  of  objects  of  meditation.   For,   if   you   cultivate
concentration by moving to many dissimilar objects of  meditation,  it  will
be a great impediment to achieving serenity.
[LRCM Vol3 page 45] Thus, authoritative texts  on  achieving  concentration,
such as Asanga's texts on  the  levels  and  Kamalasila's  three  Stages  of
Meditation, explain that when first achieving concentration, you  do  so  in
relation to a single object of meditation; they do not say  that  you  shift
among many objects of meditation.
[LRCM Vol3 page 45] Aryasura also clearly states this [in his Compendium  of
the Perfections]:
Solidify your mind's reflection
By being firm on one object of meditation;
Letting it flow to many objects
Leads to a mind disturbed by afflictions.
Also, Atisha's Lamp for the Path to Enlightenment states:
Settle your mind in virtue
On any single object of meditation.
He makes his point with the phrase "on any single."
First, decide on the object of meditation. Once  you  have  decided  on  the
object of meditation, you stick to it until you achieve calm abiding. If in-
between you switch to various kinds of object it will be very  difficult  to
achieve calm abiding.

      That being so, the measure for first getting the basis of  observation
      that the mind focuses on is this: When you  visualize  the  head,  two
      arms, torso, and two legs successively a couple of times and attend to
      the whole body at the end of that, then, if you are able to see merely
      half the limbs and parts appear to the mind, you should  be  satisfied
      with that and focus on it even if there is no brilliant clarity.  That
      is because if you are not satisfied with that alone and do  not  focus
      on it but rather want  more  clarity  and  repeatedly  visualize,  the
      object will become clearer, however, not only will you fail to acquire
      stable meditative stabilization, this will become an obstacle  to  its
      acquisition. But even though the object is  not  very  clear,  if  you
      focus on just that mere partial object, you  will  acquire  meditative
      stabilization quickly. Then, due  to  its  benefit  for  clarity,  the
      clarity aspect will also  be  accomplished  easily.  This  appears  in
      Master Yeshé Dé’s advice and is essential. (Page 210)[23]

Next is the measure of having found the object of meditation.
[LRCM Vol3 page 45] Accordingly, the measure  for  having  first  found  the
object of meditation upon which you  keep  your  attention  is  as  follows:
Visualize several times in sequence the head, two  arms,  the  rest  of  the
trunk of the body, and the two legs.  After that, if  when  you  bring  your
attention to the body as a whole you can raise before your  mind  just  half
of the gross components, then—even without  radiant  clarity—you  should  be
satisfied  with  just  this  and  fix  your  attention  upon  it.  Why?  If,
dissatisfied with just that, you fail to fix your attention on it  and  want
more clarity instead, then, as you visualize it again and again, the  object
of meditation will become a bit clearer but you will  not  obtain  a  stable
concentration; in fact, you will prevent yourself from  getting  this.  Even
though the object of  meditation  is  not  very  clear,  if  you  keep  your
attention on precisely this partial object of meditation, you  will  quickly
obtain concentration. Since this then intensifies clarity, you will  readily
achieve clarity. This comes from the instructions of Ye-shay-day; it  is  of
great importance.
First you turn the attention, visualisze  in  sequence   starting  with  the
head and the two arms followed by the torso and the rest  of  the  trunk  of
the body,and  the two legs. Once you have done gone through that,  then  you
would have a rough image of the whole body. Even though  Once  you  get  the
image of the whole body, even though itthat image  may not  be  very  clear,
you should be content with that and focus on it without  trying  to  improve
on its clarity. that.
Once you get the image of the entire body, even though it may  not  be  very
clear, you just focus on that. It is said that when if you will to focus  on
it in that waythat, , as the text said, slowly the  factor  of  the  clarity
will arise. also come about.

Once you are able to form an image of the entire body  even  though  it  may
not be very clear, you focus and stabilize your mind on that without  trying
to increase or improve on the  clarity.  It  is  said  that  the  factor  of
clarity will come about slowly.
When If you do not do it in this way, every  time  when  your  you  have  an
image of the entire body is , when it is not very clear  and  you  try  very
hard to make it clearer and clearer, that will affect the  ability  of  your
mind’s ability to abide on the object. As such, even though your effort  may
you may result in produce some clarity when you  try  but,   the  factor  of
stability is affected. Your mind is unnot able to abide on  the  object.  So
do not do that. These is is according to theare  the   instructions  of  the
master Yeshé Dé-Shay-day.

So, Tthis is the meaning of the  measure  of  having  found  the  object  of
meditation. In the case of the body of the Buddha’s body,  as  said  in  the
text, first you visualisze in sequence the  various  parts  of  the  exalted
body repeatedly , the head, the two hands, the body, the legs and so  forth.
Then you do that over and over again until you have an image of  the  entire
body. There is the mental image of the entire body. Once  the  mental  image
of the entire body that appears to your mind,  this  at  is  when  you  have
found the object of meditation.

After you have found  the  object  of  meditation,  how  do  you  keep  your
attention on it?
      Now [256] you should focus on the whole  body  to  the  best  of  your
      abilities, and if some parts of the body appear  clearly,  you  should
      focus on those. If they become unclear again, you should focus on  the
      whole again. (Page 211)[24]
[LRCM Vol3 page 46] Keep your attention on the entirety of the body  to  the
extent that it  appears.  If  some  parts  of  the  body  appear  especially
clearly, keep your attention on them. When they become unclear, return  your
attention to the entirety of the body.

Khen Rinpoche (In English): Is there any  contradiction hereory or not?
First you must find the object of meditation1. In the case of  the  Buddha’s
exalted holy body, by going through the various parts of the holy body  over
and over again until you are able to form a mental  image  of  the  Buddha’s
body in its entirety. Whether it is clear or not, it  doesn’t  matter.  Once
the appearance forms in your mind then that is the measure of  having  found
the object of meditation.
What do you do after you find the object of meditation?
How do you keep your attention on it?

The text says that having found your object of meditation, i.e., the  mental
image of the entire body appears to your mind, while doing that, some  parts
of the body may then appear clearly to you, for example,  the  head  or  the
hands. You focus and keep  your  attention  on  whatever  So  whatever  that
appears clearly to you. you focus on that. You keep your attention on  that.
After keeping your attention on,, let ’s say,  the head, when which  appears
clearly and for whatever reason  the  head  ceases  doesto   not  appear  as
clearly as before, at that time, , then  you  return  back  and  you  should
switch back your attention to the entire body again.

      At that time, if a color, shape, number, or size appears that was  not
      ascertained earlier—for example[25] you want to meditate on  something
      yellow and something red appears, you want to meditate  on  a  sitting
      figure and a standing one appears, you want to meditate on one and two
      appear, or you want to meditate on something big and  something  small
      appears—it is inappropriate to pursue them; so you  should  only  make
      your original object, whatever it is, the basis of observation.

      In the context of practicing the deity yoga of secret mantra, you must
      achieve a clear appearance of the deity, so until  that  appears,  you
      should try to generate it by various means. However, here,  if  it  is
      difficult and the  deity’s  aspect  does  not  appear,  you  may  also
      accomplish meditative stabilization by placing the mind  and  focusing
      on any one of the objects presented above that is suitable  or  within
      the view ascertaining suchness; for the main purpose is to  accomplish
      calm abiding. (Page 211)[26]

HOW TO DIRECT THE MIND TOWARDS IT

      A        Presentation of the faultless approach
      B     Eliminating faulty approaches
      C     Indicating the length[27] of sessions (Page 211)[28]
 [LRCM Vol3 page 46] At that time, there may be uncertainty as to color,  as
when you want to meditate on gold, but red appears;  or  uncertainty  as  to
shape, as when you want to meditate on  a  sitting  shape,  but  a  standing
shape appears; or uncertainty as to number, as when you want to meditate  on
one thing, but two things appear; or uncertainty as to  size,  as  when  you
want to meditate on a large body, but a tiny body appears. As it is  utterly
inappropriate to pursue such distortions, you must  use  only  the  original
object of meditation, whatever it may be, as your object of meditation.
[LRCM Vol3 page 46] When  you  are  practicing  deity  yoga  in  the  mantra
vehicle, you definitely have to establish a clear image  of  the  deity.  So
until this arises, you must use many methods for developing it. However,  in
this non-tantric context, if you have great difficulty in  making  an  image
of a deity appear, you may adopt  any  one  of  the  objects  of  meditation
presented above and keep your attention on it because the  main  purpose  is
simply to achieve a concentration of meditative serenity.

PRESENTATION OF THE FAULTLESS APPROACH
How to focus your mind on the object of meditation
   1) Presenting the flawless method
   2) Eliminating flawed methods
   3) Indicating the length of sessions.

Indication that faultless meditative stabilisation has two features
      The meditative stabilization to be accomplished here has two features;
      it has the factor of intense clarity of an extremely clear  mind,  and
      it has the factor of non-conceptual stability of a mind abiding single-
      pointedly on its object. (Page 211)[29]

(1) The flawless method
[LRCM Vol3 page 47] The concentration that you will accomplish here has  two
special  features:  vivid  intensity—an  intense  mental  clarity—and   non-
discursive stability, staying one-pointedly on the object of meditation.
In theis context here, what is flawless concentration?
The Fflawless concentration must possess two features: (1) :
intense clarity (or vVivid intensity) and (2)   –  that  is  intense  mental
clarity i.e. the way of apprehending the object with this intensity.
Stability stability. – tIn apprehending its object, the mind  must  be  able
to not only have intense mental clarity just have clarity in term  of  vivid
intensity, and clarity of  the  object  but  there  must  also  be  also  be
stability.

In the next lesson, we will look at excitement and laxity and their  .  Both
have coarse and subtle forms. We will look at their antidotes as well,  such
as mindfulness and introspection. So, please read those sections.

                                ~~~~~~~~~~~~

Question: When Student 1:  If one meditates on His Holiness the Dalai  Lama,
would the merit and benefit be equal to meditating on the body of  the  that
be  equal  merits  and  equal  benefits  as  in   meditating   on   Buddha’s
statueBuddha?

Answer: Without Not looking at the meditation it in terms  of  its  quality,
but looking at this  in terms of comparing the kindness of  the  Bbuddha  to
the kindness of one’s root guru, the root guru is more kkinder than all  the
buddhas. From that point of view, then there at is greater benefit when  you
meditate on your own guru ; more benefit because  of  the  kindness  of  the
guru.

Question: We had discussed Student 1:  Previously  we  mentioned  about  two
types of non-virtue: (1) s. tThe ten non-virtues that are which the deed  is
natural misdeedsly wrong  and (2) the non-virtues other  one  is  prohibited
by the Buddha, for instance, ordained monks  are  prohibited  from  drinking
alcohol. That was the  example  cited.  In  the  ten  non-virtues  regarding
taking intoxicants, would alcohol be one of them?Shouldn’t  the  consumption
of alcohol be a natural misdeed?

Ven Gyurme: You are asking alcohol is a natural misdeed?
Student 1: Yes
Answer: If you consider drinking alcohol in that  way,  then   then  itthere
would become the eleven non-virtues!.


QuestionStudent  2:  Relating  to  objects  of  meditation   for   purifying
behaviour, from the text iit appears to me that it is the  importantce  that
one is of it is  to  be  able  to  correctly  actually  identify  one’s  own
behaviour. , in the sense whether one has a stronger attachment  or  one  is
of a more balanced type of behavior. If that part of the recognition is  not
correctFor instance, I may , let’s say if I am aactually be dominated by  my
attachment but more of the attachment but II do not like to  don’t  like  to
think of myself in that way. I prefer to think of myself as someone who  has
balanced behaviour. as one with attachment. I like to  think  of  myself  as
one with the balanced type of behavior. Once I identify ied myself as a  the
person with the more balanced behaviour,  then the choice of my   object  of
my meditation would also be different. Won’t tThat will  make  it  difficult
for me to purify my behaviour. Would I be right?

Answer: The sign of having making the wrongly  identified  cation  of  one’s
own behavourial type would surface very quickly  when  you  are  meditating.
Let us ’s say you are a person who is  predominanted  by  attachmently  very
desirous. , Yyou would not be able to stay focussed   on  the  object.  That
would be a is a very clear sign.

For such a person, the a predominancet of attachment  desire  will  lead  to
excitement,  which which is one of the two major obstacles. When  excitement
arises easily and regularly, it is a clear sign that you  should  know  that
it is a clear  sign of the predominance of for attachment.

If you are able to abide on in the object fairly easily,  then  perhaps  you
could say then that you are a balanced person.  that is  balanced,  in  term
of balanced kind.

So Tthe advice here is  to  choose  the  correct  object  of  meditation  in
accordance with  one’s  disposition  because  everyone  body  has  different
issues with different afflictions. When If you are able to choose an  object
that is an can effectivereally act as an antidote  or  suppress  to  a  that
particular affliction  then that is going to work and will be very  helpful.


Question: Student 2: Would I be correct in saying that for lay  people  like
ourselves, in the beginning, we  would have to contendt with the  discursive
mind more than anything else for a start??

Answer: It is nNot only so for  lay people. ,  Oordained  people  are   also
the same. . When you study you already have discursiveness.

Question: Student 2: If that is the case, for beginners who wants  to  start
on this practice, at ththe beginning meditation on the  breath  will  be  as
the initial object of meditation in order would be  the  starting  point  to
calm down the mind. Of course Ssubsequently, they may  switch  to  something
anything else?.

Answer: This is definitely so because in  the  text  in  the  section  on  -
identifying the objects of meditation, - it says  that  in  general,   there
are  different  objects  of  meditation  for  different  people.  rson.   In
particular, when if you have a predominancet of  discursive  thoughts,  ness
then you definitely have to meditate on the breathe.

In the beginning, iIt is would  bevery   good  in  the  beginning  if  oneto
meditates on breathe. It will be very good. I would say perhaps this is  the
best  method  for  stopping  discursiveness.  ;  which  is  mental   chatter
basically.

QuestionStudent 2: Meditating on ugliness or the foulness  of  the  body  is
said to be the antidote to as a result ofour  attachment.  to the body,  one
meditates on the foulness of the body. But  our   the  attachment  does  not
necessarily always relate to come from being attached to our body.  Nowadays
In the present day, we have people who have addictions such as addiction  to
gambling, or addiction to drugs and so forth.  In  those  cases,  With  that
kind of attachment, meditating on the foulness of the body  may  not  be  an
the antidote to it. So, Wwithin the context of the   Dharma,  what  kind  of
antidotes can be offered to for people who are going through those  at  kind
of experiences?

Answer: In the first place, people who have  suchsuch   addictions  are  not
the suitable candidates for person  to  meditatione.  They  can’t  meditate.
Rather, what we can help them by is telling them over  and  over  again  the
faults of particular courses ause of actions and the benefits of  giving  up
those  courses  of  action  forsaking  that  cause  of  actions  until  they
understand.

If they do understand,  then maybe we can tell them that they can  meditate.
But uUnless they have some feelings and some understanding  from  the  heart
regarding the faults of those activities and the  benefits  of  giving  them
up, , at least some understanding of the faults of the particular  cause  of
the actions and the benefits of forsaking it, until then,   I  guess  it  is
very difficult for such these people to meditate.

QuestionStudent 3: How does differentiating  the  constituents  or  elements
act as an antidote a powerful counteracting force for to  the  yogi  who  is
predominateding by pride?

Answer: Thereat is a kind of pride thinking that one knows quite a  lot  but
in fact one knows very a llittle. Doesn’t tThat happens, right? This  at  is
one example. In the case of the object of meditation  for  purifying  pride,
it is said to be the differentiation of  the  constituents.  The  theory  is
this:  - when you go through the whole entire list of constituents  in  your
mind, and then start classifying them as this  or  that,  dividing  this  as
this and that as that, one realises comes to understand that there are  many
a lot of things that one is not able to list out. One does not n’t know.  By
Kknowing that there are things that one does not  n’t  know  perhaps  is  an
antidote to pride.

Question: Is there a Student 3: The other one is like Khen Rinpoche said  is
a contradiction in what ,  Lama  Tsongkhapa  said  about  tells  us  between
stability and clarity?. In the first part,First  he said that we  should  ys
to focus on stabiliszing the image of the body of  the  Buddha’s  body.  But
after that Then after that he said ys that if you are able to focus on  some
parts of the body that areis clear,   then  you  should  zoom  in  on  those
parts. at. Is there a contradiction between these two?


Khen Rinpoche (In English): There is nNo contradiction.

In the case of the body of the Buddha, tAnswer: The measure of having  found
the object of meditation is the appearance  of,  in  case  of  the  Buddha’s
body, the appearance of the entire body.  When  this  image  of  the  entire
whole body appears,  then we are supposed to keep our attention on it.
The text says that while your mind abides in that image, clarity  will  come
slowly.

Clarity does not n’t come right away even after you have  having  found  the
object of meditation. When there is clarity arises, it is  not  the  clarity
of the entire image but,  rather, some parts of the images like the arms  or
the head. Sometimes they it becomes very clear. The text said  that  w  When
certain parts of the body are appearing  clearly,  that  happens,  the  text
say, then you focus your attention on those parts. that which  is  appearing
clearly. This is the way to increase the overall clarity of the  image  over
time.

When the certain part of the  body  appears  clearly,  the  text  says,  pay
attention on it.  These  are  the  ways  to  increase  the  overall  clarity
overtimes. As you focus  on  the  parts  of  the  body  that  are  appearing
clearly, While you are doing that you do not  n’t  lose  the  image  of  the
entire bodyimage. Thate image is still  there.  You  don’t  lose  the  whole
object, and the object is still there. So,  Lama  Tsongkhapa  said  ys  that
when if some parts of the body appear clearly, keep your attention on  that.
When they it becomes unclear,  you return your attention  to  the  image  of
the entirety of the body again.

This explanation comes after when we say Tthis is the  way  of  keeping  our
the attention on the object. But this  comes after we have having found  the
object. So, after you have found the object of  meditation,  You  then  then
when you are focusing on those body parts that appear clearly to  you.  This
is the ese are  favourable  conditions  for  you  to  improve  the  cclarity
overall without . It doesn’t harming  the the stability of the image.

Question: Student 3: Will it not like what Ven Gyurme said “You zoom in”  so
that means you are not actually focusing on the entirety on the body.
Ven Gyurme: Yes, you just focusing.
Student 3: When you are focussing on certain parts of the  body  that  areis
clear to you after you have found the object, would that not mean .
Would it mean that you would then lose the focus of the entire  bodyentirety
of the body?

Answer: You must not lose the object.

QuestionStudent 3:  For inexperienced meditators,  people  who  without  any
experience can we just think in this way: of while not  losing  the  object,
i.e., it like the entire body,  is there there may be but some parts of  the
body that it is appear “brighter”? Can we say  that  it  is  something  like
that?

Khen Rinpoche (In English): You can say that.

Question: Student 4: Previously we  talked  about  calm  abiding  being  the
single-pointed mind. Then Wwhen we talk about special  insight,   we  talked
about it being an analytical mind sozing; so  it  is  not  single-  pointed.
When it comes to the union of calm abiding and special insight,  is  that  a
it single-pointed mind or not single-pointed?

Ven Gyurme: Is special insight single-pointed mind or not?
Answer: Calm abiding is a single-pointed mind.  Special  insight  is  not  a
single-pointedness mind. It is actually the mental factor of wisdom   -  the
wisdom that  analyszes  its  object.  In  the  context  of  the  Pperfection
Vvehicle  and  the  three  lower  classes  of  tantra,  special  insight  is
necessarily an analytical meditation. There is no room for  special  insight
to being a stabiliszing meditation in the Pperfection  wisdom  vVehicle  and
the three lower classes of tantra.

However iIt is mentioned towards the end of  the  MLLR  that  in  ,  in  the
completion stage of hHighest yYoga tTantra, after the winds  haves  entered,
abided and dissolved in the  the central channel,  abide and dissolve,  when
you are on the completion stage there is the  special insight that which  is
a stabiliszing meditation. In HYT, on  the  completion  stage,  the  special
insight is stabilizing meditation but Oother than that,  special insight  is
necessarily an analytical meditation according to the  Pperfection  Vvehicle
and the three lower classes of tantra.




Interpreted by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme; transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek,  Vivien  Ng
and Aki Yeo; edited by Cecilia Tsong.





-----------------------
[1] LRCM, 35.
[2] The four types of objects of meditation are: (1) the pervasive  objects,
(2) the objects for  purifying  one’s  conduct,  (3)  the  objects  for  the
skillful and (4) the objects for purifying mental afflictions.
[3] Ibid., 36-37.
[4] Ibid., 38.
[5] Ibid.
[6] Ibid., 39-40.
[7] This involves differentiating things into the six  constituents:  earth,
water, fire, air, space and consciousness. (LRCM: Chapter 2, Note 73, 397).
[8] Ibid., 40.
[9] Ibid.
[10] Ibid.
[11] Ibid., 40.
[12] Tib. gang zag so so, literally “individual persons.”
[13] Ibid., 42.
[14] Ibid., 43.
[15] Tib. dad pa skye ba, literally “faith arising.”
[16] Tib. skabs
[17] Ibid., 44.
[18] Tib. rten
[19] Tib. gzhi
[20] Ibid., 44.
[21] Ibid.
[22] Ibid., 44-45.
[23] Ibid., 45-46.
[24] Ibid., 46.
[25] Tib. sogs, the examples for color, shape, number, and size are each
concluded by this word.
[26] Ibid.
[27] Tib. tshad, usually translated here as “measure.”
[28] Ibid., 47.
[29] Ibid., 47.

