Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/SixPerfections/BP2 M4 L12 (final).doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:02.586700
================================================================================


Transcript of teachings by Khen Rinpoche Geshe Chonyi  on  the  Heart  Sutra
and Stages of the Path (the Six Perfections)

The root text, Middle Length  Lam-Rim  by  Lama  Tsongkhapa,  translated  by
Philip Quarcoo. © FPMT, Inc., May 2012, is  indented.  All  page  references
refer to the root text, unless otherwise stated.

Where applicable, page numbers of corresponding  sections  in  the  Lam  Rim
Chen Mo (LRCM) are indicated in footnotes; they refer to The Great  Treatise
on the Stages of the Path  to  Enlightenment,  Volume  2,  by  Tsong-kha-pa,
translated  by  The  Lamrim  Chenmo   Translation   Committee,   Snow   Lion
Publications, 2004.

Lesson  12                                                        6   August
2013


The definite number and the definite order of  the  six  perfections.  (From
root text, pages 170-174).


Remember in a previous class there was a question about how  Avalokiteshvara
managed to  hear  the  question  from  Shariputra?  Was  he  in  or  out  of
meditative equipoise or was he pretending to hear the question?  The  answer
from Benny (one of the students who were asked to answer the  question)  was
that,  in  reality,  Avalokiteshvara  was  a   buddha.   Being   a   buddha,
Avalokiteshvara could hear Shariputra’s  question  even  though  he  was  in
meditative equipoise.

If you were to answer the question in this way, then another question  would
arise: If he was a buddha, then shouldn’t he be able to reply under his  own
power and not require the blessing of the Buddha to do so?

Khen Rinpoche: Are you getting the question and answer that we  are  talking
about here or are you totally lost?

If Avalokiteshvara was a buddha, then whatever he said in  the  sutra  would
be speech that is directly spoken from a  buddha’s  mouth.  But  it  is  not
classified as such. It is classified as inspired speech.

It is mentioned in the commentary that Avalokiteshvara being  in  meditative
equipoise was a cause or condition  for  the  question  from  Shariputra  to
arise. That being the case, at the time of the question being asked,  it  is
difficult to say that Avalokiteshvara was  in  meditative  equipoise  as  he
would not be able to hear Shariputra’s question.

If that is the case, perhaps it is all right  to  say  that,  prior  to  the
question and answer, he was in meditative equipoise and during the  question
and answer, he was not in meditative equipoise.

Khen Rinpoche: I think that maybe that is the best  option.  I  don’t  know.
You can still think it.

There is a quotation from  the  sutras   that  happens  to  be  my  favorite
quotation, “Not seeing is the correct seeing.” Now that you have  heard  the
explanation of The Heart of Wisdom Sutra and you have some  idea  about  its
meaning,  based on what you had heard and learnt, perhaps it would  be  good
if you could explain what exactly this statement means: “Not seeing  is  the
correct seeing.”

Khen Rinpoche: “Not  seeing  is  the  best  seeing.”  Correct  seeing.  Best
seeing. You can do a commentary and explanation  based  on  that,  whichever
version you like.

                                ~~~~~~~~~~~~

                Explanation of how to train in the conduct of
                      the Victors’ children in general

   2B4B-2A2C-2C3A      How to train in the Mahāyāna in general
        This has three points:

      1   Developing the wish to train in the trainings of bodhisattvas
      2   Having developed the wish, taking the vows of the Victors’
        children
      3        Having taken them, the way in which to train in them (Page
        169)[1]


1 Developing the wish to train in the trainings of the bodhisattvas

It is said in the teachings that one  should  learn  the  bodhisattva  deeds
after generating the mind of enlightenment. It  is  also  mentioned  in  the
teachings that prior to taking the bodhisattva vows,  one  should  undertake
the study of and familiarisation  with  the  precepts  and  the  bodhisattva
vows. After having gained some  confidence  in  being  able  to  follow  the
training  and  keep  the  vows,  only  then  should  one   take   the   vows
enthusiastically.  When one takes the  bodhisattva  vows  on  the  basis  of
having been familiar with and knowing what constitutes the training  and  so
forth, it is said that one will be more stable  and  be  able  to  keep  the
vows.

I would like you all  to  read  the  first  four  perfections  on  your  own
especially before coming to class. It is not  difficult.  I  hope  to  cover
them quickly. I will just give you a short introduction to  the  first  four
perfections.


      2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3 Having taken them, the way in which to train in them
      This has three points:

          A   What the foundation of the trainings is
          B    How the trainings are contained in it
          C The stages by which to train in them (Page 170)[2]

A What the foundation of the trainings is

There are many aspects of the bodhisattva precepts and all can  be  included
within the six perfections. It is said that all the essential points of  the
bodhisattva practice is contained in the six perfections.

B HOW THE TRAININGS ARE CONTAINED IN IT

What follows is a discussion of the six perfections and how  the  number  of
perfections is fixed as six.

      2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3B      How the trainings are contained in it
      This has two points:

          1    The actual meaning: the definite number of the perfections
          2    In addition to that, their definite order (Page 170)[3]


THE FIXED NUMBER OF PERFECTIONS

The discussion of the main topic, the fixed number of perfections,  has
six parts:

      2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3B1B    The actual topic
      With regard to the perfections, the number is definite as six:

          1    The number is definite from the point of view of high status


          2    The number is definite from the point of view of the
            accomplishment of   the two welfares
          3    The number is definite from the point of view of the
            complete accomplishment of the welfare of others in all aspects
          4   The number is definite from the point of view of comprising
            the entire Mahāyāna
          5    The number is definite from the point of view of influencing
            all aspects of the path or method
          6    The number is definite from the point of view of the three
            trainings (Page 170)[4]


1    The number is definite from the point of view of high status
As you have seen from the discussion on the paths and grounds, in  order  to
achieve full enlightenment, one has to accumulate the collections of  method
and wisdom over a very long period of  time,  i.e.,  three  great  countless
eons.

Also in order to complete the accumulation of the  two  collections  and  to
achieve full  enlightenment,  one  has  to  continue  accumulating  the  two
collections not just over one or two lifetimes but over a successive  number
of lifetimes. In order to be able to continue one’s accumulation of the  two
collections in all those lifetimes, one would need a perfect basis.

We talk about high status, i.e. having successive good  rebirths,  in  terms
of the four excellences:
1. perfect resources
2. excellent bodies
3. having companions
4. being able to accomplish whatever activities one has undertaken



In general, obtaining a basis or a life whereby one has these  four  perfect
conditions—having resources, a good body, good helpers  and  being  able  to
complete whatever tasks one undertakes—are  the  excellent  conditions  that
constitute high status or good rebirth.

But most of the time, these conditions can also become the  causes  for  the
afflictions to arise.  Just look around at the  people  in  this  world  who
have these four things. There are many who  have  sufficient  resources  and
are quite well-to-do. They have good bodies.  They  have  many  helpers  and
they are successful in the sense that they achieve whatever they  undertake.
But most of these people do not practise the Dharma.

On top of that, having all these  perfect  conditions  in  life  become  the
condition for these people to be controlled by their afflictions. It is  the
same case for all of us. It is quite apparent when one starts to  have  some
money or resources or when one happens to have a perfect body or have a  big
entourage. When you think about it, most  of  the  time,  these  become  the
conditions for the three mental poisons to arise.  They are  the  conditions
for one to have jealousy that leads to negative competitiveness, ego,  pride
and so forth.

In general, it is important and it  is  good  to  have  these  four  things:
excellent resources, excellent body, excellent companions and being able  to
complete whatever activities one undertakes. The point here is that when  we
have these four things, we have to make sure that they  do  not  become  the
conditions or causes for us to generate the afflictions. Just as these  four
excellences alone are not sufficient, one must not fall  under  the  control
of the afflictions because of them.

Furthermore, without wisdom, you do not create new virtue so  that  even  as
you enjoy the four excellences, the merit that you have accumulated  in  the
past is exhausted. With wisdom however, while  you  are  enjoying  the  four
excellences, you will also be creating new causes to  be  able  to  continue
having these four excellences in future lives to come.  So  wisdom  is  very
important. In this context,  this  wisdom  is  the  mind  that  is  able  to
distinguish well what is to be cultivated and what is to  be  abandoned.  If
one does not have this, one will only  be  depleting  one’s  merits  through
enjoying all the good things of life. But if one has  this  wisdom,  instead
of depleting one’s virtues while enjoying these four excellences, one  would
continue creating causes to be able to continue to enjoy these  four  things
in the future.

In order to achieve a life that has these  four  excellences—“(1)  resources
at your disposal, (2) a body with which to  practice,  (3)  companions  with
whom to practise and (4) the ends of actions that are to be  undertaken”—you
need to create their causes. Without  the  causes,  the  effects  would  not
arise. The cause has to be a concordant cause:
• Having wealth, resources and enjoyments is a result of its own  concordant
  cause,  the practice of giving. If we want to have wealth,  resources  and
  enjoyments, we need to practise giving.
• If we want a perfect body that is not afflicted by sicknesses  and  harms,
  we would have to  practise  its  concordant  cause  of  observing  ethical
  discipline.
• The concordant cause of having companions who will help you in  your  work
  and in accomplishing your wishes is the practice of patience.
• Being able to complete whatever activities  you  undertake  with  a  happy
  mind and enthusiasm is said to be the result of  the  practice  of  joyous
  perseverance.

It is said that having single-pointedness  of  the  mind,  i.e.,  practising
concentration, is the cause for not coming under the sway  or  influence  of
the afflictions.

Having the wisdom to distinguish between what is to be cultivated  and  what
is to be abandoned is the result of the practice of wisdom, so the  practice
of wisdom is  important.

This is how the number of perfections based on high status is fixed at  six:

• High status here means having a life with the four excellences:  excellent
  resources,   excellent   body,   excellent   companions   and    excellent
  accomplishment of whatever activities one undertakes.
• On top of these four excellences, you do not come  under  the  control  of
  the afflictions due to having these four things.
• On top of that, you have the wisdom that is able  to  distinguish  between
  what you should cultivate and what you should abandon.

These are the things we need. So if we want to achieve  them  from  life  to
life, we have to accomplish their  concordant  causes.  Therefore  we  would
have  to  engage  in  the  practice  of  giving,  ethics,  patience,  joyous
perseverance, concentration and wisdom.

Usually we associate a life with the  four  excellences  to  be  part  of  a
samsaric life, but this is not necessarily the case. If one is  an  ordinary
being in  cyclic  existence,  then  these  four  excellences  do  constitute
samsara, i.e., they are part of samsara. But when one  reaches  the  end  of
the path and achieves full enlightenment, one  would  have  all  these  four
excellences in their perfect states. At that time,  these  four  excellences
are not samsara.

2 The number is definite from the point of view  of  the  accomplishment  of
the two welfares


      2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3B1B-2A The transition
      When you train  in  bodhisattva  conduct  with  such  a  support,  the
      activities of bodhisattvas  are  exhausted  in  the  two:  those  that
      accomplish one’s own welfare and those that accomplish the welfare  of
      others. (Page 171)[5]

One accomplishes the aims of others through the first three perfections:
• It is through  giving  or  the  practice  of  generosity  that  you  first
  accomplish the aims of others. Such practice must not  be  accompanied  by
  harmfulness towards sentient beings. Otherwise your giving  would  not  be
  able to accomplish the aims of others.
• As it is important to  refrain  from  causing  harm  to  others,  this  is
  accomplished through  the  practice  of  ethics  where  you  intentionally
  refrain from harming others.
• In order to accomplish the happiness of others and to be able  to  benefit
  others, it is very important to be able to refrain from giving in  to  the
  temptation of harming them, especially when they cause you harm. Therefore
  the practice of patience becomes very important as well.
Patience must come from ethics. One also needs the  practice  of  giving  in
order to accomplish the aims of others. This  is  how  you  need  the  first
three perfections—the perfection of giving, the  perfection  of  ethics  and
the perfection of patience—in order to fulfil the aims of others.

The text says that when you do not retaliate because of your  patience,  you
prevent others from accumulating a great amount of negativity. When  you  do
retaliate, you start a cycle of  counter-retaliation  and  so  forth.  One’s
practice of patience can inspire others to  cultivate  virtue.  When  others
are inspired to engage in virtue because of  one’s  own  patience,  this  is
also how one fulfils the aims of others.

One fulfils one’s own aims with the  practice  of  meditative  stabilisation
(or concentration) and wisdom. The final aim and highest happiness  one  can
achieve for oneself is the bliss of  full  enlightenment.  When  we  achieve
full enlightenment, we achieve our own purpose and fulfil our own  aims.  In
order to achieve full enlightenment, one definitely needs wisdom.  In  order
to generate the wisdom that is necessary for achieving  full  enlightenment,
one must first achieve  meditative  stabilisation.  When  our  mind  is  not
distracted, we can abide and focus our mind on any chosen  object  and  stay
on it for as long as we like. Therefore to  achieve  our  own  aim  of  full
enlightenment, we need the practice of meditative stabilisation and we  need
wisdom.

Since a lazy person will not fulfil the aims of  others,  one  needs  joyous
perseverance. In fact, one needs joyous perseverance, a mind of  enthusiasm,
to fulfil one’s own aims as well.

Therefore accomplishing the two aims—the aims of oneself  and  the  aims  of
others—the number of perfections is fixed as six.

3  The  number  is  definite  from  the  point  of  view  of  the   complete
accomplishment of the welfare of others in all aspects
• First you relieve others' poverty by giving away material goods.
• Then you do no harm to any living being, which is the practice of  ethics.


• In addition, you are patient when harm is done to you.
• With the practice of patience, you achieve joyous perseverance, i.e.,  you
  never give up.
• It is said that when you have meditative  stabilisation,  i.e.,  when  you
  achieve all the different levels of concentration, you are able to display
  supernatural powers that will  attract  sentient  beings  into  your  fold
  because of their interest in you.
• Once they are interested, they  will  listen  to  you.  When  they  become
  suitable vessels, then with wisdom you give them teachings. You help  them
  with good explanations and through that you bring them to liberation.

4 The number is definite from the point of view  of  comprising  the  entire
Mahayana
The text says, “… you will not  be  attached  to  resources  that  you  have
acquired and you will not view resources that you  have  not  acquired  with
interest.” This is saying that  when  you  practise  giving  well,  you  are
generous. You are probably not attached to your possessions.  When  you  are
not attached to your possessions, you are probably not  going  to  seek  out
objects that you do not have. When you do not seek out  such  objects,   you
are not falling under the control of attachment.

What is generosity? Generosity is primarily a mind of giving. When you  have
such an attitude, with a strong wish to give, your attachment to  things  is
probably not a big issue for you. When you do not have  strong  grasping  or
clinging to your body, resources or enjoyments, you  would  definitely  find
it much easier to be an ethical person, i.e., to practise ethics.

When one practises patience well, you will find it easier  to  tolerate  the
harm and suffering inflicted upon you. When you are  able  to  tolerate  the
harm done by others and the suffering that you  experience,  then  you  will
not get dispirited or discouraged so easily.  You would find  it  easier  to
be enthusiastic  about  virtue  and  engage  in  meaningful  and  beneficial
activities. When your joyous perseverance is  sustained,  you  would  easily
achieve concentration followed by wisdom.

5 The number is definite from the point of view of influencing  all  aspects
of the path or method:  how  the  six  perfections  become  the  method  for
accomplishing any of the individual aspects
The following points seem to be saying something similar  to  what  we  just
covered.


           A The way in which generosity is contained in the path
       The path or the  method  of  non-attachment  to  resources  that  are
       objects  you  have  already  acquired  is   generosity   because   by
       familiarizing yourself with giving them away  you  become  free  from
       attachment to them. (Page 173)[6]

This shows the practice of generosity.


           B     The way in which ethics acts as a method
       The method for restraining the distraction of  exerting  oneself  for
       the sake of acquiring objects that have  not  yet  been  acquired  is
       ethics because in one with the vows of a fully ordained monk all  the
       distractions of ends of actions do not arise. (Page 173)[7]

This is the practice of ethics.


           C     The way in which patience acts as a method

       The method for not giving up sentient beings is patience because one
      is not depressed by all the sufferings of being harmed. (Page 173)[8]
This is the practice of patience.


           D     The way in which joyous effort acts as a method [211]
       The method for increasing virtue is  joyous  effort  because  through
       undertaking virtue with joyous effort it increases. (Page 173)[9]

This is the practice of joyous effort (or joyous perseverance).


           E     The way in which the last two perfections act as a method
       The methods for completely purifying the obscurations  are  the  last
       two  perfections  because  the  mental  afflictions  are   completely
       purified  by  concentration  and  the  obscurations  to  objects   of
       knowledge are completely purified by wisdom. (Page 173)[10]

This  is  saying  that  the  final  two  perfections  clear  away  all   the
obscurations. When elaborated,  meditative  stabilisation  clears  away  the
afflictions while wisdom clears away the knowledge  obscurations.   How  are
you going to explain this? This is from perspective of which tenet?

Khen Rinpoche: Which tenet talked about this point?

When   one   abides   in   meditative   stabilisation   in    single-pointed
concentration, one  can  suppress  the  manifest  afflictions.  If  we  read
obscurations  to  objects  of   knowledge   (or   cognitive   or   knowledge
obscurations) here as the obscurations that prevent the  mind  from  knowing
phenomena as they are, this would cover  both  the  afflictive  obscurations
and the knowledge obscurations.

I am  not  sure  if  we  can  interpret  the  “obscurations  to  objects  of
knowledge” as a general reference to all obscurations,  be  they  afflictive
obscurations or knowledge obscurations.  Otherwise, how  are  you  going  to
explain this? As we had seen from the viewpoint of the  CMWS,  in  order  to
destroy any of the two obscurations, whether  they  are  the  afflictive  or
knowledge obscurations, you need the wisdom directly  perceiving  emptiness.
This is something to think about with regard to how we are  to  explain  the
last part of this quotation.

 6 The number is definite from the point of view of the three trainings
• The first of the three trainings is the higher  training  in  ethics.  The
  practice of giving or generosity is a precondition  for  the  practice  of
  ethics. The practice of patience assists the practice of ethics.  So  when
  you are looking at the six  perfections  in  terms  of  the  three  higher
  trainings, then the practice of generosity and patience  are  included  as
  part of the higher training in ethics.
• The practice  of  meditative  stabilisation  is  included  in  the  higher
  training in concentration.
• The practice of wisdom is included in the higher training in wisdom.
It is said that the practice of  joyous  perseverance  is  included  in  all
three trainings.

SUMMARY

You have to understand how the six perfections  are  essential  whether  you
are seeking to accomplish the aims of yourself or the aims of others:
• When we talk about accomplishing the aims of others, why is  it  that  you
  need the six perfections? What happens when any one of  them  is  missing?
  How does that prevent you from fulfilling the aims of others?
• Likewise in terms of fulfilling your own aims, why do  you  need  the  six
  perfections? How does each of them help you to fulfil your own aims?
Based on understanding that, you come to understand how the essence  of  the
bodhisattva training is the practice of the six perfections.

The  purpose  of  obtaining  high  status,  i.e.,  wanting  successive  good
rebirths, is to be able to move towards  achieving  full  enlightenment.  In
order to achieve full enlightenment, you need successive  good  rebirths  as
the suitable basis.  When  you  do  not  obtain  successive  good  rebirths,
achieving enlightenment is not possible.
• Not only do you need successive good rebirths, you  need  successive  good
  rebirths with all the excellences such as  an  excellent  body,  excellent
  resources, excellent companions and being able to accomplish whatever  you
  undertake.
• On top of that, these conditions must not be a cause  for  the  generation
  and increase of your afflictions.
• On top of that, you also need the  wisdom  that  is  able  to  distinguish
  between what you need to cultivate and what you need to abandon.
In order to  accomplish  these  successive  good  rebirths  with  all  these
perfect conditions, you have to train in their concordant causes.  Then  the
practice of the six perfections becomes indispensable.

We need to see for ourselves why we need  to  learn,  familiarise  ourselves
and practice the six perfections.

DEFINITE ORDER OF THE PERFECTIONS

Next is the discussion on the fixed order of the perfections.

      2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3B2     In addition to that, their definite order
      This has three points:

          A  The order in which they arise
          B  The order in terms of inferior and superior
          C  The order in terms of coarser and subtler

          A  The order in which they arise
      If you have  generosity  that  is  indifferent  and  not  attached  to
      resources, you will adopt ethics. If you possess ethics that  refrains
      from faulty behavior, you will be patient with regard to harm. If  you
      have patience that does not despair with  respect  to  hardships,  you
      will be able to act with joyous  effort  since  adverse  circumstances
      will be few. As  you  act  with  joyous  effort  day  and  night,  the
      concentration that is able to establish the mind in virtue will arise.
      When  the  mind  is  in  meditative  equipoise,  you  will  have   the
      realization of reality just as it is. (Page 174)[11]

A few lessons ago, when we were looking at the paths and grounds, there  was
a question about whether the order of the perfections is definite.  This  is
Lama Tsongkhapa’s answer.

           B     The order in terms of inferior and superior
         The earlier are inferior and the latter are superior.


           C     The order in terms of coarser and subtler
       Since the earlier are easier to engage in and  do  than  the  latter,
       they are coarser. Since the latter are more difficult  to  engage  in
       and do than the earlier, they are more subtle. (Page 174)[12]

                                ~~~~~~~~~~~~

I hope to finish the first three perfections in one session.  They  are  not
difficult to understand. You just have to read it. Of  course  if  you  have
any qualms you can bring it up in class.

Question:  I  have  two  interpretations  regarding  this  statement   about
meditative stabilisation clearing away the afflictions. Is it talking  about
the first level of concentration when afflictions are  being  suppressed  or
is it talking about the lam-rim meditations? For example,  if  one  were  to
meditate on death and  impermanence,  as  a  result  of  that,  one’s  eight
worldly concerns are reduced. Likewise the chances of  the  three  poisonous
minds arising is also reduced.

Answer: When we talk about meditative stabilisation as a perfection, we  are
mainly talking about meditative serenity or calm abiding.

                                ~~~~~~~~~~~~

(Khen Rinpoche announced that the discussion session on 18 Aug will be  held
from 2pm to 3.30pm. This will  be  followed  by  a  game  based  on  the  TV
gameshow, Who Wants to be a Millionaire? from 4pm to 5.30pm  that  is  aimed
to help students to improve their studies, encourage them to study  and  for
bonding with one another. The game is titled Who Wants to Be a  Buddha?  The
idea for the game came from the group leaders.

The questions will come from the tenets and Heart Sutra. So those  who  wish
to participate in the game should do  some  preparation  by  studying  these
topics. After the  game,  there  will  be  dinner.  Khen  Rinpoche  strongly
encouraged everyone to join and support this initiative).



Interpreted by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme; transcribed by Phuah  Soon  Ek,  Patricia
Lee and Julia Koh; edited by Cecilia Tsong.



-----------------------
[1] LRCM,  102.
[2] Ibid.,  103.
[3] Ibid., 104.
[4] Ibid.
[5] Ibid.,105-106.
[6] Ibid. 108.
[7] Ibid.
[8] Ibid.
[9] Ibid., 108.
[10] Ibid.
[11] Ibid., 111.
[12] Ibid., 111.

