Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/SixPerfections/BP2 M4 L15 (final).doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:53:57.400401
================================================================================


Transcript of teachings by Khen Rinpoche Geshe Chonyi on the Heart Sutra
and Stages of the Path (the Six Perfections)

The root text, Middle Length Lam-Rim,  by  Lama  Tsongkhapa,  translated  by
Philip Quarcoo, © FPMT, Inc., May 2012, is  indented.  All  page  references
refer to the root text, unless otherwise stated.

Where applicable, page numbers of corresponding  sections  in  the  Lam  Rim
Chen Mo (LRCM) are indicated in footnotes; they refer to The Great  Treatise
on the Stages of the Path  to  Enlightenment,  Volume  2,  by  Tsong-kha-pa,
translated  by  The  Lamrim  Chenmo   Translation   Committee,   Snow   Lion
Publications, 2004.

Lesson 15                                                         20  August
2013


The perfection off patience. (From root text, pages 181-184).




       2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C1A-1C      How to train in patience
       This has three points:

           1     The entity of patience
           2     Its subdivisions
           3     How to generate patience in one’s continuum (Page 181)

The entity of patience
What is patience?

According to the Medium Length Lam-Rim (hereinafter referred to as MLLR):,

       The entity of patience is the mind abiding  at  ease  without  being
       overwhelmed by harm and the occurrence of suffering, as well as very
       abiding dedication to the Dharma. (Page 181)[1]

This patience is the mind:
    • abiding calmly without being discouraged by harm and suffering and
    • abiding firmly in beliefs in the teachings
What I have just read out is refers to talking about the three  types  types
of patience:
1. aA mind “that abiding at ease that is not overwhelmed by harm”es calmly
2. aA mind “abiding at ease” in  face  of   “the  occurrence  of  suffering”
   without being discouraged by harms and sufferings.
3. aA mind that abidesi ng in beliefs in the teachings
• One of Tthe patience  is  the  patience  of  disregarding  harms  done  to
  oneself you, and it is a mind that  does  not  get  discouraged  when  one
  experiences harm.
• The patience of accepting sufferings is  the  mind  that  remains  staying
  calm even as one in the event ofis  experiencing suffering.
• The patience of certitude about  the  teachings  is  a  mind  that  abides
  firmly in the beliefs in the teachings. It is a mind that puts up with any
  the difficulties that one may will experience as in the course  of  tryone
  tries ing to understand the meaning of the teachings, such as the  meaning
  of selflessness,  through hearing and reflection.

Class of discordant factors
So whatever difficulties you  may  meet  during  the  course  of  trying  to
understand the meaning of the teachings or trying to understand the  meaning
of selflessness.
What is the class of discordant factors ?
In simple English, they are the things that are obstacles to  or  discordant
with patience?.

      Its opposites are hatred, disheartenment, lack  of  appreciation,  and
      lack of desire.(Page 181)[2]

In the MLLR, the class of discordant factors is stated to be:
   1. Hatred,
   2. Discouragement
   3. Non-belief.
These are the three are the class of discordant factors.
Examples: Wwhen we are receive harmed by , when someone, body does  harm  to
us,our  anger or hatred (or anger) that obstructs  us  from  being  able  to
practisce patience at that time so our hatred .
• Anger iis a discordant factor.
• The Next  discordant  factor  of  is  disheartenment  (or  discouragement)
  occurs couragement,  when  faced  with  problems  or  suffering,  we  feel
  disheartened. We feel that t the mind is becomes powerless  against  these
  difficulties. . This happens when we face with problems or sufferings, and
  feeling discourage, or feeling the mind is powerless. This is a discordant
  factor because it hinders the generation  of  the  patience  of  accepting
  sufferings.
• In order to develop the patience of  certitude  about  the  teachings,  we
  need to have a stable belief in the teachings.  and  Wwe  must  want   the
  teachings. Without such belief in and  which desire for the teachings,  we
  will not  be  able  to  generate  the  patience  of  certitude  about  the
  teachings.

In short, patience is a mind that is able to  remain  calm  and  undisturbed
when one is experiencing harm and suffering.

Completion of the perfection of patience
       The completion of the perfection of patience  is  the  mere  complete
       familiarity of the mind with ceasing one’s own  belligerence  and  so
       forth; it does not depend on freeing other sentient beings from their
       unruliness. (Page 181)[3]


What is the completion of the perfection of patience?
Completing the perfection of patience means that you  simply  complete  your
conditioning to a state of mind wherein you have stopped your anger and  the
like. It  is  not  contingent  on  all  living  beings  becoming  free  from
undisciplined conduct.
Completing the perfection of patience has  to  do  with  conditioning  one’s
mind being conditioned  to  stopping  one’s  anger.  It  The  perfection  of
patience is not contingent on having subduing ed all  the  external  enemies
as outside. tThere will never ever come a  day  when  whereby  one  can  rid
oneself get rid of all all the external enemies.

Its subdivisions
       There is the patience of not paying  heed  to  harm  by  others,  the
       patience  of  accepting  the  suffering  that  arises  in  one’s  own
       continuum, and the patience of a mind certain  with  respect  to  the
       Dharma.


How to generate patience in one’s continuum


       This has two points:
           A     Meditating on the advantages of patience and the
             disadvantages of impatience
           B     The actual way to cultivate patience (Page 181)


The way to generate patience in one’s mind is to reflect on  the  advantages
(or benefits) of patience and the faults of not having patience.

The advantages of patience[LRCM V2 page 152]  (a’) What patience is
Patience is
(1) disregarding harm done to you,
(2) accepting the suffering arising in your mind-stream, and
(3) being certain about the  teachings  and  firmly  maintaining  belief  in
them.
There are three sets of factors incompatible with these:
- for the first, hostility;
- for the second, hostility and loss of courage; and
- for the third, disbelief and dislike.
Perfecting patience means that you simply complete your  conditioning  to  a
state of mind wherein you have stopped your anger and the like.  It  is  not
contingent upon all living beings becoming free from  undisciplined  conduct
because you would  not  be  able  to  bring  this  about,  and  because  you
accomplish your purpose just by disciplining your own mind. -
(b') The divisions of patience
1. Developing the patience of disregarding harm done to you
2. Developing the patience of accepting suffering
3. Developing the patience of certitude about the teachings

(c') The ways to produce it in one’s continuum
The way to do that:
To reflect on the benefits of patience
The faults of not having patience
What are the benefits of patience? In the MLLR, it says:
   1. In the future one will not have many enemies later on
   2. Will not have separation from those to whom one is close
   3. One will has much happiness and contentment
   4. One will have no regrets at the time of death
   5. Upon disintegration of one’s bodies, one will also be reborn among the
      deities in the happy realms of high status.

      You think about the fact  that  later  on  you  will  have  [221]  few
      enemies, you will not be separated from dear ones, you will experience
      much happiness and mental happiness, you will die without regret,  and
      you will be reborn among the gods after this body has perished. (Pages
      181-182)[4]

The advantages benefits of patience are  what  I  have  just  read  out.  In
particular In particular, there is this line thatit   says,   “you  will  be
reborn among the gods after this body has perished.” upon disintegration  of
their bodies (those who have patience), they will  also  be  reborn  in  the
happy realms of the high status”.
Why is it that it only mentioned that those who are patientce will  only  be
reborn as a celestial being or ; as a worldly god? Are  they  n’t  they  not
going to be reborn also as a human being as well?

So it says “One should meditate on these benefits until you  gain  a  strong
firm certainty about the benefits such as these arise from patience”.
[LRCM V2 page 153]  Although there are many ways to cultivate  patience,  to
begin I will explain the meditation on the  benefits  of  patience  and  the
faults of not being patient. The benefits are set forth in  the  Bodhisattva
Levels: Initially, bodhisattvas consider  the  benefits  of  patience.  They
think, "Persons who have patience will not have many enemies  later  on  and
will not have many separations from those to whom they are close. They  will
have much happiness and contentment. They will have no regret  at  the  time
of death, and upon the disintegration of their  bodies  they  will  also  be
reborn among the deities in the happy realms of high status." By looking  at
such benefits, they  too  are  patient.  They  engage  others  in  upholding
patience, and they also praise patience.  When  they  see  patient  persons,
they are delighted and full of joy.
The root text also quotes the Compendium of the Perfections which  says:

      Patience is also the workshop where forms are accomplished
      With beautiful qualities and adorned with the signs.[5] (Page 182)[6]



Patience is also a craftsman that creates a Buddha’s embodiment of form*1
Adorned with the beautiful signs of good qualities.
*1 Buddha’s embodiment of form is Buddha’s form body, Rupakaya
This quotation states that patience creates the form  body  of  a  bBuddha’s
form body, the rRupakaya. The form body of a bBuddha’s form  body   consists
of the eEnjoyment body and the eEmanation  body.  Just  as  like  a  skilled
craftsman or artisan is able  to  create  a  very  beautiful  image  of  the
Buddha, likewise patience is the artisan  or  ccraftsman  that  creates  the
form body of a bBuuddha’s form body.


      Torrent of water for prairie fires of malice.
      All harm is removed by patience in this life and others. (Page 182)[7]

In In the event of a raging fire, whow do you put out the  fire?  With  what
would do you use to  put out the fire? You put  out  the  fire  with  water.
Likewise, patience is like the water that  puts  out  the  blazing  fire  of
anger. So

Ppatience is the supreme method to overcome put out  all  the  problems  and
sufferings that weyou experience in life.  It is evident from our  own  life
experience in life that when we are more patientce, we tend  to  have  fewer
enemies, and we are able to whatever friends or acquaintances that we  have,
we are able  to  maintain  a  healthy  relationship  with  our  friends  and
acquaintances. them. There is are lesser likelihood  chances  of  separation
or breakup in those relationships breaking down.
It is said in the text that one tends to have a happier life  and  one  will
experience , more much happiness and contentment. When If you  have  lead  a
happy life, you will have no regrets at the time of death. After  that,  for
example, one will get a good rebirth and be to  be  reborn  as  a  celestial
being.

MThere are many advantages benefits of patience  that  are  listed  iin  the
text. You should read them it on your  own.  We  are  told  asked  to  think
seriously about them m seriously,  and  to  meditate  on  them  se  benefits
untuntiil we gained   a  firm  certainty  about  them.   benefits  that  are
mentioned  in  the  text.  This  is  necessary  because  meditating  on  the
advantages benefits of patience  is  a  cause  for  usfor  us   to  want  to
practisce and cultivate patience. It is a cause for us  to  really  want  to
cultivate patience. Reflecting, and  Therefore  thinking  deeply  about  the
advantages benefits of patience is extremely important. This is  .  That  is
why Lama Tsongkhapa emphasiszes this so much. d  how  important  it  is.  In
Tthe text it says:



      You should meditate on the advantages as taught here until you reach a
      strong and stable certainty with regard to them. (Page 182)[8]

 “meditate on these benefits until you gained a strong firm certainty  about
these benefits”.
Meditating on the advantages benefits ofn patience and gaining  a  certainty
in your own mind about what is good for you, and what is in for you  if  you
have patience. This will naturally lead you to want to  cultivate  patience.
This is just the  a  nnatural  state  of  things.  It  is  same  like  doing
business. There is no one in existence who does not want  profit/gain.  When
A  businessman  does  business,  they  do  it  for  because  they  want  the
profit/gain. They see the gain that they can make from  business.  Likewise,
Iit is the same with relation to for cultivating patience. When If  you  see
what is in it  for you, us, and if you see how much and wwhat you  stand  to
can gain from practising patience, then  automatically  you  would  want  to
cultivate patience.

The disadvantages of impatience: the invisible  disadvantages[LRCM  V2  page
154]
Patience is also the craftsman that creates a buddha's embodiment of form,
Adorned with the beautiful signs of good qualities.
Thus, Aryasura praises patience by way of its many benefits:  it  stops  you
from turning  away  from  others'  welfare  on  account  of  living  beings'
misperceptions; it protects you from anger, the  enemy  that  destroys  many
roots of virtue; it is a captivating ornament because it  endures  the  harm
of those of little power; it is the excellent strength of ascetics  who  are
tormented by the afflictions; it is a stream of water that extinguishes  the
wildfire of malice; it is armor that cannot be  pierced  by  the  arrows  of
undisciplined  persons'  misperceptions;  it  is  the  skilled  artisan  who
creates a fine form of golden color that captivates the eyes  and  minds  of
beings.
Furthermore, Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds states:
Whoever works hard and overcomes anger
Is happy in this and future lives.
When you rely  on  patience  continually,  you  do  not  spoil  your  joyful
attitude, so you are always happy even  in  this  life.  Moreover,  patience
stops miserable rebirths in future lives, gives special  rebirths  in  happy
realms, and ultimately bestows certain goodness, so you  are  utterly  happy
in this and future lives.
Meditate on these benefits until you gain a  strong,  firm  certainty  about
the cause-and-effect relationship wherein benefits such as these arise  from
patience.
Next is an explanation of the faults of anger.
[LRCM V2 page 154]
With respe
With regard to ct to the disadvantages of  impatience  (or  the  ffaults  of
anger), the invisible disadvantagesfaults are as follows .
or faults are as follows:


      In Engaging in Bodhisattva Conduct it says:


          What has been gathered[9] in thousand eons
          Like giving and offerings to those gone to bliss,
          All those good deeds, whatever there is,
          An instant of anger destroys it all.


      Apparently this  was  composed  in  accordance  with  Āryaśūra’s  work
      Compendium  of  the  Perfections.   The   Play   of   Mañjuśri   Sūtra
      (Mañjuśrivikrīḍitasūtra) says that it destroys the virtue  accumulated
      over a hundred eons. (Page 182)[10]

Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds states:
Any good deeds, such as
Generosity and worshipping the sugatas,
You have collected over a thousand eons
Are all destroyed in one moment of anger.
Aryasura formulated this exactly as it  is  presented  in  Engaging  in  the
Bodhisattva Deeds. The Play of Manjushri Sutra mentions the  destruction  of
virtue accumulated over a hundred eons,
As you are aware,  there are the the two collections :
- the collection of merits and
- the collection of wisdom.
The virtue that is destroyed by anger is the collection  of  merits,  not  .
The the collection of wisdom is not destroyed by anger.
According to quotation  by  Shantideva  from  Engaging  in  the  Bodhisattva
Deeds, it says
Any good deeds, such as
Generosity and worshipping the sugatas,
You have collected over a thousand eons
Are all destroyed in one moment of anger.
In the commentary on the meaning of the is verse quoted above,  it  is  said
that if a non-bodhisattva gets angry at a bodhisattva, that  non-bodhisattva
destroys the merits/virtues accumulated over a thousand eons.

What about the quotation  from  The  Play  of  Manjushri  Sutra  that  which
mentionsed the destruction of virtue accumulated over a hundred  eons?  That
applies to a higher bodhisattva getting angry at a lower bodhisattva.  If  a
higher bodhisattva or more powerful bodhisattva gets angry at  a  loweresser
bodhisattva,  that  higher  bodhisattva  who   gets   angry   destroys   the
merits/virtues accumulated over a hundred eons.

From this, it is evident that there are bodhisattvas who do get angry.

           C     The support
       As regards the support of the one in whom anger arises, since even if
       a bodhisattva gets angry it destroys his roots of virtue, there is no
       need to mention  that  this  is  the  case  for  one  who  is  not  a
       bodhisattva who gets angry at a bodhisattva. In  the  Explanation  of
       Candrakīrti’s     “Commentary     on      the      ‘Middle      Way’”
       (Madhyamakāvatārațikānāma) it says that whether or not it is  certain
       that the object is a bodhisattva and whether or not  the  reason  for
       the anger, seeing faults, is  true,  the  destruction  of  virtue  is
       similar to how it was explained above. (Page 184)[11]

[LRCM  V2  page  155]   With  respect  to  the  person   who   gets   angry,
Candrakirti's Explanation of the "Middle Way" Commentary says that if  anger
even by bodhisattvas destroys their roots of virtue, it goes without  saying
that the anger of non-bodhisattvas toward bodhisattvas does.  Regardless  of
whether the recipient of the anger is ascertained to  be  a  bodhisattva  or
whether the perceived faults that cause the anger are real, the  destruction
of virtue is said nonetheless to be  just  as  explained  above  [i.e.,  the
virtue accumulated over a hundred eons is lost].
Here Iit  says  here  that  when  if  a  non-bodhisattva  gets  angry  at  a
bodhisattva, one moment of anger destroys the a  merit/  virtue  accumulated
over a thousand eons. Theis destruction of  the  merit  virtues  accumulated
over a thousand eons is not contingent on whether you know  that  the  other
party person  is  a  bodhisattva  or  not.  When  If  you  get  angry  at  a
bodhisattva,  then the merit accumulated over a thousand eons is destroyed.

There areis always some reasons for us to get upset or angry. regardless  of
w Whether the reason is  valid  or  justified.   or  not,  i.e.  whether  in
reality the reason for us getting upset is  true,  is  real,  is  valid,  it
doesn’t matter. When If it isthat  anger is directed  by  a  non-bodhisattva
at towards a bodhisattva, in a case of a non-bodhisattva getting angry at  a
bodhisattva, the merit accumulated over a  thousand  eons  is  destroyed  by
that a single moment of anger. It does not n’t matter even if  you  were  in
arethe  right. As it is says in the text says, “whether or  not  the  reason
for the anger, seeing faults, is true, the destruction of virtue is  similar
to how it was explained above.” whether the perceived faults that cause  the
anger are real, the destruction of virtue is said nonetheless to be just  as
explained above.”


Most of the time,  our the anger is stronger when we believe we  are  right.
When we are not very sure about whether our  anger  we  are  is  aabsolutely
justified or valid, our anger seems to be weaker. Thinking In  the  case  of
the anger that is present, especially when we think tthat our  anger  is  we
are justified “It is the truth, how can it be?” and the  more  justified  we
feel, it seems to leads to stronger more  anger,  i.e.,  there  is  ,  which
means mmore turbulence and disturbance in our hearts.

If we feel it is justified, how does it  lead  to  anger?  For  us,  feeling
justified, and feeling that we are right propels  us  to  get  even  angrier
and, therefore, more disturbed. How does feeling justified or  being  right?
What kind of difference does it makes whether we are right or not?  When  If
we feel that we are right, justified, and feeling that the reason is on  our
side, and therefore we are if feeling that makes  us  justified  in  feeling
angry, then it leads only to greater more  disturbance  in  our  mind.  Then
Wwhat use is that? SoIn the sense, it is not appropriate and does  not  make
sense to get upset. Becoming Therefore getting upset and  angry,   based  on
theis feeling of that  justice  and  having  truth  are  on  our  side,   is
inappropriate, and incorrect.

When If the object of your the anger is  a  bodhisattva,  it  does  not  n’t
matter whether you know thate person is a bodhisattva or not. It  also  does
not n’t matter whether your anger is there is any truth  or  justifiedcation
or not.  in getting angry. When anger  arises  even  for  aone  moment,  the
merit that you we worked so hard to accumulate over such a  long  period  of
time, , ssuch as a thousand eons, , would beis destroyed.

These are the examples  of  the  faults  of  anger.  These  faults  and  the
disadvantages of anger are invisible,  i.e.,  you cannot  ’t  perceive  them
directly. We can only generate a conviction in these such  faults  of  anger
by depending on the words of the  Buddha’s word. But  from  It  is  our  own
experience, we know  that being getting  mighty  upset  or  angry  can  ruin
destroy the happiness that we had experienced for e in the  the  whole  day.
Whatever happiness or joy we had in that day, Pperhaps it  had  been  was  a
wonderful, happy  day, but and when anger arises, theat joy, happiness,  and
pleasure that was in our mind there earlier on in the mind just  disappears.
All it takes is just being getting upset for a short while, maybe  even  for
just a couple of minutes.

moments. If the anger was it is a very intense, even if  it  lasted   anger,
and just for a short moment of ttime only, it would be  that  itself  is  so
powerful enough to  that it overwhelms, and erases  whatever  experience  of
happiness we had in the earlier in the part of the day. We could  have  been
happy, feeling relaxed and calm  for many  hours,  feeling  just  relax  and
calm for many hours. But just a moment or two that  one  or  two  couple  of
moments of anger, that whole pleasurable experience is suddenly erased,  and
is gone.

When If you think about this in a it logicallogical way, why y, that  should
that n’t be the case isn’t it? After all, tThe happiness that  we  were  had
experiencing ed lasted for a longer amount of time.  but Hhow is it that  it
is come it is overwhelmed by just a few minutes  of  couple  of  moments  of
anger? This just means that one or those few two  moments  of  anger  wereis
much more powerful when compared to the  many hours  of  happiness  that  we
may have had experienced prior to getting angry. Even  just  gGetting  upset
for a short while can make us sleepless the  entire  for  one  whole  night.
Isn’t that is our experience?

A Vvery close relationships that have been established of mutual  dependence
and trust, established over a very long period of time, say,  over 20 or  30
years,  with mutual dependence and trust. Even  such  relationships  can  be
destroyed by a few moments of anger.
For whatever reason, the  parties involved eople get upset with  each  other
and  the  that  has  at   times   relationship   is   completely   destroyed
relationships completely. The whole of 20 or 30 years  of  friendship  or  a
relationship of trust and mutual dependence is just  cut  off.  All  thatThe
20 or 30 years of happiness, friendship, mutual dependence and trust can  be
 was destroyed by just one moment or couple of moments of anger.

During the time Wwhen we are upset, we only create negativities. When If  we
think of about examples that  we  can  relate  to,   or  incidents  that  we
ourselves have things that we have experienced in in  life, perhaps then  we
can relate better to these quotations about how just a couple of moments  of
anger can destroy the merit/tvirtue that has been was accumulated over  such
a much a longer period of time.

In general, for the roots of virtue to bethere to be the  destroyed,  uction
of the roots of virtue it is not a requirement d tthat the anger  is  to  be
directed only towards the  bodhisattvas.  So  far  the  examples  are  about
getting angry at bodhisattvas but .  aAnger  towards  non-bodhisattvas  also
destroys roots of virtue.

      2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C1A-1C3A-2A2 How they are destroyed even if the object
          of anger is an ordained person who is not a bodhisattva



      In general, anger does not need to be directed  at  a  bodhisattva  in
      order for it to destroy roots of virtue.
      A passage quoted from the Sarvāstivādin scriptures in  the  Compendium
      of Trainings says:




          If a monk prostrates to a stūpa of  hair  and  nail  relics  with
          extended limbs and a pure mind, he will come  to  enjoy  as  many
          kingdoms of universal monarchs as there are particles of dust  in
          the ground covered up to the golden foundation.

      And:

          Even those roots of virtue will be  exhausted  if  he  injures  or
          disparages one of pure conduct. (Page 183)[12]

The various  benefits  of  prostrations  are  [LRCM  Vol  2  page  155]  The
Compendium of Trainings states:
The text of the Arya-sarvastivadins also says: The  Bhagavan  said,  "Monks,
consider a monk who makes a full prostration to  a  stupa  that  contains  a
buddha's hair and nails and who has an attitude of faith."
"So be it, Revered One."
"Monks, this monk will experience reigns as a universal monarch  a  thousand
times the number of grains of sand eighty-four-thousand  leagues  under  the
ground his prostrate body covers - down to the disk of  gold  that  supports
the earth."
However, the virtue/ merit that is  accumulated  is  extinguished  when  one
wound or maim a fellow practitioner who is abiding in a similar  conduct  of
celibacy.
[LRCM Vol 2 page 155] Then the venerable Upali, who was located off  to  the
side  from  where  the  Bhagavan  was  seated,  bowed  with   hands   joined
respectfully and asked, "The Bhagavan has said that  this  monk's  roots  of
virtue are so great. O Bhagavan, how are those  roots  of  virtue  used  up,
diminished, erased, and extinguished?"
"Upali, when such a sin as malice is done to  fellow  practitioners,  it  is
like a wound  or  maiming.  I  cannot  see  its  full  impact.  Upali,  this
diminishes,  erases,  and  extinguishes  those  great   roots   of   virtue.
Therefore, Upali, if you would not feel malice toward a burned  stump,  what
need to mention feeling that way toward a body with consciousness?"
It is mentioned in  the  lLam-rim  teachings  of  the  various  benefits  of
prostrations. It is said that when you make a single if someone  prostration
es with faith towards stupas or representations  of  the  bBuddhas  such  as
statues and so forth, you that one prostration accumulates  the  merit  that
will enable one tto be reborn as a wheel- turning king a equal in number  of
times equal to the atoms covered by that your  body  covers  when  you  were
prostrate on the ground. These numbers of atoms goes all  the  way  down  to
the very core of the earth.

In order to experience this ese benefits, the prostrations have to  be  made
with faith and belief. Therefore, having faith and belief  in  the  benefits
of prostrations aries important. When If  the  prostrations  are  done  with
such this faith and belief, one would accumulates the  merit  asthat  is  as
explained in the text. When If you do not n’t have any faith or belief,  you
are unlikely to be prostrating  in  the  first  place.   you  would  not  be
prostrating.

In our the discussion of the faults of anger, we saw the power of  anger  is
shown - how powerful anger is in destroying the roots  of  virtue.  Here  we
are using prostrations as an example to show . On  the  benefits  of  having
strong faith; -  how much merit one can accumulate  with  prostrations  when
they  if it areis done with very strong faith.
In Tthis quotation it says that a person who  accumulates  such  merit  from
making prostrations destroy his merit when he generates does  sins  such  as
malice towards a fellow practitioner  who  is  practiscing  correctly,   and
abiding in ethics and so forth. This shows that roots  of  virtue  are  also
destroyed when a non-bodhisattva gets  angry  at  another   non-bodhisattva,
roots of virtues are destroyed.

Qualm with regard to the meaning of “destruction of root of virtues”
What follows Next next is the elimination ng of qualms with regards  to  the
meaning of “destruction of roots of virtues.”
What is the qualm?

      2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C1A-1C3A-2A3A         Doubts raised by scholars
      Some scholars say that the meaning of  the  destruction  of  roots  of
      virtue is that the potential of earlier  virtue  to  bring  about  its
      effect quickly is destroyed,  and  the  emergence  of  its  effect  is
      delayed, so that the effects of hatred  and  so  forth  emerge  first.
      However, if they meet with suitable conditions afterward,  it  is  not
      that their respective effects do  not  emerge,  for  if  there  is  no
      mundane path whatsoever that can eliminate the seeds of the objects of
      abandonment, it is impossible for seeds to be eliminated by the mental
      afflictions. (Page 183)[13]

[LRCM Vol 2 page 155] Some scholars' position: “The  meaning  of  destroying
the roots of virtue is that in destroying the capacity of  previous  virtues
to issue their effects speedily, you delay the issuance  of  their  effects.
So anger, for instance, will give its effect first, but it is certainly  not
the case that the seeds of the roots of virtue will not issue  effects  when
they later meet with  the  requisite  conditions,  because,  given  that  no
mundane path can eliminate the seeds  that  are  to  be  eliminated,  it  is
impossible to have an elimination of the seeds of the afflictions."
That is qualm and is the position of some scholars.
According to some scholars, the meaning of  the  destructions  of  roots  of
virtue is  this:  destroying  the  roots  of  virtue  means  destroying  the
capacity of the roots of virtue’s capacity to produce  effects  quickly  and
delaying ing the issuance of such the effects.
You have to understand what this qualm means because when get this.  If  you
do not n’t understand get what is the qualmobjection, then you  cannot  talk
about dispelling theis qualmobjection.

According to some scholars, the destruction  of  roots  of  virtue  means  a
delay in the issuance of effects. It does not mean the  destruction  of  the
seeds of the roots of virtue and it the destruction of roots of virtue  does
not mean that the  roots  of  virtue  are  unable  to  produce  any  effects
whatsoever.
These scholars assert say that anger can never destroy the capacity  of  the
seeds of the roots of virtue to produce effects.  Since  the  seeds  of  the
roots of virtue are  not  destroyed,  they  will  definitely  give  rise  to
effects one day. ,  which  means  these  roots  of  virtue  will  definitely
produce effects one day.
This is the position of the scholars.


Why do they assert this?
The reason they gave is this: if no mundane path can eliminate the seeds  of
the objects that are to be eliminated, then it is not possible for anger  to
destroy the roots of virtue.

Mundane paths are like those There are sentient beings  who  that  have  not
yet not entereded  any paths. Sentient  beings  in  the  form  and  formless
realms who have achieved those various  levels  of  concentration  have  the
ability to suppress the manifest afflictions, i.e., .  Tthe  afflictions  do
not manifest for  such  those  beings  in  the  form  and  formless  realms.
However, although the  such mundane paths in the continuaum  of  these  gods
of  the  form  and  formless  realms  gods,  although   they   prevent   the
manifestation of the afflictions, they alone do not  destroy  the  seeds  of
thoseir afflictions.

Dispelling the qualmYou have  to  understand  the  qualm  first.  There  are
different positions as to what  constitutes  the  destruction  of  roots  of
virtue. According to some scholars,  the  destruction  of  roots  of  virtue
means delaying the issuance of  effects.  It  doesn’t  mean  destroying  the
seeds of roots of virtue. Since the seeds of the roots  of  virtue  are  not
destroyed, as the seeds are still there, they will definitely give  rise  to
effects one day. This is the position of some scholars.
Lama Tsongkhapa disagrees. He says: “This is incorrect”.

            A       How the effect does not arise due  to  conditions  even
            though its seed is still there
      The reason that it is uncertain is because even though ordinary beings
      purify non-virtues by means of the four opponent powers,  their  seeds
      are not abandoned. However, although the conditions are met later  on,
      [223] it is impossible for the fully ripened effects to emerge.


          B    Even if the seed has not been abandoned, its effect is not
            produced once tolerance is achieved
      Once the peak and tolerance levels of the  path  of  preparation  have
      been attained, although wrong views and the seeds of non-virtues  that
      become the causes of the lower realms have not been  abandoned,  wrong
      views and rebirths in the lower realms are impossible  even  if  these
      seeds meet with their conditions. (Pages 183-184)[14]


In his reply to the position of those scholars, he says:
This reasoning is unsound because:
(1) even the purification wherein ordinary beings clear away  non-virtue  by
means of its remedy, the four powers of confession, is  not  an  elimination
of its seeds; nevertheless, though the seeds of this  non-virtue  may  later
meet with the requisite conditions, they cannot issue a fruition.
(2) when you  attain  the  peak  and  forbearance  levels  of  the  path  of
preparation [the second and third of four levels], you do not eliminate  the
seeds  of  non-virtue  that  cause  wrong  views  and  miserable   rebirths;
nevertheless, even though the seeds of this non-virtue  may  meet  with  the
requisite conditions, they cannot give rise to wrong views  or  a  miserable
rebirth.
[LRCM Vol 2 page 156] Reply: This reasoning is unsound because
(1) even the purification wherein ordinary beings clear away  non-virtue  by
means of its remedy, the four powers of confession, is  not  an  elimination
of its seeds; nevertheless, though the seeds of this  non-virtue  may  later
meet with the requisite conditions, they cannot issue a fruition;
(2) even virtuous and non-virtuous karma that are spent upon  issuing  their
individual fruitions do not lose their seeds; nevertheless,  even  when  the
seeds of such karma meet henceforth with the  requisite  conditions,  it  is
impossible for fruitions to arise; and
(3) when you  attain  the  peak  and  forbearance  levels  of  the  path  of
preparation [the second and third of four levels], you do not eliminate  the
seeds  of  non-virtue  that  cause  wrong  views  and  miserable   rebirths;
nevertheless, even though the seeds of this non-virtue  may  meet  with  the
requisite conditions, they cannot give rise to wrong views  or  a  miserable
rebirth.
You remember the position of those scholars?’ position. What is their   main
reason for their position? Basically they are saying that  as  long  as  the
seeds are not abandoned, the seeds will give rise to their its effects.

According to Lama Tsongkhapa,  this is incorrect.
You remember our the discussion on the purification of negativities  through
the application of the four opponent powers? It is  said  that  when  if  we
confess our the negativities with  the  application  of  the  four  opponent
powers, the negativities will be purified.  When  If  the  negativities  are
indeed purified, there is no way to experience  the  fruitional  effects  of
those non-virtues non-virtueswill no longer be experienced.  Otherwise,  the
word “purification” makes no sense.

Yes, Aalll  the  negativities  can  be  purified  through  engaging  in  the
practice of confession with the application of  the  four  opponent  powers.
Even though the negativities are purified, the seeds  of  those  non-virtues
are not destroyed by that purification  practice.  Thate  practice   act  of
purification alone does not destroy the seeds of non-virtues.  However,  one
will not experience the fruitional effects of  the  non-virtues  that  haves
already been purified.

In our discussion on the pPaths and gGrounds:,
•  Aton the pPeak level of the pPath of pPreparation, wrong views  does  not
  arise. As such, there is no n’t the destruction  of  roots  of  virtue  by
  wrong views.
• By the Then on fForbearance level of the  pPath  of  pPreparation,  it  is
  guaranteed that athe bodhisattva will never be reborn in the lower realms.



But (1) t
But the roots of virtue of this is bodhisattva are not being  being  severed
by wrong views and (2) the fact that he.  He  is  not  going  to  the  lower
realms areis not due to the abandonment of (1) the seeds of the wrong  views
and (2) . tThe seeds of the  actions  or  karma  that  will  result  in  the
miserable rebirths. The seeds have not been abandoned.

However t, and the seeds are still there, his  bodhisattva  but  he  or  she
will not generate wrong views and will not be reborn  in  the  lower  realms
due  to  the  incompleteness  of  conditions.  Furthermore,  aAlthough  this
bodhisattva still has the seeds of wrong views and the seeds  of  the  karma
actions that will result in rebirths in the miserable  realms,  even  if  he
were to meets with the conditions, nothing happens.

This is the an example that Lama Tsongkhapa useds to  prove  his  the  point
that even though the seeds may be there, but it does not n’t mean that  they
it will give rise to their its effects.

It is also incorrect to state that the destruction of roots of virtue  means
a delay in the issuance of their effects.

      According to the statement “What’s heaviest in cyclic  existence  with
      karma...,”[15] either a virtuous or a non-virtuous karma, by  ripening
      sooner,, can temporarily block  the  occasion  for  another  karma  to
      ripen. However, it cannot be posited  nor  has  it  been  taught  that
      virtuous or non-virtuous  karma  is  destroyed  by  merely  that.  The
      temporary postponement of its ripening  is  not  suitable  to  be  the
      meaning of the destruction of roots of  virtue  because  otherwise  it
      would have been necessary to teach that all strong non-virtues destroy
      the roots of virtue. (Page 184)

As Lama Tsongkhapa said:
[LRCM Vol 2 page 156]
As to the actions that give rise to cyclic existence,
There are those that are weighty, those that are near,
Those to which you are habituated, and those you did earliest.
Among these, the former will ripen first.
Any virtuous or non-virtuous action that comes to fruition does  temporarily
stop the opportunity for the fruition of another action; however, it is  not
said nor can it be established  that  a  mere  preceding  fruition  destroys
virtue or non-virtue. Nor is it appropriate for  "destroying  the  roots  of
virtue" to mean the mere temporary postponement of fruition;  otherwise,  it
would absurdly  follow  that  all  powerful  non-virtuous  actions  must  be
considered destroyers of the roots of virtue.
It is said in Tthe teachings explainas to  that  the  which  karma  that  is
ripens first, those that are more weighty and  more  powerful  ripen  first.
The delay in the  issuance  of  effects  means  that  when  if  a  something
powerful karma  ripens first, then the ripening of other karmas  things  are
postponed and their  effects arise later. are  issued  later  on.  Following
from Going by this, you then have to say that, therefore, all powerful  non-
virtuous actions will be destroyers of roots of virtue  in  .  In  that  all
powerful non-virtuous actions will lead  to  a  delay  in  the  issuance  of
effects of virtue.

What Lama Tsongkhapa is trying to saying that   is:   iIt  is  incorrect  to
posit the destruction of roots of virtue to merely mean athe  delay  in  the
issuance of effects.
Next is He statesing an example next.


           B     Analogy for how the effect is not  produced  although  the
           seed has not been abandoned
       Therefore, with respect to this, Master Bhāvaviveka said:


           As explained above, neither non-virtues that have been  purified
           by the four powers nor roots of virtue that have been  destroyed
           by wrong views or harmful intent can bring about  their  effects
           even if later on they meet with the conditions; just like a seed
           that has been damaged cannot produce a sprout  even  though  the
           conditions are met. (Page 184)[16]
[LRCM Vol 2 page 156] Therefore,  concerning  this  the  master  Bhavaviveka
states (as already explained) that in the case of both the  purification  of
non-virtue by the four powers of confession and the destruction of roots  of
virtue by wrong views and malice, the seeds  of  the  virtue  or  non-virtue
cannot give rise to effects  even  though  they  may  later  meet  with  the
requisite conditions, just as spoiled seeds will not give  rise  to  sprouts
even though they may meet with the requisite conditions.
This is just an example to show that even though the seed  of  a  particular
virtue or non-virtue may be presentthere, it is not definite  that  it  will
give rise to its their respective effect.

If someone was to assert say that a powerless seed, i.e.,   –  a  seed  that
has been rendered ineffective or powerless,  – is not a seed, what  are  you
going to say?

Khen Rinpoche (in English): Is it still  that a seed?

(Student’s  response is d inaudible).

Khen Rinpoche:  (in English): Why? You must give a reason why it is that  is
a seed. ?
When If a seed cannot produce its effect, do you still call it a seed?

(Student’s  responsed is inaudible).

Ven Gyurme: It’s a seed? Somebody who has died is a human or not?
Khen Rinpoche (in English):  Having lost After losing its the  function,  is
it still isa  seed or not?
 Ven Gyurme: Was means not already right?
An Khen Rinpoche (in English): An example:  a  ,  something  like  the  dead
person is no longer anot the person, rightisn’t it?

(Student’s  responsed is  inaudible).

Khen Rinpoche (in English): Is a dDead person ais person?
Ven Gyurme: No, before means it is not a person right?
Khen Rinpoche (in English): Still you don’t know what is  a  seed?  What  is
the definition of a seed?

(Student’s response is inaudible).

Ven Gyurme: If the seed of ignorance (for example) cannot produce  ignorance
then how can it be a seed of ignorance?
Khen Rinpoche (in English): So how can you call it a seed?
Student respond inaudible
WeWe  did discussed before what a seed is. In order to be a  seed,  it  must
have the capacity to produce an effect later on.   A  seed   is  so-  called
because it has the capacity to produce a sprout. Otherwise, it would not  be
called a seed.  If that seed  does  not  have  the  capacity  to  produce  a
sprout,  there is no basis for cto calling it a seed.

(Student’s  response isd inaudible).

Ven Gyurme: A degenerated seed is a seed or not?
Is there a seed of a sprout that does not n’t have the capacity  to  produce
a sprout?
If it is a seed, is it  necessarily  pervaded  by  having  the  capacity  to
produce a sprout?

Is there a seed of a sprout that doesn’t have  the  capacity  to  produce  a
sprout?
If you say no, then it follows  that  definitely  it  is  necessarily  being
pervaded by having the capacity to produce a sprout. If it is the   seed  of
a sprout, it necessarily has the capacity to produce a sprout,  because  you
have accepted the pervasion.

AThe seed placed oon your table: , does it have the capacity  to  produce  a
sprout?



Interpreted by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme; transcribed by Phuah  Soon  Ek,  Patricia
Lee and Julia Koh; edited by Cecilia Tsong.




-----------------------
[1] LRCM, 152.
[2] Ibid., 152.
[3] Ibid.
[4] Ibid., 153.
[5] Tib. mtshan rab, literally “best/highest signs”, that is the signs of  a
buddha.
[6] Ibid., 154.
[7] Ibid., 153.
[8] Ibid., 154.
[9] Tib. bsags pa, usually translated here as “accumulated.”
[10] Ibid.
[11] Ibid., 155.
[12] Ibid.
[13] Ibid., 155-156.
[14] Ibid., 156.
[15] The statement refers to this quotation from  Vasubandhu’s  Treasury  of
Knowledge Auto-commentary: “As to the  actions  that  give  rise  to  cyclic
existence,/There are those that are weighty; those that are near,/ those  to
which you are habituated, and those you  did  earliest./  Among  these,  the
former will ripen first.” (Ibid., 156).
[16] Ibid., 156-157.

