Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/SixPerfections/Leeson1.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:53:57.409358
================================================================================


We are continuing from where we had left off about one over year ago. In
the Middle Length Lamrim, we had finished all the way up to the point of
Developing Bodhicitta through the sevenfold cause and effect instruction
and the instruction of exchanging self and other. What comes after that is
“How to learn the bodhisattva deeds after developing bodhicitta”.

AN INTRODUCTION TO THE SIX PERFECTIONS
c) How to learn the bodhisattva deeds after developing the spirit of
enlightenment
How to learn the bodhisattva deeds after developing the spirit of
enlightenment has three parts;
1. The reason why you must learn the trainings after developing the spirit
of enlightenment
2.  Demonstrating that you will not become a buddha by learning either
method or wisdom separately
3. Explanation of the process of learning the precepts

1. The reason why you must learn the trainings after developing the spirit
of enlightenment
In the teaching, it is emphasized that one must definitely learn the
training of the bodhisattva deeds after one has developed bodhicitta. As we
have seen that developing bodhicitta alone brings about many benefits, but
it is stated very clearly in the teaching that if one does not train in the
bodhisattva deeds and if one does not take the bodhisattva deeds as the
heart of the essential practice, then there is no way one can achieve
enlightenment even if one has bodhicitta.
The need to train in the bodhisattva deeds after developing bodhicitta in
order to achieve full enlightenment is actually the intent of the Buddha
himself.  As in the King of Concentration Sutra, the Buddha says:
  Therefore take practice to heart. Why? O Prince, because when you take
  practice to heart, perfect enlightenment is not hard to attain.
The teaching say that one must learn the bodhisattva deeds after having
developed bodhicitta/ the spirit to enlightenment. Before one can subdue
the minds of others, one must first subdue one’s own mind. So after having
developed bodhicitta, one must train in the bodhisattva deeds in order to
subdue one’s own mind. It is mentioned in the teaching of how important it
is to subdue or discipline oneself prior to disciplining others. It is
emphasized greatly that one must train in the bodhisattva deeds after
generating bodhicitta.
It is emphasized that the person who has developed bodhicitta must go on to
train in the bodhisattva deeds in order to subdue his or her own mind. The
main purpose of doing that is to be able to reach a point in time where one
has the capacity to subdue or discipline others. That is the goal. But
before one can do that, one must first discipline one’s own mind through
the practice of the six perfections. This is the general procedure in which
how things should be done but generally we are not like that. We want to
help others first before we can even helped ourselves or discipline
ourselves.
In the Lamrim teaching, it talks about generating bodhicitta first. After
one has generated bodhicitta, then one adopts the vows through the ritual.
After one has adopted the vows, one trains in the six perfections in order
to subdue oneself. In doing so, one then will achieve full enlightenment.
It is said that when one achieves full enlightenment, one will be in the
position to be of perfect help and be able to render really effective help
to all sentient beings.

2.  Demonstrating that you will not become a buddha by learning either
method or wisdom separately
Lama Tsongkhapa has emphasized many times of the need to train in the path
that is both unmistaken and complete. If one trains in the path that is
mistaken, then no matter how hard one tries, one will not achieve
enlightenment. Similarly, even if one train in the path that is unmistaken
but if one train in the path that is not complete, i.e. there is something
missing and the essential elements are not complete or not present, then
one will not achieve enlightenment as well. This is what Lama Tsongkhapa
emphasizes.
In the text, Lama Tsongkhapa clearly states that one must train in the path
that unites both method and wisdom in order to achieve full enlightenment.
He demonstrates how one will not become a Buddha by learning either method
or wisdom separately. Actually we have already covered that earlier.
Lama Tsongkhapa explains that in order to achieve full enlightenment one
must train in the path that unites both method and wisdom. If one trains in
method or wisdom separately, one will not achieve full enlightenment. In
his text, Lama Tsongkhapa brings up many examples of the wrong concepts and
ideas that people have about achieving enlightenment. During his time in
Tibet, perhaps even now, there are people who purport the path to
enlightenment that does not involve a union of method and wisdom. For
example, there was this very strong view in Tibet that conceptual thoughts,
any kind of thinking, are a hindrance to enlightenment. There is a school
of thought which propounds that one can just focus on nothing i.e. one
just sit there and stabilize one’s mind in a state that lacks of any kind
of thought (which we called spacing out). Then there are also people who
assert that in order to achieve full enlightenment, one does not have to
engage in the practices of the perfection of generosity, the perfection of
ethics, the perfection of patience and so forth. According to them, these
are obstacles to achieving enlightenment. There is also a view that such
practices of perfection of generosity or perfection of patience are the
practices for those of dull faculties; not for those of sharp faculties. So
these are all these wrong concepts which Lama Tsongkhapa refutes by using
scriptural authority and reasoning.
In order to be able to really put our heart into engaging in the correct
path to enlightenment which involves uniting and bringing together both
method and wisdom, we first must be convinced that such a path is
necessary. In order to do that, we first have to get rid of all the
possible wrong concepts or ideas or misunderstandings that one may have;
“There is no need to do this, there is no need to do that.” It is
absolutely important and essential for an individual who is traversing the
path to be personally convinced of the need to engage in the path that
unites both method and wisdom. Such conviction can only arise by depending
on scriptural authority and reasoning. It is quite easy to subscribe to the
thought that in order to achieve enlightenment, and become a Buddha, one
needs to get rid of all kind of conceptual thoughts. So it is quite easy to
subscribe to the idea “Enlightenment is achieved within a state whereby
there are no thoughts, and that is how one become a Buddha.” If one think
about it, it is quite easy to subscribe to this idea. Sometimes it may
sounds right that by getting rid of all the thoughts, and filter them out,
one can become a Buddha. If one ask oneself one may not even able to come
out with any reasons why one should do all these different practices such
as giving, practice ethics and so forth, anyway it is all have to do with
the mind.
The main reason that Lama Tsongkhapa uses to substantiate the need for a
path that unites both method and wisdom is the goal of what enlightenment
is or sometimes referred to as non-abiding nirvana. Buddha does not abide
in samsara. Neither does the Buddha abide in the peace of individual
liberation. Such a non-abiding nirvana is the final object of attainment of
someone on the Mahayana path.
What is that prevents someone from abiding in samsara? Ultimately, it is
the wisdom of realizing emptiness - the ultimate nature of reality- that
prevents someone from abiding in samsara.
Whether it is called wisdom of realizing emptiness, the mind realizing the
ultimate truth or the collection of wisdom, they are talking about the same
thing.
When one generates the wisdom directly perceiving emptiness, that person
does not accumulate fresh projecting karma, henceforth does not accumulate
any new projecting karma for a samsaric rebirth. The process of liberation
or freedom from cyclic existence starts from the time when one sees
emptiness directly.
It is only this wisdom directly perceiving emptiness, not anything else,
that will enable an individual to be liberated from samsara. Of the two
practices of method and wisdom, it is the practice of wisdom that prevents
or stop someone from abiding in samsara. Wisdom here is the wisdom
realizing emptiness.
The final object of attainment of the Mahayana path is full enlightenment
or non-abiding nirvana. It is a state whereby one is free of the two
extremes, so non-abiding nirvana means not abiding in the two extremes -
the extremes of samsara and the extremes of nirvana (an individual
liberation).  In order to avoid and not to fall into the extremes of
samsara, one has to have wisdom - the wisdom of realizing emptiness. In the
context of the Mahayana path, it has to be the perfection of wisdom.
We have finished with Tenets recently and now you have some idea about
tenets. You also have some idea about the procedures about the Paths and
Grounds. When you put whatever you know together, it becomes clearer and
clearer why the wisdom realizing emptiness is so important. In fact, it is
indispensable. So in order to achieve full enlightenment, wisdom is
indispensable. Put aside achieving full enlightenment, even to become a
hearer foe destroyer or solitary realizer foe destroyer to achieve
individual liberation, from the perspective of the CMWS, even to achieve
this lower nirvana, hearer’s enlightenment or solitary realizer’s
enlightenment, one needs to destroy the root of cyclic existence. In order
to destroy the root of cyclic existence, which is ignorance, one must
realize selflessness.
You must see for yourselves why you need this wisdom of realizing emptiness
in order to achieve liberation and full enlightenment. Why do you need this
wisdom? Why do you need to learn and develop this wisdom? Why is it that
you cannot achieve the goal just be sitting there and stabilizing your mind
in a state that lacks of any kind of thinking or any kind of thought? You
have to see the point for yourself, and you have to gain the conviction.
This is one of the main reasons why we study these things. This is one of
the main reasons. All the texts say the same thing, “In order to achieve
liberation and full enlightenment one needs the view of selflessness. It is
indispensable and non-negotiable”. This is what the texts say, but you have
to see for yourself and you have to gain a personal conviction.
The state of full enlightenment or the non-abiding nirvana is free from the
extremes of samsara, and is also free from the extremes of nirvana
(individual liberation). As you have seen in the Tenets, according to the
GES, the SS, and the MOS, they talk about how arhats achieve the nirvana
with remainder, and the nirvana without remainder. Whatever it is, when one
achieves nirvana with or without remainder, one is basically achieving a
state whereby one is just at peace with oneself, just imagine that one hang
out in that state for very long time. It is true they kind of hang out in
that state for very long time, literally they abide in the sphere of peace.
Why the arhats are like that? It all boils down to their lack of great
compassion and bodhicitta.
The main reason why the arhats abide in the peace of nirvana for such a
long time is due to their lack of great compassion and bodhicitta. From
this, you can see how if one does not have great compassion and bodhicitta,
one will not be able to achieve the non-abiding nirvana. This is because
one would have fallen into the extreme of nirvana. In order to achieve the
non-abiding nirvana, one also needs the factor of method, i.e. the practice
of method, so one needs great compassion. On the basis, one needs
bodhicitta. Bodhicitta is something that needs to be developed. So you have
to gain the understanding for yourself why the practice of method and
wisdom are both necessary in order to achieve enlightenment.
There is another wrong view that purports that the training in the
perfections of generosity, ethics, patience, and so forth, i.e. those that
constitutes the factor of method are only for those who have not realized
emptiness. For those who have realized emptiness, then practices that
constitute the method are not necessary. Simply speaking, once one has
realized emptiness, one can put aside all so called practices of method.
There is such a wrong view. Lama Tsongkhapa says that this is a very wrong
view. If you remember our discussions on the Paths and Grounds, from the
1st to the 7th ground, the bodhisattva accumulates both the collection of
method and wisdom in order to destroy the afflictive obscurations. The work
of destroying the knowledge obscurations/ cognitive obscurations begins
only on the 8th ground. Therefore, on the 8th, 9th and 10th ground, the
bodhisattva works at overcoming the knowledge obscurations. The actual
antidote that enables the bodhisattva to overcome the afflictive and the
knowledge obscurations is the same thing. What is that? It is the wisdom
directly perceiving emptiness. But why is it that the bodhisattvas’ wisdom
directly perceiving emptiness on the 1st to the 7th ground can only act as
an antidote to the afflictive obscurations and not the knowledge
obscurations? Why is it that after achieving the 8th ground, the
bodhisattva wisdom directly perceiving emptiness can act as an antidote to
the knowledge obscurations? The difference must come in the method aspect
of the path.
The very thing that makes the bodhisattvas’ wisdom directly perceiving
emptiness on the 8th, 9th and 10th ground powerful enough to act against
the knowledge obscurations must be the factor of method and not the wisdom
itself. If the wisdom directly perceiving emptiness is the main thing, and
there is no other determining factor, then why shouldn’t the hearer and the
solitary realizer achieve full enlightenment? The hearer arhats and
solitary realizer arhats have the wisdom directly perceiving emptiness.
They have the same wisdom directly perceiving emptiness. Why is it that
they can only become an arhat and not a Buddha? What these arhats are
lacking is the factor of method. Otherwise, there is no reason why they
cannot be a Buddha.
From the discussion on the Paths and Grounds, there is a perfection
associated with each of the ten grounds, starting from the perfection of
generosity on the 1st ground, the perfection of ethics on the 2nd ground
and so forth. So in order to achieve the non-abiding nirvana/ full
enlightenment, one needs the factor of method. The factor of wisdom alone
is not sufficient. The wisdom must be conjoined with method. So we need the
factor of method. The primary factor of method here is great compassion and
bodhicitta. We should work towards to being able to explain why the factor
of method is necessary in order to achieve full enlightenment. If somebody
were to ask you, you should be able to explain.
There is a wrong view that purports the result of the collection of merit
is only for having enjoyments, long life and so forth, i.e. the result of
the collection of merit is just that. As such, in order to achieve the full
enlightenment, which is a much loftier goal and of higher state, one is
kind of doing away with these mundane activities such as long life, good
health and enjoyments, therefore the collection of merit is not important.
The collection of merit results in the achievement of the form body. As
Nagarjuna said in his Precious Garland,
    To sum up, the embodiment of form,
    O King, is born from the collection of merit.
When one achieves full enlightenment, one achieves both the truth body and
the form body. The form body is a result of the collection of merit.
We do practices like giving, keeping ethics and so forth in order to
accumulate merit. We have to analyze whether such practices become a cause
of liberation or enlightenment if they are not conjoined with the factor of
wisdom. If you think about it, it is probably very difficult to say that
such practices alone will become a cause of liberation or omniscience/full
enlightenment if it is not complemented with the factor of wisdom. In
general, if whatever one does is not conjoined with either the factor of
method or wisdom, then those activities will only become a cause of
samsara.
Many a time wrong views or misinterpretations of the Buddha’s teachings
arise because of the inability to discover the actual intent of the Buddha
i.e. without knowing how to distinguish the purpose of the various
statements that the Buddha made. Basically, it is an inability to really
discover what exactly the Buddha meant when he made a particular statement.
Due to the lack of ability, when one sees certain passages, one will take
it literally or misinterpret the meaning. For example, the Buddha said in
one of the sutras:
  Adhering to the six perfections – generosity and so forth - is demonic
  activity
If you take it at face value, what it seems to be saying is that practicing
the six perfections is an obstacle to full enlightenment. Therefore, in
order to achieve full enlightenment, one doesn’t have to practice. One may
arrive at such a conclusion. So in order to understand and discover the
Buddha’s intent behind a particular statement, one cannot just rely on that
one text alone and try to explain what one think the Buddha has said. In
order to discover the intent of a particular statement made by the Buddha
in a particular text, one has to factor in what the Buddha has said in
other situations as well. Basically, one needs to have an overview of the
whole picture. Based on that one would be able to situate a particular
statement in its rightful context. It is only then one will be able to make
a correct interpretation. Just trying to make an interpretation based on
just one statement is not correct. A lot of problems come from not having
an overview of the Buddha’s teachings in all the different texts.
The Sutra of Showing the Tathagata’s Inconceivable Secret says:
  Children of good lineage, it is like this. Fire, for example, burns from
  a cause and goes out when this cause ceases to exist. Similarly, mind is
  activated by an observed object; without this it is inactive.
This quotation from The Sutra of Showing the Tathagata’s Inconceivable
Secret highlights the need for the mind to focus on something i.e. for the
mind to take on an observed object in order for it to develop and to
improve just as a fire needs a cause before it can blaze. Similarly, in
order for the mind to improve, it needs an observed object. This means that
stabilizing the mind in a state that lacks any thought (spacing out), and
thinking that by not thinking of anything one can achieve full
enlightenment is nonsense. One will not be able to achieve full
enlightenment by thinking of nothing.
In order for the mind to improve, it must focus on a certain object of
observation. Even in the case of meditating on emptiness, there is an
object of observation for that mind. When we meditate on emptiness it is
not as if one is staring at nothing. That is not meditation on emptiness.
The observed object or object of observation here is a non-affirming
negative, which is a negation of the object of negation.
In order for the mind to improve, it must have an object of observation. In
the case of meditation on emptiness, one is meditating on emptiness and the
emptiness is the object of observation which one is focusing at. It is not
nothingness. If we think that meditation on emptiness is just focusing on
nothingness, this is not true at all. The object is emptiness. According to
the higher school, it is a non-affirming negative; which is negation of the
object of negation. Before one can meditate on emptiness, one must first
identify correctly what is the object that one is focusing on. What one is
observing has to be emptiness. In order to be able to focus on emptiness,
one must first identify the object and that is the reason why we have to
look at tenets where there are all these explanations on what selflessness
or what emptiness really means. On the basis of identifying correctly what
the observed object is, only then one can take it to be the object of
observation. It is only then one can focus on it. It is not an easy thing,
and it is not just simply sitting down staring into space.
Lama Tsongkhapa goes to great length to refute all the wrong views
pertaining to training in the perfections. Actually we have covered this in
the first year of the Basic Program. Now you have some idea of the Paths
and Grounds, you should go back to this topic again and read it. Because
now you have some understanding of the Paths and Grounds so when you read
this again definitely you get a better understanding and better
perspective. It is in chapter 7 [An Introduction to the Six Perfections] of
the Lamrim Chenmo Vol 2.
You should start reading the text on your own. The section covering the
first four perfections – perfections of generosity, ethics, patience and
joyous perseverance- is relatively quite short and relatively quite easy.
It is not that difficult to read. Hopefully we can finish that quickly. You
should help out by doing the reading on your own. But there will be a more
extensive explanation on the last two perfections. [The Perfections of
Meditative Stabilization and Wisdom].
Student: In relation to The Heart Sutra, Chenrezig was abiding in
meditative equipoise looking upon the five aggregates, how come he can
still hear the question that Shariputra ask him?
(Khen Rinpoche posed the  question  to  few  students  and  there  were  few
discussions on it (from 74.52 to 89 minimum)
Khen Rinpoche (in English): So there are four  different  answers.  Somebody
said Buddha blessing, one said Chenrezig is not  meditating,  somebody  said
he was in meditation but still  can  hear,  and  somebody  said  in  reality
Chenrezig is Buddha so he can hear. So you choose one of that.










