Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/SixPerfections/Lesson5.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:53:57.304582
================================================================================


The Perfection OF Patience

(iii) How to train in the perfection of patience
   (a') What patience is
   (b') The divisions of patience
   (c') The ways to produce it in one’s continuum
What is patience? According to the MLLR, patience is the mind:
    • abiding calmly without being discouraged by harm and suffering and
    • abiding firmly in beliefs in the teachings
What I have just read out is talking about the three types of patience:
   1. A mind that abides calmly
   2. A mind without being discouraged by harms and sufferings.
   3. A mind abiding in beliefs in the teachings
One of the patience is the patience of disregarding harms done to you, and
it is a mind that does not get discouraged when one experiences harm.
The patience of accepting sufferings is the mind staying calm in the event
of experiencing suffering.
The patience of certitude about the teachings is a mind that abides firmly
in beliefs in the teachings. It is a mind that put up with the difficulties
that one will experience in the course of trying to understand the meaning
of the teachings through hearing and reflection. So whatever difficulties
you may meet during the course of trying to understand the meaning of the
teachings or trying to understand the meaning of selflessness.
What is the class of discordant factors?
In simple English, they are the things that are obstacles or discordant
with patience.
In the MLLR, the class of discordant factors is stated to be:
   1. Hatred,
   2. Discouragement
   3. Non-belief.
These three are the class of discordant factors. Examples: when we receive
harm, when somebody does harm to us, anger or hatred that obstruct us from
being able to practice patience at that time.
Anger is a discordant factor.
Next discordant factor is discouragement, when the mind becomes powerless.
This happens when we face with problems or sufferings, and feeling
discourage, or feeling the mind is powerless. This is a discordant factor
because it hinders the generation of patience of accepting sufferings.
In order to develop the patience of certitude about the teachings, we need
to have a stable belief in the teachings and we must want the teachings.
Without belief which desire for the teachings we will not be able to
generate patience of certitude about the teachings.
In short, patience is a mind that is able to remain calm and undisturbed
when experiencing harm and suffering.
What is the completion of the perfection of patience?
Completing the perfection of patience means that you simply complete your
conditioning to a state of mind wherein you have stopped your anger and the
like. It is not contingent on all living beings becoming free from
undisciplined conduct.
Completing the perfection of patience has to do with one’s mind being
conditioned to stopping anger. The perfection of patience is not contingent
on having subdued all the enemies outside. There will never ever come a day
whereby one can get rid of all the external enemies.
[LRCM V2 page 152]  (a’) What patience is
Patience is
(1) disregarding harm done to you,
(2) accepting the suffering arising in your mind-stream, and
(3) being certain about the  teachings  and  firmly  maintaining  belief  in
them.
There are three sets of factors incompatible with these:
- for the first, hostility;
- for the second, hostility and loss of courage; and
- for the third, disbelief and dislike.
Perfecting patience means that you simply complete your  conditioning  to  a
state of mind wherein you have stopped your anger and the like.  It  is  not
contingent upon all living beings becoming free from  undisciplined  conduct
because you would  not  be  able  to  bring  this  about,  and  because  you
accomplish your purpose just by disciplining your own mind. -

(b') The divisions of patience
1. Developing the patience of disregarding harm done to you
2. Developing the patience of accepting suffering
3. Developing the patience of certitude about the teachings


(c') The ways to produce it in one’s continuum
The way to do that:
   1. To reflect on the benefits of patience
   2. The faults of not having patience
What are the benefits of patience? In the MLLR, it says:
   1. In the future one will not have many enemies later on
   2. Will not have separation from those to whom one is close
   3. One will has much happiness and contentment
   4. One will have no regrets at the time of death
   5. Upon disintegration of one’s bodies, one will also be reborn among the
      deities in the happy realms of high status.
The benefits of patience are what I have just read out. In particular there
is this line that says “upon disintegration of their bodies (those who have
patience), they will also be reborn in the happy realms of the high
status”.
Why is it that it only mentioned that those who are patience will be reborn
as a celestial being; as a worldly god? Aren’t they going to be born as a
human being as well?
So it says “One should meditate on these benefits until you gain a strong
firm certainty about the benefits such as these arise from patience”.
[LRCM V2 page 153]  Although there are many ways to cultivate  patience,  to
begin I will explain the meditation on the  benefits  of  patience  and  the
faults of not being patient. The benefits are set forth in  the  Bodhisattva
Levels: Initially, bodhisattvas consider  the  benefits  of  patience.  They
think, "Persons who have patience will not have many enemies  later  on  and
will not have many separations from those to whom they are close. They  will
have much happiness and contentment. They will have no regret  at  the  time
of death, and upon the disintegration of their  bodies  they  will  also  be
reborn among the deities in the happy realms of high status." By looking  at
such benefits, they  too  are  patient.  They  engage  others  in  upholding
patience, and they also praise patience.  When  they  see  patient  persons,
they are delighted and full of joy.
The Compendium of the Perfections says:
   Patience is also a craftsman that creates a Buddha’s embodiment of
   form*1
   Adorned with the beautiful signs of good qualities.
*1 Buddha’s embodiment of form is Buddha’s form body, Rupakaya
This quotation states that patience creates Buddha’s form body, Rupakaya.
The Buddha’s form body consists of the Enjoyment body and the Emanation
body. Just like a skilled craftsman or artisan is able to create a very
beautiful image of Buddha, likewise patience is the artisan or craftsman
that creates the Buddha’s form body.
In the event of a raging fire, how do you put out the fire? With what do
you put out the fire? You put out the fire with water. Likewise, patience
is like the water that puts out the blazing fire of anger. So patience is
the supreme method to put out all the problems and sufferings that you
experience in life.  It is evident from our own experience in life that
when we are more patience, we tend to have fewer enemies, and whatever
friends or acquaintances that we have, we are able to maintain healthy
relationship with them. There are lesser chances of separation or breakup
in those relationships.
It is said in the text one tends to have a happier life, much happiness and
contentment. If you have led a happy life, you will have no regrets at the
time of death. After that, for example, one will get a good rebirth to be
born as a celestial being.
There are many benefits of patience that are listed in the text. You should
read it on your own. We are asked to think about them seriously, and to
meditate on these benefits until we gained a firm certainty about the
benefits that are mentioned in the text. This is necessary because
meditating on the benefits of patience is a cause for us to want to
practice patience. It is a cause for us to really want to cultivate
patience. Reflecting, and thinking deeply about the benefits of patience is
extremely important. That is why Lama Tsongkhapa emphasized how important
it is. In the text it says “meditate on these benefits until you gained a
strong firm certainty about these benefits”.
Meditating on the benefits on patience and gaining a certainty in your own
mind about what is good for you, and what is in for you if you have
patience. This will naturally lead you to want to cultivate patience. This
is just a natural state of things. It is same like doing business. There is
no one in existence who does not want profit/gain. When businessman does
business, they do it because they want the profit/gain. They see the gain
that they can make from business. Likewise, it is the same for cultivating
patience. If you see what is in for us, and if you see how much and what
you can gain, then automatically you would want to cultivate patience.
[LRCM V2 page 154]
  Patience is also the craftsman that  creates  a  buddha's  embodiment  of
  form,
  Adorned with the beautiful signs of good qualities.
Thus, Aryasura praises patience by way of its many benefits:  it  stops  you
from turning  away  from  others'  welfare  on  account  of  living  beings'
misperceptions; it protects you from anger, the  enemy  that  destroys  many
roots of virtue; it is a captivating ornament because it  endures  the  harm
of those of little power; it is the excellent strength of ascetics  who  are
tormented by the afflictions; it is a stream of water that extinguishes  the
wildfire of malice; it is armor that cannot be  pierced  by  the  arrows  of
undisciplined  persons'  misperceptions;  it  is  the  skilled  artisan  who
creates a fine form of golden color that captivates the eyes  and  minds  of
beings.
Furthermore, Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds states:
 Whoever works hard and overcomes anger
 Is happy in this and future lives.
When you rely  on  patience  continually,  you  do  not  spoil  your  joyful
attitude, so you are always happy even  in  this  life.  Moreover,  patience
stops miserable rebirths in future lives, gives special  rebirths  in  happy
realms, and ultimately bestows certain goodness, so you  are  utterly  happy
in this and future lives.
Meditate on these benefits until you gain a  strong,  firm  certainty  about
the cause-and-effect relationship wherein benefits such as these arise  from
patience.
Next is an explanation of the faults of anger.
[LRCM V2 page 154]
With respect to the faults of anger, the invisible faults are as follows.
Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds states:
   Any good deeds, such as
   Generosity and worshipping the sugatas,
   You have collected over a thousand eons
   Are all destroyed in one moment of anger.
Aryasura formulated this exactly as it is presented in Engaging in the
Bodhisattva Deeds. The Play of Manjushri Sutra mentions the destruction of
virtue accumulated over a hundred eons,
As you are aware there are the two collections:
- the collection of merits and
- the collection of wisdom.
The virtue that is destroyed by anger is the collection of merits. The
collection of wisdom is not destroyed by anger.
According to quotation by Shantideva from Engaging in the Bodhisattva
Deeds, it says
   Any good deeds, such as
   Generosity and worshipping the sugatas,
   You have collected over a thousand eons
   Are all destroyed in one moment of anger.
In the commentary on the meaning of this verse, it is said that if a non-
bodhisattva gets angry at a bodhisattva, that non-bodhisattva destroys the
merits/virtues accumulated over a thousand eons.
What about the quotation from The Play of Manjushri Sutra which mentioned
the destruction of virtue accumulated over a hundred eons? That applies to
a higher bodhisattva getting angry at a lower bodhisattva. If a higher
bodhisattva or more powerful bodhisattva gets angry at a lesser
bodhisattva, that higher bodhisattva who gets angry destroys merits/virtues
accumulated over a hundred eons.
From this, it is evident that there are bodhisattvas who do get angry.
[LRCM  V2  page  155]   With  respect  to  the  person   who   gets   angry,
Candrakirti's Explanation of the "Middle Way" Commentary says that if  anger
even by bodhisattvas destroys their roots of virtue, it goes without  saying
that the anger of non-bodhisattvas toward bodhisattvas does.  Regardless  of
whether the recipient of the anger is ascertained to  be  a  bodhisattva  or
whether the perceived faults that cause the anger are real, the  destruction
of virtue is said nonetheless to be  just  as  explained  above  [i.e.,  the
virtue accumulated over a hundred eons is lost].
Here it says that if a non-bodhisattva gets angry at a bodhisattva, one
moment of anger destroys a merit/ virtue accumulated over a thousand eons.
This destruction of the virtues accumulated over a thousand eons is not
contingent on whether you know that the person is a bodhisattva or not. If
you get angry at a bodhisattva then the merit accumulated over a thousand
eons is destroyed.
There is always some reason for us to get upset or angry. Whether the
reason is justified or not, i.e. whether in reality the reason for us
getting upset is true, is real, is valid, it doesn’t matter. If it is anger
towards a bodhisattva, in a case of a non-bodhisattva getting angry at a
bodhisattva, the merit accumulated over a thousand eons is destroyed by a
single moment of anger. It doesn’t matter even you are right. As it is says
in the text, “whether the perceived faults that cause the anger are real,
the destruction of virtue is said nonetheless to be just as explained
above.”
Most of the time the anger is stronger when we are right. When we are not
very sure about whether we are absolutely justified or valid, anger seems
to be weaker. In the case of the anger that is present, especially when we
think that we are justified “It is the truth, how can it be?” and the more
justified we feel, it seems to lead to more anger, which means more
turbulence and disturbance in our hearts.
If we feel it is justified, how does it lead to anger? For us, feeling
justified, and feeling that we are right propels us to get even angrier
and, therefore, more disturbed. How does feeling justified or being right?
What kind of difference does it makes? If we feel that we are justified,
and feeling that the reason is on our side, and if feeling that makes us
justified in feeling angry, then it leads only to more disturbance in our
mind. Then what use is that? In the sense, it is not appropriate and does
not make sense to get upset. Therefore getting upset and angry based on
this feeling of justice and having truth on our side is inappropriate, and
incorrect.
If the object of the anger is a bodhisattva, it doesn’t matter whether you
know the person is a bodhisattva or not. It also doesn’t matter whether
there is any truth or justification in getting angry. When anger arises
even for one moment, the merit that we worked so hard to accumulate over
such a long period of time, such as a thousand eons, would be destroyed.
These are the examples of the faults of anger. These faults and the
disadvantages of anger are invisible i.e. you can’t perceive them directly.
We can only generate a conviction in such faults of anger by depending on
the Buddha’s word. It is our experience that getting mighty upset or angry
can destroy the happiness that we experience in the whole day. Whatever
happiness or joy we had in that day, perhaps it was a wonderful day, and
when anger arises, that joy, happiness, and pleasure that was there earlier
on in the mind just disappears. All it takes is just getting upset for a
short while, maybe even for just a couple of moments. If it is a very
intense anger, and just for a short moment of time, that itself is so
powerful that it overwhelms, and erases whatever experience of happiness we
had in the earlier part of the day. We could have been happy for many
hours, feeling just relax and calm for many hours. But just that one or two
couple of moments of anger, that whole pleasurable experience is suddenly
erased, and is gone. If you think about it logically, that shouldn’t be the
case isn’t it? The happiness that we had experienced lasted for a longer
amount of time but how come it is overwhelmed by just a couple of moments
of anger? This just one or two moment of anger is much more powerful when
compared to many hours of happiness that we may have experienced prior to
getting angry. Even just getting upset for a short while can make us
sleepless for one whole night. Isn’t that is our experience?
A very close relationships that have been established over a very long
period of time, say over 20 or 30 years with mutual dependence and trust.
Even such relationships can be destroyed by a few moments of anger.
For whatever reason people get upset and that has at times destroyed
relationships completely. The whole of 20 or 30 years of friendship or a
relationship of trust and mutual dependence is just cut off. All that 20 or
30 years of happiness was destroyed by just one moment or couple of moments
of anger.
During the time when we are upset, we only create negativities. If we think
about examples that we can relate to, or things that we have experienced in
life, perhaps then we can relate better to these quotations about how just
a couple of moments of anger can destroy the merit/virtue that was
accumulated over a much longer period of time.
In general, for there to be the destruction of the roots of virtue it is
not required that the anger to be directed towards the bodhisattvas. So far
the examples are about getting angry at bodhisattvas. Anger towards non-
bodhisattvas also destroys roots of virtue.
[LRCM Vol 2 page 155] The Compendium of Trainings states:
The text of the Arya-sarvastivadins also says: The Bhagavan said, "Monks,
consider a monk who makes a full prostration to a stupa that contains a
buddha's hair and nails and who has an attitude of faith."
"So be it, Revered One."
"Monks, this monk will experience reigns as a universal monarch a thousand
times the number of grains of sand eighty-four-thousand leagues under the
ground his prostrate body covers - down to the disk of gold that supports
the earth."
However, the virtue/ merit that is accumulated is extinguished when one
wound or maim a fellow practitioner who is abiding in a similar conduct of
celibacy.
[LRCM Vol 2 page 155] Then the venerable Upali, who was located off to the
side from where the Bhagavan was seated, bowed with hands joined
respectfully and asked, "The Bhagavan has said that this monk's roots of
virtue are so great. O Bhagavan, how are those roots of virtue used up,
diminished, erased, and extinguished?"
"Upali, when such a sin as malice is done to fellow practitioners, it is
like a wound or maiming. I cannot see its full impact. Upali, this
diminishes, erases, and extinguishes those great roots of virtue.
Therefore, Upali, if you would not feel malice toward a burned stump, what
need to mention feeling that way toward a body with consciousness?"
It is mentioned in Lamrim teachings of the various benefits of
prostrations. It is said that if someone prostrates with faith towards
stupas or representation of the Buddhas such as statues and so forth, that
one prostration accumulates the merit that will enable one to be reborn as
a wheel turning king equal in number of times to the atoms that your body
covers when you prostrate on the ground. These numbers of atoms go all the
way down to the very core of the earth. In order to experience these
benefits, prostrations have to be made with faith and belief. Therefore,
having faith and belief in the benefits of prostrations is important. If
prostrations are done with this faith and belief, one would accumulate the
merit that is as explained in the text. If you don’t have any faith or
belief, in the first place you would not be prostrating.
In the discussion of the fault of anger, the power of anger is shown - how
powerful anger is in destroying roots of virtue. Here we are using
prostration as an example. On the benefits of faith - how much merit one
can accumulate with prostration if it is done with very strong faith.
In this quotation it says that a person who accumulates such merit from
making prostration destroy his merit when he does sins such as malice
towards a fellow practitioner who is practicing correctly and abiding in
ethics and so forth. This shows that when a non-bodhisattva gets angry at a
non-bodhisattva, roots of virtues are destroyed.
Next is eliminating qualms with regards to the meaning of destruction of
roots of virtues.
What is the qualm?
[LRCM Vol 2 page 155] Some scholars' position: “The meaning of destroying
the roots of virtue is that in destroying the capacity of previous virtues
to issue their effects speedily, you delay the issuance of their effects.
So anger, for instance, will give its effect first, but it is certainly not
the case that the seeds of the roots of virtue will not issue effects when
they later meet with the requisite conditions, because, given that no
mundane path can eliminate the seeds that are to be eliminated, it is
impossible to have an elimination of the seeds of the afflictions."
That is qualm and is the position of some scholars.
According to some scholars, the meaning of the destructions of roots of
virtue is this: destroying the roots of virtue means destroying the roots
of virtue’s capacity to produce effects quickly and delaying the issuance
of the effects.
You have to get this. If you don’t get what is the objection, then you
cannot talk about dispelling this objection.
According to some scholars, the destruction of roots of virtue does not
mean that the roots of virtue are unable to produce any effects whatsoever.

These scholars say that anger can never destroy the capacity of the seeds
of the roots of virtue to produce effects, which means these roots of
virtue will definitely produce effects one day.
This is the position of the scholars.
Why do they assert this?
The reason they gave is: if no mundane path can eliminate the seeds that
are to be eliminated, then it is not possible for anger to destroy the
roots of virtue.
Mundane paths are like those sentient beings that have not entered any
path. Sentient beings in the form and formless realms who have achieved
those various levels of concentration have the ability to suppress the
manifest afflictions. The afflictions do not manifest for those beings in
the form and formless realms. However, such mundane paths in the continuum
of these form and formless realms gods, although they prevent the
manifestation of afflictions, alone do not destroy the seeds of their
afflictions.
You have to understand the qualm first. There are different positions as to
what constitutes the destruction of roots of virtue. According to some
scholars, the destruction of roots of virtue means delaying the issuance of
effects. It doesn’t mean destroying the seeds of roots of virtue. Since the
seeds of the roots of virtue are not destroyed, as the seeds are still
there, they will definitely give rise to effects one day. This is the
position of some scholars.
Lama Tsongkhapa disagrees. He says: “This is incorrect”.  In his reply to
the position of those scholars, he says:
This reasoning is unsound because:
(1) even the purification wherein ordinary beings clear away non-virtue by
means of its remedy, the four powers of confession, is not an elimination
of its seeds; nevertheless, though the seeds of this non-virtue may later
meet with the requisite conditions, they cannot issue a fruition.
(2) when you attain the peak and forbearance levels of the path of
preparation [the second and third of four levels], you do not eliminate the
seeds of non-virtue that cause wrong views and miserable rebirths;
nevertheless, even though the seeds of this non-virtue may meet with the
requisite conditions, they cannot give rise to wrong views or a miserable
rebirth.
[LRCM Vol 2 page 156] Reply: This reasoning is unsound because
(1) even the purification wherein ordinary beings clear away  non-virtue  by
means of its remedy, the four powers of confession, is  not  an  elimination
of its seeds; nevertheless, though the seeds of this  non-virtue  may  later
meet with the requisite conditions, they cannot issue a fruition;
(2) even virtuous and non-virtuous karma that are spent upon  issuing  their
individual fruitions do not lose their seeds; nevertheless,  even  when  the
seeds of such karma meet henceforth with the  requisite  conditions,  it  is
impossible for fruitions to arise; and
(3) when you  attain  the  peak  and  forbearance  levels  of  the  path  of
preparation [the second and third of four levels], you do not eliminate  the
seeds  of  non-virtue  that  cause  wrong  views  and  miserable   rebirths;
nevertheless, even though the seeds of this non-virtue  may  meet  with  the
requisite conditions, they cannot give rise to wrong views  or  a  miserable
rebirth.
You remember those scholars’ position. What is their main reason for their
position? Basically they are saying that as long as the seeds are not
abandoned, the seeds will give rise to its effects.
According to Lama Tsongkhapa this is incorrect.
You remember the discussion on the purification of negativities through the
application of the four opponent powers? It is said that if we confess the
negativities with the application of the four powers, the negativities will
be purified. If the negativities are indeed purified, there is no way to
experience the fruitional effect of those non-virtues. Otherwise, the word
“purification” makes no sense.
Yes, all the negativities can be purified through engaging in the practice
of confession with the application of four powers. Even though the
negativities are purified, the seeds of those non-virtues are not destroyed
by that purification. That act of purification alone does not destroy the
seeds of non-virtues. However, one will not experience the fruitional
effect of the non-virtue that has already been purified.
In our discussion on the Paths and Grounds, on the Peak level of the Path
of Preparation, wrong view does not arise. As such, there isn’t the
destruction of roots of virtue by wrong view. Then on Forbearance level of
the Path of Preparation, it is guaranteed that the bodhisattva will never
be reborn in the lower realms.
But the roots of virtue of this bodhisattva are not being severed by wrong
views. The fact that he is not going to the lower realms is not due to the
abandonment of :
    - the seeds of wrong views and
    - the seeds of the actions or karma that will result in the miserable
      rebirth.
The seeds are still there, but he or she will not generate wrong views and
will not be reborn in the lower realms due to incompleteness of conditions.
Furthermore, although this bodhisattva still has the seeds of wrong views
and seeds of the actions that will result in the miserable realms, even if
he meets with the conditions, nothing happens. This is an example that Lama
Tsongkhapa uses to prove the point that even though the seed may be there,
but it doesn’t mean that it will give rise to its effects. It is also
incorrect to state that the destruction of roots of virtue means a delay in
the issuance of effects.
As Lama Tsongkhapa said:
[LRCM Vol 2 page 156]
As to the actions that give rise to cyclic existence,
There are those that are weighty, those that are near,
Those to which you are habituated, and those you did earliest.
Among these, the former will ripen first.
Any virtuous or non-virtuous action that comes to fruition does temporarily
stop the opportunity for the fruition of another action; however, it is not
said nor can it be established that a mere preceding fruition destroys
virtue or non-virtue. Nor is it appropriate for "destroying the roots of
virtue" to mean the mere temporary postponement of fruition; otherwise, it
would absurdly follow that all powerful non-virtuous actions must be
considered destroyers of the roots of virtue.
It is said in the teachings as to which karma ripens first, those that are
weighty and more powerful ripen first. The delay in the issuance of effects
means that if something powerful ripens first, then other things are
postponed and the effects are issued later on. Going by this, you have to
say that, therefore, all powerful non-virtuous actions will be destroyers
of roots of virtue. In that all powerful non-virtuous actions will lead to
a delay in the issuance of effects of virtue.
What Lama Tsongkhapa is trying to say is:  It is incorrect to posit the
destruction of roots of virtue to merely mean the delay in the issuance of
effects.
Next is stating an example.
[LRCM Vol 2 page 156] Therefore, concerning this the master Bhavaviveka
states (as already explained) that in the case of both the purification of
non-virtue by the four powers of confession and the destruction of roots of
virtue by wrong views and malice, the seeds of the virtue or non-virtue
cannot give rise to effects even though they may later meet with the
requisite conditions, just as spoiled seeds will not give rise to sprouts
even though they may meet with the requisite conditions.
This is just an example to show that even though the seed of a particular
virtue or non-virtue may be there, it is not definite that it will give
rise to their respective effect.
If someone was to say that a powerless seed – a seed that has been rendered
ineffective or powerless – is not a seed, what are you going to say?
Khen Rinpoche (in English): Is that a seed?
Student respond inaudible
Khen Rinpoche (in English): Why? You must give reason why that is a seed?
If a seed cannot produce its effect, do you still call it a seed?
Student respond inaudible
Ven Gyurme: It’s a seed? Somebody who has died is a human or not?
Khen Rinpoche (in English): After losing the function, still is seed or
not?
Ven Gyurme: Was means not already right?
Khen Rinpoche (in English): An example, something like the dead person is
not the person, isn’t it?
Student respond inaudible
Khen Rinpoche (in English): Dead person is person?
Ven Gyurme: No, before means it is not a person right?
Khen Rinpoche (in English): Still you don’t know what is a seed? What is
the definition of a seed?
Ven Gyurme: If the seed of ignorance (for example) cannot produce ignorance
then how can it be a seed of ignorance?
Khen Rinpoche (in English): So how can you call it a seed?
Student respond inaudible
We did discuss what a seed is. In order to be a seed, it must have the
capacity to produce an effect later on. A seed is so called because it has
the capacity to produce a sprout. Otherwise, it would not be called a seed.
 If that seed does not have the capacity to produce a sprout there is no
basis to call it a seed.
Student respond inaudible
Ven Gyurme: A degenerated seed is a seed or not?
Is there a seed that doesn’t have the capacity to produce a sprout?
If it is a seed, is it necessarily pervaded by having the capacity to
produce a sprout?
Is there a seed of a sprout that doesn’t have the capacity to produce a
sprout?
If you say no, then it follows that definitely it is necessarily being
pervaded by having the capacity to produce a sprout. If it is seed of a
sprout, it necessarily has the capacity to produce a sprout, because you
have accepted the pervasion.
The seed on your table, does it have the capacity to produce a sprout?


