Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/SixPerfections/Lesson12.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:02.721618
================================================================================


Student: What is the difference between the Lam Rim Chen Mo (LRCM) and the
Middle Length Lam Rim (MLLR)?
Answer:  When the Buddha taught the Perfection of Wisdom Sutra, the
Perfection of Wisdom Sutra comes in different lengths. They are the
extensive Perfection of Wisdom Sutra, the middling Perfection of Wisdom
Sutra and the short Perfection of Wisdom Sutra. They consist of 12 volumes,
4 volumes and 1 volume respectively. These are further condensed into the
Heart of the Perfection of Wisdom Sutra.
Generally, when we talk about the Lamrim, we talk about the big and the
small Lamrim. In the context of that expression, the small Lamrim refers to
the MLLR.
So, in the context of talking about Lamrim in terms of the big and the
small Lamrim, (the small Lamrim) is commonly refers to as MLLR.
If you talk about the three Lamrim texts -the extensive, the middling and
the abbreviated- that Lama Tsongkhapa had composed, the middling would be
this MLLR, the abbreviated or the short Lamrim would be Lama Tsongkhapa’s
Lamrim, which is also called the Song of the Experience.
Lama Tsongkhapa’s Lamrim has Lama Atisha’s  Lamp for the Path to
Enlightenment as its basis. So Lama Tsongkhapa’s Lamrim is an explanation
or the commentary essentially on the Lamp for the Path to Enlightenment.
In the Great Treatise of the Stages of the Path to Enlightenment, which is
the LRCM, you can find very extensive information, and citing many
quotations and the positions of various masters.
So in the Great Treatise of the Stages of the Path to Enlightenment or the
LRCM, there is an extensive citation of quotes from Buddha’s own words and
the commentaries by the various Indian masters. In the MLLR, you don’t see
as many citations. Rather, in the MLLR, it is like a collection of essence
of the main points and advices.
In many treatises, whether extensive or abbreviated, many a times they are
composed in order to benefit specific disciples. A lot of times at the
request of certain disciples or individuals a text is composed. Sometimes
people made request; “Could you please condense this particular topic? Can
you just tell us the essence? Maybe summarize it” and often this becomes a
condition for the author to compose a short explanation or an abbreviated
commentary.
Lama Tsongkhapa composed the LRCM first. The MLLR and the condensed Lam Rim
were composed later on. As such, it is possible that to the common karmic
appearance of the disciples and sentient beings, Lama Tsongkhapa composed
the LRCM at the time when he was engaging in learning and reflection on the
Buddha’s teachings. When we talk about the MLLR, which is an abbreviation,
that is the time in the later part of his life, he was condensing the main
points and just giving the essence.
Perhaps you can look at it in such a way. Perhaps there could be different
reasons why Lama Tsongkhapa composed texts of differing lengths on the same
topic. So, if you look at the MLLR, essentially the topics and subject
matter is the same. It is just that he only puts in the essential points,
which are the essence.
Now continue with the text, we will look at the objects of meditation
themselves.
a. A general presentation of objects of meditation
 1. The objects of meditation themselves
 2. Who should meditate on which objects
1 The objects of meditation themselves
[LRCM Vol 3 pg. 35]  The Bhagavan stated  that  yogis  have  four  types  of
objects of meditation, these being:
(a) universal objects of meditation,
(b) objects of meditation for purifying your behavior,
(c) objects of meditation for expertise, and
(d) objects of meditation for purifying afflictions.

(a) Universal objects of meditation
The Bhagavan stated that yogis have four types of objects of meditation.
The first one is universal objects of meditation. There are four universal
objects of meditation:
 • objects which you stabilize your mind without analysis
 • objects of analysis
 • the limits of existence for the real nature of phenomena, and diversity
   of phenomena
 • achievement of purpose - achieving the fundamental transformation
   through meditation by observing the meaning of the real nature of
   phenomena and diversity of phenomena through the previous two ways of
   meditation.
What are the universal objects of meditation?
Universal object of meditation is spoken of from the perspective of
condensing or summarizing. Basically it is a category includes all the
objects of meditation. So the universal objects of meditation is spoken
from the perspective of all the observed and the observer i.e. all the
objects of meditation and the consciousnesses (the subjects) that meditate
on them.
The text says there are four universal objects of meditation that which you
stabilize your mind and analysis, and that is speaking from the perspective
of the observer.
Then you have the limits of existence for the real nature of phenomena, and
diversity of phenomena. That is talking about the observed or the object of
meditation.
Achievement of purpose is achieving the fundamental transformation through
meditation by observing the meaning of the real nature of phenomena and
diversity of phenomena through the previous two ways of meditation.
The meaning of real nature of phenomena and the meaning of the diversity of
phenomena - when one observe the composite of them one can achieve calm
abiding. The calm abiding that is achieved itself also can become the
object.
The last thing that I have just said is from the perspective of someone who
has already achieved calm abiding. So from the perspective of someone who
has achieved calm abiding, the calm abiding itself can be an object of
meditation.
[LRCM Vol 3 pg. 35]  Universal objects of meditation are of four types:
(1) discursive images,
(2) non-discursive images,
(3) the limits of existence, and
(4) achievement of your purpose.
The two types of images (discursive and non-discursive) are posited in
terms of the observer: the first is the object of insight, and the second
is the object of meditative serenity. The image is not the actual
specifically characterized object upon which your mind is focused, but
rather the appearance of that object's aspect to your mind. When you carry
out analysis while observing an object, then the image is discursive since
analytical thinking is present. When you stabilize your mind without
analysis while observing an object, the image is said to be non-discursive
since analytical thinking is absent.
As for these images, what objects of meditation are they images of? They
are the images, or aspects, of the five objects of meditation for purifying
behavior, the five objects of meditation for expertise, and the two objects
of meditation for purifying afflictions.
The limits of existence are posited with reference to the observed object.
There are two: The limits of existence for the diversity of phenomena,
which are expressed in the statement, "Just this is all there is; there is
nothing more"; and the limits of existence for the real nature, expressed
in the statement, "This alone is how things exist; they do not exist in any
other way." In the case of the diversity of phenomena, this means that the
five aggregates include all composite phenomena; the eighteen constituents
and twelve sources include all phenomena; and the four truths include
everything there is to know; there is nothing else beyond this. In the case
of the nature, this means that reason establishes the truth or reality of
those objects of meditation.
Achievement of purpose is posited in terms of the result. With either
serenity or insight you direct your attention to the images of those
objects of meditation. Then you stabilize on them, become accustomed to
them, and, by virtue of repeated practice, you become free from your
dysfunctional tendencies, undergoing a fundamental transformation.

(b) Objects of meditation for purifying your behavior
Objects that purify behavior are the antidotes to (1) attachment, (2)
hatred, (3) delusion, (4) pride and (5) discursiveness which are
predominant in previous lives. There are five such objects of meditation.
The antidotes to these five are:
   1. ugliness,
   2. love,
   3. dependent-arising (the twelve factors of dependent-arising),
   4. differentiation of the constituents,
   5. inhalation and exhalation.
[LRCM Vol 3 pg. 36]  Objects of meditation for purifying behavior are
objects that purify behavior in which attachment or the like [hatred,
delusion, pride, or discursiveness] is predominant. There are five such
objects of meditation. Respectively they are: (a) ugliness, (b) love, (c)
dependent-arising, (d) differentiation of constituents, and (e) inhalation
and exhalation,
(a) Of these, the objects of meditation on ugliness consist of the thirty-
six uglinesses pertaining to the body, such as head and body hair, and
external uglinesses such as a corpse's turning blue. When an aspect of
impurity and ugliness arises in your mind, you keep your attention on it.
(b) Love involves focusing on friends, enemies, and persons toward whom you
have neutral feelings, and having an attitude—at the level of meditative
equipoise—of providing them with help and happiness. Keeping your attention
on these objects of meditation with a loving attitude is called "meditation
on love"; love refers both to the subjective attitude and to the object,
(c) Regarding the object of meditation on dependent-arising: All there is
in the past, the present, and the future is dependent-arising in which
effects that are mere phenomenal factors simply arise based on mere
phenomenal factors. Apart from these, there is no performer of actions or
experiencer of their effects. You focus your attention on this fact, and
hold it there,
(d) As for the object of meditation on the differentiation of the
constituents: You differentiate the factors of the six constituents—earth,
water, fire, air, space, and consciousness. You focus your attention on
them and hold it there,
(e) Regarding the object of meditation on inhalation and exhalation: You
focus your attention without distraction by counting and watching the
breath move in and out.

(c) Objects of meditation for expertise
There are also five objects of meditation for expertise, namely expertise
in:
(a) the aggregates,
(b) the constituents,
(c) the sources,
(d) twelve factors of dependent-arising,
(e) what is and is not possible.
[LRCM Vol 3 pg. 36] There are also five objects of meditation for
expertise, namely expertise in (a) the aggregates, (b) the constituents,
(c) the sources,(d) dependent-arising, and (e) what is and is not possible,
(a) The aggregates are the five aggregates of form and the others [feeling,
discrimination, compositional factors, and consciousness]. Expertise in
these is knowing that, apart from these aggregates, the self and what
pertains to the self do not exist,
(b) The constituents are the eye and the others of the eighteen
constituents. Expertise in them is knowing the causal conditions by which
those constituents arise from their own seeds.
(c) The sources are the eye and the others of the twelve sources. Expertise
in these is knowing that the six internal sources are the dominant
conditions for the six consciousnesses, that the six external sources are
the object-conditions, and that the mind which has just ceased is the
immediately preceding condition,
(d) Dependent-arising is the twelve factors. Expertise in them is knowing
that they are impermanent, suffering, and devoid of self,
(e) What is and is not possible refers to such things as it being possible
for a pleasant fruition to arise from a virtuous action, but not possible
for a pleasant fruition to arise from a non-virtuous action. Expertise in
this is knowing that things are this way. This is a particular case of
expertise in dependent-arising; the difference is that you understand
diverse causes.
When you use these as objects of meditation for cultivating serenity, you
keep your attention on just one of the perspectives in which the
aggregates, etc. may be known.

(d) Objects of meditation for purifying afflictions
There are two objects of meditation for purifying afflictions:
 • the calmness and coarseness of the higher and lower stage
 • the impermanence and the other of the sixteen aspects of the four noble
   truths
[LRCM Vol 3 pg. 37]  Purifying afflictions means either merely reducing the
strength of the seeds of the afflictions or else utterly eradicating the
seeds. In the former case, the objects of meditation are the comparative
coarseness of each lower stage and comparative calmness of each higher
stage, proceeding from the level of the desire realm up to the level of
Nothingness. In the latter case, the objects of meditation are impermanence
and the other of the sixteen aspects of the four noble truths. When you use
these as objects of meditation for cultivating serenity, you do not
analyze, but instead keep your attention on any one cognition of an aspect
of those objects that appears to it.

Next is talking about the purpose of having these objects of meditation.
[LRCM Vol 3 pg. 38]  Among these four types of objects of meditation,
objects of meditation for purifying behavior, as explained, facilitate the
stopping of attachment and such in those whose behavior is dominated by
attachment and such.
As I have mentioned earlier under the objects of meditation for purifying
behavior, in the case of someone who is predominantly affected by
attachment, then the object of meditation for purifying behavior for that
individual would be ugliness. Here the word “ugliness” as the objects of
meditation for purifying behavior should not be taken literally. It is not
about meditating on how ugly the person is. “Ugliness” here refers to the
nature of the aggregates of the body. So meditation on ugliness is
meditating on the nature of the body, which is basically filthy and dirty.
It is dirty because its cause is dirty and filthy and itself by nature is
also dirty.
[LRCM Vol 3 pg. 38]  They are special objects of meditation because you may
readily attain concentration based upon them. Objects of meditation for
expertise are conducive to the development of the insight that knows
emptiness in as much as they refute a personal self that is not included
among those phenomena. Therefore, they are excellent objects of meditation
for cultivating serenity*.
Objects of meditation for dispelling afflictions serve as general antidotes
to the afflictions, so they have great significance. The universal objects
of meditation are not distinct from the aforementioned three. Therefore,
since you must achieve concentration using an object of meditative serenity
that has a particular purpose, those who achieve concentration using things
like pebbles and twigs for objects of meditation are clearly ignorant of
the teachings on objects of concentration.
*Serenity is translated as calm abiding
These are the different objects of meditation because they have their own
purpose, like what we have saw earlier on when we talked about the four
objects.

2. Who should meditate on which objects
According to the answer to a question of Revata:

If you are a person from those with a preponderance of attachment to those
with a preponderance of discursiveness, it is said that you should focus on
ugliness up to the exhalation and inhalation of the breath respectively.
If you are a person whose behavior is balanced or one whose afflictions are
slight, then it suffices to keep your attention on whichever of the
aforementioned objects of meditation you like; it is not necessary to have
a particular one.
 • For those who are predominantly very attached, they should meditate on
   ugliness.
 • For those who have a lot of hatred, they should meditate on love.
 • For those who have a lot of delusion in this context of bewilderment,
   they should meditate on dependent-arising.
 • For those who are predominantly proud, they should meditate on the
   differentiation of constituents.
 • For those who have a lot of discursiveness (discursive thoughts), they
   should focus on the inhalation and exhalation of the breath.
[LRCM Vol 3 pg. 39]  As there are various kinds of people, from  those  with
a  preponderance  of  attachment  to   those   with   a   preponderance   of
discursiveness, Asanga's Sravaka Levels cites an answer  to  a  question  of
Revata:
 Revata, if attachment uniquely dominates the behavior of  a  monk-yogi,  a
 practitioner of yoga, then he focuses his mind on the object of meditation
 of ugliness. If hatred dominates his behavior, he meditates  on  love;  if
 ignorance dominates his behavior, then  he  meditates  on  the  dependent-
 arising of this condition; if pride dominates his behavior, he focuses his
 mind on the differentiation of the constituents.
And:
 If discursiveness uniquely dominates his behavior,  then  he  focuses  his
 mind on an awareness of the exhalation and inhalation of  the  breath.  In
 this way, he focuses his mind on an appropriate object of meditation.
Asanga's Sravaka Levels also states:
 In this regard, persons whose behavior is dominated by attachment, hatred,
 ignorance, pride, or discursiveness should, for a  while  at  the  outset,
 just purify those behaviors by contemplating  objects  of  meditation  for
 purifying behavior. After this they will see the stability of their minds,
 and they will ascertain only their objects of meditation. So  they  should
 definitely persevere at using their objects of meditation.
Thus, you certainly should work with these objects  of  meditation.  If  you
are a person whose behavior  is  balanced,  or  one  whose  afflictions  are
slight, then it  suffices  to  keep  your  attention  on  whichever  of  the
aforementioned objects of meditation you like; it is not necessary  to  have
a particular one. Asanga's Sravaka Levels states:
 Those whose behavior is balanced should work at whichever object they like
 so as to attain just mental stability; this is  not  for  the  purpose  of
 purifying behavior. Understand that the same applies to those with  slight
 afflictions.
Next is an explanation of:
 • what it means to be dominated by desire or any of the other afflictions
 • what it means to be balanced
 • what it means to have small afflictions
[LRCM Vol 3 pg. 40]  Being dominated by desire—or another of those five
afflictions— means that in a previous life you were fully involved in that
affliction, became accustomed to it, and expressed it frequently, so that
now even if there is a minor object of desire—or another of the five— that
affliction arises in a strong and long-lasting form.
So that is the meaning of being dominated.
For those whose minds are predominated by attachment, this preponderance of
attachment is due to being accustomed to attachment in the past lives such
that now in this life, just when you think on even a minor object of
desire, due to that familiarization with desire, desire arises strongly.
Balanced behavior means that you did not become accustomed to them. Still,
you have not recognized that they are faults. While desire and such are not
predominant or of great duration, it is not as though they do not occur.
Balanced behavior means while you are not accustomed to desire or other
afflictions in your previous life, but you did not recognize that they are
faults. So they do arise but they do not arise and stay for a long time.
While desire can arise, they are not predominant and they are not of great
duration. Nevertheless they still arise.
[LRCM Vol 3 pg. 40]  Balanced behavior means that you were not fully
involved in desire and the others in your previous lives, you did not
become accustomed to them, and you did not express them frequently. Still,
you have not recognized that they are faults and you have not suppressed
them, so while desire and such are not predominant or of great duration, it
is not as though they do not occur.
[LRCM Vol 3 pg. 40]  Having slight afflictions means that you were not
fully involved and so on in desire—or another of those five—in your
previous lives, and you do see their disadvantages, etc. Therefore, with
respect to objects of desire and such that are major, many, or intense,
your desire and such arise slowly, while for moderate or minor objects,
these afflictions do not arise at all.
So having a small or slight affliction means that, for example, in relation
to a desire, because of not having accustomed to it in previous lives, and
on top of that having seen the disadvantages of desire, even when you do
meet with many objects of desire and on great objects of desire, desire
does arise but they arise slowly. If the objects are moderate or minor
objects of desire, then it is said that these afflictions such as desire do
not arise at all.
[LRCM Vol 3 pg. 40]  Also, when desire or another of those five afflictions
is predominant, you take a long time to realize stability; with balanced
behavior, you do not take an excessively long time; with minor afflictions,
you do so very quickly.
Here it is saying that when desire or any of the other five afflictions are
predominant and are strong, it will take a long time to achieve calm
abiding. With balanced behavior, you do not take a very long to achieve
calm abiding. For those with minor afflictions, calm abiding is said to be
achieved quickly.
That is why one of the six preconditions (prerequisites) for developing
calm abiding is completely getting rid of thoughts of desire. If you don’t
have thoughts of desire, then it is much easier to achieve calm abiding and
it will take much shorter time.

What to do while focusing on an object of meditation
(1) Identifying the object of meditation upon which your attention is set
 (a) A general presentation of objects of meditation
 (b) Identifying objects of meditation for this context
(b) Identifying objects of meditation for this context
On which object of meditation should you base yourself so as to achieve
calm abiding?
In general, as mentioned earlier, there are objects of meditation for
different persons. In particular, if you have a predominance of
discursiveness, it is important to meditate on the breath.
[LRCM Vol 3 pg. 42]  Now, from among the many objects of meditation I have
explained, on which object of meditation should you base yourself so as to
achieve serenity? As stated in the sutra passage cited above, there is no
single, definite object; individuals require their particular object of
meditation. Specifically, if you are determined to achieve serenity at the
least, and if your behavior is dominated by attachment or another
affliction, then you need to use a certain type of object of meditation.
For if you do not, then you may attain a concentration that approximates
serenity, but you will not attain actual serenity. It is said that even if
you train with an object of meditation for purifying behavior, you will not
achieve serenity unless you do so for a very long time, so how could you
ever achieve it by rejecting objects of meditation for purifying behavior?
In particular, if you have a predominance of discursiveness, then you
definitely have to meditate on the breath.
If you are a person of balanced behavior or a person with slight
afflictions, then, as explained before, make your meditative base whichever
of the objects of meditation explained above most appeals to you.
Alternatively, the middle and last Stages of Meditation follow the Sutra on
the Concentration Which Perceives the Buddha of the Present Face to Face
and the King of Concentrations Sutra in stating that you achieve
concentration by focusing on the body of the Tathagata. Also, the master
Bodhibhadra explains the achievement of concentration by focusing on the
deity’s body. This is cited in the commentary on the Lamp for the Path to
Enlightenment.
[LRCM Vol 3 pg. 42]  Alternatively, Kamalasila's middle and last Stages of
Meditation follow the Sutra on the Concentration Which Perceives the Buddha
of the Present Face to Face and the King of Concentrations Sutra in stating
that you achieve concentration by focusing on the body of the Tathagata.
Also, the master Bodhibhadra explains a multitude [of objects]:
  Here, serenity is twofold: that  attained  by  looking  inward  and  that
  [based on] an object of meditation viewed outwardly.  Of  those,  looking
  inward is twofold: focusing on the body and focusing on what is based  on
  the body. Of those, focusing on the body is threefold:  focusing  on  the
  body itself in the aspect of a  deity;  focusing  on  ugliness,  such  as
  skeletons; and focusing on special insignia, such as a khatvanga?
  Focusing on what is based on  the  body  is  fivefold:  focusing  on  the
  breath, focusing on  subtle  divine  insignia,  focusing  on  the  drops,
  focusing on the aspects of light rays, and focusing on delight and bliss.


  Serenity based on an object of meditation viewed  outwardly  is  twofold:
  special and common. Of those, the  special  is  twofold:  focusing  on  a
  deity's body and focusing on a deity's speech.
Atisha's commentary on his own Lamp  for  the  Path  to  Enlightenment  also
cites this passage.
Before developing concentration, one must first reduce discursiveness. The
way to do that is to meditate on the breath. Once you have somewhat reduced
discursiveness, and if you do decide to develop concentration, you should
focus on the body of the Tathagata/ Buddha. For doing so, it is said to
have many special purposes.
[LRCM Vol 3 pg. 43]  In this regard, to keep your attention on the physical
form of the Buddha is to recall the Buddha, so it gives rise to limitless
merit. When your image of that body is clear and firm, then there is a
special intensification of your meditative focus on the field in relation
to which you amass merit through prostration, offering, aspirational
prayer, etc., as well as on the field in relation to which you purify
obscurations through confession, restraint, etc. This kind of meditation
serves many purposes. As stated earlier in the extract from the King of
Concentrations Sutra, it has advantages such as your not losing your
mindfulness of the Buddha as you die. And when you cultivate the mantra
path, it heightens deity yoga, etc.
If we decide to develop concentration, it is advisable to meditate or focus
on the Buddha’s body, for which there are many purposes for doing so. In
choosing the Buddha’s body as your object of meditation will also make a
difference in the future when one is practicing deity yoga.
It is also Buddha’s intent or at least it is Buddha’ opinion to focus on
the buddha’s body as an object for developing concentration.
[LRCM Vol 3 pg. 43]  The Sutra on the Concentration Which Perceives the
Buddha of the Present Face to Face gives a very clear and detailed
treatment of these benefits, as well as the method for directing your mind
toward the Buddha. Therefore, you should definitely come to know them from
there, as Kamalasila states in his last Stages of Meditation. Fearing
verbosity, I do not write of them here. Consequently, it is skill in means
when you seek an object of meditation by which you achieve concentration
and also fulfill, along the way, some other special purpose.
How do you use something like the bodily form of the Tathagata as an  object
of meditation? Kamalasila's last Stages of Meditation states:
  In that  regard,  practitioners  should  first  fix  their  attention  on
  whatever they may have seen and whatever they may have  heard  about  the
  bodily form of the Tathagata, and then achieve serenity. The bodily  form
  of the Tathagata is a golden color like that of refined gold, adorned  by
  the signs and exemplary features, dwells with its  retinue,  and  effects
  the  aims  of  living  beings  through  various  means.  By  continuously
  directing their minds toward it,  yogis  develop  a  wish  for  its  good
  qualities and  quell  laxity,  excitement,  and  so  forth.  They  should
  continue meditative stabilization for as long as they can see it clearly,
  as though the Buddha was sitting in front of them.

[LRCM Vol 3 pg. 44]  The King of Concentrations Sutra also says that you
should use this kind of object of meditation:
   The glorious protector of the world
   With a body the color of gold -
   The bodhisattva whose mind engages this object
   Is said to be in equipoise.
Of the two ways to do this, newly imagining the Buddha's form and
visualizing the Buddha's form as though actually present, the latter has a
distinct advantage in developing faith and fits within the context of
practices common to both sutra and tantra vehicles.
Next is an explanation of the way to seek the object of meditation.
[LRCM Vol 3 pg. 44]  When you seek your object of meditation, the basis
upon which you first keep your attention, look for an excellent painting or
sculpture of the Teacher's body and view it again and again. Remembering
its features, firmly familiarize yourself with the mental appearance of the
object. Or, seek your object of meditation by reflecting upon the meaning
of the eloquent descriptions of the Buddha's form which you have heard from
your guru and make this image appear in your mind. Furthermore, do not let
the object of meditation have the aspect of a painting or sculpture;
rather, learn to have it appear in your mind with the aspect of an actual
buddha.
Next is an explanation of why it is incorrect to meditate with your eyes.
[LRCM Vol 3 pg. 44]  Some set an image before them and immediately meditate
on it while staring at it. The master Ye-shay-day's rejection of this
practice is excellent. He says that concentration is not achieved in the
sensory consciousnesses, but in the mental consciousness; thus, the actual
object of meditation of a concentration is the actual object of a mental
consciousness. Therefore, you must keep your attention on this. He also
states what I explained above, that you have to focus your mind on the
appearance of the actual concept, or mental image, of the object of
meditation.
How do you find or seek the object of meditation? Let’s say the object of
mediation is the Buddha’s body. First, take a good look at the painting of
the Buddha or the statue of the Buddha. What you are trying to reproduce is
a mental image of what you are looking at, whether it is sculpture, a
statue or a painting. You are trying to produce a mental image of that in
your mind and have that mental image appears clearly to the mental
consciousness.
You look clearly at the statue or painting of the Buddha and then try to
produce an aspect of that clearly in your own mind. When you try to produce
that mental image of the Buddha in your mind, you must not have the idea
that you are just imagining. Rather, when you are trying to have that image
of the Buddha appears clearly to your mind, you must regard that as the
actual Buddha. This does not means that when you meditate, the Buddha
appears but rather you have this idea that all the while the Buddha is
there. You must have this idea that the Buddha is always there, i.e. he is
always there. When you are focusing on him, you are trying to have clear
appearance of him appearing clearly into your mind. You must have the idea
that is the actual Buddha.
First, you have to look at an image of the Buddha - whether it is a
painting or a statue. Based on that you reproduce that appearance in your
mind, and the thing that appearing in your mind is the mental image of what
you saw. So you reproduce that clearly in your mind. You should have the
idea that the mental image that you are focusing on is the actual Buddha
and he is always there.
If you are seeker of calm abiding then you must choose just one object of
meditation and stick with it until calm abiding is achieved.
[LRCM Vol3 page 44] Furthermore, there are both subtle and gross features
of the Buddha's bodily form. It is stated elsewhere that at first you focus
on the gross features, and later, when these are solid, you must focus on
the subtle.  As experience also shows that it is very easy to raise an
appearance of the gross features, you must develop your object of
meditation in stages starting with the gross features.
An especially important point is that, until you have accomplished
satisfactory concentration as explained below, it is never appropriate for
you to cultivate meditative concentration by shifting your focus to many
different types of objects of meditation. For, if you cultivate
concentration by moving to many dissimilar objects of meditation, it will
be a great impediment to achieving serenity.
[LRCM Vol3 page 45] Thus, authoritative texts on achieving concentration,
such as Asanga's texts on the levels and Kamalasila's three Stages of
Meditation, explain that when first achieving concentration, you do so in
relation to a single object of meditation; they do not say that you shift
among many objects of meditation.
[LRCM Vol3 page 45] Aryasura also clearly states this [in his Compendium of
the Perfections]:
    Solidify your mind's reflection
    By being firm on one object of meditation;
    Letting it flow to many objects
    Leads to a mind disturbed by afflictions.
Also, Atisha's Lamp for the Path to Enlightenment states:
    Settle your mind in virtue
    On any single object of meditation.
He makes his point with the phrase "on any single."
First, decide on the object of meditation. Once you have decided on the
object of meditation, you stick to it until you achieve calm abiding. If in-
between you switch to various kinds of object it will be very difficult to
achieve calm abiding.
Next is the measure of having found the object of meditation.
[LRCM Vol3 page 45] Accordingly, the measure for having first found the
object of meditation upon which you keep your attention is as follows:
Visualize several times in sequence the head, two arms, the rest of the
trunk of the body, and the two legs.  After that, if when you bring your
attention to the body as a whole you can raise before your mind just half
of the gross components, then—even without radiant clarity—you should be
satisfied with just this and fix your attention upon it. Why? If,
dissatisfied with just that, you fail to fix your attention on it and want
more clarity instead, then, as you visualize it again and again, the object
of meditation will become a bit clearer but you will not obtain a stable
concentration; in fact, you will prevent yourself from getting this. Even
though the object of meditation is not very clear, if you keep your
attention on precisely this partial object of meditation, you will quickly
obtain concentration. Since this then intensifies clarity, you will readily
achieve clarity. This comes from the instructions of Ye-shay-day; it is of
great importance.
First you turn the attention, visualize in sequence starting with the head
and the two arms and the rest of the trunk of the body, the two legs. Once
you have gone through that then you have a rough image of the whole body.
Once you get the image of the whole body, even though it may not be very
clear, you should be content with that and focus on that.
Once you get the image of the entire body, even though it may not be very
clear, you just focus on that. It is said that if you will to focus on
that, as the text said, slowly the clarity will also come about.
Once you are able to form an image of the entire body even though it may
not be very clear, you focus and stabilize your mind on that without trying
to increase or improve on the clarity. It is said that the factor of
clarity will come about slowly.
If you do not do in this way, every time you have an image of the entire
body, when it is not very clear and you try very hard to make it clearer
and clearer, that will affect your mind’s ability to abide on the object.
As such, even though you may produce some clarity when you try but the
factor of stability is affected. Your mind is not able to abide on the
object. So do not do that. This is according to the instructions of the
master Ye-Shay-day.
So, this is the meaning of the measure of having found the object of
meditation. In the case of the Buddha’s body, as said in the text, first
you visualize in sequence the various parts of the exalted body, the head,
the two hands, the body, the legs and so forth. Then you do that over and
over again until you have an image of the entire body. There is the mental
image of the entire body. Once that appears to your mind that is when you
found the object of meditation.
After you have found the object of meditation, how do you keep your
attention on it?
[LRCM Vol3 page 46] Keep your attention on the entirety of the body to the
extent that it appears. If some parts of the body appear especially
clearly, keep your attention on them. When they become unclear, return your
attention to the entirety of the body.
Khen Rinpoche (In English): Is contradictory or not?
First you must find the object of meditation1. In the case of the Buddha’s
exalted holy body, by going through the various parts of the holy body over
and over again until you are able to form a mental image of the Buddha’s
body in its entirety. Whether it is clear or not, it doesn’t matter. Once
the appearance forms in your mind then that is the measure of having found
the object of meditation.
What do you do after you find the object of meditation?
How do you keep your attention on it?
The text says that while doing that, some parts of the body may appear
clearly, for example, the head or the hands. So whatever that appears
clearly you focus on that. You keep your attention on that. After keeping
your attention on, let’s say the head, which appears clearly and for
whatever reason the head does not appear as clearly as before, then you
return back and switch your attention to the entire body again.
[LRCM Vol3 page 46] At that time, there may be uncertainty as to color, as
when you want to meditate on gold, but red appears; or uncertainty as to
shape, as when you want to meditate on a sitting shape, but a standing
shape appears; or uncertainty as to number, as when you want to meditate on
one thing, but two things appear; or uncertainty as to size, as when you
want to meditate on a large body, but a tiny body appears. As it is utterly
inappropriate to pursue such distortions, you must use only the original
object of meditation, whatever it may be, as your object of meditation.
[LRCM Vol3 page 46] When you are practicing deity yoga in the mantra
vehicle, you definitely have to establish a clear image of the deity. So
until this arises, you must use many methods for developing it. However, in
this non-tantric context, if you have great difficulty in making an image
of a deity appear, you may adopt any one of the objects of meditation
presented above and keep your attention on it because the main purpose is
simply to achieve a concentration of meditative serenity.
How to focus your mind on the object of meditation
   1) Presenting the flawless method
   2) Eliminating flawed methods
   3) Indicating the length of sessions.

(1) The flawless method
[LRCM Vol3 page 47] The concentration that you will accomplish here has two
special features: vivid intensity—an intense mental clarity—and non-
discursive stability, staying one-pointedly on the object of meditation.
In this context here, what is flawless concentration?
The flawless concentration must possess two features:
1. Vivid intensity – that is intense mental clarity i.e. the way of
   apprehending the object with this intensity.
2. Stability – the mind be able to not just have clarity in term of vivid
   intensity, and clarity of the object but there must be also stability.
In the next lesson, we will look at excitement and laxity. Both have coarse
and subtle form. We will look at their antidotes as well such as
mindfulness and introspection. So, please read those sections.
Student 1:  If one meditates on His Holiness the Dalai Lama, would that be
equal merits and equal benefits as in meditating on Buddha’s statue?
Answer: Not looking at it in terms of quality, but looking in terms of
comparing the kindness of buddha to the kindness of one’s root guru, the
root guru is more kind than all the buddhas. From that point of view, then
that is greater benefit when you meditate on your own guru; more benefit
because of the kindness.
Student 1: Previously we mentioned about two types of non-virtues. The ten
non-virtues which the deed is naturally wrong and the other one is
prohibited by the Buddha, for instance ordained monks drinking alcohol.
That was the example cited. In the ten non-virtues regarding taking
intoxicants, would alcohol be one of them?
Ven Gyurme: You are asking alcohol is a natural misdeed?
Student 1: Yes
Answer: If you consider drinking alcohol then it would become the eleven
non-virtues.
Student 2: Relating to object of meditation for purifying behavior, from
the text it appears to me that the importance of it is to be able to
actually identify one’s own behavior, in the sense whether one has a
stronger attachment or one is of a more balanced type of behavior. If that
part of the recognition is not correct, let’s say if I am actually more of
the attachment but I don’t like to think of myself as one with attachment.
I like to think of myself as one with the balanced type of behavior. Once I
identified myself as the person with the more balanced behavior then the
choice of object of my meditation would also be different. That will make
it difficult for me to purify my behavior. Would I be right?
Answer: The sign of making the wrong identification of one’s own type would
surface very quickly when you are meditating. Let’s say you are a person
who is predominantly very desirous, you would not able to stay focus on the
object. That is a very clear sign. For such a person, a predominant of
desire will lead to excitement which is one of the two major obstacles.
When excitement arises easily and regularly, it is a clear sign that you
should know that it is sign for attachment. If you are able to abide in the
object fairly easy then perhaps you could say that you are a person that is
balanced, in term of balanced kind.
So the advice here is to choose the correct object of meditation in
accordance with one’s disposition because everybody has different issues
with different afflictions. If you are able to choose an object that can
really act as an antidote or suppress that particular affliction then that
is going to work and will be very helpful.
Student 2: Would I be correct in saying that for lay people like ourselves
would have to content with the discursive mind more than anything else for
a start?

Answer: Not only lay people, ordained people also. When you study you
already have discursiveness.
Student 2: If that is the case, for beginner who wants to start, at the
beginning meditation on the breath as the initial object of meditation
would be the starting point to calm the mind. Of course subsequently, they
may switch to anything else.
Answer: This is definitely so because in the text in the section -
identifying the object of meditation- it says that in general there are
objects of meditation for different person. In particular, if you have
predominant of discursiveness then you definitely have to meditate on
breathe. It would be good in the beginning if one meditates on breathe. It
will be very good. I would say perhaps this is the best method for stopping
discursiveness; which is mental chatter basically.
Student 2: Meditating on ugliness as a result of attachment to the body,
one meditates on the foulness of the body. But the attachment does not
necessary always come from being attached to our body. In the present day,
we have people who have addiction such as addiction to gambling, or
addiction to drug. With that kind of attachment, meditating on the foulness
of the body may not be the antidote to it. So, within the context of
Dharma, what kind of antidotes can be offered for people who are going
through that kind of experience?
Answer: In the first place, people who have such addictions are not the
suitable person to meditate. They can’t meditate. Rather, what we can help
is telling them over and over again the faults of particular cause of
actions and the benefits of forsaking that cause of actions until they
understand. If they do understand then maybe we can tell them that they can
meditate. Unless they have some feelings and some understanding from the
heart, at least some understanding of the faults of the particular cause of
the actions and the benefits of forsaking it, until then I guess it is very
difficult for these people to meditate.
Student 3: How does differentiating the constituents or elements act as a
powerful counteracting force to the yogi who is predominating by pride?
Answer: That is a kind of pride thinking that one knows quite a lot but in
fact one knows a little. That happens, right? That is one example. In the
case of the object of meditation for purifying pride, it is said to be the
differentiation of the constituents. The theory is this - when you go
through the whole list of constituents in your mind, and then start
dividing this as this and that as that, one comes to understand that there
are a lot of things that one is not able to list out. One doesn’t know. By
knowing that there are things that one doesn’t know perhaps is an antidote
to pride.
Student 3: The other one is like Khen Rinpoche said is a contradiction,
Lama Tsongkhapa tells us between stability and clarity. In the first part,
he says to focus on stabilizing the image of the Buddha’s body. Then after
that he says that if you are able to focus on some parts of the body that
is clear then you should zoom in on that. Is there a contradiction between
these two?
Khen Rinpoche (In English): No contradiction.
Answer: The measure of having found the object of meditation is the
appearance of, in case of the Buddha’s body, the appearance of the entire
body.  When this image of the whole body appears then we are supposed to
keep our attention on it.
The text says that while your mind abides in that image, clarity will come
slowly. Clarity doesn’t come right away even after having found the object
of meditation. When there is clarity, it is not the clarity of the entire
image but rather, some parts of the images like the arms or the head.
Sometimes it becomes very clear. When that happens, the text say, then you
focus your attention on that which is appearing clearly.
When the certain part of the body appears clearly, the text says, pay
attention on it. These are the ways to increase the overall clarity
overtimes. While you are doing that you don’t lose the entire image. The
image is still there. You don’t lose the whole object, and the object is
still there. So, Lama Tsongkhapa says that if some parts of the body appear
clearly, keep your attention on that. When it becomes unclear you return
your attention to the entirety of the body. This explanation comes after
when we say this is the way of keeping the attention on the object. But
this comes after having found the object. So, after you have found the
object of meditation, then when you are focusing on those parts that appear
clearly to you. These are favorable conditions for you to improve the
clarity overall. It doesn’t harm the stability.
Student 3: Will it not like what Ven Gyurme said “You zoom in” so that
means you are not actually focusing on the entirety on the body.
Ven Gyurme: Yes, you just focusing.
Student 3: When you are focusing on certain parts of the body that is clear
after you have found the object.
Would it mean that you then lose the focus of the entirety of the body?
Answer: You must not lose the object.
Student 3: For people who without any experience can we just think of it
like the entire body is there but some part of it is brighter? Can we say
something like that?
Khen Rinpoche (In English): You can say that.
Student 4: Previously we talk about calm abiding being single-pointed. Then
when we talk about special insight we talk about it being analyzing; so it
is not single pointed. When it comes to union of calm abiding and special
insight, is it single-pointed or not single-pointed?
Ven Gyurme: Is special insight single-pointed mind or not?
Answer: Calm abiding is a single-pointed mind. Special insight is not a
single-pointedness mind. It is actually the mental factor of wisdom - the
wisdom that analyzes its object. In the context of the perfection vehicle
and the three lower classes of tantra, special insight is necessarily an
analytical meditation. There is no room for special insight being a
stabilizing meditation in the perfection wisdom vehicle and the three lower
classes of tantra.
It is mentioned towards the end of the MLLR, in the completion stage of
Highest Yoga Tantra, after the wind has entered the central channel abide
and dissolve, when you are on the completion stage there is special insight
which is stabilizing meditation. In HYT, on the completion stage, the
special insight is stabilizing meditation but other than that special
insight is necessarily analytical meditation according to the perfection
vehicle and the three lower classes of tantra.







