Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/SixPerfections/Lesson16.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:02.834143
================================================================================


(1) Identifying the intention and the way that it stops laxity and
excitement
In the last lesson, we saw how we must rely on vigilance in order to catch
laxity and excitement when they arise in the course of developing one’s
concentration. When vigilance notices the arising of laxity and excitement,
we immediately must apply their respective antidotes. The text says that in
order to develop powerful vigilance, one must have powerful mindfulness.
The text also says that when the mind is excessively withdrawn inward,
mental laxity arises. In order to eliminate mental laxity, we must uplift
the mind by turning the mind’s attention to something that brings joy and
delight. The text also says that we should bring to mind the image or the
appearance of brightness.
Next is an explanation of the differences in the antidote between coarse
laxity and subtle laxity.
Earlier on we did talk about coarse and subtle laxity.
[LRCM Vol 3, page 64] Also, if laxity is very slight and occurs only
infrequently, tighten up your apprehension of the object and continue
meditating.
The laxity that is mentioned here is subtle laxity. When there is subtle
laxity present, the antidote to that is tightening one’s apprehension of
the object. In the previous lesson, we talked about subtle laxity. When
subtle laxity is present, there is clarity and stability, and the mind is
abiding in the object but the mind is a bit too relax. Its manner of
apprehending the object of meditation is loose. There isn’t intensity
behind the mind’s way of apprehending the object. That basically is subtle
laxity.
In order to eliminate subtle laxity, the way is one has to tighten our
apprehension of the object of meditation.
[LRCM Vol 3, page 64] But if laxity is dense and seems to occur repeatedly,
suspend your cultivation of concentration, clear away laxity using any of
those remedies, and then resumes your meditation.
“laxity is dense” - I wonder if this is referring to coarse laxity.
The text says that if laxity is dense and if it seems to be occurring
repeatedly, then you should stop the meditation session and clear away that
laxity.
[LRCM Vol 3, page 64] Whether your object of meditation entails directing
your mind inward or outward, if the object is unclear and you have the
sense of darkness -slight or dense- descending on your mind, then it will
be hard to cut through laxity if you continue to meditate without
eliminating it. Therefore, as a remedy for that, repeatedly meditate on the
appearance of light.
Next is the way to eliminate excitement.
[LRCM Vol 3, page 65] In the case of excitement, out of attachment your
attention pursues objects such as forms and sounds; so in response to that,
bring to mind disillusioning things that cause your attention to be drawn
inward. As soon as this calms the excitement, settle your mind on the
earlier object of meditation.
We have seen how excitement is derivative of attachment. In order to
eliminate excitement, we have to bring to mind disillusioning things i.e.
things that will bring about a sense of disenchantment.
The antidote here is reflecting on impermanence.
[LRCM Vol 3, page 65] And Bhavaviveka's Heart of the Middle Way states:
  Calm excitement by bringing to mind Impermanence and so forth.
And:
  Pull your mind back from distraction by noting
  The faults of the distracting objects.
Bhavaviveka is saying that we meditate on impermanence and also reflect on
the faults of distraction.
Just like laxity, excitement also has coarse and subtle forms.
When they arise what should we do about it?
[LRCM Vol 3, page 65] So, if very strong or prolonged excitement arises, it
is crucial that you relax the meditation for a while and cultivate a sense
of disenchantment, rather than attempting to pull in your mind and direct
it back to the object of meditation every time it becomes scattered.
I think this is talking about coarse excitement. The text is saying that if
the excitement is very strong or if it persists for a prolonged period of
time, rather than pulling your mind back to the object of meditation and
trying to put it there, then it goes away again and you repeat this, it is
better to first deal with the excitement.
[LRCM Vol 3, page 65] For excitement that is not so dominant, draw in the
scattered attention, and fix your attention upon the object of meditation.
I think this is talking about subtle excitement. In the case where
excitement is not so dominant, upon noticing the arising of such excitement
with mindfulness and vigilance, then just bring the mind’s attention back
to the object of meditation and place it there.
[LRCM Vol 3, page 65] Aryasura's Compendium of the Perfections states:
   When your mind becomes excited stop this disturbance
   By calming it and stabilizing your attention.
[LRCM Vol 3, page 65] It is generally said that if your mind is excited,
you should focus on the object of meditation, while if it is lax, you
should think about a delightful object.

[LRCM Vol 3, page 66] When your mind is excited, do not bring to mind
inspiring and delightful objects because this will cause your mind to be
distracted outward.
Next is the explanation of the underlying causes of laxity and excitement.
(2) The underlying causes of laxity and excitement
The common causes of both laxity and excitement are:
    • not restraining the sensory faculties
    • not eating in moderation
    • not making an effort to practice rather than sleeping during the early
      and later parts of the night
    • ongoing lack of vigilance;
Not restraining the sensory faculties is a common cause for both laxity and
excitement. So there is a need to restrain one’s sensory faculties. In
short, you have to restrain your body and mind from inappropriate behavior.

If you remember our earlier discussion when we were looking at the
preconditions for developing calm-abiding, keeping pure ethical discipline
is one of the most preconditions. Essentially, that is restraining one’s
body and mind from non-virtuous or inappropriate behavior. It is the same
here in restraining the sensory faculties. This is a very important
precondition for developing calm-abiding.
Not eating in moderation is also a common cause for both laxity and
excitement. Therefore, one has to eat in moderation. When one’s food intake
is excessive, that will probably lead to laxity.
[LRCM Vol 3, page 66] Asariga's Levels of Yogic Deeds states:
  What are the signs of laxity? Not restraining the sensory faculties; not
  eating in moderation; not making an effort to practice rather than
  sleeping during the early and later parts of the night; ongoing lack of
  vigilance; deluded behavior; over-sleeping; being unskillful; being lazy
  in one's aspirations, joyous perseverance, intention, and analysis;
  giving only partial attention to serenity without accustoming yourself to
  it and fully refining it-letting your mind stay as though in darkness;
  and not delighting in focusing on the object of meditation.
Here, "signs of laxity" should be understood as the causes of laxity. The
word "lazy" applies to joyous perseverance, intention, and analysis, as
well as to aspirations. The same text also states:
  What are the signs of excitement? The first four points listed above for
  the signs of laxity—not restraining the sensory faculties, etc.; behaving
  with attachment; having a disquieted manner; lacking a sense of
  disenchantment; being unskillful; having a great sense of grasping in
  your aspiration, etc.; failing to accustom yourself to joyous
  perseverance; meditating in an unbalanced way without refining your
  apprehension of the object of meditation; and being distracted by any
  sort of exciting topic, such as thoughts about relatives.
The "signs of excitement" are the causes of excitement. "Great grasping" is
an excessive mental hold on a delightful object. "Aspiration, etc." refers
to the four points [aspiration, joyous perseverance, intention, and
analysis] explained earlier.
Thus the four practices of which restraint of the sensory faculties is the
first, which were discussed earlier in the section on practice between
meditation sessions, are important for stopping both laxity and excitement.
Moreover, if you recognize those causes and try to stop them, this is
obviously very helpful for interrupting laxity and excitement.
Khen Rinpoche (spoke in English): Is there any possibility of the danger of
excitement if you eat too much? Laxity, I have experienced. After eat too
much after lunch, I cannot take it and I must sleep. Not only laxity,
lethargy, this happens. Excitement I am not sure. Happen or not happen?
(Student responds inaudible)
Essentially, appropriate diet is in terms of appropriate amount of intake
of food. Problems arise when the amount of one’s food intake is too much or
not enough. Perhaps, if one’s food intake is not sufficient, it may also
promote excitement in that your mind; which starts to think about all kind
of stuff.
Khen Rinpoche (spoke in English): What to eat? Remember all these things
when you do nyung nay. Then excitement arises especially on the second day.
I think there is a text which says that you should just eat enough just to
fill two-third of your stomach.
Khen Rinpoche (spoke in English): Two-third and one part must be empty. Too
much you cannot breathe. If cannot breathe how to do meditation.
The teachings advise that we break the night into three parts. One should
only sleep in the second part of the night. In the first and the last parts
of the night, the teachings advise us to strive in virtue or to engage in
meditation. Generally speaking, this is very much related to the nature of
one’s body. If we go according to what is mentioned in the teachings where
you only sleep in the middle part of the night, the timing is approximately
between 11pm to 3am. So that is the middle part of the night where one
should be sleeping.
[Student question inaudible]
Khen Rinpoche (spoke in English):  Yes, not 3pm. You have doubt on that?
An ongoing lack of vigilance is also a common cause for both laxity and
excitement.
The causes of laxity are:
    • oversleeping,
    • the mind too lax in holding the object of meditation,
    • not balancing calm-abiding and special insight by relying too much on
      calm-abiding,
    • letting your mind stays as though in darkness and not delighting in
      focusing on the object of meditation
[MLLR page 222] 2 Causes of laxity
The causes of laxity are great sleepiness,  the mind being excessively
loose in its hold on its object, not balancing calm abiding and special
insight but relying on calm abiding too much, the mind remaining as though
in darkness, and not taking joy in directing the mind toward the object.
‘Not balancing calm-abiding and special insight by relying too much on calm-
abiding’ - here is listed as a cause of laxity. As to what it means, we
have to think about that.
The other causes of laxity such as oversleeping, the mind too lax in
holding the object of meditation, letting your mind stays as though in
darkness and not delighting in focusing on the object of meditation is
obvious.
The causes of excitement are:
    • lacking a sense of disenchantment,
    • the mind being overly tight with respect to the object of meditation,
    • failing to accustom yourself to joyous perseverance,
    • being distracted by any sort of exciting topics such as thoughts about
      relatives
These are obvious causes of excitement.
[MLLR page 223] 3 Causes of excitement
The causes of excitement are said to be little disillusionment, the mind
being excessively tense with respect to its object, not being used to
making an effort, and the mind being distracted by thoughts of relatives
and the like.
Next is an explanation of the need to strive in eliminating even the subtle
excitement and subtle laxity, for if one doesn’t do that, there is no way
to develop a pure concentration.
[LRCM Vol 3, page 67] Therefore, use vigilance to notice even subtle laxity
and excitement. You should stop laxity and excitement in every possible
way, not tolerating them in any form.
Some may gradually give up, thinking, "Slight excitement and distraction
persist even though I cut them off at the outset, so I shall not cut them
off."
Khen Rinpoche (spoke in English): So let it be.
This is saying that it is not right to leave laxity and excitement as it
is. So when laxity and excitement arise, it is incorrect to think “Anyway I
can’t do anything about it, so I just let it be and let them persist”.
[LRCM Vol 3, page 67] Or if laxity and excitement are not strong and do not
persist for long periods, they may think, "Since they are weak and of brief
duration, I do not accumulate karmic obstructions. So I do not need to cut
them off." Those who think this way and fail to apply themselves to the
elimination of these hindrances do not know the right way to achieve
concentration, yet pretend that they do. They deceive those who aspire to
concentration, for their approach places them outside the tradition of
methods for attaining concentration laid down by teachers such as the
venerable Maitreya.
Even if the laxity and excitement that arises is subtle and may not persist
for long time, one must still strive to eliminate them immediately. You
should not leave it and let them persist. For if you do so you will not
achieve pure or perfect concentration. So with mindfulness and vigilance,
upon noticing their arising, one must strive to cut them off immediately.
Next do not hope for a concentration that merely has the factor of
stability and limpidity without vivid intensity.
[LRCM Vol 3, page 67] In summary, withdraw your mind from scattering and
excitement, inwardly fixing it upon the object of meditation, and seek
stability. Each time stability occurs, take great precautions against
laxity and bring forth a vivid intensity. You will achieve flawless
concentration by alternating between these two. Do not expect to attain
stability by means of mere limpidity, which lacks the vividness that goes
along with an intense way of apprehending the object.
In order to achieve flawless or perfect concentration, you must have the
factor of stability and the factor of clarity. On top of that, there must
be vividness/intensity. With mindfulness and vigilance, one will be able to
detect the arising of laxity and excitement. When you do detect them
arising, it is important to apply the antidotes immediately. You must apply
the mental factor of intention which is called application. This was
described in the last lesson.
When laxity and excitement are absent, one should engage in non-application
of antidotes. One should not apply any antidotes but rather leave it in
equanimity.
(2) What to do when laxity and excitement are absent
[LRCM Vol 3, page 67] By continuing to meditate after eliminating even
subtle laxity and excitement, as explained above, your mind will enter a
state of equipoise that is free from the imbalances of either laxity or
excitement. At this point, it is a fault of concentration to apply or exert
yourself, so cultivate equanimity as a remedy for this.
[LRCM Vol 3, page 68] Question: How can it be that applying yourself, or
making an effort, turns into a problem?
Reply: Through meditation, turning your attention inward when your mind is
excited and stimulating your mind when it is lax, you gain confidence that
laxity and excitement will not occur during each suitable meditation
session. At this point you are still extremely wary of laxity and
excitement, just as at the outset. Sustaining this is the problem. Your
mind will become distracted, so at that time you must know to relax.

[LRCM Vol 3, page 68] As stated in Kamalasila's second and third Stages of
Meditation "If you exert yourself when your mind has entered a state of
equipoise, then your mind will be distracted.

[LRCM Vol 3, page 68] This entails relaxing the effort, but not sacrificing
the intensity of the way you apprehend your object.
When laxity and excitement are absent, one should not make any effort to
apply antidotes. When there is no laxity and excitement let the mind stays
natural and relax in that state. Here we have to make a distinction between
not making an effort in applying the antidote when laxity and excitement
are absent versus laxing the intensity of the mind. When there is no laxity
and excitement in one’s concentration, one should not be applying the
antidotes i.e. one should not be making any effort to apply the antidotes.
The text clearly states that “This entails relaxing the effort but not
sacrificing the intensity of the way you apprehend the object.” Although
you relax the effort in that you do not apply the antidote, this does not
mean that you relax in the mind’s way of apprehending the object. The
mind’s way of apprehending the object should be remain tight and there must
be vividness/intensity.
[LRCM Vol 3, page 68] Therefore, this cultivation of equanimity is not to
be done every time laxity and excitement are absent, but once you have
reduced the force of laxity and excitement; for when you have not done so,
there is no equanimity.
Here, this cultivation of equanimity is not to be done every time laxity
and excitement are absent. This will become clearer when we look at the
nine mental placements. There are nine stages where in one’s cultivation of
calm-abiding. On the 9th mental stage, there is no laxity and excitement.
It is said in the teachings that one does not need to apply any effort to
be able to stay in that experience when one has reached the 9th stage. That
is the time you stay in equanimity where you do not apply any antidotes.
This is only for the 9th mental stage.
Although there is no laxity and excitement when one is on the 8th mental
stage, one still needs to put effort to remain in that experience.
Therefore, this cultivation of equanimity is not done every time laxity and
excitement are absent, but rather this application or cultivation of
equanimity that is mentioned here is only applies to the 9th mental stage.
This is one of the antidotes. So what kind of equanimity are we talking
about?
[LRCM Vol 3, page 68] Question: What sort of equanimity is this?
Reply: Generally, three types of equanimity are taught:
(1) the feeling of impartiality,
(2) the impartiality that is one among the four immeasurables, and
(3) equanimity with respect to application. This is equanimity with respect
to application.
According to Asanga's Sravaka Levels; it is a mental balance focusing with
calm settling, spontaneous mental engagement and an achievement of
serviceability as the mind attends to the object of meditation associated
with calm-abiding and insight.
[LRCM Vol 3, page 68]. Its nature is to be understood in accordance with
this passage from Asanga's Sravaka Levels: What is equanimity? As your mind
attends to objects of meditation associated with serenity and insight, it
is focusing with calm settling, spontaneous mental engagement, a sense of
mental well-being, effortless mental functioning after becoming
serviceable, and a mental balance free from the afflictions.
[LRCM Vol 3, page 68] When you achieve such equanimity, on those occasions
when laxity and excitement are absent as you cultivate concentration, stay
with this equanimity and let your mind rest without exerting strong effort.
On this application of equanimity, the equanimity we are talking about here
is a natural settling of the mind - is a spontaneous engagement and is a
serviceability of the mind. This equanimity with respect to application
arises on the 9th mental stage. They are instructions for developing calm-
abiding from Maitreya’s texts such as The Ornaments of the Mahayana Sutras
and the Separation of the Middle from the Extremes. The explanation here is
based on Maitreya’s explanation in his “Separation of the Middle from the
Extremes.”
In the process of cultivating or developing concentration, there are five
faults to be abandoned. One of the big obstacles or impediments for
developing concentration is the fault of laziness. Without stopping
laziness there is no way to even start developing concentration. As we have
seen in our earlier discussion, in order to stop such laziness, we need the
single-pointed faith in concentration. This single-pointed faith in
concentration arises through reflecting and ascertaining the good qualities
of concentration and the benefits of having such a concentration. Through
such reflection and ascertainment, one develops this single-pointed faith
in concentration. This single-pointed faith in concentration will enable us
to stop the fault of laziness.
By reflecting and ascertaining the good qualities and benefits of
concentration, one develops an aspiration. Rather, yearning for
concentration. When you have such strong yearning for concentration,
naturally one will put in the effort to achieve this. In short you need
yearning or aspiration, belief and effort. On the basis of having single-
pointed faith in concentration, then yearning, belief and effort would
arise. With these three, one will begin to overcome laziness. Through
actualizing concentration, come the time when one experiences pliancy. When
one actualizes pliancy, this is the actual time when laziness is
eliminated.
Earlier on we did talk a little bit about pliancy. Pliancy is essentially a
serviceability of the body and mind. Once pliancy is obtained or achieved,
one can employ one’s body and mind in virtue as much as one likes without
any sense of difficulty. Not forgetting the object of meditation and
placing one’s attention on the object of meditation and having the mind
abides on it is an essential part of the process for developing
concentration. If one forgets the object of meditation then one will not be
able to develop concentration. As such, forgetting the object of
meditation, forgetfulness, is a fault. The remedy for the fault of
forgetting the object of meditation is mindfulness.
In that process when laxity and excitement arises when you hold the object
of meditation with mindfulness, this becomes a fault or impediment for
developing concentration.
It is very important to notice when these two arise. What is it that will
enable us to notice the arising of laxity and excitement? It is vigilance.
When vigilance notices the arising of excitement and laxity, and if you do
not immediately apply the antidote to them, then it is a fault of not
applying the antidote.
The remedy to that is the intention of application - having the intention
to apply the respective remedy.
Come the time when the mind is able to abide in its object of meditation
naturally and effortless without any laxity and excitement, then
application of remedy at such a time is a fault. The remedy to that is non-
application.
According to Maitreya's Separation of the Middle from the Extremes, there
are five faults to be abandoned and eight antidotes to be applied.
[LRCM Vol 3, page 68] The above explanations of the  method  for  developing
flawless  concentration  are  in  accord  with  the   venerable   Maitreya's
teachings in the Separation of the Middle from the Extremes:
   Staying with that joyous perseverance,
   Your mind becomes serviceable, and you attain all goals.
   This occurs as a result of eliminating the five faults
   And relying on the eight antidotes.
   The five faults are laziness,
   Forgetting the instructions,
   Laxity and excitement,
   Non-application, and application.
   The eight antidotes are the basis [yearning], that based on it [effort],
   The cause [confidence], the effect [pliancy],
   Not forgetting the object of meditation,
   Recognizing laxity and excitement,
   Application to eliminate them,
   And calmly stabilizing your mind when they have been quelled.
In those verses, "Staying with that" refers to  keeping  up  the  output  of
joyous perseverance for the sake of dispelling unfavorable conditions.  With
this, a concentration in which your mind is  serviceable  arises.  Moreover,
since this is the foundation, or basis, of supernormal powers which  achieve
all goals—superknowledge and so forth—you attain all goals.
What do you do to develop such concentration? It develops  as  a  result  of
using the eight antidotes in order to eliminate the five faults.  These  are
the five faults: at the time of preparation, laziness  is  a  fault  because
you do not  apply  yourself  at  concentration.  When  you  are  working  at
concentration, forgetting the instructions  is  a  fault  because  when  you
forget the object upon which you were instructed to meditate; your  mind  is
not set in equipoise upon the object  of  meditation.  When  it  is  set  in
meditative equipoise, laxity and excitement are  faults  because  they  make
your mind unserviceable. When laxity and excitement occur,  lack  of  effort
[non-application] is a fault because it  does  not  quell  those  two.  When
laxity  and  excitement  are  absent,  the  fault  is   the   intention   of
application.
Among the remedies for those faults, the eight  antidotes,  there  are  four
remedies for laziness—confidence, yearning, effort, and  pliancy.  Then  the
remedies for forgetfulness,  laxity  and  excitement,  non-application,  and
application  are,  respectively,  mindfulness,  vigilance  that   recognizes
laxity and excitement, the intention of application, and calmly  established
equanimity. I explained these extensively above.
Next is explaining how such an instruction for cultivating concentration is
common to both sutra and tantra.
[LRCM Vol 3 Page 70] That mindfulness and vigilance remove laxity and
excitement from your mind's one-pointed concentration is a common theme to
all personal instructions on this practice. So do not think, "This is a
teaching particular to the vehicle of dialectics, but it is not necessary
in the mantra vehicle." For it is common to the mantra vehicle as well,
since this is also stated in the class of the highest yoga tantras.
The instruction on the need to abandon laziness, the need to develop
mindfulness, the need to develop concentration that is free of laxity and
excitement etc. are themes that are common to both sutra and tantra.
This explanation of developing calm abiding through abandoning the five
faults and cultivating the eight antidotes is according to Maitreya's
Separation of the Middle from the Extremes. But in another of his text, the
Ornament for the Mahayana Sutras, Maitreya discusses the development of
calm abiding through the nine mental states, the four mental attentions and
the six powers or six forces.
You should read this up as much as possible before coming to the next
class. I will not have time to go through each of them and everything in
detail. What I will do in the next class is to summarize these different
things – the nine mental states, the four mental attention and the six
powers. Try as much as possible to read before coming to the next class. If
not, it may be a bit difficult for you.
[LRCM Vol 3, page 70] It also describes the three concentrations of
enthusiasm, of analysis, and of the mind in the same way. Serviceable
concentration, as explained above, is the basis for attaining qualities
such as supernormal abilities. Therefore, since it is like a foundation, it
is called the foundation of supernormal abilities. Texts such as
Sthiramati's Explanation of the "Separation of the Middle from the
Extremes" explain that there are four avenues to accomplish this: (1)
achieving it through fierce yearning, (2) achieving it through prolonged
joyous perseverance, (3) achieving concentration by discriminating
examination of the object of meditation—these first three are called,
respectively, yearning concentration, enthusiastic concentration, and
analytical concentration—and (4) achieving one-pointedness of mind based on
having in your mind seeds of earlier concentration; this is called mental
concentration. "Very slack" refers to excessive relaxation, and "very
elated" refers to excessive tightness. The point is that you should sustain
a meditation which lacks these two.
Those who are sincerely wishing and yearning to develop flawless
concentration should really rely on such instructions that are found here
in the Stages of the Path to Enlightenment literature such as the Middle
Length Lam Rim. If you are yearning to develop flawless concentration you
should know these instructions in the back of your hand and study them and
understand them well. You are not going to find any other more higher or
better exalted instructions for developing flawless concentration than the
ones we have been looking at over this period of time.
Meditation Regime
I made an announcement during the last Sunday discussion class when a lot
of you were around. Anyway, I am going to say this again. All of you have
done quite a fair bit of study up to this point in time. That is a very
good thing. All of you are very fortunate to have this opportunity so far
in learning the Buddha’s teachings and studying them. You are able to plant
positive imprints in your mind.
Our spiritual director Lama Zopa Rinpoche has been emphasizing the great
importance and need to meditate on whatever we have learned. He has always
emphasizes the great importance of mixing and integrating whatever one
knows about the Buddhadharma into one’s experience through meditation. When
we are able to do that, then that makes us much more fortunate. We
accumulate much more merit and the potential to make our lives more
meaningful is there. When we study or hear the Buddha’s teachings, we do
plant imprint from hearing the Buddha’s teaching in our mind. It is evident
from our own experience that the imprint that we plant in our minds that
comes from reflection and understanding is even stronger and more powerful.
So it is important to hold on to whatever we have learned and then reflect
on them over and over again. Then the ensuing imprint that will be placed
on our minds will be much stronger. It is clear from our experience that we
remember for a long time the things that we have understood and the things
that we think about regularly. The things that we reflect on a regular
basis are the things we tend to remember and we can remember forever. So
the imprint that is planted on the mind through reflection and analysis is
much more stable and stronger. As such, there is hope. We could say such
imprint from reflection will see us through to the next life; it will ripen
in the next life. Otherwise, if we cannot even remember the things in this
life, then it is very difficult to claim that we will remember these in the
future lives.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): Are you clear? Don’t get discouraged.
Here I’m talking about doing meditation. We call it meditation. Whether we
call it meditation or not, the meditation I’m talking about here is
constantly reflecting and analyzing on the meaning of the teachings that we
have heard. Whether we call it meditation or not, I’m referring to
constantly reflecting and analyzing the meaning of the teachings that we
have heard. The imprint that is planted on the mind through such analysis
is much more powerful and has a stronger impact on the mind. This is what
gives us hope in the future lives; not just next life but in all the future
lives, from life to life. It will make a difference in our chances of
meeting the Buddha’s teachings again in the future and also meeting with
the qualified Mahayana virtuous friend/ gurus in the future lives. On that
basis, slowly then there is some hope in achieving the state of
omniscience/full enlightenment sometime in the future.
With regards to what we need to meditate on, there is absolutely no lack of
material that we can meditate on. Everything that we need to meditate on is
something that we already know. There is no lack of material or subject
matter. What we need to do is to just act on it, analyze and reflect on the
meaning of the teachings that we have heard. What is needed now analysis,
critical thinking, and reflection on the meaning of the teachings we have
heard.
As such, those of you who are interested can voluntarily join this
meditation regime or program which will start next year. In order to join
this meditation regime which is entirely voluntary, you must make sure to
commit yourself to a minimum of one year. We are talking about doing such
critical thinking and analysis every day without fail for one year starting
from next year. We are talking about a commitment of minimum reflection or
critical analysis of 15 minutes every day for one year without fail.
Joining this meditation regime and committing to a one year meditation
regime with daily analytical meditation of not less than 15 minutes is
something to be done on your own at home. We are not going to come together
and do this every day. That is not the plan. It is to be done on your own
at home. Next year, when we come back again for class, sometime from now
till then, there will come a time when we will open up the registration and
taking in names.
Rinpoche emphasized this many times: the importance of starting and
implementing this – to really start to think about and reflect on the
Lamrim. You must understand that this becomes an offering of practice. It
is the best offering and it is the supreme and the highest way of pleasing
the virtuous friend/ the guru. That is the highest offering and the best
way of pleasing Lama Zopa Rinpoche. Also for yourself it is the highest way
of benefiting yourself. Keeping this in mind, go and think about it and see
whether you want to join this particular meditation regime and whether you
can commit to it.
By putting into practice, by obtaining the advice of the virtuous friend
and by implementing it, this becomes the highest offering to the virtuous
friend/the guru, and the best way of pleasing the guru. When the guru is
really pleased, that becomes a real cause for the guru’s long life. Of all
the different kinds of long life pujas, pleasing the guru’s mind, doing
what he or she advises, is the ultimate and is the highest long life puja.
Please keep this in mind and think about this. If you really have faith in
the guru, in Rinpoche, if you are thinking of how to please him and how you
really want to contribute to his long life, please keep all these points in
mind and think about it.
The plan is that after we start this meditation regime, every now and then
at certain intervals, let’s say every two to three months, people who have
signed up and committed to this meditation regime perhaps can come together
and share our experiences such as what were your experiences when you were
doing this daily practice, what kind of experiences you have and what kind
of problems and so forth. We will share and help one another.
There is time to think about this between now and next year when we come
back again for class. There is still some time, couple of months, to think
about it. Consider this carefully. If you really want to join, you must
commit. Commitment is the most important element. Think carefully first
before you commit.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): There will be cctv in your place. Next year I’m
going to order the cctv camera. I can’t see your mind but must make sure
you sit 15 minutes. Don’t worry, this is a joke.
Care Group
Benny Soh And Wee Geok Hua giving details about ABC Care Group. (89
~107.55)
Khen Rinpoche (in English): Today there are two announcements. One is to
help ABC members who are sick. The whole idea is to making as one family in
ABC. It is extremely important to care for each other. We want to create
this environment. Once you are ABC member, then ABC will look after you
when you have difficult time. That is the idea we want to create that.
Hopefully more people come then we can benefit more people. That is the
idea. As they mentioned, you don’t have to feel pressurized. You can sign
up whenever you are free. If you wish to go they will call you. If you are
very busy and cannot make it, you just tell them you cannot make it. So it
is not so much difficult part. Very important is your mind is there to
help. So it is important you want to help. Definitely we all get sick and
die, so they will look after us. So this is cause and effect. Please try to
help. It is not every day, not every year. Hope there is nobody sick this
year. We cannot avoid sickness and death. Everybody get sick and die.
Especially there are many people who live alone so we need to create this
group to help them. So keep in mind that.

Examination – 12 Oct 2013 at 10am

|Vigilance - to catch laxity and excitement when they arise in the course of    |
|developing one’s concentration.                                                |
|To develop powerful vigilance, one must have powerful mindfulness.             |
|Mental laxity arises when the mind is excessively withdrawn inward.            |
|To eliminate mental laxity, uplift the mind by turning the mind’s attention to |
|something that brings joy and delight. We should bring to mind the image or the|
|appearance of brightness.                                                      |
|Subtle laxity – laxity that is very slight and occurs only infrequently        |
|When subtle laxity is present, there is clarity and stability, and the mind is |
|abiding in the object but the mind is a bit too relax. Its manner of           |
|apprehending the object of meditation is loose. There isn’t intensity behind   |
|the mind’s way of apprehending the object.                                     |
|Antidote - tighten up your apprehension of the object of meditation and        |
|continue meditating                                                            |
|Coarse laxity is dense and seems to occur repeatedly, suspend your cultivation |
|of concentration, clear away laxity using any of those remedies, and then      |
|resume your meditation.                                                        |
|Excitement is derivative of attachment. In order to eliminate excitement, we   |
|have to bring to mind disillusioning things i.e. things that will bring about a|
|sense of disenchantment.                                                       |
|Antidote - reflecting on impermanence.                                         |
|Coarse excitement - if very strong or prolonged excitement arises, it is       |
|crucial that you relax the meditation for a while and cultivate a sense of     |
|disenchantment, rather than attempting to pull in your mind and direct it back |
|to the object of meditation every time it becomes scattered.                   |
|Subtle excitement - excitement that is not so dominant. Upon noticing the      |
|arising of such excitement with mindfulness and vigilance, bring the mind’s    |
|attention back to the object of meditation and place it there.                 |





