Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/SixPerfections/Lesson3.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:53:57.349268
================================================================================


It is said that our attachment to our resources and attachment to the
household way of life obstructs us from achieving liberation. Therefore, in
the context of the practice of the six perfections, the teaching states
that we should engage in the practices of generosity and ethics. Therefore,
to remove or to turn away these unfavorable factors that stop us from
achieving liberation, namely attachment to the resources of enjoyment and
attachment to the household, then there are the practices of generosity and
ethics.
Whether we are achieving our own goals or trying to fulfill the aims and
welfare of others, sometimes we are not able to complete those works. For
example, if we are engaging in something that is beneficial for others in
order to help them but in the process when we meet with difficulties, or
when others give us problems in the process of helping them, we may get
discouraged, and we are unable to tolerate and put up with it. Likewise,
when we are achieving our own purposes, because of various difficulties,
sometimes we also are unable to complete the tasks.
The antidote that prevents us from turning away achieving our goals and
fulfilling the welfare of others are the practices of patience and joyous
perseverance. Even if we engage in a beneficial action or works for
ourselves or others, sometimes we are unable to maintain the continuity of
those activities, or unable to increase those works. One of the reasons why
we are unable to maintain the continuity or unable to increase those
activities is because of our distractions to various kinds of worldly
activities. Another reason is having lack of the correct wisdom. In order
to be able to sustain our practice and have it increase more and more, we
must have the ability to place the mind single-pointedly on a virtuous
object. We also need the correct kind of wisdom. If we have concentration
and wisdom, then we will be able to maintain the continuity of the practice
and increase the practice.
Basically what I have just said is an explanation of the purpose of
practicing the six perfections. We have started talking about the six
perfections. You must understand why these practices are needed. As I said
earlier, our attachment to the enjoyments and resources and attachment to
the householder’s way of life are obstacles to virtue. They obstruct the
practices of that which is beneficial. So as an antidote to that, there are
practice of generosity and practice of ethical discipline. Even at those
times when we do engage in something that is beneficial and engage in the
practice of virtue, however we are unable to continue these practices. When
we meet with certain conditions, we stop this practice of virtue, even
though we know that it is something that we should do, and it is good for
us. But when we meet with certain conditions, we give up. For example, when
the going get rough, and tough, we lose our patience and we give up. Or in
the process we may get dispirited, we lose heart, we get discouraged and we
give up. Therefore in the cultivation of virtue, the practice of patience
and the practice of joyous perseverance are also important. In order for
one’s practice of virtue that which is beneficial to sustain over time and
for it to increase in strength to strength, then the practices of
concentration and wisdom are very important as well.

c” The process of learning the perfections
  1" How to train in the bodhisattva deeds in general
  2” In particular, how to train in the last two perfections

1" How to train in the bodhisattva deeds in general
  (a) Training in the perfections that mature the qualities you will have
  when you become a buddha
  (b) Training in the four ways to gather disciples that help others to
  mature

(a) Training in the perfections that mature the qualities you will have
when you become a buddha:
  (i).  How to train in the perfection of generosity
  (ii). How to train in the perfection of ethical discipline
    (iii). How to train in the perfection of patience
    (iv). How to train in the perfection of joyous perseverance
  (v). How to train in the perfection of meditative stabilization
    (vi). How to train in the perfection of wisdom

(i). How to train in the perfection of generosity
  (a’) What generosity is
  (b’) The divisions of generosity
  (c’) The way to generate this generosity in one’s mind

(a’) What generosity is
What is generosity? What is its entity? What exactly is generosity?
The text says:
It is the virtue of a generous attitude, and the physical and verbal
actions which are motivated by this.
The last part refers to the mind during the time in which one is engaging
in giving with one’s body and speech.
What you have to understand is that generosity is a consciousness. It does
not refer to the physical or the verbal act of giving. Usually when we talk
of generosity, we always think about the actions - the bodily or verbal
action. It is not that. Generosity is a consciousness. Generosity is the
generous attitude. It is a consciousness/mind. It is not the physical or
verbal of giving.
Therefore, in order to highlight what generosity is, the Middle Length
Lamrim (not in the Lamrim Chenmo) says: Generosity is essentially that
intention while one is giving either material object or giving with one’s
speech, for example, giving the Dharma, as one is sharing the Dharma with
others. There is this attitude of giving, the intention of giving. That is
generosity. It is the intention that is present when one is giving with
one’s body and/or speech.
[MLLR text page 175: The entity of generosity is  a  virtuous  intention  to
give and the actions  of  body  and  speech  motivated  by  it.  It  is  the
intention at the time the body and speech engage in generosity.]
The sentence in the Middle Length Lamrim which says “The intention at the
time when you are engaged in giving with your body and speech”. That is
what posited to be generosity.
Assuming the intention is the correct translation of the Tibetan word
“sempa”, it could also be translated as an attitude. Literally “sempa” is
the mental factor of intention. If it is translated as the mental factor of
intention then that would make generosity karma.
Now the question is, “Is generosity karma or not?”
The Middle Length Lamrim stated very clearly that the generous attitude,
the intention that is present during the time when you are engage in giving
either with your body or speech, is generosity.
Just as you are about to give something, during the causal motivation
phase, there is something that motivates you, and you have an intention to
give. Is that karma or not? Is that mental factor generosity?
It is clear that the intention that is present while you are engaged in
generosity with your body or speech is generosity, what about the intention
at the motivational phase? That is just before you carry out the act of
giving, and that is this intention, is that generosity as well?
In the discussion about karma during the section on the path that is shared
with the person of medium capacity, there is a discussion on karma - what
karma is and what intention is. Also in the discussion on the ten non-
virtues, there is a distinction between karma, action and path of action.
There are some that are actions but are not path of actions, while there
are some that are both actions and path of actions. Can we utilize the
concepts in those discussions in our analysis of what generosity is?
It is clear that generosity is the intention that is present when you
engage in giving either with your body or speech. Usually generosity is
stated briefly to be a generous attitude, literally a mind of giving, or
translated in the Lamrim Chenmo as a generous attitude. You should not have
the idea that generosity refers to the action that you carry out -the
physical or verbal action of giving- but generosity refers to this generous
attitude.
Next is an explanation of the measure of the perfection of generosity.
Bringing the perfection of generosity to completion is not contingent on
removing beings' poverty by giving gifts to others. You perfect generosity
after you destroy your stingy clinging and you completely condition your
mind to giving them away to living beings from the depths of your heart and
also giving to others the effects of this giving as well.
[LRCM V2 page 114]  Bringing the perfection of generosity to  completion  is
not contingent on removing beings' poverty by giving gifts to others.
Otherwise, since there still remain many destitute living  beings,  all  the
earlier conquerors would not have attained  perfect  generosity.  Therefore,
the physical and verbal aspects of generosity are not the  main  thing;  the
main thing is the mental aspect. This  is  because  you  perfect  generosity
after you destroy your stingy  clinging  to  all  that  you  own—your  body,
resources, and roots of virtue—and you completely  condition  your  mind  to
giving them away to living beings from the depths of  your  heart  and,  not
only that, but also to giving to others the effects of this giving as well.
The point that was just made is anyone having the perfection of generosity
in the mind is not contingent on removing the poverty of every sentient
being. Furthermore removing the poverty of all sentient beings is an
impossible task. In order to perfect generosity, one must destroy this
stingy clinging to things such as the body, resources and so forth.
We are talking about the measure of the perfection of generosity. When do
we know what is the criteria for having developed it in the mind?
Developing such a perfection of generosity in the mind is not dependent at
all on removing the poverty of all living beings. That is an impossible
task. But rather developing the perfection of generosity in one’s mind is
dependent on, first, having destroyed all the stingy clinging to the things
that we own, as it says here, the body, resources and our merits. But that
is not all. On top of that, one’s mind must have been completely
conditioned to giving all these away to every sentient being, i.e. you have
conditioned that you have no issue of giving them away, and dedicating them
away. On top of that, even the effects that you would experience from
giving will also be completely dedicated away to others. You don’t even
cling on to the effects, the merits, the virtues or whatever from giving.
That also you completely dedicate and give it away to others.
Only when all these factors come together, would you have completed the
perfection of generosity in your mind.

 (b’) The divisions of generosity
   1. Divisions of generosity relative to particular persons
   2. Divisions of actual generosity

1. Divisions of generosity relative to particular persons
[LRCM V2 page 121]  In general it is said that lay bodhisattvas make gifts
of material things and renunciate bodhisattvas make gifts of the teachings.
This is how generosity is divided; depending on whom the person is. A lay
person primarily makes gift of material things while renunciate/ordained
person primarily makes give of the Dharma, the teachings.
There are reasons why renunciates should focus primarily on making the gift
of Dharma. The whole purpose of becoming ordained is to strive in, first,
in hearing and reflection. One’s hearing and reflection is harmed or
disturbed if one has too many things to do, such as one is busy running
after things and having all kind of things to do. If renunciates run around
trying to accumulate wealth so that they can give, it hinders their main
activity of learning and reflecting on the Dharma. For that reason, it is
said that renunicates should focus primarily on making the gift of Dharma.
Therefore it is stated that renunciates do not have to go out purposely to
look for material things so that they can accumulate and give it away. If
they do that, it obstructs their learning through hearing and reflection.
Their main activity is to engage in hearing and reflection and on that
basis make the gift of Dharma.
However if a renunciate does happen to get material goods or money that
comes his way without looking for it due to the force of his merits, then
at that time the renunciate should also make the gift of material goods.
[LRCM V2 page 122]  The Compendium of Trainings says the Buddha intended
here material gifts that would become a hindrance to study and the like. It
is said that renunciates are prohibited from making offerings of material
goods that they have worked to obtain, but they must give them away if they
obtain many things through the force of their previous merit and without
hindering their virtuous activities. Also, Sha-ra-wa said:
      I am not talking to you about the benefits of giving; I am talking  to
you about the faults of tightfistedness.
It is displeasing news when renunciates harm  their  ethical  discipline  as
they strain to the utmost in their search for wealth to give away.

2. Divisions of actual generosity
   a. The gift of the teachings
   b. The gift of fearlessness
   c. Material gifts

a. The gift of the teachings
The gift of the teaching is teaching the Dharma with a pure motivation. In
general, it also refers to giving others education or knowledge about
things that are not harmful. That is said to be a gift of the teaching as
well.
If you help others to keep their precepts or you encourage others to take
precepts or vows, and that is also considered to be gift of
Dharma/teaching.
In short, the gift of the teaching is, as the phrase implies, giving the
Dharma with a pure motivation or just giving others some knowledge or
education about things that are not harmful, or encouraging others to take
precepts, vows, or encouraging them to keep whatever vows they have taken.
All of these are the gifts of the Dharma.
[LRCM V2 page 122]  The gift  of  the  teachings  is  teaching  the  sublime
teaching without making mistakes, teaching the arts and  the  like  (worldly
occupations which are blameless and proper to learn), and  involving  others
in upholding the fundamental precepts.

b. The gift of fearlessness
The gift of fearlessness is protecting sentient beings from fear of humans
and non-human and from fear of the elements such as earth, water, fire and
wind.
[LRCM V2 page 122]  The gift of fearlessness is protecting living beings
from fear of humans such as kings and robbers, from fear of non-human
beings such as lions, tigers, and crocodiles, and from fear of the elements
such as water and fire.
Whether one is making the gift of the teaching/ Dharma or the gift of
fearlessness, all these acts of giving should be done without any
expectations of any favors in return or getting something in return. Those
kinds of giving bring about a very special kind of joy or happiness.
Whatever gift, whether is a gift of Dharma or gift of fearlessness, is done
without any expectations, then that becomes an act of pure giving.
Otherwise, the gift, whether fearlessness or something else, for example,
you will be protecting some sentient beings but somehow deep inside you,
you are expecting something. That doesn’t become pure giving.
Whether one is making the gift of the teaching or the gift of fearlessness
or material things, if it is done completely sincerely from the bottom of
one’s heart without any expectations in return, it becomes pure giving.
If one gives and expecting something in return, and because one is
expecting something in return, but whatever one hope for does not happens,
then all kinds of problems and unhappiness such as regretting may arise
later on.
Material gift is literally giving things. When you give some material gift
to another person, it must be done from the heart. This means you have no
more clinging to that object anymore. Once it is given to others, it is not
yours anymore; literally you have cut the connection with that object. It
should be like that, and that is what giving is.
As we have seen earlier, generosity is not just about destroying our own
stingy clinging to the things that we own. The mind has to be conditioned
to be able to give away, and dedicate away whatever we own. From the heart
we are happy to let go, and just to give it away. So it is the attitude. In
order to bring the perfection of generosity to completion, it says that we
must condition our mind to giving things that we own away to living beings
from the depth of our hearts.
[LRCM V2 page 115]  Lama Tsongkhapa says: Simply destroying all stinginess
in regards to your body and resources is not the perfection of generosity,
for stinginess is included within attachment and so even the two kinds of
Hinayana arhats have totally eliminated it along with its seeds. What is
required then, is that you not only clear away stinginess’s
tightfistedness, which prevents giving things away, but also that you
develop from the depths of your heart the intention to give away to others
all your possessions. For this you have to meditate on the faults of
holding on to things and the benefits of giving them away.
Essentially what I have just read out aptly described what the perfection
of generosity is. In order to be a perfection of generosity it is not
sufficient just to have no stinginess - no attachment or clinging to the
things. That must be present. On top of that, one’s mind must have the
ability to completely dedicate away, i.e. you are able to give away
whatever you own to others. So these two features must be present.
In our discussion on the Mahayana Paths & Grounds, there is a perfection
related to each of the ten grounds. This means that it is only when the
bodhisattvas achieve the 1st ground that they achieve the surpassing
practice of the perfection of generosity. This means even the hearers and
solitary realizers arhats/foe destroyers do not have the perfection of
generosity.
We need to think whether the perfection of generosity exists in the
continuum of ordinary bodhisattvas or not.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): What do you think?
Do ordinary bodhisattvas on the Mahayana Path of Accumulation and Mahayana
Path of Preparation have the perfection of generosity or not?
Student respond inaudible
Khen Rinpoche (in English): Because?
In order to produce the perfection of generosity in the mind, you need to
overcome attachment, true or false?
Earlier on when we were looking at the measure of the perfection of
generosity, it says “You perfect generosity after you have destroyed your
stingy clinging to all that you own”. Doesn’t that refer to one’s
attachment to one’s possessions – the things that one own and the things
that belonged to you?
Student: No pervasion
Khen Rinpoche (in English): No pervasion?
You say no pervasion, then how do you destroy your stingy clinging?
What does destroying your stingy clinging means?
Student respond inaudible
Khen Rinpoche (in English): No grasping of the self?
In our discussion on The Heart of the Perfection of Wisdom Sutra, the sutra
says: “How should any one train in the perfection of wisdom?” The
perfection of wisdom there means the path of Perfection of Wisdom. After
the question is asked, the answer is given. The answer is pertaining to how
one should train in the perfection of wisdom starting from the Path of
Accumulation and Path of Preparation, which are ordinary paths. This means
that the practice of the perfection of wisdom does exist on the ordinary
paths.
If the practice of the perfection of wisdom does exist on the ordinary
paths – the Mahayana Path of Accumulation and the Mahayana Path of
Preparation- you could say that the practice of the perfection of
generosity does exist as well. If you could say that, basically you could
say that the practice of all the six perfections does exist on the ordinary
paths.  For if you say that they do not exist on the ordinary paths then it
is going be difficult to defend or justify.
The point is that you could discuss whether it is better to say the
perfection of generosity only exists on the 1st ground or already exists on
the ordinary paths. You could bring together the positions or views of the
major texts and try to make a coherent argument and then see which position
is better.
In order to have excellent or good practice of generosity one must first
contemplate well the benefits of generosity and the faults of holding on to
things without giving them away.
In the Middle Length Lamrim, the faults of holding on to things are
explained as this: You should stop attachment by viewing the body as
unclean, life as rushing like a mountain cascade, both body and life as
devoid of an independent self because they are under the control of karma,
and both as false like a dream or a magician's illusion. Furthermore, if
you do not stop attachment, you will become dominated by it, build up great
wrongdoing, and proceed to lower realms.
[LRCM Vol 2 page 115] The Moon Lamp Sutra says:
  These childish people are attached
  To this rotting body and to this
  Rushing life-force, both of which lack independence
  And are like a dream or a magician's illusion.
  So these unintelligent beings do terrible things,
  Fall under the control of sin,
  And, carried away by the chariot of Death's Lord,
  Proceed to unbearable hells.
This says that you should stop attachment by viewing the body as unclean,
life as rushing like a mountain cascade, both body and life as devoid of an
independent self because they are under the control of karma, and both as
false like a dream or a magician's illusion. Furthermore, if you do not
stop attachment, you will become dominated by it, build up great
wrongdoing, and proceed to miserable realms.
You have to understand that this discussion on the practice of generosity
is in the context of the bodhisattva deeds. Here we are mainly talking
about the practice of generosity that is done by the bodhisattvas. For the
bodhisattvas, besides giving away resources and dedicating the merits away,
they also train in giving their bodies away. In order for the bodhisattvas
to be able to dedicate and give the body away to others, they first must
reverse whatever attachment they have to their bodies. They do that by
realizing how the body is unclean by nature, how their lives are constantly
changing, and on the move just like a very fast flowing stream. They also
understand that their own body and life are under the control of their own
karma and afflictions. By realizing all these, they are able to stop
whatever attachment they have to their body and life. In doing do they
train themselves to get accustomed to the idea of giving away their bodies.
Here the text states that the bodhisattvas also train in viewing their body
and life like a dream or a magician’s illusion. They come to realize that
their body and life do not exist in the way they appear. When they realize
that, then they are able to stop whatever attachment they have to their
body and life. If you are able to stop attachment to your body and life
then you would be able to give it away.
This discussion is about the faults of attachment or clinging on to what we
have. In the case of the bodhisattvas it is talking about the faults of the
attachment to their body and life. Usually we regard our body and our life
as something very precious. We regard our body as the most precious thing
and our life as something that is never changing and is very stable. Based
on this world view and this belief, attachment comes because we find our
body very clean and pure, precious, and our lives as very stable and
unchanging, i.e. always remaining as it is. That is the basis for
attachment to arise. Because of attachment, when we meet with something
undesirable, when we feel that our body and life is going to be harmed,
then naturally there is aversion or anger towards the source or the origin
of harm. In so doing, we follow after anger, and then we engage in all
kinds of non-virtuous actions. In so doing, we accumulate negative karma.
So, all the problems basically come from attachment. Therefore, there is a
need to stop attachment.
What about the benefits of giving away the things that we own?
[LRCM Vol 2 page 116] The Compendium of Trainings says:
      My body and rnind
      Move on moment by moment.
      If with this impermanent body, dripping with filth,
      I attain enlightenment,
      Which is permanent and pure,
      Will I not have attained what is priceless?
This verse is saying that our body and mind is in the nature of
impermanence, in that it is changing momentarily in each and every single
moment. Our bodies while having the nature of impermanence changing in
every moment is also by nature filthy, unclean and impure. If we give,
dedicate and give away this body which is by nature dirty, impure, unclean
and changing in each and every moment, and what we get in return is full
enlightenment, isn’t that an amazing and wonderful thing?
Khen Rinpoche (in English): Like doing business you gives the poo to others
you get the gold back. It’s wonderful. So something like that.
Student responds inaudible.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): So the question is why you are attached to
dirty thing. That is the big question. Why get attached to dirty things?
This verse is saying that the body and life of ours, whether you like it or
not, is going to completely disintegrate and fall apart one day. Before
that happens, if we do something good with it, let’s say by dedicating it
away and giving it away and achieves something marvelous in return, that
will be wonderful.
Here in the teachings it is saying that if we are able to dedicate our body
and life away to others and in return we get something much better with so
much benefits, in the process we accumulate much less negativities.
What is the actual method of engaging in generosity?
[LRCM Vol 2 page 119]  Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds says:
      I will give away without a sense of loss
      My body and my resources
      As well as all my virtue from the past, present, and future
      For the welfare of all living beings.
You focus on three things -your body, your resources, and your roots of
virtue- and mentally give them away to all living beings.
In order to be able to really have a good practice of generosity, we first
must train ourselves to have a generous attitude. We must get accustom to
the idea of this attitude.
We are asked to focus on these three things - body, resources and roots of
virtue - and then get accustomed to mentally giving them away to sentient
beings. But as beginners, one is not able to give away the body and one
should not give away the body as a beginner. Nevertheless, we have to get
accustomed to the idea of giving it away in the future. In order to get
accustomed to the idea, we have to train ourselves by mentally dedicating
our bodies away. If we do not train the mind to get accustomed to the idea
of giving the body away to others, then there will never come a time when
we will be able to do that in reality. Through habituation, when the mind
is fully accustomed to really able to give away the body to others, then
when the time comes, we will be able to do it without any difficulty. Even
just mentally giving away our body, resources and roots of virtue to all
sentient beings will bring about immeasurable merit. Why? Because the
number of sentient beings are immeasurable.
[LRCM Vol 2 page 119] You focus on three things—your body,  your  resources,
and your roots of virtue—and mentally give them away to all  living  beings.
If you stop the craving  that  conceives  everything  to  be  your  personal
property and then repeatedly condition yourself to the  attitude  of  giving
it all away to others, you will be called a bodhisattva.
The Compendium of the Perfections says:
  "All these things are yours;
  I have no pride that they are mine/'
  Someone who has this amazing thought repeatedly
  And emulates the qualities of the perfect Buddha
  Is called a bodhisattva—so said
  The inconceivable Buddha, the supreme being.
At present, as your determination has not matured and is weak,  you  do  not
actually give away flesh, etc., though you have already mentally given  your
body to all beings. According to the Compendium of  Trainings,  however,  if
you do not train in the thought of giving away your body and life, you  will
not become accustomed to it and so will  remain  incapable  of  giving  away
your body and life. Therefore, from now on cultivate this thought.
Next the text is addressing some of the qualms that people commonly have
about generosity.
One may wonder: If I have already dedicated and completely mentally given
away my body, resources and roots of virtue to all sentient beings, am I
still allowed to use and enjoy these things?
If you have already given the things you own completely from the depth of
your heart to others then those things don’t belong to you anymore. They
belong to others. If that is the case, can you use or partake or enjoy
those things that do not belong to you?
Lama Tsongkhapa says this:
[LRCM Vol 2 page 119] If you use food, clothes, shelter and so on that you
have sincerely given away to all beings, and you do so with craving for
your personal welfare, forgetting the thought, "I will use them for others'
welfare," then you commit a major infraction (an afflictive downfall). When
you have no craving but forget to apply the idea of focusing on all living
beings, or if you use those resources for a particular living being out of
attachment, you commit a minor infraction (a non-afflictive downfall).
With regard to the material goods that you have turned over to others, the
Compendium of Trainings states that when you use them for your own welfare
fully cognizant of their being the property of others, you are stealing,
and if the total value is enough, you commit a cardinal transgression of
the vows of individual liberation.
The point here is that we are talking about the practice of bodhisattva.
The only thing the bodhisattvas are interested in is to accomplish the
welfare of all sentient beings. In order to do that, they undertake the
practice of generosity whereby they completely dedicate from the depths of
their hearts of whatever they own – their bodies, resources and roots of
virtue- to all sentient beings. Whatever they do is only to benefit
sentient beings.
If, for such a person whose only goal is to accomplish the welfare of all
sentient beings, for whatever reason forget his/her purpose, and forget
about the happiness of sentient beings, but use whatever enjoyments like
food, clothes, shelter for his/her own purpose motivated by attachment,
then it goes against the very idea of what the bodhisattva practice should
be, then for that reason it is incorrect.
If such a practitioner uses the food, clothes and shelter without craving
but forget to apply the idea of focusing on all living beings, that is
incorrect. Or if such a practitioner uses those resources for a particular
sentient being out of attachment, that is also incorrect.
In order to further clarify this issue, Lama Tsongkhapa says:
You incur a cardinal transgression (or defeat) of the individual liberation
vow given that the total value requirement has been met when you sincerely
turn your food, etc., over to a human being, and this person knows it and
takes possession of it, whereupon you fully cognizant of their being the
property of others and appropriate them for your own use.
This is Lama Tsongkhapa’s clarification on the intended meaning of what was
said earlier.
Here is a discussion of when the cardinal transgression or defeat occurs.
We are talking about a bodhisattva or practitioner who has completely
dedicated whatever he owns – body, resources and roots of virtue – from the
heart. In order for a cardinal transgression or defeat to happen, the
person who receives that thing must be cognizant and has the idea “Now this
object is mine”.
From the giver’s side, the person has completely dedicated away.
From the recipient’s side who has received the thing generates the thought
“Now this is mine”.
You, as giver, has completely dedicated away to others.
The recipient has the idea that he has received this thing and now it has
become his.
You, as the giver, are cognizant that it has become somebody else. With all
these factors in place, if you use whatever you have given away for your
own purpose, then a cardinal transgression or defeat occurs.
We are talking about the cardinal transgression or defeat in relation to
stealing, i.e. taking that which is not given. In this case, when does this
cardinal transgression happens?
We are talking about someone who has completely given and dedicated
something away to others. For such a person, when does stealing occur?
This person gives away everything and completely dedicate to others. The
recipient must cognize that and has the idea of ownership thinking “Now
this is mine”. The giver is also cognizant that this has becomes his/hers.
When these factors come together, and if you as giver use that object, it
becomes a cardinal transgression of stealing.
According to the vinaya, the recipient must be a human in order to qualify
as a defeat of the pratimoksha vow.
So for a defeat of cardinal transgression, the other party must be a human
being.
In the case of the bodhisattva practice of generosity here, we are told
that the practice involves mentally giving away all one own – body,
resources and roots of virtue - to sentient beings. Yes, such a practice is
done. But when we mentally dedicate it to others we don’t have people
coming to you acknowledging that “Thank you. I have received this and this
is mine now”.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): That means you still can give mentally and you
still can use.
There is a total value requirement that must be met.
What is conventionally accepted as stealing?
If you take something that has a value enough for it to be considered
stolen, then it is said that the total value requirement is met.
What we have mentioned so far is Lama Tsongkhapa’s position.
In the Lamrim Chenmo, Lama Tsongkhapa did state the positions that were
held by some other masters. Pertaining to the total value requirement, in
order for cardinal transgression to occur, Lama Tsongkhapa states: There
are some people who say “Since you have turned over your possessions,
whatever it is to all living beings, it is impossible for the total value
of any one being's portion to be enough, therefore you cannot commit a
cardinal transgression”.
Let’s say you do dedicate whatever you own – your body, resources and roots
of virtue – and you really give it away to all sentient beings, then it
belongs to all sentient beings. Each sentient being would have his/her
share; a portion of it. A portion of each sentient being will not be enough
to constitute the total value requirement. This is the position of some
scholars.  But there are other scholars who say such a position is wrong.
Why?
Others say: This is not correct because you have turned over your
belongings as a whole to each sentient being.
When you are giving away you are not dividing them before you give it away.
You are giving the whole thing to every sentient being.
There are other scholars who say: “It is incorrect therefore to say that
the total value requirement is not met just because every sentient being
receives only a portion of what you have given away. Therefore it is
incorrect to say that the total value requirement is not met.”
Anyway, what Lama Tsongkhapa says is: Even if you do mentally give away all
that you own to sentient beings, you would not commit the cardinal
transgression of stealing simply because others are not cognizant. They do
not generate the thought that they have now become the owners of those
things that you have given away.
While you are training your mind in giving by mentally dedicating away your
body, resources and roots of virtue to all living beings and at the time
when you are actually using these resources and enjoying them, you must do
it with the idea that you are doing it in order to help others, and you are
doing it for the welfare of sentient beings. If you do use the resources
that you have mentally given away with the idea that you are doing it to
accomplish the welfare of others, then there is no fault.

[LRCM Vol 2 page 119] With regard to the material goods that you have
turned over to others, the Compendium of Trainings states that when you use
them for your own welfare fully cognizant of their being the property of
others, you are stealing, and if the total value is enough, you commit a
cardinal transgression of the vows of individual liberation. In response to
this, some say that since you have turned over your food, etc., to all
living beings, it is impossible for the total value of any one being's
portion to be enough, so you cannot commit a cardinal transgression. Others
say this is not correct because you have turned over your belongings as a
whole to each being individually. Others argue that even though you have
mentally surrendered them to others, they do not take personal possession
of them, so there is no cardinal transgression.
The intended meaning behind the Compendium of Trainings statement is that
you incur a cardinal transgression (given that the total value requirement
has been met) when you sincerely turn your food, etc., over to a human
being, and this person knows it and takes possession, whereupon you, fully
cognizant of their being another's property, appropriate them for your own
use. Therefore, the positions stated by the others are wrong.
There is no fault in using some living beings' resources if you think,
while using them, "I do this for their welfare." The Compendium of
Trainings states:
 There is no fault in using things if you think, "I am taking care of my
 body which is owned by others with these resources that are owned by
 others." Slaves have no material goods of their own with which to survive.
You may think, "I incur a fault because, after I have turned over these
belongings to living beings, I use them without their permission," but
there is no fault. The Compendium of Trainings says:
 A servant who labors hard on a master's behalf might use the master's
 belongings without permission when the master's mind is unclear due to
 illness and so forth, but incurs no fault.
Do not lack faith and think, "Mentally giving everything away to living
beings while not actually giving it is tantamount to a lie and, therefore,
is without real substance." The Compendium of Trainings says:
 Some people who are close to a bodhisattva who practices in this way fail
 to understand the bodhisattva's practice accurately and lack faith. This
 is unwarranted because they are well acquainted with someone who has a
 great and wonderful spirit of generosity.  It is wrong for them to doubt
 this method.

