Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/SixPerfections/Lesson6 (Raw).doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:02.648554
================================================================================


Ven Gyurme: Any questions?

Cecilia: Ken Rinpoche, I have a question. This comes from about 2 lessons
back when we were talking about the practice of the perfections. We were
talking about the perfection of generosity and there was a discussion about
the practice of the perfection starting on the path of accumulation
upwards, even though the very exalted practice of the perfection of
generosity only appears on the first ground. So I’m a little confused
because although the Lam Rim Text gives very clear indications of what
qualifies as a completion of the different levels of perfections, when you
say the perfections on the different grounds, _____(? 2.32) there seems to
be something beyond the perfections. You know what I mean? So I’m just
wondering whether you know to be a perfection, there has to be a perfection
of that particular generosity, patience, ethics or whatever conjoined with
the direct perception of emptiness to qualify for it to be a perfection?
That’s my first question.

And then the second question is, you know the perfection of the different
grounds, it seems to be there’s something beyond it being a perfection. You
know what I mean? There seems to be another tier beyond being a perfection
but if a perfection is perfect right, there’s no further feature or…. I
don’t know what I’m rumbling. Sorry. Do you get what I’m saying Venerable
Gyurme?

Ven Gyurme: What’s the criteria for being a perfection let’s say in terms
of generosity?

Cecilia: Yes. That’s already clearly stated in the text but there was a
discussion that there is the perfection of generosity on the 1st ground and
then Khen Rinpoche brought  us back to talking about the path of perfection
of wisdom and how in the previous lesson, he already said that that is not
related to the direct perception of wisdom. It is just wisdom realizing
emptiness, that’s good enough, conjoined with bodhicitta. So Khen Rinpoche
commented that in fact the practice of the perfections start from the path
of accumulation. I don’t have issues with that, you know practicing the
perfections but actually achieving the perfections, I’m just wondering
whether it only happens on the various grounds, achieving and completing
the perfections. Because if something else is happening on the various
grounds, it seems like there’s something else happening with that
perfection that is beyond completing the perfection on the various grounds.


Ven Gyurme: You need to refine what I said about exalted, technically
better to say they achieve a surpassing practice.

Cecilia: So what does that mean? There seems to be something that surpasses
the perfection.

Ven Gyurme: Surpassing the practice of the perfection of generosity on the
1st ground. That’s a technical ___ (?5.11)

Cecilia: Right, but it still comes back to the same point that there’s
something beyond having the completion ….

Ven Gyurme: So what is the criteria for something being a perfection? When
is the perfection of generosity completed? At which ground or level?

Cecilia: Something like that. It’s not quite that.

Ven Gyurme: In order to be a perfection of generosity, must it be conjoined
with wisdom directly perceiving emptiness or not? So is the practice of the
perfection of generosity same as achieving the perfection of generosity?
And is there a difference between the perfection of generosity and the
completion of the perfection of generosity?

So with regards to the perfection of wisdom, there are some scholars or
there’s a position which states that in order to be a perfection of wisdom,
it has to be a wisdom that directly realize emptiness. But of course
there’s another school of thought which says that it is not necessary.

So these are the two positions. You see which you want to adopt. Which is
better? If let’s say the perfection of wisdom is not necessarily a wisdom
directly perceiving emptiness, it doesn’t have to be a mind directly
perceiving emptiness, then if you take that position, it would follow that
you will say that the practice of the perfection of wisdom does exist on
the ordinary paths.
Ordinary path as in for example the Mahayana path of accumulation. There is
a practice of the perfection of wisdom.

So if you assert that the perfection of wisdom need not be a mind directly
realizing emptiness, then it is not a problem to say that the practice of
the perfection of wisdom exist on the path of accumulation.

Khen Rinpoche (In English): Clear?

And if you say that the practice of the perfection of wisdom exists on the
Mahayana path of accumulation, then would be alright to say that the
practice of the six perfections exists on the Mahayana path of
accumulation. There’s nothing wrong with saying that if you already say
that there is the practice of the perfection of wisdom on the Mahayana path
of accumulation.

If it is a mind realizing emptiness, is it necessarily a perfection of
wisdom? No right? Because for example, the wisdom directly realizing
emptiness in the continuum of a foe destroyer arhat, that is not a
perfection of wisdom. Why? At the end of the day, that wisdom is not
conjoined with bodhicitta. So which means that in order to be a perfection
of wisdom, it must be a mind realizing emptiness that is conjoined with
bodhicitta.

So if that’s the case for a mind realizing emptiness, if it is conjoined
with bodhicitta then it becomes a perfection of wisdom. Then you could
likewise say that it is so for generosity, ethics, patience, meditative
stabilization etc. So for example generosity is not necessarily a
perfection of generosity. Ethics is not necessarily a perfection of ethics.
It is just generosity or ethics on its own but if they are conjoined with
bodhicitta, then it becomes a perfection of generosity, a perfection of
ethics and so forth. So by extension, the logic should apply to the rest of
the perfection.

Cecilia: Then what about that culmination of that perfection?

Ven Gyurme: Completion.

Cecilia: The completion ya. That means it’s reached its full fruition. This
perfection is perfected. Because now we are saying a perfection in that
sense you know you are still practicing, practicing, practicing on the
various paths, so there will come a point where it is completed. The
perfection is completed. Does that mean the perfection of generosity is
completed on the first ground? The perfection of ethics is completed on the
second ground? Is it like that? Because if it’s not, then it sounds like
it’s something else.

Ven Gyurme: You know that there is a perfection that is related to each of
the ten grounds, each of the ten bodhisattva grounds. So on the 1st ground,
you have the perfection of generosity. What it means is that on first
ground for example, the bodhisattva achieves a surpassing practice of the
perfection of generosity. So this is what is mentioned in the text.

On the 2nd ground, the bodhisattva achieves a surpassing practice of ethics
and his practice of ethics that he achieves on the 2nd ground surpasses the
practice of ethics that was present on the first ground.
And this is how it goes on the subsequent grounds.

So then the question is if the bodhisattva achieves a surpassing practice
of the perfection of generosity on the 1st ground, does it mean that he has
achieved a completion of the perfection of generosity? That is what we need
to think.

So my personal opinion is that it is probably nothing wrong if you say that
the perfection of generosity has reached its pinnacle on the 1st ground.

Then likewise on the 2nd ground, you could say that the bodhisattva
achieves a completion of the perfection of ethics and so forth, and of
course we are saying this on the perspective of equating achieving a
surpassing practice of that particular perfection to a completion of the
perfection. That is if we equate this two to be the same.

That is if you equate achieving a surpassing practice of a perfection to a
completion of that perfection, if you equate this two to be the same, then
this is how you explain. On the 1st ground therefore, the bodhisattva
achieves a completion of the perfection of generosity and so on and so
forth.

So if you take this position, is there any fallacy? Any loopholes?

Then if you understand the word perfection to be completion, then you could
say that in order to achieve a perfection of generosity, you need wisdom
directly perceiving emptiness which means to say that the perfection of
generosity does not exist before the 1st ground.  So then when he achieves
the 1st ground, the bodhisattva achieves a perfection of generosity and if
you take perfection here to mean literally perfected, completed.

Is there any difference between what I’ve just said and what was said
earlier? Do you see? Are you confused?

Khen Rinpoche (In English): What I’m saying earlier and what I’m saying now
is totally different. You get that? Okay that’s good. If you get that,
that’s the point.

This is what analysis or discussion is. There’s debate isn’t it? You can
argue ‘Oh no, the perfection of wisdom doesn’t exist before the 1st ground,
it must have realize wisdom directly realizing emptiness first before you
can have any perfection of generosity. ‘

Lama Tsongkhapa states in the Lam Rim, bringing the perfection of
generosity to completion is not contingent with removing beings of poverty
by giving gifts to others. You perfect generosity after you destroy your
stingy clinging to all that you own and you completely condition your mind
to giving them away to all living beings. He said you perfect generosity
after you destroy your stingy clinging. So this states clearly that the
perfection of generosity does not exist in the continuum of our ordinary
being.

So this is why analysis, discussion is so important. It’s not right, not
enough just to hear something and then think that that is it. This is the
only position and one and only position. You have compare what is mentioned
in the text, what is mentioned in the philosophical text and so forth. Put
together and see, and then you make up your mind and see for yourself.

Khen Rinpoche (In English): Are you getting what I’m trying to do here or
not?

Ven Gyurme: Now somebody ask you, is there the perfection of generosity on
ordinary paths? What are you going to say?

Khen Rinpoche (In English): If somebody ask you, what are you going to say?
You cannot keep quiet there, you must say something.

Ven Gyurme: Is there the perfection of wisdom on the path of accumulation?
Yes or no?

Khen Rinpoche (In English): Yes or no doesn’t matter, say something. You
cannot say maybe. You must say something, you must decide. If you say maybe
then there’s no need to debate. You can say yes, you can say no. You must
confident and say “Yes” like that. Very beginning part “Yes or No” like
that then there’s no point (?28.32)in debate. You must be strong very
beginning part then you ____(? 28.37) that’s the point (?28.38) you know.
Very beginning you are weak then there’s no point to fight. When you have
to fight, tone (?28.45) must be calm. Must be ready you know. So who want
to fight?

(Laughed)

When you use the word debate, you must analyze, this is the way to do. You
have to take a position and then you move off from there. If nobody wants
to take a position then I have nothing else to say.

When you debate, you have hold on to one position and then you defend that
position. You cannot hold on to two positions.

Cecilia: Khen Rinpoche, if we follow the view that….

Ven Gyurme: Yes or no?

Cecilia: The answer is yes. But I have another question.

Ven Gyurme: Then it’s his turn. (referring to Khen Rinpoche)

It’s not about really “Yes or No”. It is more important to be sure why you
are taking a position. Make sure you know why. Doesn’t matter right or
wrong. You have your reasons, you can just standby to (defend). That’s the
important thing.

Khen Rinpoche (In English): So now what? Yes.

Cecilia: So my question is Khen Rinpoche gave another view whereby the
perfection of generosity or whatever it is, is perfected or completed after
the direct realization of emptiness.

Khen Rinpoche(In English): I’ve already given the broad view, so I’m asking
question. So now you answer for that. You don’t talk other thing.

Cecilia: So the answer was yes.

Khen Rinpoche (In English): Ok you hold your answer for ten minutes.

Why do you say that there is the perfection of generosity on the Mahayana
path of accumulation? So this exercise is not just a between two people
here, all of you should participate. Those who said yes, there’s the
perfection of generosity on the path of accumulation, you know why? You
must know why you say yes. So why is there the perfection of generosity on
the Mahayana path of accumulation?

So when you debate, when you respond to question, the respond has to
address only the question and not bring in other auxiliary topics or
discussion.

Cecilia: Khen Rinpoche’s question was why is there the practice the
perfection of generosity on the ordinary paths? Because the ordinary paths
is the time when the perfections are the activities of the bodhisattvas
basically,  the bodhisattvas’ conduct is the perfections. So during the
ordinary paths when they are ordinary bodhisattvas, are they practicing the
perfection of generosity? Yes we will have to say they are practicing the
perfection of generosity.

Khen Rinpoche (In English): Why? You still are not getting why?

Cecilia: Is the practice of generosity conjoined with bodhicitta? Just
saying I’m practicing the perfection of generosity does not mean I have
completed the perfection. Which is what we were talking about right?

Ven Gyurme: Actually you can just say, the perfection of generosity exists
because the practice of generosity conjoins with bodhicitta.

Khen Rinpoche (In Tibetan): If it is a perfection of generosity, isn’t it
necessary for stingy, clingy to be destroyed?

Cecilia: Yes.

Khen Rinpoche(Tibetan): Has the ordinary bodhisattva on the Mahayana path
of accumulation abandoned stingy, clingy?

Cecilia: Not yet.

Ven Gyurme: You just follow, you just say “Yes”.

Khen Rinpoche (In English): You have to think because you have to think
that if you say no, you are contradicting yourself. Then now you say yes, I
don’t know.

Cecilia: I have no choice but to say yes (Laugh)

Khen Rinpoche (In English): You have no choice. It’s all in your debate,
your problem. What you say?

Cecilia: Yes.

Khen Rinpoche (In English): Why you say yes?

Cecilia: Your question to me was whether the bodhisattva has abandoned
stingy, clinging on the path of accumulation.

Ven Gyurme: No the question is do they have stingy, clinging or not?

Cecilia: Do they have stingy clingy? Then I have to say no. Because I have
already asserted that they are practicing the perfection….(speech got cut
off)

Khen Rinpoche (In Tibetan): In order for them to have stingy clingy, there
must be a cause for stingy clingy. The main cause for stingy, clingy is
attachment. So don’t the bodhisttva on the Mahayana path of accumulation
have attachment?

Cecilia: Yes.

Khen Rinpoche (In Tibetan): Do ordinary bodhisattvas have attachment? Do
ordinary bodhisattvas have attachment to their own bodies?

Cecilia: Yes.

Khen Rinpoche (In Tibetan): So it is not thought that the practice of
giving the body is for an ordinary bodhisttva or an ordinary person.  So
these ordinary beings, these ordinary bodhisattvas have attachment to their
bodies. They have miserliness. They have not destroyed all stingy, clinging
and miserliness. If they haven destroy stingy clinging, don’t they have the
perfection of generosity?

Do you see the flow? How you think, how you can continue? That’s the
exercise for everybody.
So the ordinary beings have not destroyed stingy, clinging.

Cecilia: Yes. Obviously my original position was wrong.

Khen Rinpoche (In English): Which is right you know?

Cecilia: No, it seems that Khen Rinpoche is showing us the logic coming to
the point where it can only qualify as a perfection on the 1st ground then.
This is where I’m seeing.

Khen Rinpoche (In English): Which way you going now? Which you think is the
right one? You choose.

Ven Gyurme: Let’s go back to the first question.

Cecilia: It’s a bit tricky when we are talking now about this line of
argument that Khen Rinpoche is showing us, then it becomes clear that it
cannot be a perfection until we have abandoned the attachment and the
clinging. So then it can only be after you have abandoned the afflictions
right?

Ven Gyurme: Let’s take the position we debate on that now.

Cecilia: But Khen Rinpoche previously taught us that the path of the
perfection of wisdom when we were talking about the heart sutra, the
perfection of wisdom can be argued to start from the path of accumulation.
So this is a completely position that Khen Rinpoche is bringing us towards.
I’m just making an observation.

Khen Rinpoche (In English): I am bring what?

Cecilia: This position where it only becomes a perfection after the direct
realization of emptiness. Because it is only with the direct realization of
emptiness on the 1st ground do I abandon the intellectually acquired
afflictive obscurations which would look like attachment and so forth
right. Because my attachment is the thing that doesn’t make it a
perfection.

Ven Gyurme: Let’s see whether what you think is correct. Let’s say now you
start from the 1st question, you say that there is no perfection of
generosity on the ordinary path. Then we start with the debate again? You
want to see the process?

Cecilia: Yes please.

Khen Rinpoche (In English): What? Debate? Which position you want?

Cecilia:  Because it sounds like what Khen Rinpoche is guiding us towards,
is showing that my original position to say that there was the perfection
of generosity on the path of accumulation and preparation is incorrect
because during that time, there is still the stingy, clinging to….

Ven Gyurme: No I think the purpose of the exercise, Khen Rinpoche is trying
to show ….. you think for yourself, whatever way you go, you choose and
then you stick, and then you see how, why you stick to it. That’s the
point, how to debate, how to think.

Cecilia: So if I follow that position, it leads me to this absurdity.
Because when you are on the ordinary path, you haven abandoned the
attachment. That is my understanding from what Khen Rinpoche is trying to
teach me.

Ven Gyurme: Do you want to continue with this particular debate? Or do you
want change your answer and retry?

Cecilia: Whatever Khen Rinpoche feels will be most beneficial for all of
us.


Khen Rinpoche (In English): I’m just wondering what is beneficial for you.
Which position you are going to take?

Cecilia: I’m more inclined towards this line of reasoning that Khen
Rinpoche is going towards where we come to the conclusion that it can only
be a perfection when you have reached the 1st ground, a perfection is
completed on the 1st ground.

Khen Rinpoche (In English): So you are totally happy with your position
now?

Cecilia: I think so.

Khen Rinpoche (In English):  You must be confident with yourself.

Cecilia: I think so. The only qualm I have then is that …

Khen Rinpoche (In English):  No qualm, no qualm. You must decide.

Cecilia: Because the scriptural authority is like then why doesn’t Lama
Tsongkhapa make it explicit that the completion of the perfection must be
conjoined with the direct realization of emptiness. Nowhere does it say
that.

Khen Rinpoche (In English):  Now there’s two positions to take. Which we
you are more comfortable now? ___ (?47.10) you not comfortable with,
halfway you give up. So now you choosing another position you feel
comfortable with that?

Cecilia: I think so. I’m comfortable with that.

Khen Rinpoche (In English):  Why you think is comfortable?

Cecilia: Because based on the logic that Khen Rinpoche demonstrated, shows
me the fault….

Ven Gyurme: Do you want to try debating from the beginning for this
position?

Cecilia: Can also. Debating from the position that there is no perfection
of generosity on the ordinary paths.

Khen Rinpoche (In English):   So you are comfortable with that now?

Cecilia: That is what Khen Rinpoche’s guide.

Khen Rinpoche (In English):   I direct both way. I don’t know which one you
are more comfortable with.

Cecilia: I was inclined towards the first one. The one where there’s no
perfection of wisdom on the ordinary paths.

Khen Rinpoche (In Tibetan):  So if that’s the case, if you say that there
is no perfection of generosity in the ordinary paths, so you are explicitly
saying that the perfection of generosity is the same as the completion of
the perfection of generosity.

Khen Rinpoche (In English):  Exactly same isn’t it now?

Cecilia: Yes. I’m saying that the completion of the perfection and the
perfection is the same.

Khen Rinpoche (In Tibetan):  So it follows that in the continuum of an
ordinary bodhisattva on the Mahayana path of accumulation, there is isn’t
any practice of the perfections. Including the perfection of wisdom.

(50.15s)

50.17
Khen Rinpoche (In English): Now you kena. (Laughter)

Student: No, there isn’t

It is for everyone, everyone has to think.

Khen Rinpoche: It follows that on the first ground, all the six perfections
are also not there. In the continuum of the first ground bodhisattva, not
all six perfections are there. Right?

Student: No.

Khen Rinpoche: The six perfections do not exist in the continuum of the
first grounder. No.

Student: First grounder is the perfection of generosity.

Khen Rinpoche (In English): I know that, that is not the question.

Khen Rinpoche: In the continuum of the first grounder, the six perfections
are not there. Isn’t it?

Student: Yes, don’t have.

Khen Rinpoche: When the first grounder practices the perfection of
generosity, that practice of the perfection of generosity encompasses all
the other perfections isn’t it?

Student: No

Khen Rinpoche: Anyway, it is mentioned in the text right? If the practice
of perfection of generosity is accompanied by all six perfections, it
becomes extremely powerful isn’t it? So, it follows that the first grounder
does not have the practice of perfection of generosity that encompasses all
the other perfections. If on the first ground, the practice of perfection
of generosity is not accompanied by the other perfections then there is no
basis to say that the practice of generosity become more powerful when it
is accompanied by the other perfections.

Khen Rinpoche (in English): Yes so, continue.

Student: No

Khen Rinpoche (in English): You say no.

Student: Yes

Khen Rinpoche: So there is no basis for saying that there is a stronger
practice of the perfection of generosity when it is accompanied by the
other perfections isn’t it? There is no purpose also in saying that right?

Student: Hmmm, yes

Khen Rinpoche: But Lama Tsongkhapa said that there is a stronger practice
of the perfection of generosity when it is accompanied by other
perfections. What exactly is Lama Tsongkhapa saying, if it isn’t? Then
isn’t there the practice of perfection of wisdom on the Path of
Accumulation and the Path of Preparation?

Khen Rinpoche (In English): Yes or No?

Khen Rinpoche: In the Heart of the Perfection Wisdom Sutra, Shariputra
asked Avalokiteshvara how should one train in the perfection of wisdom? The
perfection of wisdom is the mind realizing emptiness and so the reply is
this is how you train in the perfection of wisdom on the Path of
Accumulation and on the Path of Preparation. So, therefore it is wrong to
say that, there isn’t any practice of the perfections on the ordinary
paths.

(Inaudible)

Khen Rinpoche: Then Avalokisteshvara should have just said, the practice of
the perfection of wisdom starts from the first ground.

Student: He was referring only to the practice of the perfection of wisdom.
He wasn’t talking about the other practices like generosity, ethics and so
forth.

Khen Rinpoche (in English): He talking about wisdom isn’t it? You are
confirmed with that isn’t it?

Student: Only wisdom, but we are talking generosity here.

Khen Rinpoche (in English): This is not the question about that. I know
that. You must know.

Khen Rinpoche: The practice of the perfection of wisdom is basically
talking about the practice of the mind realizing emptiness isn’t it?

Student: Correct.

Khen Rinpoche: So, in the Heart of the Perfection Wisdom Sutra, the
perfection of wisdom is taken to be the mind realizing emptiness and based
on that then they said that there is a practice of perfection of wisdom on
the Mahayana Path of Accumulation and Path of Preparation also.

Student: Yes

Khen Rinpoche: Basically there is the practice of the perfections on the
ordinary path and there is the practice of the perfection of wisdom on the
ordinary path.

Student: Yes

Khen Rinpoche: The practice of perfection of wisdom exists in the continuum
of ordinary beings. So, in order to achieve the perfection of wisdom, you
need not on the first ground. Have to accept right?

Student: To practice the perfection of wisdom, you don’t have to be on the
first ground. Was that you statement?

Ven Gyurme: Yes, no problem.

Student: Yes.

Khen Rinpoche: In order to possess a perfection, you need not be a
superior.

Student: Yes

Khen Rinpoche: So, there isn’t the perfection in the continuum of someone
on the Path of Accumulation. The bodhisattva on the Path of Accumulation
does not have the perfection of wisdom.

Student: No.

Khen Rinpoche (in English): What do you think have or don’t have?

Student: Have

Khen Rinpoche: You need not be a superior right?

Khen Rinpoche (in English): One way you have already agreed must be
superior being then again you have here.

Student: I am very flexible.

Please understand that this whole exercise now, it is not the waste of
time. It is not the waste of time at all. This is to show how you can
utilize your time during discussion. In discussion, you usually have
questions isn’t it? Then you answer and then you take a position. So, it is
not so much about saying yes or no. But when somebody says yes or no, you
should question deeply, why you say this and why you say that. That is what
discussion is all about. It is not just take out a piece of paper and write
yes. What I see is most people, they just content of just writing yes or no
and then they don’t think much. For example, a lot of people based on what
I said in class and they are just comfortable and saying yes, there is a
practice of the perfection on the ordinary path. But the understanding is
not stable at all. Actually, you have to know why you take a position. You
have to keep questioning and once you have sorted out all the difference
reasons that understanding, you have much certainty behind your position.
You know why you believing in something and one of the benefits is, you
will never forget it, seriously. You will never forget your position.

Khen Rinpoche (In English): As Cecilia said, when you kena then you will
never forget. The point of debating is that when you really it is right
then somebody is squashing on your neck until you cannot breath then you
will never forget. Probably you get what I mean, not really squashing their
neck but some ways, different reasons, these ways, that ways, you don’t
know where to go then you have some idea. So, like that. Okay, next.

Student: Based on the way, Lama Tsongkhapa wrote the Lamrim, which views is
he supporting?

Khen Rinpoche (In English): We don’t know.

Student 2: There are ten grounds and there are ten perfections. Do the
other four perfections exist on the ordinary paths?

Khen Rinpoche: What if I say yes. Is there anything you want to say? This
is an answer given in response to a question in the debate. It is not a
conclusion. So, if I say yes then? Many of you always think that when I say
yes, you think that that is yes and you just leave it like that. That is
not the case. That was never the case. So?

Student 2: Does LamaTsongkhapa think that it is not important for him to
include as one of the perfections to be taught in the text?

Ven Gyurme: You want to edit the Lamrim basically?

Student 2: If you say yes then why didn’t Lama Tsongkhapa teach us as one
of the perfections to be practiced? Then it should be ten perfections to be
practiced. So, Lama Tsongkhapa isn’t perfect?

Khen Rinpoche (In English): Now Swee Kim knows how to debate a little bit.
Joking.

Khen Rinpoche: Lama Tsongkhapa explained. Lama Tsongkhapa explained well.
The composition of Lama Tsongkhapa amounts to the total of eighteen volumes
of which the LRCM is just one text. For example in his composition called
The Golden Rosary which is the commentary on The Ornament of Clear
Realization, in that text there is an explanation of the other four
perfections. It is said in the Lamrim clearly that there isn’t any
bodhisattva practice that cannot be condensed in the six perfections. All
the bodhisattva deeds/practices can be condensed/summarized in the six
perfections and as such if you want to include the method, prayer, power
and exalted wisdom, these four can be condensed in the perfection of
wisdom. Of course, one has to know how these remaining four perfections are
subsumed/condensed into the perfection of wisdom. By expanding the
perfection of wisdom then you have the remaining four perfections.

Student 3: (1) I think there is a generosity, perfection of generosity,
completing the perfection of generosity which is the exalted or surpassing
practice of perfection of generosity, these two are the same. In the
continuum of the Buddha, what has these six perfections or ten perfections
transform into? (2)Since in the continuum of a non-human, the bodhisattva
vows are suitable basis whereas the praktimoksha vows are not suitable
basis, how is it that the non-humans are able to take up the bodhisattva
vows without the praktimosha vows?

Khen Rinpoche: On the Buddha ground, there are the two bodies: (1)
embodiment of truth or truth body or Dharmakaya (2) embodiment of form or
form body or Rupakaya. So, that is the result. At the time of the basis,
you have the two truths. The path you have method and wisdom. The results
are these two bodies. All the bodhisattva deeds, all practices of the
bodhisattvas can be condensed into the six perfections. The six perfections
can be condensed into method and wisdom. The first five perfections are
included in method and the last perfection - the perfection of wisdom is
included in the collection of wisdom. So, it is mentioned clearly in the
text, teaching on the perfection path, the perfection vehicle or the
Mahayana sutra that the practice of the method results in rupakaya, form
body and the collection of wisdom results in the truth body. One
accumulates merit by practicing generosity. One accumulates merit by
guiding ethical disciplines. One accumulates the collection of merit by
practicing this thing including patience and the effect of this collection
of merit is the form body. You are happy with the answer for the first
question?

(Response is inaudible)

Ven Gyurme: Merit is consciousness?

Khen Rinpoche: So, we need to think about this. By practicing the
perfection of generosity we accumulate the collection of merit isn’t it? By
familiarizing with the mind realizing emptiness, one accumulates the
collection of wisdom. By practicing the perfection of generosity for
example, one accumulates the collection of merit. What is this collection
of merit? Something to think about. I would think it is the non-associated
compositional factor. In simple English, for those of you who do not know,
as an impermanent phenomenon that is not form, not consciousness. Can
generosity act as a substantial cause of a form body? That is the question.
Can generosity which is a consciousness, can a consciousness act as a
substantial cause for a form body? So, in the explanation of the six
perfections, it is explained that these six are all consciousnesses. For
example, what is generosity? It is a generous attitude. It is a
consciousness. Can generosity which is a consciousness act as a substantial
cause for a form body? So, what if we say that generosity cannot act as a
substantial cause of the form body? But is it okay to say that the
collection of merit that is accumulated through the practice of generosity
whether that collection of merit can act as a cause of the form body? This
is an extremely important point because when we are talking about achieving
the result, the result is Buddhahood which consists of the two bodies: the
form body and the truth body. But in the perfection vehicle, in simple
English, Mahayana Sutra, there is no better or higher explanation in
perfection vehicle for achieving the form body other than saying that it is
the collection of merit that results in the form body. It is an important
question because at the time of the result, there are these two bodies.
These two bodies have their own substantial causes. Unique.  But in the
perfection vehicle, there is no better explanation rather the best
explanation about what exactly is the cause of the body is none other than
the collection of merit. The superior bodhisattvas, they have what we call
a mental body – a body in the nature of mind. The tenth ground bodhisattva
or the tenth grounder also has that body, the body of the mental nature. We
would say that that body doesn’t go to enlightenment. That body does not go
to enlightenment. So, the body which is in the nature of the mind, I am not
sure the mental body is the suitable translation or not. Let’s say the
mental body, I think we stuck to it. I am not satisfied with that, but I
think so far in English, it is the mental body. So, the mental body that
the superior bodhisattvas have, even the tenth grounders, this mental body
cannot proceed to enlightenment, cannot transform into the form body of the
Buddha. Why? Because the main cause, the actualizing cause for this mental
body is the ravels of the predisposition of ignorance together with
uncontaminated karma. This is something we have to think. I mean this is
the explanation in the perfection vehicle. So, according to the perfection
vehicle, so what is the substantial cause for the body of the next life?
Does the consciousness of this life act as a substantial cause for the body
of next life? The consciousness of this life definitely is a cause of the
body of next life, is a cause. So the consciousness of this life is one the
causes for the body of next life. So, then what exactly is the substantial
cause of the body of next life? Is it the imprint or latency of karma that
is deposited on the mental continuum of a sentient being?

Khen Rinpoche (In English): What? It is question.

Khen Rinpoche: So, you see it is not so straightforward. You really have to
think. Basically, at the end of the day, according to the Mahayana Sutra,
sutric perspective, more technically accurate the Paramitayana, according
to the perfection vehicle point of view, how do they explain the
accomplishment of a form body? At the end of the day, they are unable to
say more or beyond the collection of merit. That is all. So, if you think
about it. Many questions arise. Which means the explanation of the
Paramitayana for achieving the form body is not very deep. It is not there
yet. That is where tantra come in. That is why tantra is so important.
Because it is in tantra that you have the explanation of the extremely
subtle wind and the extremely subtle mind and based on that we explain how
after death, what are the substantial causes and cooperative conditions for
the intermediate state being’s body and mind. Then it is only in tantra
that you find a coherent explanation of what is the exactly substantial
cause, real correct explanation of what the substantial cause of a form
body is. So, this will come towards the end of the basic program where we
will be looking at tantra. It is important therefore to really in future to
study this. So, therefore if you have an overview, a rough idea of the
general procedure of sutra and tantra whatever understanding you gain will
really be very special, different, not ordinary.

In dependence on our learning these deep teachings, these great treatises
then even you do get some understanding of the general procedure of sutra
and tantra then this is one of the things that would make your present life
meaningful. All of us are extremely fortunate in just, although we have a
little bit of faith and some interest in wanting to learn, that itself is
something, we are so fortunately basically even just to have this small
faith and small interest. While we still have some faith and interest
learning the Buddha’s teachings, take the opportunity and strive as much as
possible in learning and analyzing the Buddha’s teachings so as to leave as
many imprints in our minds. So, the more imprints we place then there is
hope that things will become better and clearer from life to life.

I have mentioned before, couple of times, I said mere coming to class, mere
listening, mere hearing the teachings, just merely that and just merely
reading the books on your own, that itself make it quite difficult to learn
anything. It is very important to think about things, to analyze deeply and
whether through discussion or in the discussion group, debate and analysis,
that is very important because it is only through analysis and deep
reflection that you come to gain very clear understanding and thereby
conviction, very stable knowledge. So, this is what we need to do. We all
have to do this. From my side, I would like to kind of like request,
encourage, please make this happens. Really have to step it up. If you have
the question, something that you do not understand, you shouldn’t feel
embarrass or shy to ask. If you don’t know then you should ask. You must
ask. I see that most of the time, the people who are asking questions in
class are the people have finished, who are   from the first basic program.
Those of you have just joined in this recent basic program, I don’t see
many of you asking. I don’t know why. Maybe pei she, maybe malu. I don’t
know.

Khen Rinpoche (in English): What is malu?

Ven Gyurme: Khen Rinpoche said something which I forgot to say. There is no
such thing as a stupid question. You don’t think your question is stupid
therefore I don’t want to ask.






