Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/SixPerfections/Lesson9.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:02.823863
================================================================================


Student 1: What is the difference between root of virtue and the seed?
The text says “Cuts the root of virtue”, what does it means?
Is there a difference from the seed of virtue? After having cut the root of
virtue, the seed is still there, so what is the function of the seed?
Khen Rinpoche: If you think about the word “roots of virtue”, the meaning
of that term “roots of virtue” would seems to be the same as “seeds of
virtue”, because the root of virtue is that which produces virtue.
We saw how anger can destroy the roots of virtue. So when anger destroys
roots of virtue, what the anger harming or destroying are the seeds and the
latencies of that virtuous action. The seeds of the action and the
latencies of the action are deposited on the mind.

Student 1:  The text says “the root”, why cannot it just say “the seed”?
The text says “after having destroyed the root, the seed is still there”.
It is very confusing.
Khen Rinpoche (English): Not confusing. Sometimes it says “root”, sometime
it says “seed”. The meaning is the same but different word.
Khen Rinpoche: When we accumulate virtue, the seeds of that virtue and the
latencies/imprints of that virtue are deposited on the mind. When anger
destroys the root of virtue, what it means is that anger is harming those
seeds and the latencies.
We did talk about the meaning of destruction of roots of virtue before.
Anger can harm the production or the arising of the ripened effect. These
particular seeds of virtue could have given rise to a powerful effect such
as happiness, but anger destroys that in the sense of making it very small.
(That particular seeds of virtue) could have been very wonderful and
spectacular effect but anger comes along and makes it very small.  Or we
could have experienced the positive ripened effect for very long time, but
when anger comes along, it reduces the span of time, i.e. it makes the
positive experience much shorter.
The seeds of virtue and the latencies of virtue have the potential to
produce a ripened effect. So when we say anger destroys the roots of
virtue, what anger does is that it harms the seeds and latencies potential
to issue forth an effect. Therefore, a big effect becomes a small effect,
and a positive experience that you could have experience it for a very long
period of time is much reduced.

Student 1: So destroying root of virtue means the seed is not entirely
destroyed.
Khen Rinpoche (English): Yes.
Student: Not like “burnt seed” like what we have learned before? That means
even after you get angry, you still enjoy your virtuous actions just that
it is smaller and for a shorter period of time. It is not entirely
destroyed?
Khen Rinpoche:  Essentially, what are the seeds of virtue and the latencies
of virtue? They are the potential to issue forth their respective effect.
So when we harm the root of virtue, it is rendering the potential to issue
forth an effect, i.e. rendering that potential ineffective, and in some
cases rendering it impotent.
We have talked about the three levels of extinguishment - the great, the
middling and the small extinguishment. The great extinguishment means that
the potential to issue forth the ripened effect is mostly destroyed.

Student 1: Once the potential is destroyed, why the seed is still there?
What is the function of the seed after the potential is destroyed?  Why you
cannot just destroy the seed and just leave the latencies. That will be
easier to understand.
Ven Gyurme: It is interesting why the seed is there. When an effect ripens
the seed is gone, but when it is destroyed by anger it is still there. It
is kind of weird.
Khen Rinpoche: It is very clear in the text that anger cannot destroy the
seed of virtue. While anger can harm the potential to issue forth an effect
i.e. anger can completely harm the seed of virtue such that it will not
give rise to any effect. But that anger cannot destroy the seed. The
potential to issue forth an effect can be completely destroyed, but the
seed is there. If the seed is not destroyed then the seed is still there.
Then question arise “What is its job? Does it have a role? What does it
do?”
Imagine there is a barley seed, and barley seed is burnt. Let’s say you
leave a barley seed out in the sun, it then becomes completely dried up
such that it cannot grow no matter how much water you put. The seed is
there but it cannot produce anything.
An individual on the forbearance stage of the Path of Preparation will
never take rebirth in the lower realms. Has he abandoned the seeds of the
lower realms rebirth? The answer is “No, he still has the seeds of the
lower realms rebirth”. If you ask “Is he ever going to born in the lower
realms?” The answer is “No”.  Even though this person on the forbearance
stage of the Path of Preparation has the seeds of the lower realms rebirth,
he will not be reborn in the lower realms. So the analogy is like the burnt
barley seed.
Although a burnt barley seed has lost all the potential to produce a
seedling, but nevertheless it is still there. Just like how a person on the
forbearance stage of the Path of Preparation has the seed to be born in the
lower realms but he will never be born in lower realms, although the seeds
are still there.  Back to the barley seed, although the barley seed is
burnt and has lost it potential to produce the seedling, but the burnt seed
is still there. In order to destroy the seed, you need another condition.
It does not go away. There must be another condition. You have to do
something in order to destroy it completely.

Student 1: Why do you have to destroy the virtuous seed? I don’t
understand.
Khen Rinpoche (English): First, you have to get the example clearly. You
got the example clearly?
Student 1: No. Now are we talking about virtuous or non-virtuous?
Khen Rinpoche: There are spoilt seeds such as barley seed or whatever seed.
No matter what you do to the spoilt seed, it will never produce a seedling.
But the spoilt seed exists and is still there.  You can destroy the spoilt
seed such as burn it in very high temperature.
The person on the forbearance stage of Path of Preparation has the seed of
the lower realms rebirth, but he will never be reborn in the lower realms
although he has the seeds. Because it is said that no matter what
conditions come about, that seed cannot produce a lower realms rebirth. He
still has the seed, i.e. the seed is still there. Although the seed is
there, that individual will not be reborn in the lower realms. The seed can
be destroyed, and it has to be destroyed by a powerful antidote, just like
how a normal seed must be destroyed by something powerful. The very thing
that can destroy the karmic seed is the wisdom directly perceiving
emptiness.

Student 1: Does it apply to virtuous seeds?
Khen Rinpoche: You can destroy seeds of non-virtue. Can you destroy seeds
of virtue?

Student 2 offered an explanation. (27mins – 28.40mins)
Khen Rinpoche: According to your view when do you think the contaminated
seeds of virtue are destroyed?
Student 2:  At enlightenment.
Ven Gyurme: There must be a destroyer. So it is destroyed by what?
Student 2:  You destroy even the obstruction to knowledge.
Ven Gyurme: So all seeds are obstruction to omniscience?
Student 2:  I wouldn’t say that.
Khen Rinpoche: We will accumulate the roots of virtue when we make
prostration to the Buddha. We accumulate the roots of virtue when we make
offerings. Let’s say we dedicate it to enlightenment, do these roots of
virtue go to enlightenment or not?
Student 2: It will be with you all the way to enlightenment.
Khen Rinpoche (English): All the way to enlightenment? Then just now you
said you have to stop all these?
Student 2:  Right. But the contaminated virtue…
Khen Rinpoche: There is no doubt that all the virtues that we do are
necessarily contaminated.
Student 2: I thought the contaminated virtue and uncontaminated karma would
obviously be very different. The uncontaminated karma would be from
somebody that have seen emptiness directly and doing things with a pure
motivation.
Khen Rinpoche: It follows that all contaminated path do not go on to
enlightenment.
Student 2: That is not true.
Khen Rinpoche: This follows that the wisdom realizing emptiness in the
continuum of someone on the Path of Preparation does not go to
enlightenment because it is a contaminated path.
Student 2: That is not true too.
Khen Rinpoche: It follows that it is not contaminated path.
Student 2: The path is not contaminated but the seed that is accumulated
without seeing emptiness directly i.e. we still do things with everything
as inherent existence, so obviously the act and the motivation would be
very different.

Khen Rinpoche: You say that contaminated virtue does not go to
enlightenment. Let’s posit what is contaminated virtue first. What is the
measure of contaminated virtue?
Student 2: I guess not knowing that whatever we posit is not inherent
existence and because of the ignorance, our motivation would be somewhat
different.
Ven Gyurme: If it is a virtue that is not done conjoined with the wisdom
directly perceiving emptiness is a contaminated virtue, are you saying
that?
Student 2: Yes.
Khen Rinpoche: So whatever virtue we accumulate necessarily contaminated?
Student 2: Yes.
Khen Rinpoche: Because it is contaminated, so all the virtues in our
continuum would not proceed on to enlightenment, right?
Student 2:  Not necessarily.
Khen Rinpoche: Your fundamental thesis from the beginning is that Buddha
has no contaminated phenomena. No contaminated because either it didn’t
come or it disappear. It follows that the contaminated virtue does not go
to enlightenment.
Student 2:   Maybe it is destroyed along the way.
Ven Gyurme: If it is destroyed it doesn’t go to enlightenment, right?
Student 2:   At the time of enlightenment it would all be burst out.
Khen Rinpoche:  It doesn’t go to enlightenment, so it is destroyed. How is
it destroyed? Is there a destroyer of the seeds of virtue?

We must remember the meaning of the destruction of roots of virtue. What is
the meaning of the destruction of roots of virtue? The destruction of roots
of virtue is posited as: “Harming the capacity of the roots of virtue to
issue forth a ripened result.”
The meaning of destroying the roots of virtue is not destroying the seeds
of virtue.
What we need to think is “Is there really a time or a need that the seeds
of virtue are eliminated?”

Student 2:   I don’t think there is a need at all. For the sake of like
putting a destroyed seed somewhere, because it is already rendered
ineffective, and it would not ever issue any function/effect at all. So it
is not a bother, it is not physically or mentally bothering actually.
Khen Rinpoche (English): So nothing bother so can go to enlightenment? No?
Student 2:   Even up to enlightenment, you can still carry those so called
debris.
Ven Gyurme: That means your thesis defeated.
Student: I am sure, but at least I learn.
Ven Gyurme: You accept?
Student 2:   I accept in the fact that by understanding the seed is no
longer issues any effect which is good enough for us to practice. Beyond
that, whether it evaporates or not evaporate, I think is of no practical
reference.
Ven Gyurme: Cannot. Cannot. You cannot account for a contaminated Buddha.
Khen Rinpoche: Let’s say when we develop a good heart, there is a part of
mind that is a virtuous mind, a good heart, does that go to enlightenment
or not?
Student 2:   Any virtuous activity would propel us towards the path of
enlightenment.
Ven Gyurme: Does the virtuous mind (the good heart) go to enlightenment?
Student 2:   Yes, it does.
Khen Rinpoche: It goes on to the next life isn’t it?
Student 2:   Of course.
Khen Rinpoche (English): Of course it goes to enlightenment.
Khen Rinpoche: You cannot totally eradicate the seed of virtue.
Student 2:   Because of that I believe all sentient beings one day goes to
enlightenment.
Ven Gyurme: Why is it that you can destroy the seed of non-virtue and not
the seed of virtue?

Khen Rinpoche: Seeds of non-virtue, latencies of non-virtue, seeds and
latencies of afflictions are all included under obscuration. They are all
obscurations. Therefore, they are objects of abandonment, and need to be
abandoned. The objects of abandonment are either abandoned by the Path of
Seeing or by the Path of Meditation. So it is alright to say that the seed
of non-virtue has to be abandoned, and the seed of a lower realms rebirth
has to be abandoned.
Now the question that remains is about the seed of virtue, has it got to be
destroyed? If it can be destroyed, what is its destroyer? That is what we
need to think about.
In the case of a spoilt seed of virtue which has been rendered ineffective
in issuing forth an effect, and it is a seed of virtue, how far can it go?
In the previous lesson, there was a discussion about how you can call
something a seed when it no longer functions as a seed. If the seed of
virtue has completely lost all potential to issue forth its ripened effect,
is it a seed?

Student 2:   I think it lost the function of being a seed already i.e. the
function is no longer there. So if you define a seed function, it can only
be debris and not a seed with function.
Khen Rinpoche: If that particular phenomenon, which you called a seed, has
completely lost all potential to produce its effect, what reason do you
have to still call it a seed?
Student: No reason, because it is no function.
Khen Rinpoche (English): No seed?
Ven Gyurme: A corpse is not a human right?
Student 2:   A corpse is not a human.

Student 1: Regarding the question “Why is it still called a seed”, I
remember something vaguely but I cannot quote it, “After realizing
emptiness directly, do those seeds that have been rendered impotent ripen
or not?
Ven Gyurme: You mean seed of virtue? Before the Path of Seeing it is
impotent, and then after the Path of Seeing, it revives?
Student 1:  You said the seed is still there, but only the potential is
destroyed. After you have realized emptiness, it is empty, so can it ripen?
Khen Rinpoche (English): Very, very interesting now. Now is more
interesting of what she said.
Khen Rinpoche: It is quite amazing to see how the root of virtue that was
destroyed before the Path of Seeing can produce result after entering the
Path of Seeing.
Khen Rinpoche (English): I mean it is an interesting idea, you can think
about it. I don’t know possible, but I don’t know why cannot.

Student 3:  I was asked a question “Whether a seed can be still called a
seed when it cannot issues forth an effect?” My answer is this “All
compounded phenomena are themselves effects and causes. A seed is produced
by its causes -it is produced as a seed in order to produce a certain
effect. For example, a mango seed is produced from mango trees. All these
got its causes, so it produces an effect which is the seed. It is not
called a seed just because it can produce a mango tree but because it
produces a certain causes. Similarly, the virtuous seed is produced from
virtue; it produces a seed in order to bring forth an effect. The fact that
its potentiality has been destroyed by anger, it is true that it can no
longer produce an effect, but the causes that produce it as a seed is still
there. So it still can be considered a seed i.e. is a seed without its
potentiality. That is my taking why it still can be labeled as a seed.
Khen Rinpoche: Please explain the reason for a spoilt seed to be called a
seed. A spoilt seed is something that has been rendered ineffective in
producing its effect. Although it is rendered ineffective, why do you still
call it a seed? There is barley that cannot produce any new barley, will
you still call it barley or not?
Student 3:  Yes, it is a spoilt barley seed. I don’t think it can still
produce but the characteristic is still there. If you open up the seed, it
still got all its structure.
Ven Gyurme: Is a person alive and the person dead in the coffin the same?
He came from the same causes. He is produced from the same causes and when
you opened up, the structure is the same, and the only difference is that
he cannot function.
Student 3:   I am not saying that all the structure is completely the same.
The way it is produced it was produced as a barley seed, and there is a
structure to it.
Ven Gyurme: Dead person was also produced as a person.

(Some discussions from 56 mins to 58mins)

Khen Rinpoche (English): I don’t know exactly. Just to discuss. Think more.
Now go back to our topic.

Employing the methods to eliminate the incompatible factors
1. Stopping the laziness of procrastination
2. Stopping attachment to ignoble activities
We have looked at joyous perseverance. It is said that if there is no
joyous perseverance, nothing can be achieved. With joyous perseverance all
qualities can be achieved.
We talked about the two factors incompatible with joyous perseverance. If
there are these two factors, you cannot engage in joyous perseverance.
These two factors incompatible with joyous perseverance are:
1. Seeing that you can do it, let’s say, the practice, but not doing it.
2. Thinking that it is too difficult and then not doing it.
Of the two incompatible factors, it is mentioned in the text that “not
doing it despite seeing that you can do it” is due to two reasons:
1) Procrastination: thinking that there is time. Basically just postpone in
   doing it - day after tomorrow, day after tomorrow
2) Not doing something that you know you can do due to attachment to
   ignoble activities. The solution is reflection on the topics of human
   life of leisure and endowments and death and impermanence that are from
   the section of the persons of small capacity. These fundamental
   meditations or reflections of human life of freedom and endowments and
   death and impermanence are extremely important. When we start to
   practice, we begin to practice with those reflections. Without engaging
   in those reflections, it is difficult to do the reflections and
   meditations, the practices that come after it, i.e. the later practices
   are very difficult to accomplish.
It is mentioned in the Lamrim texts about the nature of worldly activities.
Once you start the worldly activities/affairs, it will continue forever and
ever. They will never come to an end on their own. The question is: “When
do the worldly activities end?”  The answer is: “The day when you stop it”.

The thing about the human life of freedom and endowments is that while
after having obtained it, it is important that at the end of your life, you
do not go empty handed; which means you didn’t use it.
As mentioned in the teachings, when that happens, we are advised to think
of how we may go to the lower realms and suffer.  This is the way to
counteract attachment. We are advised to keep this in mind, and by keeping
this in mind, we strive in virtue.
There is also a Kadampa’s advice that says:
  Due to the precious past,
  Now you have obtained this precious jewel – the human life of freedom and
  endowments.
  Now when you have this precious jewel,
  Please do not throw it down the cliff
Precious past – past lives
Throw it down the cliff -literally is the future life.
Another incompatible factor with joyous perseverance is discouragement,
thinking “I cannot do it, it is just too difficult”.
There is the discouragement about the goal, thinking “There is no way, how
can I possibly achieve such a state?” We are advised to think and remember
“The Buddha in the past was like us. He was not a Buddha to begin with. But
through his gradual practice he became a Buddha. If we put in effort and
strive, why can’t we be one as well?” We have to think about this for
ourselves and to have encouragement.
[LRCM Vol 2 page 188] Stopping discouragement about the goal
Qualm: If the goal is buddhahood—the total elimination of all faults and
the total completion of all good qualities—then, since it is extremely
difficult for me to accomplish even a few good qualities or to remove even
a few faults, how could someone like me be capable of attaining such a
result?
Reply: If such a sense of discouragement manifests, it is a very great
fault because it constitutes giving up the spirit of enlightenment. Even if
such a thought does not fully manifest, you must stop it at its incipient
stage.
How to stop it? Encourage yourself with this thought: "The Bhagavan—the
authoritative person who speaks what is true and correct, never what is
false or erroneous—said that even flies, etc. will attain enlightenment.
That being so, why should I not attain it—so long as I do not give up
persevering—inasmuch as human birth gives me an excellent basis and I have
the mental capacity to analyze what to adopt and what to cast aside?"
Furthermore, stop your discouragement with this thought: "In the past there
were former buddhas, now there are living buddhas, and in the future there
will also be those who reach buddhahood. It is not the case that just one
person who has already become a buddha accomplishes the path. Rather, those
just like myself, gradually progressing upward, have become buddhas and
will become buddhas."

There is also discouragement about the means to attain the goal. In the
course of learning, we discover “In order to become a Buddha you have to a
lot of things. When comes to giving, you have to give everything - give
your arms and legs- and you have to engage in hardships”. When we learn
about these, we think “How is this possible? It is so difficult. Forget
it”. There is such a kind of discouragement.
The answer to that qualm is: “You do not give away your body so long as you
perceive it to be a difficult deed, but rather do so once it becomes very
easy, like giving a vegetable”. The practices of giving the body and those
very difficult things are practices that are meant for people who have
reached a certain level of their practice. In the case of giving you must
have reached a very advance stage in your practice of giving. Such
practices are not meant for people who have not reached that level. It is
said that once a person reached that level, such a practice is not
difficult for that person. The advice is “There is no need to get
discouraged now”.
[LRCM Vol 2  page 190] Stopping discouragement about the means to attain
the goal
Qualm: To accomplish buddhahood you have to give away your feet, hands,
etc., but I am not capable of such feats.
Reply. You must bear suffering to that extent, for even those who live as
they please without engaging in the bodhisattva deeds experience as they
pass through cyclic existence unspeakable sufferings such as having their
bodies cut open, torn to pieces, stabbed, set on fire, and so forth, but
they do not accomplish even their own welfare. The suffering occasioned by
undergoing hardships for the sake of enlightenment is not even a fraction
of this suffering, and also has the great purpose of accomplishing both
your own and others' welfare.
With respect to giving away your body, you do not give it in the beginning
when you are afraid. But through graduated training in generosity, you end
your attachment to your body. Once you have increased the strength of your
great compassion, you have no difficulty when you give it away, provided it
is for a great purpose
Some say that since practitioners of the perfection vehicle must give away
their bodies and lives, they undergo torment and are on a path that is very
difficult to follow. This text clearly refutes this, because you do not
give away your body so long as you perceive it to be a difficult deed, but
rather do so once it becomes very easy, like giving a vegetable.
Another reason for getting discouraged is thinking “In order to achieve
enlightenment we would have to take so many rebirths and all these rebirths
are in samsara. In all these rebirths in samsara, I will suffer greatly”.
The answer to that is: Bodhisattvas have eliminated all negativities;
therefore, sin's effect - the feeling of suffering - will not arise because
they have stopped the cause. Through firm knowledge that cyclic existence
lacks an intrinsic nature, like a magician's illusion, they also have no
mental suffering. Given that their physical and mental bliss increases,
they have no reason to become disheartened even though they are still in
cyclic existence.
I think the bodhisattvas here are bodhisattva superiors - those who have
realize emptiness directly. Such bodhisattva superiors have abandoned all
negativities. Because of their powerful insight into emptiness, they do not
experience pain or suffering mentally. Such bodhisattvas do not experience
physical and mental pain. As such it doesn’t matter how many more times
they are reborn, it doesn’t affect them.
[LRCM Vol 2  page 191] Stopping discouragement because wherever you are is
a place to practice
Qualm: Reaching buddhahood requires taking limitless rebirths in cyclic
existence, so I will be harmed by the suffering therein. I am not capable
of such a thing.
Reply: Reflect as follows. Bodhisattvas have eliminated all sin; therefore,
sin's effect—the feeling of suffering—will not arise because they have
stopped the cause. Through firm knowledge that cyclic existence lacks an
intrinsic nature, like a magician's illusion, they also have no mental
suffering. Given that their physical and mental bliss increases, they have
no reason to become disheartened even though they are still in cyclic
existence.
There are all these different advices. The point is not to get discouraged.
That is the whole message. Once you are discouraged and give up, nothing
happens.
One needs to gather the favorable conditions as well for developing joyous
perseverance. There are the four powers that we are supposed to develop.
[LRCM Vol 2 page 195] (b") Gathering the forces of the favorable conditions
  1. Developing the power of aspiration
  2. Developing the power of steadfastness
  3. Developing the power of joy
  4. The power of relinquishment
1. Developing the power of aspiration
The power of aspiration is essentially yearning i.e. you want it so badly.
So, developing the power of aspiration is developing this yearning.  If you
apply it to studying, you develop the yearning by seeing what is in there
for you- the benefits of studying. That is how you develop the yearning.
The yearning is a long term thing. The yearning should be the yearning to
complete the process of learning. Time is not really a factor thinking “It
doesn’t matter how long it takes, this is what I will do”.
2. Developing the power of steadfastness
The power of steadfastness is not engaging in just any action without
investigation. But once you engage in the action upon investigation, make
sure you carry it out to the end and complete it. Just like how one strives
in one day, and completing in one day, like that then developing the
steadfastness of being joyously persevering for the entire life.
3. Developing the power of joy
The attitude we should have is like a child who once engage in play, he
engages in play without being satisfied/satiated. So when we joyously
persevere in virtue, the attitude should be like that of a child while
engaging in play.
4. The power of relinquishment
The power of relinquishment is that you should rest for a while if you
become physically or mentally fatigued from your perseverance. Once you are
rested, you should continue joyously persevering at that whatever activity.

The power of joy and the power of relinquishment go together. So using the
example of play, if you are playing a game that you have great interest,
you will play the game for a long time. But you need to rest as you just
cannot just go on for 24 hours. So then you take a rest. But when you are
resting, you still have the urge and want to play. After you are rested,
you will continue with the game. As in the example, this aspect is
important. While joyously persevering, whether it is a particular practice
or study, we do get tired out while in the process. When we are tired out,
we take a short rest.  While we are resting, at the back of our mind we
have this idea that we want to continue. That is what we need to have. Once
we are sufficiently rested, we engage again in the study or practice and
then continue.
The power of joy and the power of relinquishment are very important
especially in seeing a virtuous act to the completion. One of the reasons
why we don’t really complete whatever virtuous acts we have started is due
to lack of joy in the first place. Even we have a little bit of joy when we
get at it, we will have some rest when we are tired. But for us, the rest
is permanent and there is no continuity. That is why it all ends there.
The power of aspiration and power of steadfastness are also very important.
These are the four favorable conditions for producing joyous perseverance.
These powers also basically apply to anything you do. In order to start on
anything and complete it, these powers apply.
There is advice given in the teachings that when we engage in virtue and we
are joyously persevering, whatever virtue that we do should be done with a
calm mind that is not tense. Then the practice of the virtuous activity
will be effective.
Ven Gyurme: I don’t use the word “relax” because it sounds like loose. So I
use the word “not tense” - kind of “open spacious” mind.
While there is joyous perseverance, it is important that the mind engaging
in virtue is spaciousness, i.e. not tense.
You can see a lot of people when they engage in virtue, the mind becomes
very tight, very tense, and not spacious. Because of that such people
hardly complete the things they started with.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): Practicing too hard become stressed, too
intense or too relax?
Strive in joyous perseverance till the time whereby just as wind drives a
piece of cotton to and fro, a joyful energy enthused for virtue, controls
your body and mind. This comes by depending on stopping the incompatible
factors with joyous perseverance and developing the favorable conditions
for joyous perseverance.
First you have to know what the incompatible factors with joyous
perseverance are, i.e. obstacles or hindrances to joyous perseverance.
You know what they are, then oppose them and get rid of them.
Know what the compatible factors or favorable conditions are and then
develop them.
When you are able to do so, then you are able to engage in any virtuous
activities happily and joyously.
[LRCM Vol 2 page 206] Question:  What  form  will  the  joyous  perseverance
produced by such efforts take?
Reply: Just as wind drives a piece of cotton to and fro,  a  joyful  energy,
enthused for virtue, controls your body and mind. When you  act  along  with
this energy, joyous  perseverance  is  well-established.  Once  you  produce
this, you will easily achieve all the collections.
Next lesson we will start with calm abiding or meditative serenity. Please
read on your own starting from the end of joyous perseverance till just
before the section on calm abiding i.e. on the short description of the
perfection of meditative stabilization and perfection of wisdom, and the
four ways of gathering people around you. We will start on calm abiding on
the coming lesson.

[LRCM Vol 2 page 195-201]
(1") Developing the power of aspiration
As it is said that yearning acts as the basis for joyous perseverance,
aspiration here refers to yearning.
(2") Developing the power of steadfastness
Developing the power of steadfastness means that you bring to conclusion,
without turning back, anything at which you joyously persevere. First, do
not try to do everything; examine the situation carefully. If you see that
you can do it, you engage in it; whereas if you cannot do it, you do not
engage in it. You should not even start in the first place things you will
do for a while and then discard. The reason is that if you become
habituated to giving up in the middle what you have committed yourself to
do, then through this conditioning you will in other lives again abandon
your commitment to the training, etc. Consequently, your sin will increase
in that life, and in subsequent lives the suffering that is the effect of
this sin will increase. Furthermore, you will not accomplish other virtues
because you will be thinking of carrying out your earlier commitment; there
will be an inferior result because you turned away from your earlier
commitment; and your earlier commitment itself will not be fulfilled
because you did not follow through. In sum, committing yourself to do
something but leaving it unfinished is a hindrance to your accomplishment
of other projects, and the conditioning also destabilizes your commitment
to the vows you have taken.
(3") Developing the power of joy
You develop the power of joy after the power of aspiration, an intense
yearning, produces a joyous perseverance not previously present, and you
have achieved the power of steadfastness (also called the power of pride)
which causes the perseverance that has already developed to be
irreversible. The power of joy means that when you first engage in an
activity, you do it joyfully, and once you have engaged, you have a sense
of being insatiable in that you do not want to discontinue the activity.
So strive with an attitude like that of children who engage in play without
being satiated. That is, you must be just as insatiable about what causes
pleasurable results as you are about the results themselves. For, if
ordinary persons strive even when they are uncertain whether they will
obtain a pleasant result, what need is there to speak about activities
which are certain to bear pleasurable results?
(4") The power of relinquishment
If you become physically or mentally fatigued from your perseverance, you
must rest for a while. Otherwise, you will become exhausted and very
disheartened, thereby later preventing your joyous perseverance.
Immediately after you have rested, persevere again, and when you have
completely finished your earlier activity, do not let this satisfy you. You
must joyously persevere at other, higher activities
The above presentation shows how to joyously persevere. Do not overexert
yourself. You must avoid both being overly intense and being overly
relaxed, so make your effort continuous like a river.
