Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/SixPerfections/Lesson7.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:53:57.244723
================================================================================


The Perfection OF Patience

(iii) How to train in the perfection of patience
 (a') What patience is
 (b') The divisions of patience
 (c') The ways to produce it in one’s continuum
(c') The ways to produce it in one’s continuum
Anger destroys virtue; sometimes anger destroys the fruitional effects,
sometimes anger destroys the causally concordant effects.
[LRCM Vol 2 page 157] Moreover, as already explained, even though you
cleanse your accumulation of sins through purification by the four powers,
this does not contradict the fact that you are slow to produce higher
paths. Accordingly, for some persons anger destroys, for instance, their
resources and excellent body—the respective effects of giving gifts and
safeguarding ethical discipline—but is unable to destroy their ability to
easily produce roots of virtue again through giving gifts and safeguarding
ethical discipline by means of the causally concordant behavioral effect of
their habituation to generosity and an attitude of abstention.
The text is saying that for some people, anger destroys the fruitional
effects of their virtues.
For some people, anger destroys the fruitional effects of having resources
and having an excellent body. These are the fruitional effects. However,
for these same people, their anger does not destroy their natural liking or
dispositions towards safe guarding their ethical discipline or giving. This
natural liking for giving and the natural liking for ethical discipline are
said to be the causally concordant behavioral effects of giving and safe
guarding ethical discipline respectively.
What we are discussing here are the different ways in which anger destroys
virtue. For some people, anger destroys the fruitional effects of their
virtues but does not destroy the causally concordant behavioral effects.
[LRCM Vol 2 page 157] For other persons, anger destroys the continuous
occurrence of a similar type of causally concordant virtuous behavior like
ethical self-discipline and so on, but does not destroy the occurrence of
an excellent body, resources, and so forth.
For some people, anger destroys the causally concordant behavioral effects
such that they lose their liking or dispositions towards giving and
safeguarding their ethical discipline. Although the causally concordant
behavioral effects of such virtues are destroyed, they do experience the
fruitional effects of their virtue; they are able to have resources, and
also have excellent bodies. For such people, although they may have
resources and have excellent bodies, they do not like to practice giving,
or they do not want to safeguard their ethical discipline.
This shows that for some people anger destroys the causally concordant
behavioral effects but does not destroy the fruitional effects of their
virtues.
[LRCM Vol 2 page 157]  Some [bodhisattvas] realize a path through which
they progress to perfection within one eon, for instance, if they do not
generate anger toward a bodhisattva who has obtained a prediction of his or
her upcoming enlightenment (as explained earlier). If they produce a single
angry thought toward such a bodhisattva, this path is not expelled from
their mind-stream, but their progress on the path becomes slow for the
length of an eon.
For some people, anger does not destroy the fruitional effects and the
causally concordant effects of their virtues, but their progress on the
path is delayed or slowed down. For example, there may be someone who may
achieve enlightenment in an eon, but if they get angry, their enlightenment
is delayed for an eon. That means, for them it become one eon further away
from enlightenment.
Lama Tsongkhapa mentioned in his “Illumination of Thought”, commentary to
Chandrakirti’s  “Supplement to the Middle Way”, that if a bodhisattva on
the Mahayana Great Path of Accumulation gets angry with a bodhisattva who
has obtained a prediction of enlightenment, this bodhisattva (who gets
angry) has to train again from the beginning in his path.
As for the measure of having obtained a prediction or not, I am not exactly
sure about the measure as it is not explicitly stated. This is something
that we can think about.
Does a bodhisattva on the Path of Preparation get angry?
Is there manifest anger in the continuum of a bodhisattva on the Path of
Preparation?
[LRCM Vol 2 page 157]  In brief, just as in the case of the purification of
non-virtue there is no need to purify every behavioral effect, so with
respect to the destruction of virtue there is no need to destroy every
behavioral effect.
(Student queried about the difference between what is in the Lamrim Chenmo
and MLLR.
Ven Gyurme: The MLLR and Lamrim Chenmo are the same. Cheba?? in Tibetan
should be behavioral effect, and is translated as efficacy in MLLR. Cheba
is not total effect. )
[LRCM Vol 2 page 157]  However, as this is important and as it is critical
to analyze it using the scriptures of the unique Buddha and the reasoning
based on them, you should research the scriptures well and do an analysis.
This example shows that it is very important to learn and reflect on many
texts and scriptures. When you do that, you are able to gain a better and
stronger conviction and ascertainment. In this case, with respect to the
faults of anger and the benefits of patience, with this conviction one
would be in a better position to be able to counteract anger. In the
previous discussion, we saw how conventionally in this world, most people
would agree that with some justification it is alright to be angry
especially when the truth is on their side. Anyway most people think like
that. If truth is on their side and if they are right, it is kind of
justified to be angry. But, as we saw earlier in the text, Lama Tsongkhapa
mentioned that when it comes to the destruction of virtue, anger does not
make a distinction between getting angry with just reason or unjust reason.
There is no distinction for it.
In the situation whereby the truth is on your side and you are right, and
if that truth is a condition for you to get upset, then when you are angry,
you suffer because your mind are disturbed and you lose all the peace.
So far we saw how:
• in some cases anger destroys the root of virtue accumulated over a
  thousand eons,
• in other instances anger destroys the root of virtues accumulated over a
  hundred eons, and
• in some situations, where ordinary being getting angry at another
  ordinary being, the root of virtue accumulated over many lifetimes are
  destroyed.
All these are invisible faults of anger, and we cannot directly perceive
these faults. We can only come to the understanding of these faults and
develop an ascertainment of them by depending on the scriptures of Buddha.
By depending on these scriptures, then we have to think.
[LRCM Vol 2 page 157]  Thus, the invisible faults of anger are that it
projects its own fruitions, which are extremely unpleasant, and that it
prevents the arising of the measureless very pleasant fruitions of its
opposite [virtue].
Anybody understands about one of the invisible faults which say “it
prevents the arising, one of the invisible faults, it prevents the arising
of the measureless very pleasant fruitions of its opposite”?
Khen Rinpoche: I didn’t understand that sentence for some time. What is the
sentence saying? Now it is your turn to explain to me. What does that mean?
Student: It means that the fault of anger is that it will throw you into
many unpleasant rebirths, and it either delay or actually destroy
measureless rebirths in good conditions.
Khen Rinpoche: Anyway I don’t understand, you can think about it.
Next is the visible effect.
[LRCM Vol 2 page 157] The faults of anger visible in this lifetime are that
you do not experience a peaceful and good mind; the joy and happiness that
you had previously perish, and you cannot regain them; you cannot sleep
well; and you weaken the stability wherein your mind stays calm. When you
have great hatred, even those for whom you formerly cared forget your
kindness and kill you; even friends and relatives will get annoyed and
leave you; although you gather others with your generosity, they will not
stay; and so on.
These things are quite apparent in our life. As it says here, when there is
great hatred, we get upset, we lose the mental calm, and our mind gets
disturbed. When our mind gets disturbed it affects us physically as well.
If due to great hatred, even those who we have cared for in the past may
forget our kindness and may even harm us and kill us if we do things when
we get upsets.
Depending on the motivation, sometimes people engage in the practice of
generosity to gather people such as to bring people into the fold.  Even if
you do bring people into your fold by giving them things, they may just
take the things and without staying, they leave. Then you get upset.
There isn’t a single person who has not experience strong anger. Everybody
knows how anger disturbs oneself mentally. We could say that we have the
full realization of the effects, i.e. the full realization of how it feels
to have strong anger. We just have to be aware and cognizant of the points
that were listed in the text about the faults and disadvantages of anger.
We should try to moderate or diminish and reduce our anger.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): We have the perfection of the anger. Not the
generosity but the perfection of anger. I think probably we have. If there
is perfection of anger then we should have.
[LRCM Vol 2 page 158]  Thus, Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds says:
      There is no sin like hatred
      And no fortitude like patience.
      Therefore, earnestly cultivate
      Patience in a variety of ways.
First, understand the benefits and faults, and then strive to cultivate
patience in many ways.
It can make a difference if we memorize this verse, or even the first two
lines: “There is no sin like hatred, And no fortitude like patience”. If we
have memorized it, then we can recall it at times when we get upset or we
are angry. If we have memorized the verse, then it is easier to recall. So
by recalling the verse, we should bring to mind the meaning of the two
lines by thinking about the faults of anger, and then thinking about the
benefits of patience. I n doing so, we can try to moderate and reduce the
anger.
There is no one who doesn’t get angry. If you are someone who has full
conviction in karma, and in the validity of the Buddha’s teachings, then
when you recall this verse “how anger destroys merits/virtues”, definitely
you can do something with the anger that is manifesting. You can reduce it
and get a hold of it. We should derive some benefit from studying about the
perfection of patience, then reading and thinking about it. It is very
difficult to stop anger from arising. What we can do is to get hold of it
and reduce it when it does arise. At the very minimum this is what we
should do after learning and studying about this.
[LRCM Vol 2 page 159] Still, there are many wrongs other than anger that
combine both production of a terrible fruition and destruction of the roots
of virtue: wrong views that deny cause and effect; abandoning the sublime
teachings; generating pride in relation to bodhisattvas, gurus, and the
like and thus terribly belittling them; and so forth. You can know of these
from the Compendium of Trainings.
Anger is not the only thing that destroys the root of virtue. We have just
read some examples of other mental states. For example, if we have wrong
views denying karma or we abandon the dharma or we belittle the bodhisattva
or our own gurus, these actions are said to produce terrible fruitions.
Next, in the MLLR, it is how we should meditate on patience. Prior to this
section, one should reflect on the benefits of patience and the faults of
anger. On that basis then one cultivates patience.

(c') The divisions of patience
1’. Developing the patience of disregarding harm done to you
2’. Developing the patience of accepting suffering
3’. Developing the patience of certitude about the teachings

1’. Developing the patience of disregarding harm done to you
In the MLLR, “developing the patience of disregarding harm done to you” is
covered in five points.
If you analyze whether the harm doers have any self-control not to harm
you, they did not harm you while having self-control. Rather it was the
seeds left by afflictions to which they were previously habituated and
erroneous conceptions that produced the desire to harm. This in turn
produces the work of harming; and this produces suffering for someone else.
Moreover, they have become like servants of their afflictions, because they
are under the control of others, i.e., their afflictions.
[LRCM Vol 2 page 160]  Analyze, thinking, "What would be reasonable grounds
for anger toward harm doers?" Whereupon, you might think, "They first had
the thought of wanting to harm me, prepared the method, and then either
prevented my happiness or inflicted unpleasant physical or mental
suffering, so my anger is justified." Are you angry because they inflicted
harm while they had the self-control not to harm you, or are you angry
because they were utterly without any self-control and hurt you while
helplessly impelled by something else? In the former case, your anger is
unjustified because those who inflict harm do not have control over
themselves, for, when the conditions and causes - seeds left by afflictions
to which they were previously habituated, a nearby object, and erroneous
conceptions - come together, they give rise to the thought to harm, even
though the harm-doers do not think, "I will feel malice"; whereas if those
causes and conditions are not complete, they will never produce the thought
to harm, even if the harm doers think, "I will feel malice." These causes
and conditions produce the desire to harm; this in turn produces the work
of harming; and this produces suffering for someone else, so those harm
doers do not have even the slightest self-control. Moreover, they have
become like servants of their afflictions, because they are under the
control of others, i.e., their afflictions.
In trying to develop the patience that disregards harm done to you, the
first thing to think and analyze is whether the harm doer has any self
control or not when he is harming you. Upon analysis, the conclusion is
that the harm doer has no self-control as to whether to harm us or not.
Why? Because he/she is completely under the control of his/her own
afflictions.
Or, if the other person, the harm doer doesn’t have anger i.e. is not under
the control of his anger then there is no way that the person harms you.
But the other person is under the control of his afflictions such as anger,
attachment and so forth. In that sense they are under the control of the
afflictions, and they harm because of their afflictions.
What we have to establish with 100% certainty from our side is that the
harm doer has no choice whatsoever, i.e. he has completely no self-control.
We have to establish for ourselves that the person really has no choice,
and no self-control. We have to develop conviction in this. By thinking
about this using many avenues of reasoning, and if you do come to a very
decisive ascertainment that the person really has no self-control and he
doesn’t have any independence, then definitely it helps to weaken our
anger.
Basically the text is saying that it is incorrect to get upset and angry
with someone who has no self-control. It is not justified to feel angry
even if the harm doers are without self-control and are impelled by others
to hurt you. For instance, some people who have been possessed by demons
and have come under their control may wish to hurt those who are helping
them to get free of their demons and thereupon beat them, etc. However,
their helpers think, "They do this because their demons have eliminated
their ability to control themselves," and do not have even the slightest
anger toward them. They then strive to the best of their ability to free
them from the demons. Likewise, the bodhisattvas also need to do the same.
[LRCM Vol 2 page 161]  In the latter case—you are angry because the harm
doers are utterly without any self-control and, being helplessly impelled
by something else, they hurt you—then your anger is totally unjustified.
[406] For instance, some people who have been possessed by demons and have
come under their control may wish to hurt those who are helping them to get
free of their demons and thereupon beat them, etc. However, their helpers
think, "They do this because their demons have eliminated their ability to
control themselves," and do not have even the slightest anger toward them.
They then strive to the best of their ability to free them from their
demons. Likewise, when bodhisattvas are hurt by others, they think, "They
do this because the demons of the afflictions have eliminated their ability
to control themselves." Without being even the slightest bit angry with
those persons they then must generate the spirit of enlightenment,
thinking, "I will strive at the bodhisattva deeds in order to free them
from these afflictions."
Thinking about the meaning of the analogy is a method for us to stop our
anger.
Next is stating the source for this line of reasoning.
[LRCM Vol 2 page 161]
      Aryadeva's Four Hundred Stanzas says:
      Just as a doctor does not fight but helps
      Patients who are possessed by spirits, though they get angry,
      So the Sage sees that the afflictions are at fault.
      Not the persons who have the afflictions.
      The master Candrakirti also states:
      "This is not living beings' fault,
      Rather it is the fault of the afflictions."
      So the learned analyze
      And do not fight with others.
The fault does not lie with the person, the harm doer, rather the fault
lies with their afflictions. That is one way of thinking. Another way of
thinking is linking that the harm that you received back to your own karma.

On analysis of the subject, anger is unjustified
The suffering generated by harm is the effect of previous bad karma. By
experiencing it, you exhaust this karma. If you bear the suffering, you do
not accumulate new sins and you greatly increase your merit. If you are
angry, you will experience greater suffering than that.
[LRCM Vol 2 page 164] The suffering generated by harm is the effect of
previous bad karma; by experiencing it, you exhaust this karma. If you bear
the suffering, you do not accumulate new sins and you greatly increase your
merit. Therefore, you must not consider how harm doers ruin their virtue,
but view them as kind in that it is as though they are engaged in actions
for the sake of clearing away your sins.
Intellectually, this is not a difficult thing to understand. If you think
about it, it is quite straight forward. Even if you look at it from the
perspective of just one life, this life, generally people who are good
people don’t have much problems. Whenever you experience a problem, usually
the victim is also involved. It must have been due to an inappropriate
action committed in the past such as you didn’t show the correct kind of
facial expressions or you didn’t say something properly or your way of
doing things for whatever reason was not correct.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): You didn’t say “Hi”. You didn’t say “Hello”.
It is definitely something lies in us that are the basis or cause for the
other person to get upset. People don’t get upset for no reason. In that
sense we are a condition for the other person to get upset. We can think
about what we can do to stop the person from being upset so that he can
relax.
In short, every undesirable thing that happens to us, every single
suffering, and every problem is the result of our own negative karma. When
we experience problems, we can think that the negative karma that is the
cause of this particular experience is being purified. We can also remind
ourselves “If I react to this in a negative way, then I will accumulate new
negative karma which will lead to greater sufferings”. This way of thinking
is actually a great summary in itself as a technique for controlling anger.

[LRCM Vol 2 page 165] Therefore, just as you tolerate bleeding or burning
as a treatment to cure a severe illness, it is appropriate to bear small
suffering for the sake of preventing great suffering.
The concept is not difficult at all. What is difficult is thinking about
it. We just have to get at it, and think about this over and over again. By
thinking about these different points, we practice the patience of
disregarding harm done to us.
So that is developing the patience of disregarding harm done to you.
Next is developing the patience of accepting suffering.
(2') Developing the patience of accepting suffering
Developing the patience of accepting suffering is covered in three points.
1. Rejecting the idea that when suffering occurs it is absolutely
unpleasant
[LRCM Vol 2 page 173] If you can remedy a situation wherein suffering
occurs, you do not need to feel that it is unpleasant. If you cannot remedy
it, it is not helpful to find it unpleasant, so there is no need for, or
effectiveness to, your displeasure; there is even a disadvantage. If you
are very impatient, a slight suffering is extremely difficult to bear,
whereas if you minimize your impatience, you can endure great suffering.
Take for instance, when one comes down with a sickness. Usually people get
upset when they find that they have particular sickness. They get upset and
the minds are disturbed. At such a time we should think about what we have
just read from the Lamrim. We should sit down and analyze: “Is there a cure
to the sickness?” If there is, then there is no reason to get upset or
worried. If there is no cure, there is also no need to get upset. We need
great fortitude great forbearance. For if there is no forbearance, even a
small problem can bring about great suffering for us.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): I want to speak, for example, in the monastery
there are some monks who are very impatient. You cannot even throw small
pebble to his head. He becomes very impatient. Sometimes everybody tease
especially that monk. Everybody tease him. If his zhen is pulled from the
side he gets angry. You cannot touch him. This monk has so much suffering
because everyone teases him. Because of that everybody wants to play with
him. At times who throw the rock nobody knows. When he looks back he gets
angry like that. By getting teased, after 5 years or 10 years, he becomes
very patient. We need to try here. Joking! So that’s the benefit. After
that he doesn’t care. Even how many rocks come to him he doesn’t care. Once
he doesn’t care, nobody throw the rock. We have some monks in the class
also, everybody tease him. In the end, he becomes the best in the class –
no anger. So the example likes that. In monastery it is like that. When the
person is angry, everybody tease him. But again, depend on the person. Some
people generates…better don’t talk. Later the monk found out.
That is rejecting the idea that when suffering occurs it is absolutely
unpleasant.
Next is reflecting on the good qualities of suffering.
2. Reflecting on the good qualities of suffering
[LRCM Vol2, page 174] Suffering has five good qualities:
(1) The good quality of spurring you on to liberation. This is because if
you had no suffering, you would not develop the determination to be free of
it.
(2) The good quality of dispelling arrogance. This is because when
suffering strikes you, it reduces your sense of superiority.
(3) The good quality of causing you to shun sin. This is because when you
experience very painful feelings, they arise from non-virtue, so if you do
not want these effects, you must avoid their causes.
(4) The good quality of causing you to like cultivating virtue. This is
because when you are tormented with suffering, you desire happiness, and
once you want it, you must cultivate the virtue that causes it.
(5) The good quality of producing compassion for those who wander in cyclic
existence. This is because after you have assessed your own situation, you
think, "Other beings suffer like this."
From these five and what they indicate, recognize other good qualities on
your own and then repeatedly train your mind to think, "This suffering is a
condition that I want."
In the teachings on the Four Noble Truths, the Buddha talked about true
suffering first. The Buddha gave an extensive explanation on what suffering
is. It is essentially an introduction to help us to recognize what
suffering is. The best way to understand and recognize suffering is at the
individual level by relating to one’s own experience. That is the best way.
When you really recognize what suffering is, you will produce a
determination to be free from it. At times you may be feeling arrogant for
whatever reason and at that time if you happen to fall very sick, naturally
the sickness will dispels the arrogance. So being arrogant is not a good
thing.
There are many good qualities of suffering. We have to think about them.
When we experience problems, and if we recognize and realize that it is the
result of our own non-virtue, our own negative karma, that may propel us to
think about abandoning non-virtue. The point is that we are just trying to
prevent or stop our mind from being disturbed when facing crisis or problem
such as a sickness or when we are harmed. When there is a problem, there
are techniques to remain calm and not to be disturbed. The way to remain
calm is to think about the qualities of suffering and the benefits.
[LRCM Vol2, page 176] (c) How it is not difficult to bear suffering if you
gradually grow accustomed to it, starting with the small
Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds states:
    There is nothing whatsoever
    That does not become easier through habituation.
    So by becoming used to small harms
    You will bear great harms as well.
After you have conceived the armor-like thought to accept suffering, you
gradually blend it with suffering, starting with small sufferings. When you
do this, you steadily increase your capacity to accept suffering.
That is all for developing the patience of accepting suffering.
Next is developing the patience of certitude about the teachings.  The way
to meditate on the forbearance or believe about certitude about the
teachings:
[LRCM Vol2, page 178] (3) Developing the patience of certitude about the
teachings
The patience of certitude about the teachings means generating the
forbearance of conviction. It has eight objects:
1. The object of faith. This is the good qualities of the three jewels.
2. The object to be actualized. This is the reality of the two
selflessnesses.
3. The desired object. This is the great powers of the buddhas and
bodhisattvas, of which there are three –the power of the superknowledges,
the power of the six perfections, and the power which is innate.
4. The object to be adopted. This is wanting both the cause - good deeds -
and the effect of these deeds.
5. The object to be discarded. This is wishing to avoid both the cause –
misdeeds - and the effect of these deeds.
6. The object of meditation that is the goal to be achieved. This is
enlightenment.
7. The object of meditation that is the method for achieving the goal. This
is all the paths of training in the spirit of enlightenment.
8. The object of subsequent practice through study and reflection.
According to Dro-lung-ba, this refers to the province of what is to be
known, such as impermanence and so forth. The Power-Lineage Chapter of the
Bodhisattva Levels mentions that the eighth is the sublime teaching - the
twelve branches of scripture and so forth - so I think you have to take it
as being this.
It is mentioned in the teachings that with regards to the destruction of
virtue, there is:
   1. Great extinguishment,
   2. Middling extinguishment
   3. Small extinguishment
We are talking about the destructions of roots of virtue. That is covered
using these three terms - great extinguishment, middling extinguishment and
small extinguishment.
What is small extinguishment?
A small extinguishment is reducing the length of time whereby you can
experience the effects of virtue.
Without anger you would have experience the positive effects for a very
long time. But when anger destroys virtue, rather than experiencing for a
long time, you can only experience the positive effect for a short time.
Or that root of virtue would have produced a great happiness and great
result for you, but due to anger the result becomes very small. These are
instances of small extinguishment.
A great extinguishment refers to, you could say, the almost complete
destruction of all effects.
When virtue gives rise to effect, there are the fruitional effects and the
causally concordant effects which are good effects. The effects of virtue
are good effects. Great extinguishment is the situation whereby the effects
of both the fruitional effects and the causally concordant effects are
mostly wiped out.
Now you know what a small extinguishment is and what a great extinguishment
is. The middling extinguishment is something that is in between these two.
Using reasoning, you should be able to infer or posit what it is.
What is the meaning of the destruction of roots of virtue? What does it
mean to destroy the roots of virtue? What does destroy here means?
Destroy here means harming the roots of virtue’s capacity to produce or
issue forth its pleasant effects.
As for the degree of harm, there is great harm, middling harm and small
harm.
As we saw in the earlier lesson, as mentioned in the Lamrim, the
destructions of roots of virtue does not mean the destructions of the seeds
of virtue. It doesn’t mean that.
Our own position is that the destruction of roots of virtue does not mean
the destruction of the seeds of virtue. Our position is that the
destruction of roots of virtue means harming the roots of virtue’s capacity
to produce pleasant effects.
Student: (Ven Gyurme summarized) What kind of sin or negativity destroys
only the behavioral effects? What kind of sin destroys only the fruitional
effects? Are there sins that destroy both or not?
Answer: I think it is difficult to posit such kind of anger, for example,
destroys the fruitional effects, whereas it is another kind of anger that
destroys the behavioral effects. I guess it is possible to conceive certain
types of anger as being the destroyer of fruitional effects and one can
think of there are certain kinds of anger that destroy the behavioral
effects. That is different from positing. I haven’t seen such a discussion
in the text. Neither have I thought about it because I didn’t have the time
to think about this.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): Anybody have idea? This type of anger destroy
fruitional effects and you have this type of anger destroy behavioral
effects. I am not sure.
Student: In western psychology there is this therapy whereby they ask the
patients to hit the pillow or throw darts at the picture of the enemy in
order to bring out the anger in full force to eliminate the anger. If
someone will to ask me about this, and being a Buddhist who believe in
karma, how should I advise that person? Is it virtuous or non-virtuous?
Khen Rinpoche (in English):  I heard some people when they get angry they
eat a lot. They can eat and eat to subdue their anger.
Answer: There are all kinds of temporary methods that give you a relief
from that frustration. Some people are just gorging away. This basically
takes your mind away from the unpleasant situation. It is kind of
distraction, thinking about something else or as you say, bash up your
pillow. But these are just temporary. You are basically taking yourself for
a ride. It is just basically cheating yourself, make yourself not think
about anger.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): There is one businessman. He told me sometimes
he has so much stress, so much anger in his life. How he control his anger
and stress? He said he drink 3 bottles of wine and then falls asleep so he
doesn’t think the whole night. That is his method. He is not Buddhist. But
he said when he wakes up in the morning, the problems come back. Problem is
back. Every day he has to do like that. The example about hitting the
pillow maybe whole day need to hit the pillow, every night, whole life need
to hit the pillow.
There are many such temporary methods, but they are just temporary. The
approach that we are learning here in the teaching is a radically different
one because it is not seeking the solution from outside, but it is changing
the inside, i.e. changing the way we think. That is the big difference.
Vending the frustration on an external object like a pillow is temporary.
It is just dealing with that one anger at that one particular time. What we
really need to do is to take total control of anger, not just for one day
or for one situation. As such the technique has to come from the inside,
for example, thinking about karma if you have conviction in karma. If you
have conviction in karma and you are able to get your head around it, you
will see for yourself that there is no point. Then you actually get a hold
over all instances of anger. It helps. In general, that way of thinking can
act as solution for anger. It is a very radical approach, and is very
different. That is the difference between the Buddhist approach and the
conventional approach. Remember in the beginning of the chapter on
Patience, it says if we subdue our minds it is the same as having subdued
all the outside enemies.  Even if we try to subdue the outside enemies,
there is no way we can do it. There will never come a day when all the
external enemies will be defeated. If we subdue our own minds it is the
same as having subdued all the external enemies. In general, if you look at
all the Buddha’s teaching, everything is about disciplining and subduing
the mind. In particular the Mahayana teachings on the practices for the
person of great capacity stress the great importance of disciplining and
subduing one’s own mind. We have to see for ourselves what makes the
Buddha’s teachings stand out, and how is it different. Its approach is
about working with the mind from inside; not so much trying to fix the
outside. Of course there are methods to deal with the external situations
and they can be of benefit. But the thing that makes the Buddhist method
different from the other approaches is about dealing with the inside, i.e.
solving the problems from the inside. If we cannot see it, we don’t realize
it, we cannot do it then of course it is a different case. But if you see
that it can work and it works when you try it, then that is when we realize
that the Buddha’s teaching is really different and very special.
We still have the perfection of joyous perseverance and the perfection of
meditative stabilization. We will stop at the fifth perfection.
[LRCM Vol2, page 179] (e') A summary
The recollection and cultivation of the spirit of enlightenment—the basis
of the bodhisattva deeds—is the root of the wish to establish all beings in
a patience wherein they have extinguished the contaminations. After you
steadily increase this spirit, aspire to practice the patience of those at
high levels and then train your mind in it. Distinguish the trainings for
the patience of a beginning bodhisattva, and then learn these properly. If
you transgress the boundaries as explained, you must make an effort to
amend this. If you neglect these transgressions at the time of practicing
these trainings, you will be continually tainted by many great misdeeds,
and even in future lifetimes your practice of the marvelous deeds of the
bodhisattvas will be extremely difficult- Seeing that the essentials of the
path are supreme, practice right now what you can, and inculcate the
intention to practice even those you now cannot. If you do this, then, as
the Questions of Subahu Sutra says, you will bring the perfection of
patience to completion with little difficulty and minor suffering.

