Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/SixPerfections/Lesson14.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:02.813401
================================================================================


How to focus your mind on the object of meditation
   1) Presenting the flawless method
   2) Eliminating flawed methods
   3) Indicating the length of sessions
(2) Eliminating flawed methods
Next is looking at the difficulties and the challenges of developing a
flawless concentration that possesses the two features. As we have seen
earlier, the concentration that we need to develop in the context here is a
concentration that possesses the two special features:
   1. The feature of vivid intensity
   2. The feature of single-pointedness; where the mind abides on the
      object.
This is the type of concentration that we need to develop. It is said that
developing such a concentration that possesses these two features is a
challenging task.
[LRCM Vol 3 page 51]  Thus, if you use an intense cognition that is too
tight, you may have clarity, but excitement will predominate so that it
will be hard to develop stability.
If you sustain your meditation after becoming greatly relaxed, then you may
have stability, but laxity will predominate so that there is no vivid
intensity. It is very hard to find the right balance of tension so as to be
neither too taut nor too relaxed, and for this reason it is hard to develop
a concentration free from laxity and excitement. With this in mind, the
master Candragomin stated in his Praise of Confession-
   If I use exertion, excitement arises;
   If I abandon it, slackness ensues;
   It is hard to find the right balance in this—
   What should I do with my troubled mind?

[LRCM Vol 3 page 51]  The meaning of this is as follows: "Use exertion"
means your mind is too tight; when you do this, excitement arises. When you
let the tightness go and relax too much, you produce slackness, with your
attention remaining inward. So it is difficult to find the proper balance
for an even state of mind, free from laxity and excitement.

Khen Rinpoche (in English): So he said “Better relax”.
[LRCM Vol 3 page 52]  Candragomin's Praise of Confession also states:
   If I strain to engage the object, excitement occurs;
   If I relax, slackness develops.
   It is hard to find a practice midway between these two—
   What should I do with my troubled mind?

Now Lama Tsongkhapa explains what Master Candragomin is saying. He is
saying that when you strain for a tight focus on the object and exert
yourself, excitement arises. When you see that you relax your mind which
has been straining to engage the object and give up your exertion that
produces the laxity or slackness in your mind. Therefore it is difficult to
find a proper balance for an even state of mind that is a mid-way practice
free from the two extremes of laxity and excitement. If he was saying that
getting quite relax were adequate, then there would be not any problem at
all. Since he said that this leads to laxity, it is obviously improper to
use this method to achieve concentration.
So you can see that it is very difficult and is extremely challenging to
develop a concentration that possesses those two features. It is quite
obvious from our experience like what was explained in the earlier lessons:
first you seek the object of meditation and then you have to find it.
You are supposed to tighten your focus on the object of meditation and try
to have the mind stay on it.
At the beginning it is really difficult for the mind to stay on the object
of meditation. In the initial stages there is a lot of excitement and the
mind just cannot stay on the object, either the object changes into
something else, for example, object having white color becomes red. This
shows that there is a lot of excitement.
Of the nine mental stages that are moving towards calm-abiding, the first
mental state is called placement. That is the time when you are supposed to
focus. After having found the object of meditation, you are supposed to
place your mind on it. The way to do it is to tighten one’s focus so that
one can stay on the object of meditation. If you have ever experience this,
you would know that this initial level is very challenging. When you try to
tighten your focus and when it becomes too much, excitement arises easily.
After having found the object of meditation, and after having achieved some
stability where your mind is abiding on the object, at that time you relax
your mind.  When you relax your focus, and when that becomes too relax,
there is a danger of laxity arising. This is what it is being said in the
text.
In short, when one’s focus is too tight, there is a danger of excitement
arising. But when the mind’s manner of apprehending the object is too relax
i.e. the focus is too relax, there is a danger of laxity arising.
Therefore it is said that it is very difficult to develop a concentration
that is free from laxity and excitement.
As for finding the right balance between tightness and relaxation, this is
something that can only be found and understood through one’s own
experience. You have to see in your own experience that when you tighten
your mind too much, above a certain level, then you will experience
excitement. In your own experience when you loosen your mind too much, then
you find that you developed laxity. That is the sign that you have gone too
far.
What is the right balance between tightness and relaxation? This is
something one has to discover for oneself in the practice. It is not
possible to specify and measure “It is this and not that”.
Here Lama Tsongkhapa is saying that developing the kind of concentration
whereby your mind is not distracted and your mind is able to stay on the
object and yet very relax is not difficult at all. The problem is that this
is not the kind of concentration that one is supposed to develop.
Achieving such an experience whereby your mind has found your object of
meditation, your mind is abiding on it but your mind is quite relax, in
this state, there is no thoughts are operating. You are kind of relaxed.
Your mind are kind of staying on the object when you feel relax. Lama
Tsongkhapa is saying: “Such kind of experience is not difficult to attain,
but it is not the correct form of concentration”.
For if you gain this kind of experience and, in fact, stay in this kind of
experience is a hindrance and impediment to developing the actual
concentration. Why? Because such a kind of experience allows for laxity to
arise. It is condition for laxity of the mind.
What is said to be a right balance between tightness and relaxation?
As for the right balance of tightness and relaxation, having investigated
for yourself, you should be more relaxed than the level of awareness where
you think “If I heighten it this much, excitement would surely arise,” and
you should place your mind above the level where you think “If I place it
at this low level, laxity will arise”.

[MLLR page 215]  How to meditate balancing tightness and relaxation
As for the point where tightness and relaxation are balanced, having
investigated this for yourself you should be more relaxed than that level
of awareness where you think “If I heighten it this much, excitement will
surely arise,” and you should also place it above that level where you
think “If I leave it just here, laxity will easily arise”.
So we have to find the right balance between tightness and relaxation by
looking at our own experience, or by checking for oneself.
[LRCM Vol 3 page 52]  Buddhasanti's commentary on this is clear:
If you strain for a tight focus on the object and exert yourself, your  mind
becomes excited and distracted, and you thereby destroy your  concentration.
Therefore, you are not attaining mental stability through exertion. This  is
problematic, so in order to avoid it you relax your  mind,  which  has  been
straining to engage the object, and give up your exertion. Then faults  such
as forgetting the object of meditation lead to slackness and laxity.
Therefore, Candragomin says "it is hard to find"  a  concentration  that  is
the right balance or midway practice free from the two  extremes  of  laxity
and excitement. If getting quite relaxed were adequate, there would  not  be
any problem at all. Since the text says that this leads  to  laxity,  it  is
obviously improper to use this method to achieve concentration.
It is not enough to have the clarity which is simply the limpid  quality  of
a very relaxed mind; there also must be a degree of  tightness  in  the  way
you apprehend the object.

Next is citing scripture of authorities to prove the point.
We look at the section where it says the need for relying properly on
mindfulness.

[LRCM Vol 3 page 53]  The above-mentioned way of maintaining mindfulness is
extremely important. Without knowing it your meditation will show a great
number of faults, such as slipping into great forgetfulness commensurate
with the amount of your meditation or dulling the wisdom that
differentiates phenomena
If you remember our earlier discussion about how important it is to have a
very strong mindfulness. It is very important to cultivate a strong
mindfulness, not just mindfulness but a strong mindfulness. If there is no
strong mindfulness, even if you have found the object of meditation and
your mind is abiding on the object, but if your mind is too relax and there
is no strong mindfulness, then it is said that this will lead to an
increase in forgetfulness and the dulling of one’s wisdom.
The state of mind where you have found the object of meditation i.e. your
mind is abiding in it but your mind’s way of apprehending the object is
very relax, there isn’t any intensity or force behind the way of
apprehending the object. So, it is kind of relaxed. That kind of
concentration is not a flawless concentration. In fact that kind of
meditation is actually a meditation whereby you are accumulating laxity.
When your mind is going to relax and there is no force or no vivid
intensity i.e. no force behind its way of apprehending the object,
basically there is no activity, no thoughts, not thinking, you are just
kind of spacing out when there is laxity. If you are accumulating that over
time, that contributes to more and more forgetfulness. Also it said in the
teachings, it dulls your wisdom.
You do hear accounts of meditators who are striving to actualize calm-
abiding. They talked from their experience. They say that after coming out
from their practice, they feel they become a little bit more mentally
slower, not as quick and not as intelligent. This shows the kind of
concentration that one should seek to develop is the concentration that
possesses the two special features: vivid intensity and stability. Such a
kind of concentration that possesses these two special features is very
difficult to accomplish.
From this you have to understand what is the essential point or
characteristics of the concentration that you are trying to develop. What
is the main purpose? It is not about relaxing the mind, or developing some
stability of the mind where you are just not thinking about anything, i.e.
your mind is not distracted but you are yet not thinking of anything. That
is not the kind of concentration that one should develop. When you have
achieved such an experience, you do experience less mental chatter, less
mental disturbance and thoughts. Apart from that there is no great benefit
and no great purpose behind achieving such concentration because such a
kind of concentration or such kind of state or experience leads to more
forgetfulness and dulling of wisdom. This is not what we are looking for.
The whole point of developing concentration is to make the mind more
stable, your mindfulness become more powerful, having better memory, having
sharper and  quicker mind. The whole point of having such a concentration
with all these features is so that you use it to develop the wisdom
realizing selflessness.
When one is seeking to develop concentration, it is extremely important to
rely on powerful and very strong mindfulness. The mindfulness has to be
very powerful. It has to be continual placement on the object and that has
to be strong. Only then there is hope. Then you have a basis for improving
your memory. You have a basis for making the mind sharper and more
powerful.
Next is the discussion for the need for vigilance when you maintain
mindfulness on the object of meditation.

[LRCM Vol 3 page 53]
Question: While mindfulness fixes your attention on the object of
meditation as explained above, is it appropriate to monitor your meditation
and think about whether you are holding the object of meditation well?
The answer to this: Yes, it is said in the second Stages of Meditation that
you have to do this.

[LRCM Vol 3 page 53]  Reply: You have to do this, for Kamalasila's second
Stages of Meditation states:
  After you have thus set your attention on whatever your chosen object of
  meditation may be, fix it there continuously. While you stay right with
  the object, analyze and investigate your mind, thinking: "Is my mind
  apprehending the object of meditation well? Or is it lax? Or is it
  distracted by the appearance of external objects?"
It is not that you stop your concentration and then look at your mind.
Rather, while maintaining your state of concentration, you just look to see
whether your attention is staying where it was previously set on the
primary object of meditation and, if it is not, whether there is laxity or
excitement.

[LRCM Vol 3 page 53]
While maintaining your state of concentration, you just look to see whether
your attention is staying where it was previously set on the primary object
of meditation and, if it is not, whether there is laxity or excitement.
After you have settled into concentration, you monitor this at moderate
intervals, neither too often nor too seldom. If you do this while the
intensity and force of the previous awareness are not quite gone, it takes
place within the perspective of this awareness. This has the purpose of
both enabling long-lasting, intense stability, and letting you quickly
recognize laxity and excitement.
While maintaining the concentration (mindfulness) on the object of
meditation, one has to check one’s meditation with vigilance. The way to
utilize vigilance is not doing it outside of that
perspective/experience/meditation. It is not as if you put the object of
meditation one side, the experience of being in that meditation one side
and you switch to vigilance and see what is happening. No, not like that,
but rather you employ vigilance within the perspective of that awareness
where your mind is abiding on the object. So that is how you should be
vigilant.
As for the frequency of vigilance i.e. checking up on one’s concentration,
the frequency should be moderate - not too often and not too seldom.
Back to the analogy of the elephant, the elephant is analogous of one’s
unsubdued mind.
If you want to tame the wild elephant, you tie it down to a sturdy post
with a very strong rope. This is analogous of focusing our attention on the
object of meditation with strong mindfulness.
After you have tied the wild elephant with a strong rope to a sturdy post,
every now and then you check to see if the elephant is still tied to the
post or not. You don’t have to sit there all the time and stare at the
elephant to see whether the elephant has run away or not.  You check every
now and then to see whether the elephant is still secured to the post by
the strong rope. Likewise, after you have placed your attention on the
object of meditation, while maintaining mindfulness, every now and then at
moderate interval, you check to see if the mind is abiding on the object or
not.
We check whether the mind is abiding on the object of meditation within
that awareness i.e. within the mind being mindful of the object; just like
you check whether the elephant is tied to the post or not. There isn’t any
checking to be done after the elephant has escaped.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): Most of the times after the elephant run away
then we check. Before that we are too relaxed. After the elephant run away
then you check. And after run away, you cannot tie back as the elephant is
too strong. I am talking about the mind elephant.
When the elephant trainer realizes the rope that is tying the elephant to
the sturdy post has become somewhat loose, he will tighten the noose. So
every now and then the trainer will checks whether the rope that is tying
the elephant to the sturdy post is in place or not. When he sees the rope
is becomes somewhat loose, he will tighten it while the rope is still
holding the elephant to the sturdy post and not after the elephant has run
away. When the rope is a bit loose, it is so much easier to tighten it
while the elephant is still attached to the rope. Likewise, we are supposed
to focus our attention on the object of meditation. With mindfulness one
does not forget the object. Every now and then behind there is this
vigilance that sees if the mind is staying on the object or not. For
example, if the vigilance discovers that the mind is about to lose the
object i.e. when the mind is about to be distracted or run away from the
object, then you have to tighten your mindfulness. Therefore, the teachings
says; “One need to cultivate or develop mindfulness and vigilance in order
to develop concentration”.
Using analogy makes it easier for us to understand especially when one
doesn’t have any experience to talk about. So using analogy will helps us
to understand. So, back to the elephant again, now you have tied the
elephant down with strong rope to a sturdy post. You do it in such a way
that you get this confidence: “I think for the next one hour, the elephant
will probably not run away. It probably stays happily as it is right
there”. Likewise, it is said that “Through finding the proper balance
between tightness and relaxation, one gain this confidence “I can probably
stay on this object of meditation for say a couple of minutes without any
laxity or excitement”.
There are always many questions arising about if one employ vigilance to
check whether one’s mind is staying on the object or not would become an
obstacle for developing stability?  Many people have this question. So Lama
Tsongkhapa states that very clearly: No, vigilance does not harm
mindfulness. Vigilance does not harm one’s ability to stay on the object of
meditation. There is a proper way to do it. You employ vigilance from
within the perspective of that awareness while maintaining mindfulness on
the object of meditation. Within that, then every now and then at moderate
intervals -not too often, not too seldom- you check whether the mind is
coming under the influence of laxity or excitement. This is important. If
you do not employ vigilance then one would not be able to detect laxity or
excitement when they arise. If laxity and excitement arises, and if one
doesn’t check them then one would not develop a flawless concentration.
So checking with vigilance is done at time when in one’s experience and at
one’s level of attainment where there is still danger of laxity and
excitement arising. When there is still a danger of laxity and excitement
arising, you have to employ vigilance. Until when you have reached a state
whereby there is no more danger of laxity or excitement arising, then there
is no need to check. All you have to do is to abide single-pointedly on the
object.
So when there is no danger of laxity and excitement arising, then there is
no need for one to check. You just have to abide and focus single-pointedly
on the object. While doing so, the mind is actually relaxed.
Next is an explanation of how important it is to continually rely on
mindfulness without forgetting the object.
[LRCM Vol 3 page 53]  Accordingly, this is how you sustain your
mindfulness, for a necessary cause of powerful and continuous mindfulness
is sustaining your meditation by repeatedly reminding yourself, at
intervals, of the intended object of meditation.
[LRCM Vol 3 page 54]   Also, Sthiramati's Explanation of the "Separation of
the Middle from the Extremes" states:
The statement "Mindfulness means not forgetting the object of meditation"
means that you mentally express the instructions on stabilizing your mind.
Therefore, you maintain mindfulness to stop forgetfulness wherein you stray
from the object of meditation. Hence, non-forgetfulness of the object of
meditation -wherein forgetfulness is stopped- is when you "mentally
express" the object of meditation; you bring the object of meditation to
mind again and again. For example, when you are anxious about forgetting
something you know, it will be hard to forget if you recall it again and
again.
We need to rely on mindfulness over and over again. For when we do that we
will not forget the object of meditation and we will be able to place our
mindfulness continually on the object. For example, when we recall the
object of meditation over and over again, when you rely on mindfulness over
and over again, one’s mindfulness increases and becomes more stable.
[LRCM Vol 3 page 54] Thus, you have to remind yourself of the object of
meditation at moderate intervals in order to develop strong mindfulness.
The way to strengthen your vigilance, which notices laxity and excitement,
is to lock your attention on the object of meditation without distraction,
and then to monitor it. Realize that if you repudiate such a procedure by
thinking, "This is discursiveness," it will be extremely difficult to
develop powerful mindfulness and vigilance.

Next is a discussion of the length of the meditation session.
[LRCM Vol 3 page 54] Question: When you fix your attention on the object of
meditation with mindfulness, is there a definite length for the session,
such that you say, "I will stabilize my mind on the object only until
then"?
Reply: On this matter, Asanga’s Sravaka Levels and other classic texts do
not state the length of sessions clearly. However, Kamalasila's third
Stages of Meditation does say:
   At this stage engage in meditative equipoise for twenty-four minutes, an
   hour-and-a-half, three hours, or as long as you can.
While this statement occurs in the context of the length of the session for
cultivating insight after you have already achieved serenity, it is clearly
similar when you are first achieving serenity, so do it this way.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): How long you have to meditate? One hour? Twenty-
four minutes? I don’t know. What Lamrim says?
(Student response inaudible)
Khen Rinpoche (in English): One part is twenty-four minutes? Okay, so not
too long. I thought four hours.
The third stages of meditation says that one can remain in meditative
equipoise that is divorced of free of laxity and excitement and then
staying in that equipoise for, let’s say, twenty-four minutes. This says
that the duration of a session is indefinite.
The point is about first finding a proper balance between tightness and
relaxation whereby based on your own experience, you judge for yourself;
“If I were to tighten this much, I can stay in equipoise for five, ten,
fifteen minutes or whatever time without being affected by excitement”.
Based on your own judgment; “If I loosen or relax my mind this much, I can
stay for next five, ten or fifteen minutes also without being affected by
laxity”. You have to judge for yourself. I think it would be good if you
try to relate the finding of proper balance between tightness and
relaxation back to the analogy of tying an elephant with ropes to a sturdy
post like what I have mentioned earlier.
Next is explaining or stating that it would be difficult for beginners to
eliminate or to cut laxity or excitement if the length of the session is
too long.
[LRCM Vol 3 page 55] If you practice the techniques of mindfulness and
vigilance explained above—reminding yourself of the object of meditation
and monitoring your meditation at moderate intervals—it does not matter if
the session is a little long. However, usually one of two things will
happen when you are a beginner and have a long session. On the one hand you
may become distracted due to forgetfulness. In this case, you will not
recognize the occurrence of any laxity or excitement quickly but only after
a long period of time. On the other hand, though you may not lose your
mindfulness, it is easy to fall under the sway of laxity and excitement,
and you will not quickly recognize them when they occur.
For beginner, if the session is too long, there is the danger of forgetting
the object of meditation or losing it. Or you become distracted. For such a
person there is the danger that excitement and laxity arises and is there
for long time but you are not aware of it;  just like discovering that the
elephant has already run away after a long time.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): Long time ago, then you recognize.
For beginner if the session is too long, this is one of the dangers. You
completely lose the object of meditation. You forget it.
For beginner, if the session is too long, even if you don’t lose the object
of meditation, excitement and laxity arises easily.
For beginner who is doing too long a session, even though he may be abiding
on the object without losing it, but laxity and excitement arises easily
and he is not aware of it immediately.
These are the two situations. The first situation hinders the development
of strong mindfulness. In order to develop strong mindfulness one must
continuously rely on mindfulness. Application of mindfulness has to
continue all the time in order to develop strong mindfulness.
In this first situation, for a beginner who is doing too long a session,
the beginner has lost the object of meditation completely and not even
aware. When you lose the object of meditation through non-mindfulness,
obviously that is an obstacle to developing strong mindfulness.
[LRCM Vol 3 page 55] The first situation hinders the development of strong
mindfulness; the latter hinders the development of strong vigilance. Hence,
it is very difficult to stop laxity and excitement.
In the second situation, the beginner who is doing a long session has not
lost the object of meditation but he is not aware of the presence of laxity
and excitement due to a lack of vigilance. In order for one to be aware
that laxity and excitement has risen or is about to arise, you must employ
vigilance at certain intervals - moderate intervals. Development of strong
mindfulness occurs within the non-degeneration of mindfulness that was
cultivated or developed earlier. Likewise, the development of strong
vigilance occurs within the non-degeneration of the vigilance that was
developed earlier.
[LRCM Vol 3 page 55] In particular, failing to recognize laxity and
excitement after you have become distracted due to forgetting the object of
meditation is much worse than failing to quickly recognize laxity and
excitement while not forgetting the object of meditation. So the techniques
for maintaining mindfulness—the previously explained remedies which stop
the breakdown of mindfulness ensuing from distraction—are very important.
Next is an explanation of the need to act in accordance with one’s mental
capacity.
[LRCM Vol 3 page 55] If you have great forgetfulness ensuing from
distraction, as well as vigilance so weak that it does not quickly
recognize laxity and excitement, then your session must be short.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): So here says very short.
[LRCM Vol 3 page 55]  If it is hard for you to forget the object and you
can quickly notice laxity and excitement, it does not matter if the session
is a little long. This is the idea behind Kamalasila's statement above that
the duration of a session is indefinite—twenty-four minutes and so forth.
In short, since the duration has to comport with your mental capacity,
Kamalasila says "as long as you can."
If temporary injury to your mind or body does not occur, set your mind in
equipoise. If such injury does occur, do not persist in meditating, but
immediately stop your session and then clear away the impediments in your
mental and physical constituents. Then meditate. This is what the adepts
intended, so recognize that doing this is an aspect of how long a
meditation session should be.
Next is what to do after you focus on an object of meditation.
Student: Does one need to have calm abiding in order to have uncontrived
bodhicitta?
Answer: It is pretty much the case and clears that without calm abiding one
cannot enter any path. Here the path is the Mahayana path.
According to the Ornaments of Clear Realizations there is this complete
application in all aspects. When one achieves that one achieves the union
of calm abiding and special insight.
When does one achieve this application in the complete aspects? When one
generates bodhicitta.
Based on this assertion that the application in the complete aspects is
achieved when you actualized bodhicitta, this application in the complete
aspects is a union of calm abiding and special insight. Now you know that
before you can have special insight you must actualize calm abiding. For
that reason you need calm abiding in order to enter the Mahayana path. It
is quite clear that you need calm abiding to enter the Mahayana path. In
general, do you need calm abiding to enter any path? That is not evident in
any text and it is not clear. I wonder whether there is a need for that or
not.
Student: The [MLLR] text says: “When you are experiencing mental harm you
should stop your meditation and overcome the physical or mental harm before
you meditate again”. What kind of mental harm is being referred to here?
Answer: As in the text: “If temporary injury to your mind and body does not
occur, set your mind in equipoise. But if such injury does occur, do not
persist in meditating but rather clear away the impediments of the physical
and mental constituents”. At the time when your mind gets disturbed from
meditation it is important to relax the mind and loosen it up. Sometimes
due to an imbalance in the four elements in the body one will feel physical
discomfort. This has an effect on the mind as well. You just feel not right
because there is an imbalance in the elements of the body. When this
happens it is said that we should rest. Generally speaking, we know what
our limit is. If we push ourselves beyond that we will get disturb. We have
to meditate in accordance with one’s situation. We do experience physical
discomfort when we are sitting down meditating. Sometimes we have pain in
the neck or pain in the back. We shouldn’t push and we should rest.
Sometimes if one pushes over and above one’s limit then the physical
condition or situation become even worse. That will prevent you from doing
any meditation at all.
Most people stopped meditating at the slightest onset of any discomfort.
That is incorrect as well. You have to push a bit. You have to practice
forbearance in putting up with some of these difficulties. Of course if you
really know that you have reached your physical limit, then you have to
stop. Anyway, finding the proper balance between tightness and being too
relaxed is something that has to be applied in everything that we do.
Therefore, the text says that it is very difficult to find the proper
balance – in the case of concentration to find the proper balance between
tightness and relaxation.
That is our problem behind everything that we do. We don’t find the proper
balance. For most people, as in our case, the problem here of not finding
the proper balance is being too overly relaxed. For us there is no danger
of being too tight or overly focus in one’s dharma practice. Rather it is a
matter of being too relaxed.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): So no worry of that. So push harder.
There is more to come about vigilance.
Student: There is physical and mental pliancy that comes from concentration
where you achieve calm abiding.
There is also a pliancy that comes from the power of investigation which is
special insight. What is the difference between these two pliancy? There
was one footnote in the root text that says that the pliancy that comes
from investigation is even more blissful than the pliancy that comes from
concentration.
Answer: The pliancy part will come towards the end of the section.
Student: Why is the practice of concentration coming only at the great
scope? We would have presumably meditated on the small scope and the medium
scope to come to the great scope
Answer: The best part always come in the last. I don’t know. We’ll see.

Discussion questions (Sunday, 29th September 2013)
1. (a) Explain how the six perfections  are  definite  in  number  from  the
point of view of high status.
    (b) Why is there a definite order to the six perfections?

2. (a) What is the perfection of generosity?
    (b) How is the perfection  of  generosity  practised  by  including  the
other perfections?

3. (a) What is the meaning of destruction of roots of virtue?
    (b) How are the roots of virtue destroyed?
    (c) What is the advice given for developing patience?

4. (a) What  are  the  four  favourable  conditions  for  developing  joyous
effort?
    (b) How does each of them help in the development of joyous effort?
