Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/SixPerfections/Lesson15.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:02.777789
================================================================================


                     Dealing with Laxity and Excitement
What to do after you focus on an object of meditation
   (1) What to do when laxity and excitement occur
   (2) What to do when laxity and excitement are absent
(1) What to do when laxity and excitement occur
   (a) Using the remedy for failing to recognize laxity and excitement
   (b) Using the remedy for failing to try to eliminate them even when they
   are recognized
(a) Using the remedy for failing to recognize laxity and excitement
    (1') The defining characteristics of laxity and excitement
    (2') The method for developing vigilance that recognizes laxity and
   excitement during meditation
(1') The defining characteristics of laxity and excitement
When you use the remedy for failing to recognize laxity and excitement, you
must first identify what is laxity and excitement. So what is excitement?
According to Compendium of Knowledge:
Excitement is an unquiet state of mind, considered a derivative of
attachment, which pursues pleasant objects and acts as an impediment to
calm abiding.
(LRCM Vol 3 page 58) Excitement is defined in Asanga's Compendium of
Knowledge:
What is excitement? It is an unquiet state of mind, considered a derivative
of attachment, which pursues pleasant objects and acts as an impediment to
meditative serenity.
Note: Meditative serenity is also translated as calm abiding.
Next is an explanation of the definition of excitement.
The explanation is done by looking at:
   1. Its object,
   2. Its subjective aspect
   3. Its function
The object of excitement is an attractive and pleasant one.
What about its subjective aspect?
Its subjective aspect is that one’s mind is unquiet and scattered outward.
Its function is to impede stabilization of one’s mind on its object.
It is a derivative of which of the three mental poisons? It is a derivative
of attachment.
Essentially, excitement is a mind that is attached to a pleasant object.
Because of attachment, that mind becomes unquiet, and the mind is not a
peaceful mind. Therefore, it is distracted.
(LRCM Vol 3 page 58) There are three aspects to this definition:
(1) Its object is an attractive and pleasant one.
(2) Its subjective aspect  is  that  your  mind  is  unquiet  and  scattered
outward. As it is a derivative of attachment, it engages its object  with  a
sense of craving.
(3) Its function is to impede stabilization of your mind on its object.

How does excitement impede placing ones attention on the object? What does
it do?
(LRCM Vol 3. page 58) When your attention is inwardly fixed upon its
object, excitement – which is attached to form, sound, and so on – pulls
your attention helplessly toward these objects and causes distraction.
In general, excitement is a derivative of attachment; while distraction is
not necessarily a derivative of attachment. Therefore, excitement and
distraction are different.
Distraction can happen due to other afflictions. One can also be distracted
to virtuous objects. As such, distraction and excitement are different.
(LRCM Vol 3. page 58) Question: Is it excitement when there is scattering
in which other afflictions distract your mind away from the object—or, for
that matter, when there is scattering toward other virtuous objects?
Reply: Excitement is a derivative of  attachment,  so  being  distracted  by
other afflictions is not excitement; rather, it is  the  mental  process  of
distraction which is one of the  twenty  secondary  afflictions.  Scattering
toward virtuous objects may involve any virtuous mind or mental process,  so
not all scattering is excitement.

Next is an explanation of laxity.
Here the teachings state that laxity and lethargy are different.
Many translations render laxity as “slackness”. Some consider laxity to be
a lethargic state of mind that stays on its object of meditation without
scattering elsewhere but lacks limpid clarity. This is incorrect, for
lethargy is said to cause laxity, as mentioned in the second Stages of
Meditation and the Sutra Unravelling the Intended Meaning.

(LRCM Vol 3, page 58) Many translations render laxity as "slackness”, but
this "slackness" should not be construed as meaning discouragement.  As for
its definition, most yogis among these snowy peaks seem to consider laxity
to be a lethargic state of mind that stays on its object of meditation
without scattering elsewhere but lacks limpid clarity. This is incorrect,
for lethargy is said to cause laxity, so the two are distinct, as suggested
in Kamalasila's second Stages of Meditation:
  If, being oppressed by lethargy and sleepiness, you see your mind become
  lax, or in danger of laxity....
Also, the Sutra Unravelling the Intended Meaning says:
  If there is laxity due to lethargy and sleepiness, or if you are
  afflicted by any secondary afflictions in meditative absorption, it is a
  case of internal mental distraction.
This states that when your mind becomes lax due to lethargy and sleepiness,
it is distracted inwardly

(LRCM Vol 3, page 59) Asanga's Compendium of Knowledge also discusses
laxity in the context of the secondary affliction of distraction, but
distraction as he explains it may also be virtuous, so it is not
necessarily afflictive.
The point is laxity and lethargy is different; they are not the same. For
it is mentioned here that lethargy is a cause of laxity. Lethargy is
explained here as a derivative of delusion or the mental factor gti-mug.
Depending on the context, sometimes it is translated as ignorance and
sometimes it is translated as bewilderment. But here is translated as
delusion. The delusion is not a generic delusion but it is a specific
mental factor of gti-mug.
Lethargy is a derivative of this delusion or the mental factor of gti-mug.
It is essentially an unserviceable state of mind.
This is not the case for laxity because there could be instances of laxity
which is virtuous. As such, it is then difficult to say that laxity is a
derivative of delusion. If you remember the earlier discussion, even when
there is laxity in the mind, there are instances where there is stability
i.e. when the mind is staying on the object but not much clarity. If that
is the case, then laxity is not lethargy.
It is possible to confuse laxity for lethargy especially during the time
when there is coarse laxity. Coarse laxity is where the object is not
appearing clearly and also the perceiving mind is not clear. At those
times, it is possible to mistake laxity for lethargy. Here Lama Tsongkhapa
is saying that these two are different.
Of lethargy, the Compendium of Knowledge and the Treasury of Knowledge Auto-
commentary says that it is a derivative of delusion, the heaviness and
unserviceability of body and mind.
(LRCM Vol 3, page 59) Of lethargy, then, Asanga's Compendium of Knowledge
says:
  What is lethargy? An unserviceable state of mind classified as a
  derivative of delusion, it works to assist all root afflictions and
  secondary afflictions.
So, this derivative of delusion is the heaviness and unserviceability of
body and mind.
Vasubandhu's Treasury of Knowledge Auto-commentary  says:
   What is lethargy? The heaviness of the body and the heaviness of the
  mind which are the unserviceability of the body and the unserviceability
  of the mind

(LRCM Vol 3, page 59) Laxity means that your mind's way of apprehending the
object of meditation is slack, and it does not apprehend the object with
much vividness or firmness. So even if it is limpid, if your mind's way of
apprehending the object is not highly vivid, then laxity has set in.
Kamalasila's second Stages of Meditation states:
  When your mind does not see the object vividly—like a person born blind,
  or a person entering a dark place, or like having one's eyes shut—then
  recognize that your mind has become lax.
I have not seen a clear presentation of the definition of laxity in the
other classic texts.
Laxity may be virtuous or ethically neutral, whereas lethargy is either a
non-virtuous or ethically neutral mental obstruction, and it is invariably
a derivative of delusion.
What this is saying is that laxity and lethargy are not the same. For
laxity, it can be virtuous whereas lethargy is either non-virtuous or it
has the entity of being a mental obstruction. Therefore, these two are not
the same.
Next section is explaining how in order to eliminate laxity you need both
the factor of mental clarity and the factor of focus or tightening.
(LRCM Vol 3, page 59) Moreover, the classic texts say that to dispel
laxity, you must bring to mind pleasant objects such as the body of the
Buddha, or meditate on light so as to stimulate your mind. Therefore, you
have to stop the object from appearing unclearly, as though darkness were
descending on your mind, and you have to put an end to the quality of
attention which has become flaccid. You need both a clear object of
meditation and a tight way of apprehending the object.  Neither a clear
object alone nor transparency of the subject alone is enough.
In one of the previous lesson, we looked a little bit at the difference
between coarse laxity and subtle laxity. When there is coarse laxity, there
may be somewhat stability with regards to the mind abiding on the object
but there isn’t any clarity. For example, the object is not appearing
clearly. Your object is not clear and your mind is not clear. You get the
feeling as if darkness has descended on your mind. So that’s what it’s like
when there is coarse laxity.
When there is subtle laxity present in the mind, there is stability and
also there is some clarity of the mind and the object. But there isn’t
intensity behind the mind’s way of apprehending the object.
Therefore, in order to eliminate laxity, you must increase the factor of
clarity and you must also increase the tightness of apprehending the
object.
In order to eliminate laxity, one must up the clarity i.e. work on the
factor of clarity and also tighten the mind’s way of apprehending the
object. So there must be intensity behind the mind’s way of apprehending
the object.
(LRCM Vol 3, page 60) It is easy to recognize excitement, but laxity is
hard to comprehend since it is not clearly identified in the authoritative
classic texts. It is also very important because in this case it is a major
point of misunderstanding concerning flawless concentration. Therefore, you
should experience laxity with an exacting awareness, and on that basis
examine it well and identify it in accordance with Kamalasila's Stages of
Meditation
I think what it is saying here is that it is difficult to identify exactly
what laxity is and there is the danger of confusing of taking laxity to be
lethargy and lethargy to be laxity. For that reason, in order to be clean
clear about what exactly laxity is, then Lama Tsongkhapa said that we
should identify laxity in accordance with what the master Kamalasila wrote
in the Stages of Meditation.
Again Lama Tsongkhapa is emphasizing the need to recognize laxity correctly
by depending on the explanation of authoritative classic texts like
Kamalasila’s Stages of Meditation and looking inward through experience by
combining these two and come to identify laxity correctly. This is very
much emphasized. If one makes a mistake in identifying laxity, one may end
up meditating with laxity and then runs into a danger of developing a
flawed concentration. As we had seen in the previous lesson, the whole
point of developing the concentration that has the correct qualities is to
be able to develop the mind, to develop the intellect, and the wisdom that
differentiates. That kind of wisdom has to be developed on the basis of
correct concentration. If one develops a concentration that is flawed, put
aside increasing one’s wisdom, one runs into the danger of dulling one’s
wisdom as it was explained before.
Next is explaining how to recognize laxity and excitement through
developing vigilance.
(2') The method for developing vigilance that recognizes laxity and
excitement during meditation
(LRCM Vol 3, page 60) It is not enough just to have an understanding of
laxity and excitement; you have to be able to develop vigilance that
accurately detects whether laxity or excitement is present during
meditation. Moreover, by gradually developing powerful vigilance, not only
must you develop vigilance that recognizes laxity and excitement as soon as
they occur, you must also develop a vigilance that recognizes them when
they are on the verge of occurring, before they have actually arisen
Essentially this paragraph is saying you need to develop powerful
vigilance. For when there is powerful vigilance, you will be able to
recognize laxity and excitement as soon as they arise. On top of that, you
need vigilance powerful enough such that one can recognize them when they
are on the verge of occurring i.e. you are able to recognize that they are
about to arise. This is the kind of powerful vigilance that needs to be
developed.
This is the kind of powerful vigilance that the text is talking about. The
kind of powerful vigilance you need to develop. It is a powerful vigilance
that can detect laxity and excitement when they are on the verge of
occurring. Even before they arise, one has detected that they are about to
arise. So the text says; “This is what needs to be cultivated”.
(LRCM Vol 3, page 60) This is demonstrated by statements in Kamalasila's
last two Stages of Meditation:
      If you see your mind become lax, or in danger of laxity...
And:
      You see your mind become excited or in danger of becoming excited.
Here basically you have to develop vigilance that recognizes whether it
able to detect or recognize whether the laxity and excitement has arisen or
not. If one does not cultivate or develop vigilance, then one’s meditation
will come under the influence of laxity and excitement.
(LRCM Vol 3, page 60) Until you develop such vigilance, you cannot reliably
conclude that you have had flawless meditation—free of laxity and
excitement— during a given period of time. This is because, not having
developed powerful vigilance, you cannot be sure whether laxity and
excitement have occurred.
Likewise, in a passage that begins, "There is recognition of laxity and
excitement...," Maitreya's Separation of the Middle from the Extremes says
that you need vigilance in order to recognize laxity and excitement.
Accordingly, if you have not developed vigilance such as would preclude any
failure to recognize the presence of laxity or excitement, then even if you
try to meditate for a long time you will pass the time under the influence
of subtle laxity and excitement, failing to sense laxity and excitement
while they are occurring.
Next is an explanation of how the development of vigilance is dependent on
the development of mindfulness.
(LRCM Vol 3, page 61) Question: How do you develop this vigilance?
Reply: Its most important cause is the process of maintaining mindfulness
which I explained above. If you can develop continual mindfulness, you will
be able to avoid forgetting the object of meditation and becoming
distracted.

(LRCM Vol 3, page 61) Thus, since this prevents a prolonged failure to
sense the presence of laxity and excitement, you can easily recognize
laxity and excitement.
If you remember from our previous earlier discussion, after having found
the object of meditation, you are supposed to hold on to the object of
meditation without forgetting it. One holds onto the object of meditation
with mindfulness. So if mindfulness is holding onto the object of
meditation, then your mind will not be distracted from the object of
meditation.
With mindfulness holding onto the object of meditation and from within that
perspective of that awareness when you are holding onto the object of
meditation with mindfulness, when laxity and excitement arises, one would
know. This is what the text is saying. So if one has powerful mindfulness
and one’s mindfulness is holding onto the object of meditation, then this
mindfulness acts as a cause for vigilance.
For when you have mindfulness of the object i.e. when you are holding on to
the object, as soon as laxity and excitement arises, one would be able to
spot it right away. If one is not mindful i.e. if one is not holding onto
the object of meditation with mindfulness, particularly when one is
distracted and lose the object of meditation, one is sitting there for long
time being distracted and the mind has gone off somewhere and losing the
object of meditation, one is not even aware that there is excitement and
laxity. Then it will take one a long time to be even aware. That is why it
says that one needs strong mindfulness in order to have vigilance.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): This sometimes happens when you are not
mindfulness. First you are chanting Om Mani Padme hum for one mala, then
after that you are not mindfulness, you are chanting different mantra.
After half a mala, then you recognize you that you are chanting different
mantra only after a while. You don’t recognize immediately. Everybody has
that realization, I think. Sometimes this happened because you are not
really thinking, then chant, chant, and then you are chanting different
things.
(LRCM Vol 3, page 61) This will be perfectly evident if you examine in
terms of your own experience how long it takes to recognize laxity and
excitement when mindfulness is impaired and how quickly you recognize them
when it is not impaired.
When there is mindfulness, one has vigilance and one would be able to
recognize quickly laxity and excitement. If one doesn’t have mindfulness,
when one’s mind is distracted, then it takes a long time to recognize
laxity and excitement. The essence here is in order to have strong
vigilance, one must have mindfulness.
(LRCM Vol 3, page 61) With this in mind, Santideva's Engaging in the
Bodhisattva Deeds states:
    When mindfulness dwells
    At the gate of your mind for its protection,
    Then vigilance will appear.
And Sthiramati's The Explanation of the "Separation of the Middle from the
Extremes" also states that mindfulness is the cause of vigilance.
(LRCM Vol 3, page 61) And Sthiramati's Explanation of the "Separation of
the Middle from the Extremes" states:
  The  statement,  "There  is  recognition  of  laxity  and  excitement  by
  vigilance if mindfulness does not  lapse,"  indicates  that  mindfulness,
  when fully present, is accompanied by vigilance. That is why it says, "if
  mindfulness does not lapse...."
The following cause of vigilance is distinctive to the way to maintain
vigilance. Focus your mind on a visualized image of the body of a deity,
etc., or focus on a subjective aspect such as the quality of experience
being simply luminous and aware.
(LRCM Vol 3, page 61) Then, while you stay mindful as explained above, hold
your attention on the object while continuously monitoring whether it is
scattering elsewhere. Know that this is critical for the maintenance of
vigilance.
As Santideva's Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds says:
  Examining again and again
  The states of the body and the mind—
  Just that, in brief,
  Is what it means to preserve vigilance.
Next is the importance of correctly distinguishing or differentiating the
way to sustain mindfulness and vigilance.
It is important to properly distinguish the method or the way of sustaining
mindfulness and vigilance.
(LRCM Vol 3, page 61) Thus, with this method you develop vigilance that
notices laxity and excitement when they are on the verge of arising, while
with the method for maintaining mindfulness you prevent forgetfulness in
which attention is distracted and slips away. Hence, you have to properly
distinguish these two.
The function of mindfulness and the function of vigilance are different.
What mindfulness does is non-forgetfulness of the object of meditation.
When mindfulness is holding on to the object, it benefits and helps the
mind to be not distracted. You don’t lose the object. You are not
distracted. So that is the function of mindfulness.
What vigilance does is it just on the look up to see, for example, if the
mind is already distracted or not or whether the mind has come under the
influence of laxity.
So mindfulness and vigilance have different functions.
Student 1: The frequency of using vigilance here in the powerful vigilance
seems like it is constantly monitoring whether the mind is under the
influence of laxity and excitement or not. Compare to the earlier part
where the analogy of the trainer taming the elephant is used, where the
trainer comes in at moderate interval to check.
Answer:  Checking with vigilance is only done at moderate interval as we
have seen in the previous lesson. It is not to be done all the time. But
nevertheless, the continuum of the force or energy of that introspection is
always there just like the continuum of the mindfulness is there
continuously. But with regards to vigilance, there is no need to check all
the time but rather at certain intervals.
(Student 1responded – inaudible)
Answer:  Of course, first we have to develop the power of vigilance. At the
beginning we have to develop the power of vigilance. Once vigilance is
developed then it stays in the mind. There is a force behind it. There is
energy behind it. That has to be maintained. While that is maintained, it
is not necessarily that one is always checking. That is what that passage
means.
What the text is saying is that there is a force or power or strength or
potential behind that vigilance. When you cultivate it, that potential or
that force is there. That is what allows one to catch laxity and excitement
when they arise. In the initial stages, one has to cultivate or develop
over and over again mindfulness and vigilance. But as the mind developed
then there is less needs for that.
Next is the explanation of the need to use the remedy after you have
recognized laxity and excitement.

(b) Using the remedy for failing to try to eliminate them even when they
are recognized
[LRCM Vol3 page 62] As explained above, you develop very powerful
mindfulness and vigilance through proper use of the methods for maintaining
mindfulness and vigilance. Vigilance is then able to notice even very
subtle laxity and excitement, so there is no problem recognizing the
occurrence of laxity and excitement. However, when you make no effort to
stop those two as soon as they arise, your complacency or failure to apply
yourself constitutes an extremely serious problem for your concentration.
For, if you practice in this way, your mind will form bad habits and then
it will be extremely difficult to develop a concentration free of laxity
and excitement. Therefore, to remedy a failure to apply yourself to the
elimination of laxity and excitement, cultivate the intention called
application, or effort.
What this paragraph is saying is that first you have to hold onto the
object of meditation with mindfulness. Then you seek to strengthen the
mindfulness until it becomes powerful. For once your mindfulness becomes
powerful then the vigilance that developed will also be powerful. When you
have powerful vigilance there will not be the fault of not recognizing
laxity and excitement quickly when they arise. So, with powerful vigilance,
one will be able to recognize laxity and excitement quickly. Once laxity
and excitement are recognized, it is important to apply the remedy right
away without any delay.
(b) Using the remedy for failing to try to eliminate them even when they
are recognized
(1) Intention and the way that it stops laxity and excitement
(2) The underlying causes of laxity and excitement

This section ‘Using the remedy for failing to try to eliminate them even
when they are recognized’ has two parts:
   1) Identifying the intention (called application or effort) and the way
      that it stops laxity and excitement
   2) The underlying causes of laxity and excitement

(1) Identifying the intention and the way that it stops laxity and
excitement
[LRCM Vol3 page 62] Asahga's Compendium of Knowledge:
What is intention? It is the mental activity of applying your mind, having
the function of drawing your mind to virtue, non-virtue, or the ethically
neutral.
This is how you should understand it. For example, iron filings are
compelled to move under the influence of a magnet. Similarly, the mental
process* of intention moves and stimulates your mind toward virtue, non-
virtue, or the ethically neutral. So it here refers to an intention that
applies your mind to the elimination of laxity or excitement when one of
them occurs.
Note: Mental process – mental factor
Here the intention called application is the mental factor of intention
that wishes to abandon, in this case, laxity and excitement as soon as you
recognized that they have arisen.
So, here the intention called application is the mental factor of intention
that wishes to abandon the laxity and excitement as soon as you recognize
that they have arisen; instead of letting them to just persist. It is this
mental factor of intention. It is the intention that wants to abandon the
laxity and excitement right away when they arise through seeing that these
two are obstacles for developing a flawless concentration.
Then how do you stop laxity and excitement?
[LRCM Vol3 page 62] Question: After you have thus aroused your mind to
eliminate laxity and excitement, how do you stop laxity and excitement?
[LRCM Vol3 page 63] Reply: Mental laxity involves a very excessive inward
withdrawal, leading to a slippage in the way you apprehend the object of
meditation; so you should direct your mind to delightful things that cause
it to expand outward. This should be something like a very beautiful image
of the Buddha, not something delightful that gives rise to afflictions.
When the mind is excessively withdrawn inward then there is a danger of
laxity arising. In order to eliminate that, the teaching advises us to
bring to mind delightful objects such as beautiful image of the Buddha. The
point of doing so is to bring joy and delight to the mind.
[LRCM Vol3 page 63] Or bring to mind an image of light, such as sunlight.
When this clears away laxity, immediately tighten the way you apprehend the
object and sustain that in meditation.
This is mentioned in the first Stages of Meditation.
[LRCM Vol3 page 63] As Kamalasila's first Stages of Meditation explains:
  How? When you are overcome with lethargy and sleepiness, when there is a
  lack of clarity in your apprehension of the object of meditation and your
  mind has become lax, then meditate on the idea of light or bring to mind
  the most delightful things, such as the qualities of the Buddha. Dispel
  laxity in this way and firmly hold on to the object of meditation.

[LRCM Vol3 page 63] In this situation, do not meditate on a disenchanting
object because disenchantment causes your mind to withdraw inward.
When you expand your mind by using discerning wisdom to analyze an object
of your choice, this also stops laxity. Aryasura's Compendium of the
Perfections says:
  When slack, your mind is stimulated and inspired
  By virtue of the energy of striving for insight.

[LRCM Vol3 page 63] So here is the most important remedy for stopping
laxity: When you reflect on the good qualities of such things as the three
jewels, the benefits of the spirit of enlightenment*1, and the great
significance of attaining leisure*2, it should have a bracing effect on
your mind, just as cold water is thrown in the face of a sleeping person.
This depends on your having had experience with discerning analytical
meditation on these beneficial topics
*1 the spirit of enlightenment – bodhicitta
*2 leisure - human life of freedom

When the mind is excessively withdrawn, there isn’t clarity. You may have
stability, your mind maybe abiding on the object but there isn’t clarity in
that experience. What you need to do is to raise the intensity of that
mind. You need to lift the mind. That is done by reflecting on the
qualities of the Three Jewels, for example, and then one uplifts the mind
by also recalling the benefits on bodhicitta.
Here you can see the great importance of analytical meditation. That has to
be done prior to calm abiding. When the mind is excessively withdrawn that
which leads to mental unclarity, then you need to lift the mind. You need
to expand the mind. In order to lift the mind you have to reflect on
something that will uplift your mind. Here, we are asked to think, for
example, about how wonderful the advantages of having this human life of
freedoms and endowments. In order to uplift the mind, you must reflect on
these qualities. This requires a prior experience i.e.  somewhat some
experience of having reflected on these topics earlier. Otherwise, it is
not possible if nothing to uplift the mind. Just because you want to uplift
your mind, you sit there and you think without any prior experience it is
not going to happen.
Here, they give the example of splashing cold water on the face of a sleepy
person. You are being sleepy and when someone throws cold water at you, you
will probably wake up and feel afresh and freshen up. You will feel fresh.
Likewise, in order to uplift the mind when the mind is down or when it is
excessively withdrawn inwards when there is mental unclarity, you need to
lift the mind.  That has to be done by reflecting on objects such as the
benefit of bodhicitta or the advantages of having this human life of
freedoms and endowments or the wonderful qualities of the Three Jewels.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): About that, when you are sleepy, throwing of
water. When I was young in the monastery, early morning we have to wake up
at five o’clock as we have to go to puja.  Of course we fall asleep.  At
that time, Lama Yeshe sometimes he comes, then he goes to the water bowl at
the altar, brings and put on the head. One bowl of water! When I read this,
I just remember that. It is winter, November and December and is cold, it
is extremely cold, early morning. Wake up, you fall asleep then sometimes
Lama Yeshe comes then he put, not one drop but one bowl of water. After
that there is no time to fall asleep.
What happen if the object of meditation is unclear and you feel as if
darkness is kind of descended on your mind. What do you do in such a
situation?
[LRCM Vol3 page 64] If you cultivate a remedy for being accustomed to the
underlying causes of laxity—namely, lethargy, sleepiness, and something
that induces these two wherein your mind takes on a gloomy aspect—then
laxity resulting from these causes will not arise or, if it has arisen,
will stop.
Basically, it is saying that when you have the experience of darkness has
descended on your mind and then the object of meditation is not clear, you
have to literally brighten up the mind. Bring to mind brightness.
[LRCM Vol3 page 64] In this regard, Asanga's Sravaka Levels suggests such
activities as going for a walk; holding an image of brightness in your mind
and familiarizing yourself with it repeatedly.
Sometimes, it happens no matter how many times you try. No matter what you
do you just unable to get rid of that gloominess or that darkness
enveloping the mind. At that time, rather than forcing or persisting, the
text here recommends perhaps one just stand up and goes for a walk to
freshen up your body or it says bring to mind an image of brightness in the
mind and then familiarize yourself with it repeatedly.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): I think that need to do. Sometimes we meditate
and then the mind is little bit dull, falling asleep. Then you thought I
will try but not improving. Instead of that, fall asleep. Sometimes, you
tried and you are tired then just let it sleep. So, happen that.
So, in such a situation when there is gloominess in the mind and you tried
to eliminate but it doesn’t succeed, rather than persisting the advice here
is to take a break and stand up and have a walk, freshen up or bring an
image of brightness to the mind.
There are methods like:
[LRCM Vol3 page 64] pursuing any of the six recollections—the Buddha, the
teaching, the community*, ethical discipline, generosity, and the deities;
stimulating your mind by means of other inspiring objects of meditation;
orally reciting teachings that discuss the faults of lethargy and
sleepiness; gazing in different directions and at the moon and stars; and
washing your face with water.
Note: community - sangha

Khen Rinpoche (in English): Even if that doesn’t help, huh? Sometimes very
tough, even wash your face, sometimes, if it doesn’t help what is next?
(Inaudible from students)
Khen Rinpoche (in English): There is what the Zen master which I saw in one
of the Youtube. They are facing the wall, must be straight. If you are
little bit right, you are behind the stick then at the head, it hit you.
That really wakes you up. I think it is not painful but noise. Some kinds
of bamboo there which make very strong noise, but maybe not so painful, I
don’t know. Look very painful. Hasn’t had that before.
So far this is the discussion on what to do when lethargy arises. For
lethargy is the cause of laxity. In the text, there will be a discussion on
the antidotes for dealing with coarse laxity and subtle laxity and the
differences between them. Both lethargy and sleepiness causes laxity.
Therefore this is the discussion here about the methods dealing with them
when there is gloominess in the mind such as going for a walk, freshening
up, thinking about something bright.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): It is still a lot to cover.
[LRCM Vol3 page 64] Also, if laxity is very slight and occurs only
infrequently, tighten up your apprehension of the object and continue
meditating; but if laxity is dense and seems to occur repeatedly, suspend
your cultivation of concentration, clear away laxity using any of those
remedies, and then resume your meditation.
Whether your object of meditation entails directing your mind inward or
outward, if the object is unclear and you have the sense of darkness—slight
or dense—descending on your mind, then it will be hard to cut through
laxity if you continue to meditate without eliminating it. Therefore, as a
remedy for that, repeatedly meditate on the appearance of light.

|Excitement is an unquiet state of mind, considered a derivative of attachment, |
|which pursues pleasant objects and acts as an impediment to calm abiding.      |
|Its object is an attractive and pleasant one.                                  |
|Its subjective aspect is that one’s mind is unquiet and scattered outward.     |
|Its function is to impede stabilization of your mind on its object             |
|It is a derivative of attachment.                                              |
|Therefore excitement is a mind that is attached to a pleasant object.          |
|Because of attachment, that mind becomes unquiet. The mind is not a peaceful   |
|mind, therefore it is distracted.                                              |
|When your attention is inwardly fixed upon its object, excitement – which is   |
|attached to form, sound, and so on – pulls your attention helplessly toward    |
|these objects and causes distraction.                                          |
|Excitement is different from distraction. Distraction is not necessarily a     |
|derivative of attachment, but is due to other afflictions and also can also    |
|move towards virtuous object                                                   |

|Laxity                                 |Lethargy                               |
|Laxity means that your mind's way of   |Lethargy a derivative of delusion, the |
|apprehending the object of meditation  |heaviness and unserviceability of body |
|is slack.                              |and mind                               |
|It does not apprehend the object with  |                                       |
|much vividness or firmness.            |                                       |
|Even if it is limpid, if your mind's   |                                       |
|way of apprehending the object is not  |                                       |
|highly vivid, then laxity has set in.  |Lethargy is either a non-virtuous or   |
|Laxity may be virtuous or ethically    |ethically neutral mental obstruction   |
|neutral                                |                                       |
|Lethargy is a cause of  laxity                                                 |

