Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/SixPerfections/Lesson11.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:02.745111
================================================================================


[LRCM Vol3 page 23] (e) How to be certain about their order
Here it talks about there being a certainty in the order of developing calm
abiding and special insight. There is indeed an order: first, calm-abiding
is developed and then follows by special insight.
So, the development of special insight follows after the development of
calm-abiding.
According to Santideva's Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds says:
      Insight possessed of serenity
      Destroys the afflictions.
      Knowing this,
      Seek serenity at the outset.
According to this statement, you first achieve meditative serenity and then
cultivate insight on that basis.
The text then presents an argument from an opponent who states that there
is no definite order.
This opponent argues that calm-abiding and special insight can be developed
simultaneously.
[LRCM Vol3 page 23] Qualm: Kamalasila's first Stages of Meditation says,
"Its object of meditation is indeterminate," meaning that the object of
meditation of meditative serenity is indeterminate. As explained above, the
object of meditation of serenity may be either reality itself or a
conventional phenomenon possessed of reality. If you first understand the
meaning of selflessness, and then meditate while focusing on this, it
should be enough to simultaneously produce both the serenity of an
undistracted mind and insight focused on emptiness. Why, then, is it said
that you first seek serenity and then cultivate insight?
The position of the opponent is this “The object of calm-abiding can be
emptiness. As such, first one gains an understanding of emptiness, and with
whatever understanding one has on emptiness, one focuses on that object
emptiness in order to develop calm-abiding. Calm-abiding will be eventually
attained. At that time of attaining calm-abiding observing emptiness,
special insight will also be attained”.
This is what the opponent is saying.
Lama Tsong Khapa replies:
[LRCM Vol3 page 24] Reply: The way in which serenity precedes insight is as
follows. You do not need to have serenity already in order to develop an
understanding of the view that knows that there is no self, for we see that
even those who lack serenity develop this view. Nor do you need to have
serenity already in order to experience mental transformation in regard to
the view, for nothing precludes mental transformation being brought on by
the practice of repeated analysis with discerning wisdom, even in the
absence of serenity. If you claim that the absence of serenity precludes
mental transformation in regard to the view, then the very same reasoning
forces you to the extremely absurd conclusion that serenity is required
even to experience mental transformation when meditating on impermanence,
the faults of cyclic existence, or the spirit of enlightenment*.
* Spirit of enlightenment is also translated as bodhicitta
Khen Rinpoche (English): What is Lama Tsongkhapa answering? How does he
answer the question?
One of the things that Lama Tsongkhapa has just said is; “You do not need a
prior realization of calm-abiding in order to gain an understanding of
selflessness”.
The above paragraph that was just read out is stating that you do not need
a prior realization of calm-abiding in order to gain either an
understanding of selflessness or a mental transformation with regard to the
view of selflessness. Basically, mental transformation with regard to the
view or an understanding of selflessness can be gained without having
achieved calm-abiding.
Lama Tsongkhapa said that prior to developing calm-abiding one can gain an
understanding of selflessness through the wisdom of discernment. Therefore
you don’t need prior realization of calm-abiding before gaining an
understanding of the view of selflessness. If you disagree, then that would
lead to the extremely absurd consequence of having to also assert that
prior to gaining calm-abiding, you cannot realize impermanence, you cannot
realize the faults of samsara or you cannot meditate on bodhicitta. So
prior to developing calm-abiding, you can develop an understanding of view
with the wisdom of discernment.
You do realize emptiness with the wisdom of discernment. But that
realization is not special insight. For that reason, when you do develop
calm-abiding with emptiness as object of observation, and at that time of
achieving calm-abiding you cannot say that you then achieve special
insight. This is what Lama Tsongkhapa says which act as an answer to the
argument.
Next section is not in the LRCM but is in the MLLR
[MLLR page 202) B The manner in which calm abiding needs to precede special
insight
What, then, is the manner in which calm abiding precedes special insight?
Here the context for the generation of special insight is that of ordinary
beings without a previous realization arisen from meditation who newly
generate it. In this regard, there is a method of meditation on
selflessness with a special consciousness that realizes emptiness. Its
peculiarities will be explained below. Apart from that, in the context of
the Pāramitāyāna and the three lower classes of tantra, analytical
meditation is necessary because special insight, which is a realization
born from meditation, does not arise unless you have examined the meaning
of selflessness by means of individual investigation and then engaged in
analytical meditation sustaining it. If you seek an understanding of
selflessness and repeatedly analyze its meaning before accomplishing calm
abiding, it will be impossible to accomplish calm abiding in dependence on
that because calm abiding has not been accomplished. If you perform non-
analytical stabilizing meditation, even though you accomplish calm abiding
in dependence on it, this will only be a method for sustaining calm
abiding, and you will not have a method for sustaining special insight
apart from that. Therefore you must seek special insight afterwards. That
is why you do not deviate from the order of seeking calm abiding first and
then cultivating special insight in dependence on it. So if this system did
not understand the method for generating special insight to be the
generation of pliancy by means of the analytical meditation of individual
investigation, there would be no good reason to seek calm abiding first and
then meditate on special insight in dependence on it.
(Ven Gyurme’s translation) Well then, what is the way in which calm-abiding
precedes special insight? Here developing special insight is newly
developing a previously undeveloped realization arisen from meditation in
the context of ordinary being. As for special insight, there is a way of
meditating on selflessness with a special consciousness realizing emptiness
which will be explained below. Apart from this exception, in the perfection
vehicle and the three lower classes of tantra, special insight which is a
realization arisen from meditation, will not be developed without
analytical meditation that is sustained by analysis on the meaning of
selflessness with the wisdom of discernment. Therefore analytical
meditation is needed.
If you thus first seek an understanding of selflessness, analyzing its
meaning again and again, it will be impossible to achieve calm-abiding on
the basis of this analysis since you have not previously achieve calm-
abiding. If you do stabilizing meditation without analysis, you will
achieve calm-abiding on that basis. However as there is no way to sustain
special insight except by sustaining calm-abiding, you have to seek special
insight later. Hence this does not fall outside the pattern in which having
previously sought calm-abiding, you cultivate special insight based on it.
Accordingly the way special insight develops is that the discerning
analytical meditation generates pliancy. If this were not so, there would
not be the slightest good reason to seek calm-abiding first and then
cultivate a special insight based on it.”
What was just read out is a difficult point. This needs time to sort out,
and you have to read the text and think about it. In short, what it is
saying is this: in general, special insight must be preceded by calm-
abiding.
Generally speaking, in the context of the perfection vehicle and the three
lower classes of tantra, special insight must be preceded by calm-abiding.
Without calm-abiding, there is no way to actualize special insight in the
perfection vehicle (Pāramitāyāna) and the three lower classes of tantra.
Why it is that calm-abiding must precedes special insight?
In order for it to be special insight, there must be the bliss of pliancy
induced by the force of the analysis done by the wisdom of discernment.
So in order for the bliss of pliancy to arise, first there must be calm-
abiding. Without calm-abiding, you cannot have special insight, because
special insight is a wisdom that is conjoined with the bliss of pliancy
that is induced through the force of analysis by the wisdom of discernment.
As says in the text; “Accordingly the way the special insight develops is
that the discerning analytical meditation generates pliancy. If this were
not so, there would be not the slightest good reason to seek calm-abiding
first and then cultivate special insight based on it”.
[LRCM Vol3 page 24] So, why is serenity required for insight?  According  to
the Sutra Unravelling the Intended Meaning,  as  long  as  the  practice  of
discrimination and special  discrimination  with  discerning  wisdom  cannot
generate physical and mental pliancy, it constitutes  a  type  of  attention
which approximates insight; when it generates pliancy, then it  is  insight.
Thus, if you have not attained serenity, then no matter how much  analytical
meditation you do with discerning wisdom, in the end you will  not  be  able
generate the delight and bliss of physical  and  mental  pliancy.  Once  you
have attained meditative serenity, then even the  analytical  meditation  of
discerning  wisdom  will  culminate  in  pliancy.  Hence,  insight  requires
meditative serenity as a cause. This will be explained below.
Discerning wisdom  becomes  insight  when,  without  focusing  on  a  single
object,  it  can  generate  pliancy  through  the  power  of  analysis.   So
generating  pliancy  by  setting  your  attention  on  a  single  object  of
meditation—even if the object is emptiness—is nothing more  than  a  way  to
achieve serenity; that alone does not count as attaining  insight.  Why?  If
you thus first seek an understanding of selflessness, analyzing its  meaning
again and again, it will be impossible to achieve serenity on the  basis  of
this analysis since you have not previously achieved  serenity.  If  you  do
stabilizing meditation without analysis, you will achieve serenity  on  that
basis. However, as there is no way to sustain insight except  by  sustaining
serenity, you have to seek insight later. Hence, this does not fall  outside
the pattern in which,  having  previously  sought  serenity,  you  cultivate
insight based on it.
Accordingly,  the  way  insight  develops  is  that  discerning   analytical
meditation generates pliancy. If this were not so, there would  not  be  the
slightest good reason to seek serenity  first  and  then  cultivate  insight
based on it.
Student: If I use mental image of selflessness as object of meditation to
achieve calm-abiding, the object of meditation is mental image of
selflessness. Base on that, I develop calm-abiding. So this state of mind
is still calm-abiding, not special insight?
Khen Rinpoche (English): Correct.
You have to read this section a few times in order to get a clearer idea. I
also have to think about it in more detail of how to put everything
together in a coherent package.
The point being made here is that calm-abiding must precedes special
insight. The development of special insight must be preceded by calm-
abiding. Any assertions contrary to this are assertions that flies in the
face of what the trailblazers have presented.
[LRCM Vol3 page 25] Failing to do these meditations in this order is quite
inappropriate because the Sutra Unravelling the Intended Meaning states in
a passage cited above that you cultivate insight on the basis of having
attained serenity. Also, the order of meditative stabilization and wisdom
among the six perfections— of which it is said that "the latter develop
based on the former"— as well as the sequence in which training in higher
wisdom is based on training in higher concentration are in agreement with
the sequence in which, having previously cultivated serenity, you later
cultivate insight. Asanga's Bodhisattva Levels (cited earlier) and his
Sravaka Levels  indicate that insight is cultivated on the basis of
meditative serenity.  Also, Bhavaviveka's Heart of the Middle Way,
Santideva's Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds, Kamalasila's three Stages of
Meditation, Jnanakirti, and Ratnakarasanti all state that you cultivate
insight after previously seeking serenity.
The fact that special insight is cultivated after calm-abiding is stated
clearly by the Buddha in the Sutra Unravelling the Intended Meaning and the
subsequent Indian masters who commented on his thought are all in agreement
as well.
[LRCM Vol3 page 25] Some Indian masters claim that, without seeking
serenity separately, you generate insight from the outset through analysis
by discerning wisdom. Since this view contradicts the texts of the great
trailblazers, the wise deem it to be untrustworthy.
This is the sequence in which you newly develop serenity and insight for
the first time; later the sequence is indefinite, as you may cultivate
serenity after previously cultivating insight.
Next is a qualm which says that the position which claims that calm-abiding
must be cultivated prior to special insight contradicts certain text.
[LRCM Vol3 page 25]  Qualm: Asanga's Compendium of Knowledge states, "Some
attain insight, but do not attain serenity; they strive for serenity on the
basis of insight." How do you account for this?
Reply: This means that they have not attained the serenity of the actual
first meditative stabilization, or beyond; it does not preclude their
having attained the serenity which is included in the access to the first
meditative stabilization. Also, once you have perceptual knowledge of the
four truths, you can establish on that basis the serenity of the actual
first meditative stabilization and the higher meditative stabilizations.
For Asanga's Levels of Yogic Deeds says: Moreover, you can accurately know
the reality of the truths from suffering to path, without having attained
the first meditative stabilization, etc. As soon as this knowledge of the
truths occurs, you stabilize your mind and do not analyze phenomena. Based
on this higher wisdom, you pursue the practice of higher states of
consciousness.
In general, for the sake of comprehensive terminology, the nine mental
states are called meditative serenity and the fourfold analysis is called
insight. However, you must apply the terms "actual serenity" and "actual
insight"—as will be explained—after the generation of pliancy.
We talk about the mind or consciousness of the higher realms in terms of
“access” and in term of the “actual”. While the access and the actual is
not the Uninterrupted Path and the Path of Release as it is known in the
context of studying the Paths and Grounds, the way of relating or the way
of thinking about access and the actual meditative stabilization can be
thought of in the similar way.
These two - access meditative stabilization and the actual meditative
stabilization - are talking about the mind of the higher realms, for
example, the form realms. There is a certainty in their order – first, an
access must be attained before you can attain the actual meditative
stabilization.
With regards to the access to the meditative stabilization, there are two
kinds of access:
    • there is an access which is calm-abiding and
    • there is an access which is special insight
The mind of the higher realms, for example, the form realm, there are these
different concentrations/meditative stabilization:-
    • there is an access to meditative stabilization and
    • there is an actual meditative stabilization
For the access itself:
    • there is an access that is calm-abiding and
    • there is an access that is special insight
You must understand this first. How do you explain this qualm?
Here it stated that the opponent quoted Asanga's Compendium of Knowledge
which states: "Some attain insight, but do not attain serenity”.
What this quotation means is: The actual meditative stabilization is
attained in dependence on actualizing the access which is a special
insight.
So by depending on an access which is special insight, one attains a calm-
abiding which is included in the actual meditative stabilization.
This is the meaning of the quotation. The quotation does not mean that
special insight can be achieved without having achieved calm-abiding first.
Khen Rinpoche (English): Okay, just to leave imprint there.
As I have mentioned before, in one way the Stages of the Path to
Enlightenment literature is not easy material because it condenses the
subject matter of the five great treaties - the five big areas of study. In
regards to this particular topic, without understanding or without learning
the Ornaments of Clear Realizations, of which there are eight categories,
and  in the first category there is a discussion about the minds of the
higher realms (the form and formless realms), different levels of
concentrations - what they are and the ways to achieve them and so forth.
So without understanding that, it is going to be difficult to understand
such a discussion here. This is because many great meanings from many
topics are packed into just one short paragraph.

Preparing For Meditative Serenity
How to train in meditative serenity
      1. Relying on the preconditions for calm abiding*
      2. How to cultivate serenity on that basis
      3. The measure of successful cultivation of calm abiding
*Calm abiding is also translated as meditative serenity

1. Relying on the preconditions for calm abiding
[LRCM Vol3 page 28]  (1') Dwelling in an appropriate area
The area should have five attributes: (a) easy access, so that necessities
such as food and clothing may be readily obtained; (b) being a good place
to live, where there are no wild beasts such as predators, no enemies,
etc.; (c) being on a good piece of ground, in that it does not breed
sickness; (d) offering good companionship insofar as your companions are
ethically disciplined and like-minded; and (e) being well-situated inasmuch
as there are not many people about in the day and little noise at night.
1. Dwelling in an appropriate area
Basically the place where you are cultivating calm-abiding must be a good
one.
[LRCM Vol3 page 28]  Maitreya's Ornament for the Mahayana Sutras states:
      The intelligent practice in a place
      Which is accessible, is a good place to live,
      Offers good ground and good companions,
      And has the requisites for comfortable yogic practice.
This is quite straightforward. If you read the text you should be able to
understand this easily.
One of the biggest hindrances to cultivating calm-abiding is sound. So the
place in which you are living or abiding to cultivate calm-abiding has to
be very quiet.
The preconditions for cultivating calm-abiding are:
   1. Dwelling in an appropriate area
   2. You must be someone who has little desire.
   3. You have to be contented.
   4. You have to completely give up many activities or busy life.
   5. You need pure ethical discipline.
   6. You have to completely get rid of thoughts of desire.
So these are the six preconditions for developing calm-abiding.
[LRCM Vol3 page 29]
(2') Having little desire
You do not strongly crave more or better robes, etc.
(3') Being content
You are always content to have even the poorest robes, etc.
(4') Completely giving up many activities
You give up base activities such as buying and  selling;  you  also  abandon
excessive  socializing  with  householders  and  renunciates,  as  well   as
pursuits such as medicine and astrology.
(5') Pure ethical discipline
You do not violate precepts, doing deeds that are wrong by nature  or  wrong
by prohibition, either in the case of vows of individual  liberation  or  in
the case of bodhisattva vows. If you do violate them  through  carelessness,
you restore them promptly with regret in accordance with the teaching.
In order to cultivate calm-abiding, one must get rid the thoughts of
desire. Without getting rid the thoughts of desire, there is no way to
develop calm-abiding. On top of that you need pure ethical discipline. You
need to guard against the cause of misdeeds of the body and speech.
[LRCM Vol3 page 29] (6') Completely getting rid of thoughts of desire, etc.
 In the case of desires, contemplate their disadvantages in  this  lifetime,
such as  their  leading  to  being  killed  or  imprisoned,  as  well  their
disadvantages for the future, such as their leading to rebirth in  miserable
realms.  Alternatively,  eliminate  all  thoughts  of  desire  and  such  by
meditating with the thought that "Everything in cyclic  existence,  pleasant
or unpleasant, is ephemeral and impermanent. Since  it  is  certain  that  I
will shortly be separated from all of  these  things,  why  should  I  crave
them?"
In short, the meditation on impermanence is crucial by thinking how
everything in life, whether pleasant or unpleasant, are all in the nature
of disintegrating moment by moment. It is this meditation on impermanence
that is very helpful in stopping thoughts of desire.
[LRCM Vol3 page 30] Atisha's Lamp for the Path to Enlightenment states:
When you lack the elements of serenity,
Even if you meditate assiduously,
You will not achieve concentration
Even in thousands of years.
Therefore, it is very important for those who sincerely wish to achieve the
concentrations of serenity and insight to work on the elements or
preconditions for serenity, such as the thirteen* which are set forth in
Asanga's Sravaka Levels.
The quotation from the Lamp of the Path to Enlightenment is saying that it
is very important to have the preconditions for cultivating calm-abiding
before you cultivate calm-abiding. Its importance is emphasized, because if
you don’t have the preconditions, nothing will happen even if you try to
meditate for thousands of years. This particular advice is directed at
those who sincerely wish to achieve the concentration of calm-abiding and
special insight.
As for what are the thirteen preconditions that are stated in the Sravaka
Levels, I didn’t get time to read them but in the Lamrim Chenmo they are
included in the end notes.
*LRCM Vol3 Note 51: The thirteen are: (1) the chief prerequisites, i.e.
familiarity with the teaching and inner discipline; and, additionally, (2)
excellence of one’s own aims; (3) excellence of others’ aims; (4) desire
for the teaching; (5) renunciation; (6) vows of ethical discipline; (7)
restraint of the senses; (8) moderation in eating; (9) the practice of
wakefulness; (10) dwelling vigilantly; (11) solitude; (12) cleansing of
obscurations; and (13) proper basis of concentration.
How to cultivate serenity on that basis
   1) Preparation
   2) Actual practice.
(1) Preparation
[LRCM Vol3 page 30] Practice the six preparatory teachings explained above
and especially cultivate bodhicitta for a long time; also, in support of
that you should do the meditative practices that are shared with persons of
small and medium capacities.
(2) Actual practice
(a) Meditative posture
(b) Meditative process itself.

(a) Meditative posture
We will not go through this as this is quite straight forward. If you read
it you should be able to get it. Anyway, many of you already know this.
In short, the meditative posture to be adopted when cultivating calm
abiding is adopting the seven-fold Vairocana posture. If you add the aspect
of breathing then you have the eight points of physical conduct. For those
who are actual meditators, they have to meditate while adopting this
posture.
The main purpose for teaching the meditating posture for cultivating calm
abiding is so that you can sustain the practice for over a long period of
time. Calm abiding is cultivated over a long period of time. As such you
need to have a good posture. If you adopt a posture which is incorrect or
not suitable –moving here and there, fidgeting, cannot sit still – then
there is no way to actualize calm abiding. For that reason the seven-fold
Vairocana posture is taught and emphasized. Those who are meditators would
have to train in adopting this seven-fold Vairocana posture.
[LRCM Vol3 page 31] (a) Meditative posture
Kamalasila's second and third Stages of Meditation say that you should  take
up an eight-point posture on a very soft and comfortable seat:
(1) Cross your legs in the manner of the venerable Vairocana,  using  either
the full-lotus posture or the half-lotus posture as appropriate.
(2) Your eyes should be neither wide open  nor  too  far  closed,  and  they
should be fixed on the tip of your nose.
(3) Sit with your awareness directed  inward,  keeping  your  body  straight
without leaning too far back or being bent too far forward.
(4) Keep your shoulders straight and even.
(5) Do not raise or lower your head nor turn it to one side; set it so  that
your nose and navel are aligned.
(6) Set your teeth and lips in their usual, natural positions.
(7) Draw your tongue up close to your upper teeth.
(8) Your inhalation and exhalation should not be noisy, forced,  or  uneven;
let it flow effortlessly, ever so gently, without any  sense  that  you  are
moving it here or there.
Asanga's Sravaka Levels  gives  five  reasons  for  sitting  as  the  Buddha
taught, cross-legged on a seat, stool, or grass mat:
(1) This posture in which the body is pulled together well is  conducive  to
the arising of pliancy, so you will develop pliancy very quickly.
(2) Sitting in this way makes it possible to  maintain  the  posture  for  a
long time; the posture does not lead to physical exhaustion.
(3) This posture is not common to non-Buddhists and our opponents.
(4) When others see you sitting in this posture, they are inspired.
(5) The Buddha and his disciples used this posture and bestowed it upon  us.

Asanga's Sravaka Levels says that, in light of  these  reasons,  you  should
sit cross-legged. It also says that you keep  your  body  straight  so  that
lethargy and sleepiness will not occur.
Thus, at the outset  you  have  to  meet  these  eight  points  of  physical
conduct, particularly the calming of breathing  just  as  I  have  described
above.

[LRCM Vol3 page 31] (b) The meditative process
Broadly speaking, the "stages of the path" tradition indicates that you
achieve calm abiding by means of the eight antidotes which eliminate the
five faults listed in Maitreya's Separation of the Middle from the
Extremes. Personal instructions passed down from Geshe Lak-sor-wa explain
that in addition to that you have to achieve calm abiding through the six
powers, the four types of attention, and the nine mental states which
Asanga’s Sravaka Levels explains.
[LRCM Vol3 page 32] Also, the venerable Maitreya discusses the methods of
the nine mental states and the eight antidotes in his Ornament for the
Mahayana Sutras and Separation of the Middle from the Extremes. Following
them, such learned Indian masters as Haribhadra, Kamalasila, and
Ratnakarasanti wrote much about the process of achieving concentration.
In addition, you also need to know the methods that are taught in the
Mantrayana.
[LRCM Vol3 page 32] In particular, texts in the sutra class provide very
extensive discussions of problems—such as the five faults of
concentration—and ways of clearing them away.

[LRCM Vol 3 pg 31] Broadly speaking, the "stages of the path" tradition
indicates that you achieve calm abiding by means of the eight antidotes
which eliminate the five faults listed in Maitreya's Separation of the
Middle from the Extremes. Personal instructions passed down from Geshe Lak-
sor-wa explain that in addition to that you have to achieve calm abiding
through the six powers, the four types of attention, and the nine mental
states which Asanga’s Sravaka Levels explains.
The scholar Yon-den-drak says:
  The methods of the nine mental states are included in the four
  attentions, and the six faults and the eight applications which are their
  antidotes are the method [for achieving] all concentrations. This is
  agreed upon in all teachings about the techniques for meditative
  stabilization—including those in most sutras, Maitreya's Ornament for the
  Mahayana Sutras and Separation of the Middle from the Extremes, Asanga's
  texts on the levels, and Kamalasila's three Stages of Meditation. Those
  who first have the preconditions for concentration will definitely attain
  concentration if they use these methods to work at it. Nowadays,
  supposedly profound oral traditions on meditative stabilization lack even
  the names of these techniques. These texts do not indicate that you will
  achieve concentration without the preconditions for concentration and
  these techniques, even if you work at it for a long time.
This is stated in his text on the stages of the path; it speaks of reaching
pure certainty about how the classic texts present the way to achieve
concentration. In that regard, since the general way of teaching the stages
of the paths of the three vehicles is demonstrated at length in the noble
Asanga's five texts on the levels, the texts that teach these practices are
very extensive. Among these five, one text gives a detailed explanation,
while the others do not. Asanga's Compendium of Determinations says that
his Sravaka Levels should be used to understand serenity and insight, so it
is the Sravaka Levels that is most extensive.
Also, the venerable Maitreya discusses the methods of the nine mental
states and the eight antidotes in his Ornament for the Mahayana Sutras and
Separation of the Middle from the Extremes. Following them, such learned
Indian masters as Haribhadra, Kamalasila, and Ratnakarasanti wrote much
about the process of achieving concentration. On the general sense of
concentration the tantras are very consistent with the explanations in
these classic texts, except that they use different objects of meditation,
such as divine bodies, drops, and syllables. In particular, texts in the
sutra class provide very extensive discussions of problems—such as the five
faults of concentration—and ways of clearing them away.

(b) Meditative process itself.
A. How to develop flawless concentration
B. The stages in which the mental states are thereby developed
(A) How to develop flawless concentration
1. What to do prior to focusing the attention on an object of meditation
2.  What to do while focusing on an object of meditation
3.  What to do after you focus on an object of meditation
1. What to do prior to focusing the attention on an object of meditation
Laziness is stated as one of the obstacles for developing calm abiding. If
you want to develop calm abiding, you first must eliminate laziness. As
with many things in life, prior to cultivating calm abiding, you first must
have a very strong yearning for calm abiding i.e. you really want to
achieve calm abiding from the depths of your heart. Such a yearning is not
just a fleeting one. Such a yearning has to be sustained over a long period
of time; it is always there. Before you can even start to develop calm
abiding you have to overcome laziness.
How do you have such a strong sustained yearning for calm abiding?
You first must see for yourself the benefits of having calm abiding.
In order to have a very strong and sustained yearning for concentration,
you must see what the benefits of having calm abiding are, and what the
qualities of calm abiding are. You must see this very strongly. It is only
when you see the qualities and the benefits of concentration only then you
have a very strong faith in it.
In order to have a strong stable faith in concentration, you must sustain
in the reflection over and over again about the benefits and the qualities
of calm abiding/concentration. You must gain an understanding of the
benefits and the qualities of concentration through learning, studying and
reflection. Through a constant process like this, you develop a stable
faith in the qualities and the benefits of concentration. On the basis of
this strong and stable faith in the qualities and the benefits of
concentration, you will be able to develop a strong sustained yearning for
concentration.
When you have a strong sustained yearning for concentration, then you will
be able to apply joyous perseverance. Your application of joyous
perseverance in achieving concentration will not be intermittent, but it
will be sustained as well. You will be able to continue joyously persevere
in cultivating calm abiding until it is achieved.
When you have achieved pliancy, your body and mind become serviceable such
that you will not experience any difficulty in cultivating concentration.
When pliancy is achieved then laziness is stopped.
[LRCM Vol 3 pg 33] What to do prior to focusing the attention on an object
of meditation
If you cannot stop the laziness of being disinclined to cultivate
concentration and of enjoying things that are not conducive to it, from the
outset you will not gain entry into concentration; even if you do attain it
once, you will be unable to sustain it, so it will quickly deteriorate.
Therefore, it is most crucial to stop laziness in the beginning. When you
attain pliancy in which your mind and body are full of delight and bliss,
you will stop laziness inasmuch as you will be able to cultivate virtue all
day and night without weariness. To develop this pliancy, you must be able
to have continuous enthusiasm for the concentration that causes pliancy. To
develop this enthusiasm, you need a continuous, intense yearning that is
intent on concentration. As a cause for this yearning you need steadfast
confidence in and fascination with the good qualities of concentration. So
to start with, cultivate again and again a confidence that is aware of the
good qualities of concentration. When you see this process in practice, you
will understand this most vital point with the clearest sense of certainty.
[LRCM Vol 3 pg 34] Maitreya's Separation of the Middle from the Extremes
states:
  The basis and what is based upon it
  Are the cause and its result.
Here, the "basis" is yearning, which is the basis of endeavor; "what is
based upon it" is the endeavor or enthusiasm. The cause of yearning is
confident faith in the good qualities of concentration. The result of
endeavor is pliancy.
In this context, the good qualities of concentration are as follows: When
you reach serenity, your mind is filled with delight and your body filled
with bliss, so you are happy in this lifetime. Also, since you have
attained physical and mental pliancy, you can turn your attention to any
virtuous object of meditation you choose. Since you have quelled
uncontrolled distraction toward the wrong sort of objects, you are not
constantly involved in wrongdoing and any virtue you do is very powerful.
Based on serenity, you can achieve good qualities such as the
superknowledges and supernormal powers. In particular, it is on the basis
of serenity that you develop the knowledge of insight that knows the real
nature, whereby you can quickly cut the root of cyclic existence. If you
reflect on any of these good qualities, you will become aware of, and
meditate upon, things that strengthen your inclination to cultivate
concentration. When this inclination arises, you will be continually
prompted from within to cultivate concentration, so it will be easy to
attain concentration. Also, since you will cultivate it repeatedly even
after attaining it, you will be unlikely to lose it.
Because we don’t have single-pointedness of mind, therefore the mind is
always running here and there. As such it is always accumulating karma. A
lot of time is accumulating non-virtuous karma. Once we move, the mind just
goes to all kinds of different objects. Without having the ability to place
our mind single-pointedly on the chosen object, the mind moves here and
there powerlessly. That is what karma is - mind moving and always engaging
in something, thereby we are always constantly accumulating karma. Of
course that is non-virtue. When you think about how much non-virtue is
accumulated all the time, and if you think about the ripening effect as
mentioned in the earlier discussion about karma, not just karma in general
but each particular karma has four results. There is numberless karma all
the time, and all of them having their own respective results. If you think
about it, it is quite difficult to put up with it. Until we have single-
pointedness of mind, there is really no way for non-virtue and the
accumulation of karma to just stop on their own.
Without single-pointedness of mind, all of us are powerlessly drawn into
accumulating all kinds of karma, in particular non-virtuous karma. In
addition, we have seen over time how the root of cyclic existence is
ignorance. In order to destroy ignorance, we must develop special insight.
Without special insight, there is no way we can even touch ignorance. Now
you know that, so in order to have special insight, you first must have
calm abiding. This is how important having calm abiding /concentration is.
You have to think about the benefits of concentration over and over again
to develop this interest and yearning. We have to think over and over about
the purpose and benefits of concentration.
If your mind is captivated by such kind of faith in concentration, and when
you see from your heart you feel that there is really no way out, “I really
have to develop concentration.  I will do it no matter how long it takes”
i.e. when you have this kind of captivating faith and intention from the
heart, only then it makes sense and it will be alright to go into
isolation. When you go into isolation, you lead a simple life. It is a
simple life when you cultivate all those pre-conditions. When all these
come together, maybe there is a chance for you to actualize calm abiding.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): Pack your luggage, then go. Otherwise, it is
not possible.
You can see how Lama Tsongkhapa explains how important it is. In the MLLR,
he says in order to cultivate calm abiding:
    • you need to have very strong faith
    • you need to have very strong sustained yearning.
    • on that basis, comes joyous perseverance.
When you have these three from your side, you have very strong
determination, and you want to do it because of these different mindsets.
Combined with the coming together of the external conditions such as being
able to find a suitable place and so forth, and if you do cultivate calm
abiding, as said in the teaching, calm abiding will be attained without
taking too long a time.
This is difficult for us, isn’t it? We do study, and we do talk about these
things. I mean these are all good advices and we are said to be practicing
the dharma. But it is extremely difficult to produce this heartfelt faith
and yearning. In the teaching it is said that faith is the root of all
qualities. When you have faith, everything comes. All good qualities are
preceded by faith. So whether it is developing concentration or something
else, faith is said to be the root.
What to do while focusing on an object of meditation
1. Identifying the object of meditation upon which your attention is set
2. How to focus your mind on the object of meditation
1. Identifying the object of meditation upon which your attention is set
a. A general presentation of objects of meditation
b. Identifying objects of meditation for this context
a. A general presentation of objects of meditation
i. The objects of meditation themselves
ii. Who should meditate on which objects
We will look at this in the next lesson. In general there are four objects
of meditation.
It is stated in the sutra that there are:
    • universal objects of meditation,
    • objects of meditation for purifying your behavior,
    • objects of meditation for expertise, and
    • objects of meditation for purifying afflictions.
As much as possible, please try your best to read before coming to class.
Student: In the first meditative stabilization, about the access and the
actual, it was mentioned that it applied to the higher realm. Does that
mean it doesn’t happen in the human realm?
Answer: There are three realms – desire realm, form and formless realms.
When we talked about mind, they are
    • the mind of the desire realm and
    • the mind of higher realms
For the mind of the higher realms, it is basically:
    • the mind of the form realm and
    • the mind of formless realm.
We talked about meditative stabilization. Access to meditative
stabilization/concentration is necessarily a mind of the higher realm, not
mind of the desire realm.
In achieving calm abiding there are nine mental states. The nine states are
called the single-pointed minds of desire realm. The nine mental states is
not the actual calm abiding. Actual calm abiding come after the nine
states. When one achieves calm abiding that mind does not belong to the
desire realm.
When we talked about access to concentration/meditative stabilization, it
is necessarily the mind of the higher realm; it is not the mind of the
desire realm. After the nine states, one achieves the actual calm abiding.
The actual calm abiding is not a mind of the desire realm.
Student: If it is not the mind of the desire realm and human being is part
of the desire realm, it seems to say that it has to be achieved being born
in the higher realm?
Answer: What is the mind of the desire realm? Is the mind of a person in
desire realm necessarily a mind of the desire realm? The answer is “No”.
The mind of a person in the desire realm is not necessarily a mind of the
desire realm.
We have a human body, and the basis is human body. We are still in desire
realm, but the mind of calm abiding is not the mind of desire realm. As a
human being, we all are in the desire realm. When you achieved calm abiding
your mind is not included in the mind of desire realm. It is not the mind
of desire realm, but it is the mind of the higher realm. On the basis of
the calm abiding, preceded by access, then you actualize the actual
concentration/meditative stabilization. Only then, there is rebirth into
the higher realms – form and formless realm.
Student: With regard to cultivating special insight with
investigation/examination and analysis, from the definition it seems
similar, but what is the distinction? In cultivating special insight, is
there an order such as investigation come first then followed by analysis?
Ven Gyurme: There are these two mental factors, and in LRCM it is
translated as examination and analysis. In the Mind and Mental Factors
module it was translated slightly differently.  I can’t remember what it
was. If we translate as investigation then the whole process of
investigating with examination and analysis have to be substituted with
another verb. That is why we stick to examination and analysis.
Answer: The difference between examination and analysis is what I have
mentioned before. Examination is a rough investigation of the object.
Analysis is a detailed analysis of the object.
Student: Is it together, like no first or second since you mentioned it is
one term?
Khen Rinpoche (in English): It is different.
Answer: These are two separate mental factors. But I would think that it is
possible for these two to operate simultaneously.

For pre-class reading purpose
[LRCM Vol 3 pg 35]  (1')) The objects of meditation themselves
The Bhagavan stated that yogis have four types  of  objects  of  meditation,
these being:
(a) universal objects of meditation,
(b) objects of meditation for purifying your behavior,
(c) objects of meditation for expertise, and
(d) objects of meditation for purifying afflictions.
 (a) Universal objects of meditation
Universal objects of meditation are of four types:
(a) discursive images,
(b) non-discursive images,
(c) the limits of existence, and
(d) achievement of your purpose.
The two types of images  (discursive  and  non-discursive)  are  posited  in
terms of the observer: the first is the object of insight,  and  the  second
is  the  object  of  meditative  serenity.  The  image  is  not  the  actual
specifically characterized object upon  which  your  mind  is  focused,  but
rather the appearance of that object's aspect to your mind. When  you  carry
out analysis while observing an object, then the image is  discursive  since
analytical thinking  is  present.  When  you  stabilize  your  mind  without
analysis while observing an object, the image is said to  be  non-discursive
since analytical thinking is absent.
As for these images, what objects of meditation are  they  images  of?  They
are the images, or aspects, of the five objects of meditation for  purifying
behavior, the five objects of meditation for expertise, and the two  objects
of meditation for purifying afflictions.
The limits of existence are posited with reference to the  observed  object.
There are two: The limits of  existence  for  the  diversity  of  phenomena,
which are expressed in the statement, "Just this is all there is;  there  is
nothing more"; and the limits of existence for the  real  nature,  expressed
in the statement, "This alone is how things exist; they do not exist in  any
other way." In the case of the diversity of phenomena, this means  that  the
five aggregates include all composite phenomena; the  eighteen  constituents
and twelve sources include  all  phenomena;  and  the  four  truths  include
everything there is to know; there is nothing else beyond this. In the  case
of the nature, this means that reason establishes the truth  or  reality  of
those objects of meditation.
Achievement of purpose is posited  in  terms  of  the  result.  With  either
serenity or insight you  direct  your  attention  to  the  images  of  those
objects of meditation. Then you stabilize  on  them,  become  accustomed  to
them, and, by virtue  of  repeated  practice,  you  become  free  from  your
dysfunctional tendencies, undergoing a fundamental transformation. [492]
(b) Objects of meditation for purifying your behavior
Objects of  meditation  for  purifying  behavior  are  objects  that  purify
behavior in which attachment  or  the  like  [hatred,  delusion,  pride,  or
discursiveness] is predominant. There are five such objects  of  meditation.
Respectively they are: (a) ugliness,  (b)  love,(c)  dependent-arising,  (d)
differentiation of constituents, and (e) inhalation and exhalation,
(a) Of these, the objects of meditation on ugliness consist of  the  thirty-
six uglinesses pertaining to the body, such  as  head  and  body  hair,  and
external uglinesses such as a corpse's  turning  blue.  When  an  aspect  of
impurity and ugliness arises in your mind, you keep your attention on it.
(b) Love involves focusing on friends, enemies, and persons toward whom  you
have neutral feelings, and having an attitude—at  the  level  of  meditative
equipoise—of providing them with help and happiness. Keeping your  attention
on these objects of meditation with a loving attitude is called  "meditation
on love"; love refers both to the subjective attitude and to the object,
(c) Regarding the object of meditation on dependent-arising:  All  there  is
in the past, the present, and  the  future  is  dependent-arising  in  which
effects that  are  mere  phenomenal  factors  simply  arise  based  on  mere
phenomenal factors. Apart from these, there is no performer  of  actions  or
experiencer of their effects. You focus your attention  on  this  fact,  and
hold it there,
(d)  As  for  the  object  of  meditation  on  the  differentiation  of  the
constituents: You differentiate the factors of the  six  constituents—earth,
water, fire, air, space, and consciousness.  You  focus  your  attention  on
them and hold it there,
(e) Regarding the object of meditation on  inhalation  and  exhalation:  You
focus your attention  without  distraction  by  counting  and  watching  the
breath move in and out.
(c) Objects of meditation for expertise
There are also five objects of meditation for  expertise,  namely  expertise
in (a) the aggregates, (b) the constituents, (c) the sources,(d)  dependent-
arising, and (e) what is and is not possible,
(a) The aggregates are the five aggregates of form and the others  [feeling,
discrimination, compositional  factors,  and  consciousness].  Expertise  in
these is knowing that, apart  from  these  aggregates,  the  self  and  what
pertains to the self do not exist,
(b)  The  constituents  are  the  eye  and  the  others  of   the   eighteen
constituents. Expertise in them is knowing the causal  conditions  by  which
those constituents arise from their own seeds.
(c) The sources are the eye and the others of the twelve sources.  Expertise
in these  is  knowing  that  the  six  internal  sources  are  the  dominant
conditions for the six consciousnesses, that the six  external  sources  are
the object-conditions, and that the  mind  which  has  just  ceased  is  the
immediately preceding condition,
(d) Dependent-arising is the twelve factors. Expertise in  them  is  knowing
that they are impermanent, suffering, and devoid of self,
(e) What is and is not possible refers to such things as it  being  possible
for a pleasant fruition to arise from a virtuous action,  but  not  possible
for a pleasant fruition to arise from a non-virtuous  action.  Expertise  in
this is knowing that things are this way.  This  is  a  particular  case  of
expertise in  dependent-arising;  the  difference  is  that  you  understand
diverse causes.
When you use these as objects of meditation for  cultivating  serenity,  you
keep  your  attention  on  just  one  of  the  perspectives  in  which   the
aggregates, etc. may be known.
(d")) Objects of meditation for purifying afflictions
Purifying afflictions means either  merely  reducing  the  strength  of  the
seeds of the afflictions or else  utterly  eradicating  the  seeds.  In  the
former case, the objects of meditation are  the  comparative  coarseness  of
each lower stage and comparative calmness of each higher  stage,  proceeding
from the level of the desire realm up to the level of  Nothingness.  In  the
latter case, the objects of meditation are impermanence  and  the  other  of
the sixteen aspects of the four noble truths. When you use these as  objects
of meditation for cultivating serenity, you  do  not  analyze,  but  instead
keep your attention on any one cognition of an aspect of those objects  that
appears to it.

