Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/SixPerfections/Lesson2.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:53:57.314307
================================================================================


Remember in the previous class there was a question about how did
Avalokiteshvara actually hear the question from Shariputra. Was he in or
out of meditative equipoise or was he pretending not to hear, or was he
pretending to hear? Benny’s answer was that in reality Avalokiteshvara is a
Buddha. So being a Buddha, Avalokiteshvara could hear Shariputra’s question
even though he was in meditative equipoise.
If you answer in this way then question would arise “If he is a Buddha,
then he should be able to give reply under his own power and not be blessed
by the Buddha.”
Khen Rinpoche (in English): You getting the question and answer what we are
talking now? Or you are totally lost?
If Avalokiteshvara is a Buddha, then whatever he said in the sutra would be
a speech that is directly spoken from the Buddha’s mouth. But it is not
being classified as that. It is being classified as an inspired speech. In
the commentary, it is mentioned that Avalokiteshavra being in meditative
equipoise was a cause or condition for the question to come about from
Shariputra. If that being the case, Avalokiteshvara being in meditative
equipoise was the cause or condition for Shariputra to ask the question, so
at that time of asking the question, it is difficult to say that
Avalokiteshvara was in meditative equipoise, otherwise, he would not be
able to hear Shariputra’s question. If that is the case, then it is alright
to say that prior to the question and answer session he was in meditative
equipoise, and during the question and answer session he was not in
meditative equipoise.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): I think that is the best option. Maybe that is
the option. I don’t know, but still can think.
There is a quotation from the sutra, which happens to be my favorite
quotation, “Not seeing is the correct seeing”. Now that you have heard the
explanation of The Heart of the Perfection of Wisdom Sutra, and now you
have some idea about the meaning of The Heart of the Perfection of Wisdom
Sutra, so based on what you have heard and what you have learned, perhaps
it would be interesting or good if you could explain what exactly this
statement “Not seeing is the correct seeing” means.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): “Not seeing is the best seeing”, correct
seeing, best seeing. You can make commentary base on that. You can explain
whichever you like to.
Middle Length Lamrim
Training in the Mahayana: Precepts and Perfections
Explanation of the process of learning the precepts
a' How to train in the Mahayana in general
1' Establishing the desire to learn the precepts of the spirit of
enlightenment
2' Taking the vows of the conquerors' children after establishing the
desire to learn the precepts
3' How to train after taking the vows
1' Establishing the desire to learn the precepts of the spirit of
enlightenment
It is said in the teaching that one should learn the bodhisattva deeds
after generating the mind of enlightenment. It is also mentioned in the
teaching that prior to taking the bodhisattva vows, one should undertake
the study and the familiarization with the precepts and the bodhisattva
vows. After having gained some kind of certainty or confidence of being
able to keep with the training and vows, only then one should take the vows
with enthusiasm. If one takes the bodhisattva vow on the basis of having
been familiar with and knowing what constitutes the training and so forth,
then it is said that you will be able to keep the vows. Basically you
become more stable.
I would like you to read up on the first four perfections on your own
especially before coming to class. It is not difficult to read. I hope to
cover this quickly. I will just give you a short introduction to the first
four perfections.
3' How to train after taking the vows
a”. What the precepts are based upon
b”. How all the precepts are included in the six perfections
c”. The process of learning the perfections
a" What the precepts are based upon
There are many aspects of the bodhisattva precepts, and all can be included
within the six perfections. It is said that all the essential points of the
bodhisattva practice is contained in the six perfections.
b”. How all the precepts are included in the six perfections
1” A discussion of the main topic, the fixed number of perfections
2” An ancillary discussion of the fixed order of the perfections
1” A discussion of the main topic, the fixed number of perfections
There is a discussion on the six perfections and the discussion on how the
number of perfections is fixed as six.
[Extracts from LRCM V2 are for reference only]
[LRCM V2 page 104] The discussion of the main topic, the fixed number of
perfections, has six parts:
      a. The fixed number of perfections based on high status
      b. The fixed number of perfections based on fulfilling the two aims
      c. The fixed number of perfections based on perfecting the complete
      fulfillment of others' aims
      d. The fixed number of perfections based on their subsuming the entire
      Mahayana
      e. The fixed number of perfections in terms of the completeness of
      paths or method
      f.  The fixed number of perfections based on the three trainings
(a) The fixed number of perfections based on high status
As you have seen from the discussion on the Paths and Grounds, in order to
achieve full enlightenment one has to accumulate the collections of method
and wisdom over a very long period of time. It is said that period of time
is three great countless eons. Also in order to finish the accumulation of
the two collections, and to achieve full enlightenment, one has to continue
accumulating the two collections, not just over one or two lifetimes, but
over a successive number of lifetimes. In order to be able to continue
one’s accumulation of the two collections in all those lifetimes, one would
need a perfect basis.
When we talk about high status, i.e. getting successive good rebirths, we
are talking about the high status in terms of the four excellences:
   1. Perfect resources
   2. Excellent bodies
   3. Having companions
   4. Being able to accomplish whatever works or activities after you have
      taken them
[LRCM V2 page 104] To fully complete the greatly effective bodhisattva
deeds you need an immeasurably long succession of lifetimes.  Moreover, to
attain quick success on the path within these lifetimes you need a life
excellent in every aspect. Our present life is not excellent in every
aspect but rather has only some of the aspects of full excellence; we do
not make progress with it though we practice the teachings. You need a life
that has four kinds of excellence:
(1) resources to use [the result of the perfection of generosity]
(2) a body with which you act [the result of the perfection of ethical
discipline]
(3) companions together with whom you act [the result of the perfection of
patience]
(4) work that you are able to accomplish once undertaken [the result of the
perfection of joyous perseverance].


In general, obtaining a basis or a life where one has these four perfect
conditions -having the resources, good body, good helpers and able to
complete whatever tasks or activities that one undertakes- are to be
excellent conditions that constitute high status or good rebirth.  But for
most of the times these conditions become a cause for afflictions to arise.
 If you just look around at the people in this world who have these four
things; there are many who have sufficient resources, and quite well to do,
they have good body, they have many helpers and they are quite successful
in the sense they achieved whatever they undertake, but most of these
people are the people who do not practice Dharma. On top of that, having
all these perfect conditions of life becomes a condition for these people
to be controlled by their afflictions. It is a case for all of us, as it is
quite apparent when one starts to have some money or resources or happens
to have a perfect body, or having big entourage. If you think about it,
most of the times these things become a condition for the three mental
poisons to arise, and is a condition for one to have jealousy that leads to
negative competitiveness, ego, pride and so forth.
In general, it is important and is good to have these four things - having
an excellent resources, excellent body, excellent companion and being able
to complete whatever activity one undertake. The point here is that while
we have these four things, we have to make sure that they do not become a
condition or cause for us to generate afflictions/negative emotions.
Just as these four kinds of excellence alone are not sufficient, one must
not fall under the control of the afflictions because of these four
excellences. On top of that we must also possess the eyes of wisdom that
discriminates between what we should adopt and what we should discard.
Therefore having wisdom is very important. If one doesn’t have wisdom, then
these four excellences that one has obtained as the result of the ripening
of the virtues that one has accumulated in the past, would lead to the
depletion of one’s merits. However, for those who are wise, they know how
to not let their merits or virtues deplete while having these four
excellences.
So it is not enough just to have high status that is qualified by these
four excellences. It is important to not let these four excellences become
a condition for the afflictions to arise. That is not enough. Here you have
these four excellences and your mind may not come under the control of the
afflictions. But without wisdom you do not create new virtues. As such as
you enjoy these four excellences, your merit that you have accumulated in
the past is exhausted. With wisdom, while you are enjoying these four
excellences, you will also be creating new causes to be able to continue
having these four excellences in the future life after life. So wisdom is
very important. The wisdom here is the mind or the wisdom that is able to
distinguish well in regards to what to adopt and what to cast aside. If one
does not have this, one will only be depleting one’s merits through
enjoying all the good things of life. But if one has the wisdom, instead of
depleting one’s virtues while enjoying these four excellences, one would
continue creating causes to be able to continue to enjoy these four things
in the future.
In order to achieve a life that has these four kinds of excellence -
resources to use, a body which one act, the companions together with whom
one act, and the work that one is able to accomplish once undertaken - you
need to create the causes. Without the cause the effect would not arise.
The cause has to be a concordant cause. Having resources and having
enjoyment is a result of its own concordant cause. The concordant cause of
having wealth and enjoyment is giving. So having resources and enjoyment is
the result of giving. If we want to have wealth and enjoyment, and having
resources then one need to practice giving. If we want a perfect body, a
body that is pleasant, a body that is not afflicted by sicknesses and
harms, then one would need to practice the concordant cause of practicing
ethics.
Next is having excellent companions - people who help you. The concordant
cause of having companions who will help you in your work or accomplishing
your wishes is the practice of patience.
Being able to accomplish whatever work you undertake is said to be the
result of joyous perseverance. So being able to really complete whatever
activity that you start and you will be able to do it with a happy mind and
enthusiasm is said to be a result of joyous perseverance.
It is said here that having a single-pointedness of the mind is the cause
of not coming under the sway or influence of the afflictions. Therefore
achieving the cause, practicing concentration would result in the mind not
coming under the sway or the control of the afflictions. Having the wisdom
to distinguish between what is to be adopted and what is to be discarded is
the result of the practice of wisdom. So the practice of wisdom is
important.
This is how the number of perfections is fixed at six based on high status.
The high status here means:
- Having a life where you have the four excellences - excellent resources,
excellent body, excellent companion and excellence accomplishment of
whatever activities one undertake.
- On top of these four, you do not come under the control of afflictions
because of having these four things.
- On top of that having the wisdom to distinguish between what you should
adopt and what you should discard.
These things are what we need. So if we want to achieve these things from
life to life then we have to accomplish their concordant causes. Therefore
one would have to engage in the practice of giving, ethics, patience,
joyous perseverance, concentration and wisdom.
Usually we associate a life that has these four excellent things to be as
part of samsara life, but it is not necessarily the case. Of course, if one
is an ordinary being in cyclic existence then these four things constitute
samsara, i.e. is part of samsara. But when one reaches the end of the path,
when one achieves a full enlightenment, full enlightenment is a case
whereby one has all these four excellences in the perfect states. At that
time, these four things are not samsara. So that is how the number of
perfections is fixed at six based on high status.
[LRCM V2 page 105] Since in many cases these four kinds of excellence alone
may themselves become conditions for afflictions, you must not fall under
the control of the afflictions [the result of the perfection of meditative
stabilization]. As just the four kinds of excellence are not sufficient,
you must also distinguish well, in regard to what to adopt and what to cast
aside, precisely what things to do and to stop doing [the result of the
perfection of wisdom]. Otherwise, just as a bamboo or plantain tree dies
after giving fruit, or a mule dies with pregnancy, you will be destroyed by
the four excellences.
The wise understand how these six—the four excellences, control of the
afflictions, and knowledge of what to adopt and what to cast aside—are the
results of earlier virtuous actions, and they strive again at steadily
increasing their causes. The unwise use the results of their earlier
accumulations of virtue and exhaust them; as they do not increase them
anew, they reach the brink of their future suffering.
When you again produce these six in future lives, their production will not
be causeless, or from discordant causes, but rather from concordant causes
that are the perfections, fixed as six in number. Therefore in this
lifetime you must repeatedly habituate yourself to constant reliance on the
six perfections because the superiority of the effects is commensurate to
the superiority of the causes. A life with the four excellences constitutes
temporary high status, whereas the ultimate high status, which consists of
ultimate excellence of body, etc., exists at the buddha level.
Thus the Ornament for the Mahayana Sutras says:
  High status possessed of excellent resources and body,
  Excellent companions and undertakings,
  Not going under the power of the afflictions.
  And never being mistaken in activities....
(b) The fixed number of perfections based on fulfilling the two aims
When someone in such a life of high status learns the bodhisattva deeds,
the deeds that he or she trains in can be categorized as two:
   1. Those deeds that fulfill their own aims
   2. Those deeds that fulfills the aims of others.
One accomplishes the aims of others through the first three perfections.
To fulfill the aims of others you need to practice generosity or giving. It
is through giving that you first accomplish the aims of others. Whatever
practice of generosity must not be accompanied by harmfulness towards
sentient beings. If one’s giving is accompanied by harmfulness then one
would not be able to accomplish the purposes or aims of others. So it is
important to refrain or to stop causing harms to others. This is
accomplished through the practice of ethics where you intentionally refrain
from harming others.
In order to really fulfill the aims of others and to accomplish the
happiness of others, it is very important to be able to refrain or not to
give in to the temptation of harming others especially when they retaliate
or when they cause harm. Therefore, the practice of patience becomes very
important as well. In order to be able to be of benefit to others, you need
patience. Patience must come from ethics. One also needs the practice of
giving in order to accomplish the aims of others. This is how you need the
first three perfections – perfection of giving, perfection of ethics and
perfection of patience in order to fulfill the aims of others.
In the text it says that if you do not retaliate because of your patience,
you prevent others from accumulating a great amount of negativity. When you
retaliate, you start the cycle of retaliation and counter-retaliation and
so forth. By not retaliating, it says that we prevent others from
accumulating a great amount of negativity. Because of one’s practice of
patience, one can inspire them to cultivate virtue. If others are inspired
to engage in virtue because of one’s patience, this is also how you fulfill
the aims of others. The teachings say that one needs giving, ethics and
patience to accomplish the aims of others.
One fulfills the aims of oneself with meditative stabilization and wisdom.
When we talk about achieving our own aims, the final aim and the highest
happiness one can achieve for oneself is the bliss of full enlightenment.
When we achieve full enlightenment we achieve our own purpose, and we
fulfill our own aims. In order to achieve full enlightenment one definitely
needs wisdom. In order to generate the wisdom that is necessary to achieve
full enlightenment, one must first have achieved meditative stabilization.
When our mind is not distracted, we can abide and focus our mind on any
chosen object and stay on it for as long as you like. Therefore, in order
to achieve our own purpose to achieve full enlightenment, we need the
practice of wisdom and we need to have meditative stabilization. Since a
lazy person will not fulfill the aims of others, one needs joyous
perseverance. In fact, even to fulfill one’s own aims one needs joyous
perseverance, a mind of enthusiasm, as well.
Therefore, for accomplishing two aims - the aims of oneself and the aims of
others- the number of perfections is fixed as six.
[LRCM V2 page 105] When someone in such a life of high status learns the
bodhisattva deeds, these activities are comprehensively categorized as two:
those which fulfill your own aim and those which fulfill the aims of
others. Therefore, there is a fixed number of perfections based on
fulfilling the two aims.
To fulfill the aims of others you must first help them with material goods.
Since no benefit will come from generosity accompanied by harmfulness
toward living beings, you need ethical discipline, which has a great
purpose for others in that it is the state of desisting from harm to others
and the causes of such harm. To bring this to its full development you also
need patience that disregards the harm done to you, for, if you are
impatient with harm and retaliate a time or two, you will not attain pure
ethical discipline. When you do not retaliate because of your patience, you
prevent others from accumulating a great amount of sin and bring them to
virtue by inspiring them with your patience. So this practice has a great
purpose for others.
You attain your own aim, the bliss of liberation, through the power of
wisdom. Since you will not attain this with a distracted mind, you must set
your mind in meditative equipoise by means of meditative stabilization,
obtaining a mental serviceability wherein you intentionally set your
attention on any object of meditation. Since a lazy person does not produce
this, you need joyous perseverance day and night that never slackens, so
this is the basis of the other perfections.
For accomplishing the two aims, then, the number of perfections is fixed as
six. The Ornament for the Mahayana Sutras says:
       Those who strive for the aims of beings
       Work at giving, non-harm, and patience;
       And completely fulfill their own aims
       With stabilization and liberation, together with their basis.
In these six there is no complete fulfillment of others' aims. The mention
of "stabilization and liberation" differentiates between the two as
(1) the stabilization of the mind on the object of meditation, this being
the imprint of meditative stabilization, and
(2) the liberation from cyclic existence, this being the imprint of wisdom.
Notice that this does not mistake meditative serenity for insight.
 As this is so, those who assert that the meditation of fixing one's
attention in an absence of conceptual thought is meditation on the profound
are speaking of a meditation that is a single portion of the meditative
stabilization that is one of these six perfections. You must attain certain
knowledge of the six perfections in their entirety.
(c)The fixed number of perfections based on perfecting the complete
fulfillment of others' aims
You first relieve others' poverty by giving away material goods. Then you
do no harm to any living being, and that is the practice of ethic. In
addition, one is patient with harm done to you, and that is the practice of
patience.
With the practice of patience one achieves joyous perseverance i.e. never
give up. It is said that when you have meditative stabilization, i.e. when
you achieve all those different levels of concentration, you are able to
display supernatural powers. Through that you attract sentient beings into
your fold because they will be interested in you. Once they are interested,
they will listen to you. Once they become a suitable vessel, then with
wisdom you give them teachings. You help them with good explanations and
through that you bring them to liberation.
[LRCM V2 page 106] You first relieve others' poverty by giving away
material goods. Then you do no harm to any living being and, in addition,
are patient with harm done to you. Without becoming dispirited you joyously
persevere at helping those who harm you. You depend on meditative
stabilization and inspire them through displaying supernormal powers and so
forth. When they become suitable vessels for the teachings, you rely on
wisdom and give good explanations, cut through their doubts and thereby
bring them to liberation. Because you do all this, the perfections are
fixed as six in number.

(d) The fixed number of perfections based on their subsuming the entire
Mahayana
You are indifferent to resources because you are not attached to those you
have and do not pursue those you lack. It is saying that if one has good
practice of giving, one is generous. Then probably you are not attached to
stuff. When you are not attached to stuff, you are probably not going to
run around looking for the stuff that you do not have. When you don’t go
around looking for or acquiring stuff, you are not falling under the
control of attachment.
What is generosity? Generosity is mainly a mind of giving. If one has such
an attitude, with a strong wish or mind to give, then your attachment to
stuff is probably not a big issue for you. When you don’t have strong
grasping or clinging to your body, resources or enjoyment, you would
definitely find it much easier to be ethical, i.e. to practice ethics. If
you have strong attitude of giving (generosity), that makes it so much
easier for you to practice ethics. One would find it easier to tolerate the
harms and sufferings done to you, if you have a good practice of patience.
When we are able to tolerate the harms done by others and the sufferings
that we experience, then we do not get dispirited or discouraged so easily.
As such, one would find it easier to be enthusiastic about virtue, and
about doing things that matter and beneficial. If one’s joyous perseverance
is sustained, one would easily achieve concentration. Following that is
wisdom.
[LRCM V2 page 107]  You are indifferent to resources because you are not
attached to those you have and do not pursue those you lack. Since you then
have the ability to safeguard precepts, you adopt and respect ethical
discipline. You are patient with the suffering that comes from living
beings and inanimate things and you are enthusiastic about whatever virtue
you set out to cultivate, so you do not get dispirited by either of these.
You cultivate a non-discursive yoga of meditative serenity and a non-
discursive yoga of insight. These six comprise all the Mahayana practices
through which you advance by the six perfections, for you accomplish these
practices in stages by means of the six perfections and you do not need any
more than these six perfections. The Ornament for the Mahayana Sutras
states:
  The entire Mahayana is summed up in
  Not delighting in resources.
  Reverence, not being dispirited in two ways,
   And the yogas free of discursiveness.
Given this, it is a contradiction to want to enter the Mahayana and yet to
reject the practice of the six perfections.
(e) The fixed number of perfections in terms of the completeness of paths
or method
This following paragraph seems to be saying pretty much the same thing.
“The path -i.e., method—for not being attached to the resources that are
your possessions is generosity, because you become free from attachment to
your things by becoming habituated to giving them away” – this shows the
practice of generosity.
“The method for restraining yourself from the distraction of trying to
possess what you do not possess is ethical discipline, for when you
maintain a monk's vows, you do not have all the distractions of making a
living”- that is the practice of ethics.
“The method for not abandoning living beings is patience, because you do
not despair at the suffering caused by the harm others inflict” – this is
the practice of patience.
“The method to increase virtues is joyous perseverance, because you
increase them when you joyously persevere at what you undertake” – this is
the practice of joyous perseverance
“The methods for clearing away obscurations are the final two perfections,
because meditative stabilization clears away the afflictions and wisdom
clears away the cognitive obscurations” – this is saying that the final two
perfections clear away all the obscurations. When elaborated, it is said
that meditative stabilization clears away the afflictions, while wisdom
clears away the knowledge obscurations.
How are you going to explain this? From which tenet’s perspective is this?
Khen Rinpoche (in English): Which tenet talked about this paragraph?
When one abides in meditative stabilization in single-pointed
concentration, one can suppress the manifest afflictions. If we read
cognitive obscurations here as the obscurations that prevent the mind from
knowing phenomena as they are, this would cover both the afflictive
obscurations and knowledge obscurations.
I am not sure if you could read cognitive obscurations here to mean a
general way of referring to all the obscurations. Here you are taking the
word “cognitive” to mean not knowing exactly how things exist. That would
cover all the obscurations; whether afflictive or knowledge obscurations.
Otherwise, how are you going to explain this?
As we have seen from the CMWS' point of view, in order to destroy any of
the two obscurations, whether it is the afflictive or knowledge
obscurations, you need the wisdom directly perceiving emptiness.
This is something to think about on how you can explain the last part of
this paragraph.
[LRCM Vol 2 Pg 108] The path—i.e., method—for not being attached to the
resources that are your possessions is generosity, because you become free
from attachment to your things by becoming habituated to giving them away.
The method for restraining yourself from the distraction of trying to
possess what you do not possess is ethical discipline, for when you
maintain a monk's vows, you do not have all the distractions of making a
living. The method for not abandoning living beings is patience, because
you do not despair at the suffering caused by the harm others inflict. The
method to increase virtues is joyous perseverance, because you increase
them when you joyously persevere at what you undertake. The methods for
clearing away obscurations are the final two perfections, because
meditative stabilization clears away the afflictions and wisdom clears away
the cognitive obscurations. Thus the perfections are fixed as six in number
(f) The fixed number of perfections based on the three trainings
The first of the three trainings is the higher training in ethics. Giving
or generosity is like a precondition for ethics, and patience is like that
which assist the practice of ethics.
If you are looking at the six perfections in terms of the three higher
trainings, then generosity and patience are included as part of training in
ethics.
Meditative stabilization is included in the higher training in
concentration.
The practice of wisdom is included in the training in wisdom.
It is said that joyous perseverance is included in all three trainings.
In short, what you have to understand is how the six perfections are
needed, whether you are seeking to accomplish the aims of yourself or the
aims of others.
Based on the discussion, you have to be able to come to an understanding of
how the six perfections are essential, whether you are seeking to
accomplish the aims of yourself or the aims of others.
When we talk about accomplishing the aims of others, why is it that you
need the six perfections?
What happens if any of the six is missing?
How does it prevent you from fulfilling the aims of others?
In terms of fulfilling your own aims, why do you need the six perfections?
How does each of the six perfections help you to fulfill your own aims?
Based on that then you come to understand how the essence of the
bodhisattva training is the practice of the six perfections?
The whole point of obtaining high status i.e. wanting successive good
rebirths is so that one can move towards achieving full enlightenment. In
order to achieve full enlightenment you need successive good rebirths as a
suitable basis. If you do not obtain successive good rebirths, you can
forget about achieving enlightenment. It is not possible. Not only do we
need successive good rebirths, we need successive good rebirths with all
the excellences such as excellent body, excellent resources, excellent
companions and being able to accomplish whatever you undertake.
On top of that, these conditions must not be a cause for the generation and
increase of afflictions.
On top of that, you also need the wisdom that is able to distinguish
between what we need to adopt and what we need to discard.  In order to
accomplish these successive good rebirths with all these perfect
conditions, we have to train in the concordant causes. Then the practice of
six perfections becomes indispensable.
We need to see for ourselves why we need to learn the six perfections, why
we need to familiarize ourselves with it and practice them and be familiar
with them.
[LRCM Vol 2 page 109]  The nature of the training in ethical discipline
[the first of the three trainings] is the practice of ethical discipline.
The precondition of the training in ethical discipline is generosity,
because once you have generosity that is indifferent to resources, you can
properly adopt an ethical discipline. The aid to the training in ethical
discipline is patience, because the patience of not retaliating when
scolded, etc. safeguards your properly adopted ethical discipline.
Meditative stabilization is the training of mind [the second training, the
training of meditative concentration], and wisdom is the training in wisdom
[the third training]. As for joyous perseverance, it is included in all
three trainings, so the perfections are fixed at six in number.
The Ornament for the Mahayana Sutras states:
   The Conqueror rightly presented six perfections
   In terms of the three trainings: three are the first,
   Two of the six are connected with the final two,
   One is included in all three.
By a certain kind of excellent life you bring to completion either others'
or your own aims; you practice certain kinds of trainings by possessing a
diversity of methods, depending on which vehicle you are in. Understand in
this way that the six perfections comprise and bring to completion the
above perspectives on their fixed number—life, aims, the Mahayana, the
methods, and the trainings. Reflect until you get a deep conviction about
how the six perfections are the summation of all the key points of
bodhisattva practice.
Next is the discussion on the fixed order of the perfections. First there
is the order of arising, which means which comes first, which second and
third
2" An ancillary discussion of the fixed order of the perfections
a. The order of arising
b. The order in terms of inferior and superior
c. The order in terms of coarse and subtle
(a) The order of arising
[LRCM Vol 2 Pg 111] When you have a generosity that is disinterested in and
unattached to resources, you take up ethical discipline. When you have an
ethical discipline which restrains you from wrongdoing, you become patient
with those who harm you. When you have the patience wherein you do not
become dispirited with hardships, the conditions for rejecting virtue are
few, so you are able to persevere joyously. Once you joyously persevere day
and night, you will produce the meditative concentration that facilitates
the application of your attention to virtuous objects of meditation. When
your mind is in meditative equipoise, you will know reality exactly.
Past few lessons ago, when we were looking at the Paths and Ground there
was a question about whether the order of the perfections is definite. This
is Lama Tsongkhapa’s answer: “Then there is the order in terms of inferior
and superior. “
(b) The order in terms of inferior and superior
[LRCM Vol 2 Pg 111]  Each preceding perfection is inferior to the superior
one that follows it.
(c) The order in terms of coarse and subtle
[LRCM Vol 2 Pg 111]  Each preceding perfection is easier than the
subsequent one to engage in and perform, so it is coarser than the
subsequent one. Each subsequent perfection is more difficult than the
preceding one to engage in and perform, so it is more subtle than the
preceding one.
The Ornament for the Mahayana Sutras says:
    Because the subsequent perfections arise contingent on the preceding
    ones,
    Because they are ranked as inferior and superior,
    And because of their coarseness and subtlety,
    The perfections are taught in order.
I hope to finish the first three perfections in one session. They are not
intellectually difficult to comprehend. You just have to read it. Of course
if you have any qualms you can bring it up in class.
Student: This statement about meditative stabilization clearing away the
afflictions, I have two interpretations here. Is it talking about the first
level of concentration when afflictions are being suppressed or is it
talking about the Lamrim meditation, for example. if one were to meditate
on death and impermanence, as a result of that one’s eight worldly concerns
are reduced and therefore the chances of the three poisons mind to arise.
Actually, the afflictions are reduced?
You interpret meditative stabilization to mean two things. One it could
mean the first concentration of the form realm. When you achieve that then
you suppress the afflictions. Or it could mean meditating on death and
impermanence. When you meditate on death and impermanence your coarse
afflictions are also reduced.  Therefore, that is how meditative
stabilization clears away the obscurations. So are you asking whether this
is true or false? When we talk about meditative stabilization as a
perfection, we are mainly talking about meditative serenity or calm
abiding.
Khen Rinpoche made an announcement that there will be discussion on 18 Aug
from 1.30pm to 3.30pm. Thereafter from 4pm to 5.30pm there will be a game
to help students to improve studies and for bonding. Questions will come
from Tenets and Heart Sutra.  After the discussion, it will be followed by
dinner together. Khen Rinpoche strongly encouraged everyone to join this
game and support. ABC will be sending out an email.
(Audio from 90 to 95min)
