Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/SixPerfections/Lesson6.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:53:57.274504
================================================================================


Student: In relation to the practice of the perfections, we were talking
about the perfection of generosity and there was a discussion about the
practice of the perfection starting on the Path of Accumulation upwards,
even though the exalted practice of the perfection of generosity only
appears on the 1st ground. Although the Lamrim text gives very clear
indications of what qualifies as a completion of the different levels of
perfections, but when you say the perfections on the different grounds,
there seems to be something beyond the perfections. I am just wondering
whether the perfection, there has to be a perfection of that particular
generosity, patience, ethics or whatever, to be conjoined with the direct
perception of emptiness to qualify it to be a perfection?
Another question: The perfection of the different grounds, it seems there
is something beyond it being perfection.
(Ven Gyurme summarized): What is the criterion for being a perfection, for
example, in terms of generosity?
Student: Yes. That was already clearly stated in the text. There was a
discussion that there is the perfection of generosity on the 1st ground.
Then Khen Rinpoche talked about the path of perfection of wisdom. In the
previous lesson, he said that is not related to the direct perception of
wisdom. It is just wisdom realizing emptiness conjoined with bodhicitta.
Khen Rinpoche commented that the practice of the perfections start from the
Path of Accumulation. Is the completing the perfections only happening on
the various grounds? If something else is happening on the various grounds?
It seems like there is something else happening with that perfection that
is beyond completing the perfection on the various grounds.
Ven Gyurme: You need to refine what I have said about “exalted”.
Technically it is better to say “they achieve a surpassing practice”, i.e.
the technical translation is “surpassing the practice of the perfection of
generosity on the 1st ground”.
(Ven Gyurme summarized): What is the criterion for something being a
perfection? When is the perfection of generosity completed, at which ground
or level?
In order to be a perfection of generosity, must it be conjoined with the
wisdom directly perceiving emptiness or not? Is the practice of the
perfection of generosity same as achieving the perfection of generosity? Is
there a difference between the perfection of generosity and the completion
of the perfection of generosity?
With regards to the perfection of wisdom, there is a position which states
that in order to be a perfection of wisdom it has to be a wisdom that
directly realizes emptiness. There is another school of thought which says
that it is not necessary. So these are these two positions. You see which
is better to adopt.
Let’s say you take the position that the perfection of wisdom is not
necessarily a wisdom directly perceiving emptiness, i.e. it doesn’t have to
be a mind directly perceiving emptiness, it would follow that the practice
of the perfection of wisdom does exist on the ordinary paths, for example,
in the Mahayana Path of Accumulation.
If you assert that the perfection of wisdom need not be a mind directly
realizing emptiness, then it is not a problem to say that the practice of
the perfection of wisdom exist on the Path of Accumulation. If you say that
the practice of the perfection of wisdom exists on the Mahayana Path of
Accumulation then it would be alright to say that the practice of the six
perfections exists on the Mahayana path of accumulation. There is nothing
wrong with saying that.
If it is a mind realizing emptiness, is it necessarily a perfection of
wisdom?
No, because, for example, the wisdom directly realizing emptiness in the
continuum of a foe destroyer arhat is not a perfection of wisdom. Why? At
the end of the day, that wisdom is not conjoined with bodhicitta. That
means in order to be a perfection of wisdom it must be a mind realizing
emptiness that is conjoined with bodhicitta.
If that is the case, for a mind realizing emptiness conjoined with
bodhicitta to be a perfection of wisdom, then you could likewise say that
it is so for generosity, ethics, patience, meditative stabilization etc.
For example, generosity is not necessarily a perfection of generosity.
Ethics is not necessarily a perfection of ethics. It is just generosity or
ethics on its own. But if perfection of generosity or perfection of ethics
is conjoined with bodhicitta, then it becomes a perfection of generosity, a
perfection of ethics and so forth. So by extension, the logic should apply
to the rest of the perfections.
Student: What about the completion of that perfection? We are saying a
perfection in the sense that you are still practicing and practicing on the
various paths till a point where the perfection is completed. Does that
mean the perfection of generosity is completed on the 1st ground, and the
perfection of ethics is completed on the 2nd ground? Is it like that?
You know that there is a perfection that is related to each of the ten
bodhisattva grounds. So, on the 1st ground you have the perfection of
generosity. What it means is that on the 1st ground, the bodhisattva
achieves a surpassing practice of the perfection of generosity. This is
what mentioned in the text.
On the 2nd ground, the bodhisattva achieves a surpassing practice of
ethics. The practice of ethics that he has achieved on the 2nd ground
surpasses the practice of ethics that was present on the 1st ground. This
is how it goes on the subsequent grounds.
The question is: “If the bodhisattva achieves a surpassing practice of the
perfection of generosity on the 1st ground, does it mean that he has
achieved a completion of the perfection of generosity? That is what we need
to think.
My personal opinion is that probably it is nothing wrong if you say that
the perfection of generosity has reached its pinnacle on the 1st ground.
Likewise, on the 2nd ground, you could say that the bodhisattva achieves a
completion of the perfection of ethics. We are saying this on the
perspective of equating achieving a surpassing practice of that particular
perfection to a completion of the perfection, that is, if we equate
achieving a surpassing practice of a perfection to a completion of that
perfection to be the same. This is how you explain. Therefore, on the 1st
ground, the bodhisattva achieves a completion of the perfection of
generosity and so on and so forth.
So, if you take this position, is there any fallacy?
If you understand the word “perfection” to be completion, then you could
say that in order to achieve a perfection of generosity, you need the
wisdom directly perceiving emptiness. This is to say that the perfection of
generosity does not exist before the 1st ground.  When the bodhisattva
achieves the 1st ground, the bodhisattva achieves a perfection of
generosity if you take perfection here to mean, literally, perfected or
completed.
Is there any difference between what I have just said and what was said
earlier?
Khen Rinpoche (In English): What I’m saying earlier and what I’m saying now
is totally different. You get that? Okay that is good. If you get that,
that is the point.
This is what analysis or discussion is about. It is a debate. You can argue
“No, the perfection of wisdom doesn’t exist before the 1st ground because
one must have realized the wisdom directly realizing emptiness first before
one can have any perfection of generosity”.
In the Lamrim text Lama Tsongkhapa states “Bringing the perfection of
generosity to completion is not contingent with removing beings of poverty
by giving gifts to others. You perfect generosity after you destroy your
stingy clinging to all that you own and you completely conditioned your
mind to giving them away to all living beings”. He says “You perfect
generosity after you destroy your stingy clinging”. This states clearly
that the perfection of generosity does not exist in the continuum of our
ordinary being.
This is why analysis or discussion is so important. It is not enough just
to hear something and then think that is it. This is the only position; one
and only position. You have to compare what is mentioned in the text, what
is mentioned in the philosophical text and so forth. Then you put them
together and see for yourself. Then you make up your mind.
Khen Rinpoche (In English): Are you getting what I’m trying to do here or
not?
Now somebody ask you: “Is there the perfection of generosity on ordinary
paths?” What are you going to say?
Khen Rinpoche (In English): If somebody were to ask you that, what are you
going to say? You cannot keep quiet. You must say something.
Is there the perfection of wisdom on the path of accumulation? Yes or no?
Khen Rinpoche (In English): “Yes” or “No” doesn’t matter. Say something.
You cannot say “Maybe”. You must say something. You must decide. If you say
“Maybe” then there is no need to debate. You can say “Yes”, you can say
“No”. You must confidently say “Yes”.  In the very beginning part, if “Yes
or No”, like that then there is no point coming to debate. You must be
strong at the very beginning part.  Very beginning if you are weak then
there is no point to fight. When you have to fight, tone must be not calm
(???), must be ready. So who want to fight?
When you use the word “debate” then you must analyze. This is the way to
do. You have to take a position and then you move off from there. If nobody
wants to take a position then I have nothing else to say. When you debate,
you have to hold on to one position. Then you defend that position. You
cannot hold onto two positions. It is not about “Yes or No”. It is more
important to be sure why you are taking a position. Make sure you know why.
It doesn’t matter right or wrong. You have your reasons, which you can just
standby to defend. That is the important thing.
Khen Rinpoche (In English): So now what? Yes? I’ve already given the broad
view. I’m asking question. Now you answer for that. You don’t talk other
thing.
Student: Yes
Khen Rinpoche (In English): You hold your answer for 10 minutes.
Khen Rinpoche: Why do you say that there is the perfection of generosity on
the Mahayana Path of Accumulation?
This exercise is not just between two people here. All of you should
participate. Those who said “Yes” that there is a perfection of generosity
on the Path of Accumulation, do you know why? You must know why when you
say “Yes”.
Why is there the perfection of generosity on the Mahayana Path of
Accumulation?
When you respond to question in the debate, the respond has to address only
the question and not bringing in other auxiliary topics to the discussion.
Student: There is the practice the perfection of generosity on the ordinary
paths because the ordinary path is the time when the perfections are the
activities of the bodhisattvas. The bodhisattvas’ conduct is the
perfection.
Yes, during the ordinary paths, the ordinary bodhisattvas are practicing
the perfection of generosity.
Khen Rinpoche (In English): Why?
Student: Is the practice of generosity conjoined with bodhicitta? Just
saying I’m practicing the perfection of generosity does not mean I have
completed the perfection.
Ven Gyurme: Actually you can just say the perfection of generosity exists
because the practice of generosity conjoins with bodhicitta.
Khen Rinpoche: If it is a perfection of generosity, isn’t it necessary for
stingy clinging to be destroyed?
Student: Yes.
Khen Rinpoche: Has the ordinary bodhisattva on the Mahayana Path of
Accumulation abandoned stingy clinging?
Khen Rinpoche (In English): You have to think. If you say “No”, you are
contradicting yourself. Now you say “Yes”, I don’t know.
Student: Yes.
Khen Rinpoche (In English): Why you say “Yes”?
The question is “Do they have stingy clinging or not?”
Student: No, because I have already asserted that they are practicing the
perfection.
Khen Rinpoche: In order for them to have stingy clinging, there must be a
cause for stingy clinging. The main cause for stingy clinging is
attachment. Don’t the bodhisattvas on the Mahayana Path of Accumulation
have attachment?
Student: Yes.
Khen Rinpoche: Do ordinary bodhisattvas have attachment? Do ordinary
bodhisattvas have attachment to their own bodies?
Student: Yes.
Khen Rinpoche: So it is not taught that the practice of giving the body is
for an ordinary bodhisattva or for an ordinary person.  These ordinary
beings or ordinary bodhisattvas have attachment to their bodies. They have
miserliness. They have not destroyed all stingy clinging and miserliness.
If they have not destroyed the stingy clinging, don’t they have the
perfection of generosity?
Do you see the flow of how you think, and how you can continue? That is the
exercise for everybody.
The ordinary beings have not destroyed stingy clinging?
Student: Yes.
(Some discussions in between)
Khen Rinpoche (In English): So you are totally happy with your position
now?
Student: I think so.
Khen Rinpoche (In English):  You must be confident with yourself. Now there
are two positions to take. Now which one you are more comfortable with?
First one you not comfortable with and halfway you give up. Now you
choosing another position, you feel comfortable with that?
Student: I think so. I’m comfortable with that.
Khen Rinpoche (In English):   So you are comfortable with that now? I
direct both way. I don’t know which one you are more comfortable with.
Student: The first one where there is no perfection of wisdom on the
ordinary paths.
Khen Rinpoche: If you say that there is no perfection of generosity in the
ordinary paths, so you are explicitly saying that the perfection of
generosity is the same as the completion of the perfection of generosity.
Khen Rinpoche (In English):  Exactly same isn’t it now?
Student: Yes.
Khen Rinpoche:  It follows that in the continuum of an ordinary bodhisattva
on the Mahayana Path of Accumulation there isn’t any practice of the
perfections, including the perfection of wisdom.
Student: No, there isn’t
It is for everyone. Everyone has to think.
Khen Rinpoche: It follows that on the 1st ground all the six perfections
are also not there in the continuum of the 1st ground bodhisattva.
Student: No.
Khen Rinpoche: In the continuum of the 1st ground bodhisattva, the six
perfections are not there. Isn’t it?
Student: Yes
Khen Rinpoche: When the 1st ground bodhisattvas practice the perfection of
generosity, that practice of the perfection of generosity encompasses all
the other perfections, isn’t it?
Student: No
Khen Rinpoche: Anyway, it is mentioned in the text that if the practice of
perfection of generosity is accompanied by all six perfections, it becomes
extremely powerful. So it follows that the 1st ground bodhisattvas do not
have the practice of perfection of generosity that encompasses all the
other perfections. If on the 1st ground, the practice of perfection of
generosity is not accompanied by the other perfections then there is no
basis to say that the practice of generosity become more powerful when it
is accompanied by the other perfections.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): Yes?
Student: No
Khen Rinpoche (in English): You say “No”.
Student: Yes
Khen Rinpoche: So there is no basis for saying that there is a stronger
practice of the perfection of generosity when it is accompanied by the
other perfections.
Student: Yes
Khen Rinpoche: But Lama Tsongkhapa said that there is a stronger practice
of the perfection of generosity when it is accompanied by other
perfections. What exactly is Lama Tsongkhapa saying if it isn’t? Isn’t
there the practice of perfection of wisdom on the Path of Accumulation and
the Path of Preparation?
Khen Rinpoche (In English): Yes or No?
Student: No
Khen Rinpoche: In the Heart of the Perfection Wisdom Sutra, Shariputra
asked Avalokiteshvara: “How should one train in the perfection of wisdom?”
The perfection of wisdom is the mind realizing emptiness. The reply is:
“This is how you train in the perfection of wisdom on the Path of
Accumulation and on the Path of Preparation.” Therefore it is wrong to say
that there isn’t any practice of the perfections on the ordinary paths.
(Inaudible)
Khen Rinpoche: Avalokiteshvara should have just says: “The practice of the
perfection of wisdom starts from the 1st ground.”
Student: He was referring only to the practice of the perfection of wisdom.
He wasn’t talking about the other practices like generosity, ethics and so
forth.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): He was talking about wisdom, isn’t it? You are
confirmed with that isn’t it?
Student: Only wisdom. But we are talking generosity here.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): This is not the question about that. I know
that. You must know.
Khen Rinpoche: The practice of the perfection of wisdom is basically
talking about the practice of the mind realizing emptiness, isn’t it?
Student: Correct.
Khen Rinpoche: In The Heart of the Perfection Wisdom Sutra, the perfection
of wisdom is taken to be the mind realizing emptiness. Based on that then
they said that there is a practice of perfection of wisdom on the Mahayana
Path of Accumulation and Path of Preparation also.
Student: Yes
Khen Rinpoche: Basically there is the practice of the perfections on the
ordinary path and there is the practice of the perfection of wisdom on the
ordinary path.
Student: Yes
Khen Rinpoche: The practice of perfection of wisdom exists in the continuum
of ordinary beings. So in order to achieve the perfection of wisdom, you
need not to be on the 1st ground.
Ven Gyurme: Have to accept right?
Student: To practice the perfection of wisdom, you don’t have to be on the
first ground. Was that your statement?
Ven Gyurme: Yes.
Student: Yes.
Khen Rinpoche: In order to possess a perfection, you need not be a
superior.
Student: Yes
Khen Rinpoche: So there isn’t the perfection of wisdom in the continuum of
someone on the Path of Accumulation. The bodhisattva on the Path of
Accumulation does not have the perfection of wisdom.
Student: No.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): What do you think? Have or don’t have?
Student: Have
Khen Rinpoche: You need not be a superior right?
Khen Rinpoche (in English): One way you have already agreed “Must be
superior being”. Then again you say “have”.
Student: I am very flexible.
Please understand that this whole exercise now is not the waste of time. It
is not the waste of time at all. This is to show how you can utilize your
time during discussion. In discussion, you usually have questions, then you
have answer and you take a position. So, it is not so much about saying
“Yes” or “No”. When somebody says “Yes” or “No”, you should question
deeply: “Why you say this and why you say that”. That is what discussion is
all about. It is not just taken out a piece of paper and writes “Yes”. What
I see is that most people just contented with just writing “Yes” or “No”
and don’t think much about it. A lot of people are just comfortable of
saying “yes” to what I have said in the class that there is a practice of
the perfection on the ordinary path. But that understanding is not stable
at all. Actually you have to know why you take that position. You have to
keep questioning. Once you have sorted out all the different reasons and
with that understanding, you have much certainty behind your position. Then
you know why you believed in something. One of the benefits is that you
will never forget it. You will never forget your position.
Khen Rinpoche (In English): As Cecilia said ‘When you “kena”’ then you will
never forget. The point of debating is that when you really think is right,
and somebody is squeezing your neck until you cannot breath then you will
never forget. Probably you get what I mean, not really squeezing their neck
but some ways, or different reasons, these ways, that ways, you don’t know
where to go then you have some idea. So, like that.
Student: Can I just clarify?
Khen Rinpoche: There is no clarification as I have already given two views.
Student: Lama Tsongkhapa is following the views that the perfection happens
on the ordinary path.
Khen Rinpoche: Which view Lama Tsongkhapa is following, we don’t know.
Student: Based on the way Lama Tsongkhapa wrote the Lamrim, which views is
he supporting?
Khen Rinpoche (In English): We don’t know. I don’t know. Think about it.
Student 2: There are ten grounds and there are ten perfections. Do the
other four perfections at the end exist on the ordinary paths?
Khen Rinpoche: What if I say “Yes”. Is there anything you want to say? This
is an answer given in response to a question in the debate. It is not a
conclusion. If I say “Yes” then what?
Many of you always think that when I say “Yes” you think that is “Yes” and
just leave it like that. That is not the case. That was never the case.
Student 2: Does LamaTsongkhapa think that it is not important for him to
include as one of the perfections to be taught in the text?
Ven Gyurme: You want to edit the Lamrim basically?
Student 2: If you say “Yes” then why didn’t Lama Tsongkhapa teach us as one
of the perfections to be practiced?
Then it should be ten perfections to be practiced. So Lama Tsongkhapa isn’t
perfect?
Khen Rinpoche (In English): Now Swee Kim knows how to debate a little bit.
Khen Rinpoche: Lama Tsongkhapa did explain and he did explain well. The
composition of Lama Tsongkhapa amount to the total of 18 volumes, of which
the LRCM is just one text. For example, in his composition called The
Golden Rosary which is the commentary on The Ornament of Clear Realization,
there is an explanation of the other four perfections. It is said clearly
in the Lamrim that there isn’t any bodhisattva practice that cannot be
condensed in the six perfections. All the bodhisattva deeds/practices can
be condensed in the six perfections. As such if you want to include the
perfection of method, perfection of prayer, perfection of power and
perfection of exalted wisdom, these four can be condensed in the perfection
of wisdom. One has to know how these remaining four perfections are
condensed into the perfection of wisdom. By expanding the perfection of
wisdom, you have the remaining four perfections.
Student 3: (1) I think there is a generosity, perfection of generosity,
completing the perfection of generosity which is the exalted or surpassing
practice of perfection of generosity, these two are the same. In the
continuum of the Buddha, what has these six perfections or ten perfections
transform into?
(2)Since in the continuum of a non-human, the bodhisattva vows are suitable
basis whereas the pratimoksha vows are not suitable basis, how is it that
the non-humans are able to take up the bodhisattva vows without the
pratimoksha vows?
Khen Rinpoche: On the buddha ground, there are the two bodies:
(1) the embodiment of truth or the Truth Body (dharmakaya)
(2) the embodiment of form or Form Body (rupakaya)
That is the result.
On the basis, you have the two truths.
The path you have method and wisdom.
The result is these two bodies.
All the bodhisattva deeds (all practices of the bodhisattvas) can be
condensed into the six perfections.
The six perfections can be condensed into method and wisdom.
The first five perfections are included in method.
The last perfection - the perfection of wisdom- is included in the
collection of wisdom.
It is mentioned clearly in the teaching on the perfection path (the
perfection vehicle or the Mahayana sutra):
- the practice of the method results in rupakaya, Form Body, and
- the collection of wisdom results in the Truth Body.
One accumulates merit by practicing generosity. One accumulates merit by
guiding ethical disciplines. One accumulates the collection of merit by
practicing these things including patience. The effect of this collection
of merit is the Form Body.
We need to think about this. By practicing the perfection of generosity we
accumulate the collection of merit.
By familiarizing with the mind realizing emptiness, one accumulates the
collection of wisdom.
For example, by practicing the perfection of generosity one accumulates the
collection of merit. What is this collection of merit? This is something to
think about. I would think it is the non-associated compositional factor,
which is an impermanent phenomenon that is not form, not consciousness.
Can generosity act as a substantial cause of a Form Body?
That is the question.
Can generosity, which is a consciousness, act as a substantial cause for a
Form Body?
In the explanation of the six perfections, it is explained that these six
are all consciousnesses. For example, what is generosity? It is a generous
attitude. It is a consciousness. Can generosity, which is a consciousness,
act as a substantial cause for a Form Body?
What if we say that generosity cannot act as a substantial cause of the
form body?
Is it okay to say that the collection of merit that is accumulated through
the practice of generosity can act as a cause of the Form Body?
This is an extremely important point because when we are talking about
achieving the result, the result is Buddhahood which consists of the two
bodies: the Form Body and the Truth Body.
In the perfection vehicle, Mahayana Sutra, there is no better or higher
explanation in perfection vehicle for achieving the Form Body other than
saying that it is the collection of merit that results in the Form Body.
It is an important question because at the time of the result, there are
these two bodies, and these two bodies have their own substantial causes.
In the perfection vehicle, there is no better explanation. Rather, the best
explanation about what exactly is the cause of the body is none other than
the collection of merit.
The superior bodhisattvas have a mental body – a body in the nature of
mind. The 10th ground bodhisattva also has that body, the body of the
mental nature. That body does not go to enlightenment. The body which is in
the nature of the mind, the mental body, that the 10th ground superior
bodhisattvas have cannot proceed to enlightenment, i.e. cannot transform
into the Form Body of the Buddha. Why? Because the actualizing cause for
this mental body is the level of the predisposition of ignorance together
with uncontaminated karma. This is something we have to think about. I mean
this is the explanation in the perfection vehicle.
So according to the perfection vehicle, what is the substantial cause for
the body of the next life? Does the consciousness of this life act as a
substantial cause for the body of next life? The consciousness of this life
definitely is a cause of the body of next life. The consciousness of this
life is one the causes for the body of next life. What exactly is the
substantial cause of the body of next life? Is it the imprint or latency of
karma that is deposited on the mental continuum of a sentient being?
Khen Rinpoche (In English): What? It is question.
You see it is not so straightforward. You really have to think. According
to the perfection vehicle point of view (Mahayana Sutra, sutric
perspective, Paramitayana) how do they explain the accomplishment of a Form
Body? At the end of the day, they are unable to say more or beyond the
collection of merit. That is all. If you think about it, many questions
arise. Which means the explanation of the Paramitayana for achieving the
Form Body is not very deep. It is not there yet. That is where tantra comes
in. That is why tantra is so important.  It is in tantra that you have the
explanation of the extremely subtle wind and the extremely subtle mind.
Based on that, it explain how after death, what are the substantial causes
and cooperative conditions for the intermediate state being’s body and
mind. It is only in tantra that you find a coherent explanation of what is
the substantial cause of a form body is.  This will come towards the end of
the basic program where we will be looking at Tantra. It is important
therefore to really study this in the future. Therefore, if you have an
overview of the general procedure of sutra and tantra, and whatever
understanding you gain will really be very special, different, and not
ordinary.
In dependence on our learning these great treatises, even you do get some
rough understanding of the general procedure of sutra and tantra, this is
one of the things that would make your present life meaningful. All of us
are so extremely fortunate even just to have this small faith and small
interest in wanting to learn. While we still have some faith and interest
in learning the Buddha’s teachings, you should take the opportunity and
strive as much as possible in learning and analyzing the Buddha’s teachings
so as to leave as many imprints in our minds. The more imprints we place
then there is hope that things will become better and clearer from life to
life. I have mentioned a couple of times before that just mere coming to
class, mere listening to the teachings, mere hearing the teachings, and
just merely reading the books on your own, that alone actually make it
quite difficult to learn anything. It is very important to think and
analyze deeply whether through discussion or in the discussion group,
debate and analysis. That is very important because it is only through
analysis and deep reflection that you come to gain very clear understanding
and thereby conviction, and very stable knowledge. This is what we need to
do. We all have to do this. From my side, I would like to request and
encourage you to make this happens. We really have to step it up. If you
have the question or something that you do not understand, you shouldn’t
feel embarrass or shy to ask. If you don’t know then you should ask. You
must ask. I see that most of the time the people who are asking questions
in class are the people have finished first basic program. I don’t see
those who have just joined in this recent basic program asking question. I
don’t know why. Is it because too shy? There is no such thing as a stupid
question. You should not think “My question is stupid therefore I don’t
want to ask”.

