Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/SixPerfections/Lesson8.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:02.767514
================================================================================


We have been talking about the practice of patience, and I have suggested
that you should memorize the verse that says:
      There is no sin like hatred
      And no fortitude like patience.
      Therefore, earnestly cultivate
      Patience in a variety of ways.
It is useful to recall this verse whenever you are upset, or whenever you
are angry. By recalling this verse and bringing the meaning to your mind,
try to use this to deal with your anger especially at time when you are
upset. Most of the time anger set in after a particular problem has
surfaced or after harm is done. Whatever harm that is done is already done
i.e. it has finished. Usually we follow up with it with anger. If we really
think about it, this does not serve much purpose or benefit. If harm is
already done and if we follow it up with anger, we are creating more
disturbances. As the harm is already done, we are creating new disturbance
to our minds and in the process, we are getting angry again and accumulate
fresh negative karma. So the best thing is to remind ourselves that the
unpleasant experience is the result of the ripening of a negative karma
that we ourselves have created in the past. That is the best thing to think
about. Otherwise, if we continue to be upset after the harm is done, then
the mind is very much disturbed and we accumulate a lot of negative energy
and negative karma. If getting angry after harm has already been done can
reverse the harm or can undo the whole thing, perhaps there is some meaning
or purpose to it. But getting angry after harm is done does not turn away
and can never undo the harm. On top of that, it creates more problems and
more unhappiness.
Getting upset is a very easy thing. Just some slight provocation, we get
upset. So it is not easy to counteract anger. We have to counteract anger
with many lines of reasoning. One has to debate with oneself using many
lines of reasoning, in different ways, and from different perspectives. At
the end of the day, we have to prove and convince ourselves that it is
pointless to get upset. It is only when we develop that ascertainment and
conviction for ourselves that it is really pointless to do so, until then
change does not come. Once we accept in our heart that there is no point to
do so after thinking through those reasons over and over again, and then
strengthening the conclusion that we have reached, only then change will
come slowly. What we need is very sharp discriminating wisdom. If we have
sharp discriminating wisdom then we are able to think. When we are able to
think well, then we can stop all these different negative thoughts. So by
thinking about all these things and putting whatever we have learned into
practice, of course it is good if we can stop ourselves from getting angry.
Even if that does not happen, at least what we can do is not to hold
grudges and resentment. It is quite silly or sad state of affairs that on
one hand studying and being a Buddhist, but in relation to some situation
we keep that unhappiness and resentment for life. That will be a very sad
state of affairs, and it is kind of very silly. Of course resentment and
grudges do arise, but at least we could think that the purpose of learning
and practicing the Buddha’s teachings is not to make ourselves miserable
for life by holding on to grudges and resentment. Resentment is kind of
silly and sad state of affairs because it makes ourselves unhappy and makes
others unhappy. For sure we create negative karma when we hold on to
grudges and resentment. Of course that is for the future, but at the
present, we are also very miserable and very unhappy because when we see
the object of our resentment and grudges, we are unhappy and the other
person is also unhappy.
Here we are talking about perfection of patience which is a practice of the
bodhisattvas. Learning this can be a condition for us to practice and at
least to implement some of these things in our lives. Even if we are not
able to really counteract or stop anger, but the studies will serve a
purpose if we are not affected by resentment or grudges, i.e. we don’t hold
grudges. You could perhaps consider making a pledge that this will be the
goal or this must be the outcome for studying this.
Khen Rinpoche (In English): At one time, His Holiness the Dalai Lama gave
some refuge vows or something like that in Dharamsala. Then he asked to the
people whether anybody can commit not to get angry. Then there is one
person, I think Rinpoche’s brother, Sangye, said: “Yes I can”. His Holiness
was very surprised and can’t believe. He said “Not getting angry is not
possible”. So Rinpoche’s brother Sangye said: “I will keep the vows”. He
really said that, so His Holiness was very happy. Not to get angry - that
kind of vows - I don’t know. After that whether Sangye, Rinpoche’s brother,
get angry or not, I don’t know. Haven’t tried yet.

The Perfection of Joyous Perseverance
(iv) How to train in the perfection of joyous perseverance
1. What joyous perseverance is
2. The divisions of joyous perseverance
3. The way of generating it in your mind
1. What joyous perseverance is
[LRCM Vol 2 page 182] The Bodhisattva Levels explains it as a flawless
state of mind that is enthusiastic about accumulating virtue and working
for the welfare of living beings, together with the physical, verbal, and
mental activity such a state of mind motivates.
Joyous perseverance is enthusiasm; enthusiasm for virtue and enthusiasm for
helping others. As say here - enthusiasm in working for the welfare of
living beings. So it is a mind, it is an attitude.
At the causal motivational phase of a virtuous physical or verbal activity,
before you engage in those activities, at the time of motivation there is
this enthusiasm. That is posited as joyous perseverance.
At the time when you are carrying out those virtuous activities with your
body and speech, the enthusiasm that is present, you could also call that
joyous effort. So joyous effort is that enthusiasm
So joyous perseverance is enthusiasm, it is a mind. It does not refer to
the physical or verbal activity.
2. The divisions of joyous perseverance
i. Armor-like joyous perseverance
ii. Joyous perseverance of gathering virtue
iii. Joyous perseverance of acting for the welfare of living beings
i. Armor-like joyous perseverance
[LRCM Vol 2 page 184] When bodhisattvas joyously persevere prior to
actively engaging themselves, they put on the armor of a preliminary
enthusiastic thought such as,” For a trillion sets of three immeasurably
great eons each composed of days as long as a thousand great eons, I shall
not relinquish my practice of joyous perseverance. For the sake of
relieving the suffering of a single living being, I would rejoice at
remaining only as a hell-being until I attain buddhahood. As I exert myself
in this manner for the sake of complete enlightenment, what need is there
to mention my perseverance over a shorter period or in the face of lesser
suffering?"
Bodhisattvas put on this armor-like joyous perseverance. They have this
kind of idea: “Even if I have to spend eons in hell just to cause one
sentient being to produce one single virtue, I would do it.”
You can apply this to many things - your studies, your quest in attaining
qualities, in your meditation. For example, in the case of educating
ourselves in the Buddha’s teachings, you could think “My entire life is
dedicated for that. I’m going to learn and educate myself using this whole
life”.
Although the study program we have here is supposed to finish in five
years, but it doesn’t matter whether it is five years, ten years, or twelve
years.  The point here is that you have to be enthused about it. You really
have that enthusiasm to want to do it.  The enthusiasm will make a
difference.
You could wear this armor of joyous perseverance thinking “Whatever I don’t
understand in this life, I will make sure I will understand it in the
future lives”. Basically we see that we have to continue to educate
ourselves and to learn until enlightenment. In learning, we need to have
wisdom. Wisdom can only come from learning. By seeing the point that we
need wisdom, whether you like it or not, you need the wisdom. In order to
have wisdom, you need to study. So for as long as we need to develop this
wisdom, we will have this idea “I will study for as long as I develop this
wisdom”. Whether it is this life, future lives or all the lives, if we put
on this kind of armor, this kind of thought will make a difference. So when
it comes to your own learning, and your own education, you need this
enthusiasm for yourself. If you do have this enthusiasm, it will make a big
difference.
[LRCM Vol 2 page 184] Such is the joyous perseverance that is like armor.
Abodhisattva who produces even an aspiration for, or just faith in, such
joyous perseverance is steadfast; how much more so one who is endowed with
this perseverance, given that he or she develops measureless causes for
joyously persevering for the sake of unsurpassed enlightenment. The
Bodhisattva Levels says that for such a person there is absolutely no
action for the sake of others and for enlightenment that is discouraging or
entails hardship. When you become conditioned to such a state of mind, it
becomes the definite cause of awakening your potential for the Mahayana
lineage, so train in it.
ii. Joyous perseverance of gathering virtue
[LRCM Vol 2 page 185] The joyous perseverance of gathering virtue is
applying yourself to the practice of the six perfections in order to
properly accomplish them.
Here the joyous perseverance of gathering virtue is joyously persevering in
accomplishing the six perfections in practicing them. In short, whatever
virtue we engage in, it has to be done with enthusiasm happily.
iii. Joyous perseverance of acting for the welfare of living beings
In the MLLR, the joyous perseverance of acting for the welfare sentient
beings is similar to the one before.  It means having enthusiasm while
working for the welfare of sentient beings.
3. The way of generating it in your mind
For the actual way of producing joyous perseverance in our minds, we first
have to reflect on the benefits of having joyous perseverance and the
faults of not having it.
[LRCM Vol 2 page 182] Maitreya’s Ornament for the Mahayana Sutras states:
    Joyous perseverance is supreme among virtues;
    Based on it, you subsequently attain the rest.
    Through it you immediately gain a supreme state of joy,
    As well as the mundane and supramundane attainments.
    With joyous perseverance you attain the pleasures desired in life;
    Become possessed of utter purity;
    Are liberated, transcending the view of the perishing aggregates;
    And reach buddhahood, the supreme enlightenment.
Joyous perseverance is praised as the supreme among virtues. Why? Because
if you have joyous perseverance, everything comes. Joyous perseverance
collects all the other virtues.
 • If you look at the object of attainment of a person of small capacity,
   it is high status, a rebirth as human or god/celestial being. Such high
   status is achieved by true joyous perseverance.
 • The object of attainment of the person of middling capacity is
   liberation from cyclic existence.  Achieving liberation is also done
   through joyous perseverance.
 • The object of attainment of the person of great capacity, the state of
   buddhahood/full enlightenment is also comes about through joyous
   perseverance.
[LRCM Vol 2 page 183] The Compendium of the Perfections also states:
   If you are free of fatigue and have great joyous perseverance,
   There is nothing you cannot attain or accomplish.
And also:
   Even all non-human beings delight in helping you;
   You attain all types of meditative concentrations
   And spend all periods of the day and night fruitfully.
   Your collection of good qualities does not decline,
   And your purposes surpassing the affairs of humankind
   Flourish like the blue utpala flower.
I guess whenever one engages in virtue and one does it happily and really
enthusiastic about it, it is said that one will not experience harms from
humans and non-humans. By not experiencing harm means they are helping you.

When one has a lot of confidence and enthusiasm for virtue and with that
kind of powerful mindset, I guess we will not be susceptible to harms from
non-humans.
We become susceptible to non-human harms when your mind is low, feeling
down, getting discouraged and lose heart. In that state, your mind is
probably under the influence of some afflictions as well. That is what
allows the external beings, non-human beings, to cause problems and harm
us.
Most of the time, because of a lack of strong and powerful enthusiasm and
lacking the happy mind while carrying out our practices or study, then one
is susceptible to obstacles. In the course of study or practice, obstacles
come. But when there is a strong enthusiasm, even if we meet with
obstacles, it may not affect us.
When you are not very enthusiastic about doing something, or don’t really
want it or don’t want too much of it, then when we meet with a problem,
although it may be a very small problem, it will overwhelms you completely.
First, there is not much interest to start with. With not much enthusiasm,
then problem comes, then don’t want to study already, don’t want to do
mantras, don’t want to recite prayers, and don’t want to come to class.
Basically, you just stop whatever practice. You don’t feel like doing even
though the problem is very small. However, if you really want something,
let’s say if you really want to study and you are enthusiastic about it,
the small problem remains as it is, and it goes away. Even if the problem
is big, but you have strong interest and really want object, whatever you
are looking for, and you are enthusiastic about it, it doesn’t affect you
much. It will not stop you.
The power of enthusiasm is positive mind. If it is a powerful mind, it can
overwhelm the external obstacle. I guess that could explain how having
joyous perseverance can stop harms from non-human beings. So it says - when
you have joyous perseverance, there is nothing that you cannot learn, there
is nothing that you will not come to understand.
A lot of people say that they cannot study. They put forth the thesis: I
cannot study. So whenever there is a thesis, there is a reason. Then they
provide many reasons -“I don’t have brains, I am slow, I am old, my memory
is no good and whatever I study I forget”. They posit many reasons to prove
that they cannot study. These are all what we call: “Incorrect reasons”.
Actually the real reason is “I am not really interested.  I don’t have
joyous perseverance”. That is the actual reason.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): You agree? No?
It is true that there is nothing that one cannot learn. There is nothing
that one will not come to know if we have joyous perseverance.
[LRCM Vol 2 page 183] As to the faults of not joyously persevering, the
Questions of Sagaramati Sutra states:
      The enlightenment of the lazy is exceedingly far off and distant.
      The lazy lack all perfections from generosity to wisdom.
      The lazy do not work for others' welfare.
And the Mindfulness of the Excellent Teaching states as well:
      Whoever has laziness -
      The single basis of the afflictions -
      Whoever feels some laziness
      Lacks all good qualities.
These are the faults of not joyously persevering. In the absence of joyous
perseverance, there is laziness, and with laziness, nothing is achieved.
[LRCM Vol 2 page 184] Thus, if you lack joyous perseverance, you come under
the influence of laziness and become poor in all good qualities, so you
lose every temporary and ultimate purpose of being human.
There are two unfavorable conditions for producing joyous perseverance:
   1) Not entering the path even though you see that you can do the practice
      i.e. not doing the practice even though you see that you can do the
      practice
   2) Not entering the path because you become discouraged, thinking, “How
      can I do such a thing?" i.e. not doing it because one think one is
      unable to do it
[LRCM page 186] Identifying factors incompatible with joyous perseverance
There are two factors incompatible with entering the path:
(1) not entering even though you see that you can do the practice,  and  (2)
not entering because you become discouraged, thinking, "How can I do such  a
practice?" Indeed there is also not practicing because you  are  unconcerned
with whether you are capable or not, but this is irrelevant here since  this
explanation is for those pursuing liberation.
So these are the two unfavorable conditions for producing joyous
perseverance.
(1). Not doing the practice even though one sees that one has the ability
to do it
(2). Not doing it because one think one is unable to do it.
[LRCM Vol 2 page 186] Within the first factor, there are two possibilities:
(1) you have the laziness of procrastination, thinking, "There is still
time"; and (2) you are not procrastinating but you are overwhelmed by your
attachment to inferior and common activities.
The real obstacles that prevent us from practicing something that we know
we are capable of is the laziness of procrastination, thinking “I will do
it tomorrow or the day after tomorrow”. We all like that. Whatever virtue
activities you can name, for example, prostration, we know we can
prostrate, we have the time to prostrate and we can even talk about the
benefits of prostrating “You create the causes to be born as the wheel
turning king for many zillion times”, but we think “Maybe I prostrate the
next time”.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): You say the next time, then the next time never
happen. Before happen the next time, happen the next life.
This is what stopped us from virtue and it is called the laziness of
procrastination. Of course when there is the laziness of procrastination,
there isn’t any enthusiasm for virtue at all. The same attitude is present
when we are studying “Oh, this module not turning very well for me and this
module has already gone. Never mind I will study harder for the next
module”.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): Now, I am saying I have clairvoyance. Joking.
Procrastination is a form of laziness. It is called the laziness of
procrastination. This is very bad and it is one of the worst things because
it pushes all the virtues away.
The antidotes that stop the laziness of procrastination involves
contemplating :
    • that the body that you have at present is rapidly disintegrating,
    • that after death you will fall into the lower realms, and
    • that it will be difficult to find an excellent life such as this one
      again.
These three meditations were explained earlier.
[LRCM Vol 2 page 187] (a)) Stopping the laziness of procrastination
This involves the following three  meditations:  you  contemplate  that  the
body you have at present is rapidly disintegrating,  that  after  death  you
will fall into miserable realms, and that it will be difficult  to  find  an
excellent life such as  this  one  again.  Meditation  on  these  stops  the
laziness that holds to the notion that there  is  plenty  of  time,  thereby
generating the conviction in your mind that  there  is  no  time  to  spare.
These three meditations were explained earlier in the section on the  person
of small capacity.
We have to reflect on how ourselves, our life, our body is disintegrating
moment by moment. We have to reflect on death and impermanence using the
nine-point meditation, which was taught in the path that is shared with the
person of small capacity. To stop ourselves from not practicing when we see
that we are able to practice, we have to reflect on death and impermanence.
As the great Kadampa masters of the past had said “We do not know which one
will come first, tomorrow or next life. So, therefore, start now”.  If we
are not able use this life in a meaningful way and in a virtuous way then
it is not incorrect to say that we are headed for the lower realms. Once we
go to the next life and if we go to the lower realms, then once again it
will be very difficult to get such an opportunity again. As it is said in
the teaching, the opportunity that we have is something very difficult to
come by. So, we have to go back to the section in the beginning of the
Lamrim on the difficulty of obtaining the human life of leisure and
endowments. We have to meditate on death and impermanence all the times,
over and over and over again. A good constant reflection on death and
impermanence will enable us to engage in virtues.
Stopping attachment to ignoble activities
That is another kind of laziness. It is a laziness that takes the form of
attachment to ignoble activities. Attachment to ignoble activities prevents
us to engage in virtue. While we see that we can engage in it but what
stops us is attachment to ignoble activities, for example, passing time in
meaningless talk, walking around, going out or doing meaningless activity
like watching movies.
Khen Rinpoche (In English): Watching TV. Going Karaoke.
The essence is that attachment to ignoble activities mean coming under the
control and overwhelmed by distraction. While in the midst of being
distracted, you still have the idea that you need to practice, but at the
end of the day nothing gets done.
The antidotes to such attachment is that we should see that the sublime
teaching is the source of endless joy in this and future lives, and that
you lose its great purpose when you are distracted in idle chatter and
amusements which are the source of much pointless suffering later. See this
and stop your attachment.
[LRCM Vol 2 page 187] Stopping attachment to ignoble activities
You see that the sublime teaching is the source of endless joy in this and
future lives, and that you lose its great purpose when you are distracted
in idle chatter and amusements which are the source of much pointless
suffering later. Meditate on this and stop your attachment.
Practicing the dharma means engaging in virtue and abandoning non-virtue.
That is the solution to attachment to ignoble activities. Essentially the
solution is thinking about karma and its effect –
    • thinking what is virtuous karma and what are its effects and
    • thinking what is the non-virtue and what are its effects.
We have to gain a conviction for ourselves in that the happiness that we
want has its cause in virtue. We have to think about the presentation of
karma as was explained in the section of the path that is shared with the
person of middling capacity.
Another kind of laziness is thinking that “This is beyond me. There is no
way I can do this. I really cannot do this”. One of the kinds of laziness
is the laziness of discouragement. There are three kinds of discouragement
that we need to stop:
1. The discouragement about the goal
  ⇨ This is thinking “I cannot possible achieve all these limitless
    qualities of the Buddha”. If we do look at the explanation of the
    Buddha’s qualities, we will realize that it is so many. It is just
    limitless - like there is no end to it. We just find it difficult. We
    cannot imagine how it is possible - not just one but so many. This
    becomes the reason for us to get discourage “So many! How is it
    possible for me to actualize all these?” Then you to get discourage.
  ⇨ While it is same like in the studies, you may think “Sometimes you
    say “Yes”, later you say “No”.  Up there “Yes” and below there “No”!
    What is it? How am I supposed to know? Can you just tell me? It is not
    possible”. This is like what happen in last week debate.
    Or you get discourage because there is so many tenets and all of them
    are saying their own things – “The Vaibashika said this, and the
    Prasangika said that. Not only that, they said different things and
    there are different texts say that they individually said different
    things. It is so complicated! How is it possible? I won’t understand
    all these”. Then you get discouraged.
  ⇨ If you get discouraged, you will definitely not achieve anything.
    Once you get discouraged then nothing happens. There is no point.
    Therefore the armor-like joyous perseverance is very important.
2. The discouragement about the means to attain enlightenment
  ⇨ “In order to achieve the goal, I have to give my arms and legs and so
    forth. I need to do many of such things, and it is so difficult. How is
    it possible?” Then you get discouraged.
  ⇨ Some people get discouraged when they hear that one need to
    accumulate the collections over a three great countless eons.
3. The discouragement about the kind of place that you have to live in
  ⇨ One thinks; “In order to become a Buddha, between now and buddhahood,
    I still have to reborn for so many lifetimes in samsara. In those times
    when I am in samsara, I will really get it and a lot of sufferings.”
    That is another source of discouragement.
So the three kinds of discouragement are:
   1. Discouragement about the goal itself
   2. Discouragement about the means to achieve the goal
   3. Discouragement about the place that you have to live in
[LRCM Vol 2 page 187] Stopping discouragement or self-contempt
It is not enough just to delight in the sublime teaching after you have
stopped your procrastination and your attachment to ignoble activities; you
must train as a Mahayana practitioner. Therefore, if you become
discouraged, thinking, "Someone like me is unable to practice that," you
must eliminate this discouragement. Stopping discouragement or self-
contempt has three parts:
  1. Stopping discouragement about the goal
  2. Stopping discouragement about the means to attain the goal
  3. Stopping discouragement because wherever you are is a place to
  practice
What is the antidote to the first kind of discouragement – discouragement
about the goal?
What you have to think in this: “In the past, all the buddhas did not start
as someone who has high realization. They were all like me. They gradually
progress higher and higher and that is how they became a Buddha.
The Buddha also said “Those sentient beings that are lower than me now can
also achieve enlightenment. As long as I don’t give up joyously
persevering, I can also achieve enlightenment”. There is no reason why I
cannot achieve it”. “Although the Buddha has limitless qualities, and if I
work at it, I will also achieve it”.
You can apply this to your learning here, and generate the determination to
learn. “There is no reason why I cannot understand this. There are people
who understand it. If they can understand it, there is no reason why I
cannot understand it. If I put in effort, I would come to understand it one
day”. So, you generate that kind of determination.
I guess you have heard this as it is common talk among most people. Most
people would say: “Of course the bodhisattvas can do it because they are
bodhisattvas. But we are not bodhisattvas. That is different kind of thing.
Of course all the gurus, the teachers, can do it. That is why they are
teachers. They are teachers, we are not. Why should you expect me the same
as them?”
The bodhisattvas were not bodhisattvas from day one. They became a
bodhisattva. If they can become a bodhisattva, we can also become a
bodhisattva by putting in effort. It is the same thing as the teachers. The
teacher is not a teacher from day one. He didn’t know everything from day
one. He also has to study and learn. We should think “Just like what the
teacher did, he studied then he came to understand the topics. If I do the
same, I also would be like him”.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): If he can do it, I can do it. There is a famous
cook, Yan can cook, I can cook. Now I don’t see the cook, I don’t know.
Last time, I see this Chinese guy in America in the TV. Last time, I see he
teaches it is very easy like that. At the ending part, he said, Yan can
cook, I can cook also. Something liked that.
There are few more pages which treats the last two perfections briefly. You
should read that. After that we will look at the way to develop calm
abiding.

[LRCM Vol 2 page 188-191]
(1) Stopping discouragement about the goal
Qualm: If the goal is buddhahood—the total elimination of all faults and
the total completion of all good qualities—then, since it is extremely
difficult for me to accomplish even a few good qualities or to remove even
a few faults, how could someone like me be capable of attaining such a
result?
Reply: If such a sense of discouragement manifests, it is a very great
fault because it constitutes giving up the spirit of enlightenment. Even if
such a thought does not fully manifest, you must stop it at its incipient
stage.
How to stop it? Encourage yourself with this thought: "The Bhagavan—the
authoritative person who speaks what is true and correct, never what is
false or erroneous—said that even flies, etc. will attain enlightenment.
That being so, why should I not attain it—so long as I do not give up
persevering—inasmuch as human birth gives me an excellent basis and I have
the mental capacity to analyze what to adopt and what to cast aside?"
Furthermore, stop your discouragement with this thought: "In the past there
were former buddhas, now there are living buddhas, and in the future there
will also be those who reach buddhahood. It is not the case that just one
person who has already become a buddha accomplishes the path. Rather, those
just like myself, gradually progressing upward, have become buddhas and
will become buddhas."
(2) Stopping discouragement about the means to attain the goal
Qualm: To accomplish buddhahood you have to give away your feet, hands,
etc., but I am not capable of such feats.
Reply. You must bear suffering to that extent, for even those who live as
they please without engaging in the bodhisattva deeds experience as they
pass through cyclic existence unspeakable sufferings such as having their
bodies cut open, torn to pieces, stabbed, set on fire, and so forth, but
they do not accomplish even their own welfare. The suffering occasioned by
undergoing hardships for the sake of enlightenment is not even a fraction
of this suffering, and also has the great purpose of accomplishing both
your own and others' welfare.
(3) Stopping discouragement because wherever you are is a place to practice
Qualm: Reaching buddhahood requires taking limitless rebirths in cyclic
existence, so I will be harmed by the suffering therein. I am not capable
of such a thing.
Reply: Reflect as follows. Bodhisattvas have eliminated all sin; therefore,
sin's effect—the feeling of suffering—will not arise because they have
stopped the cause. Through firm knowledge that cyclic existence lacks an
intrinsic nature, like a magician's illusion, they also have no mental
suffering. Given that their physical and mental bliss increases, they have
no reason to become disheartened even though they are still in cyclic
existence.

