Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/SixPerfections/Lesson10.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:02.731947
================================================================================


How to train in the perfection of wisdom
[MLLR page 194]  The importance of hearing as a cause of wisdom
Therefore it is necessary to generate wisdom Its cause, hearing the
completely pure scriptures in accordance with one’s mental capacity
You need to generate wisdom and the cause of that is studying the stainless
text in accord with your mental capacity. This sentence is from MLLR but
not in the LRCM.
[LRCM Vol 2 page 218]
  Little study is like blindness – you do not know how to meditate.
  Without study, what could there be to reflect upon?
  Therefore, from the cause of making an effort to study
  You meditate in accord with reflection and thereby gain vast wisdom.
The goal of studying the text is to be able to think about and reflect on
their meaning, and then to familiarize your mind with those meanings. This
is what called meditation. In order to be able to reflect and to mediate,
one must have vast study, and vast learning. This is the advice of Lama
Tsongkhapa.
[LRCM Vol 2 page 218] Therefore, as the Compendium of the Perfections says:
  Serve and venerate a guru worthy of trust,
  And study to achieve wisdom.
Once you rely on a learned person, you must study in accord with your
capacity, for if you do not, you will not produce the wisdom that arises
from study and the wisdom that arises from reflection, whereupon you will
not know what to meditate upon, And if you do study, you will produce the
wisdom that arises from reflection by thinking over the meaning of what you
have studied, and from this you will gain vast wisdom that arises from
meditation.
The cause of wisdom is to engage in vast learning and vast study.
Why is wisdom important?
Wisdom is important because without wisdom, we cannot eliminate the
obscurations.
[LRCM Vol 2 page 218] The venerable Maitreya also says in the Sublime
Continuum:
  The conceptualizations of the three spheres
  Are asserted to be cognitive obscurations,
  While conceptualizations such as stinginess and the like
  Are asserted to be afflictive obscurations.
  Solely wisdom is the cause
  Of their elimination, nothing else,
  So wisdom is supreme. Study is its basis,
  So study is supreme.
[LRCM Vol 2 page 221] As the former excellent beings said:
Make all the teachings you have previously heard completely clear in your
mind. You must reflect upon them again and again, evaluate them, and
deliberate on them. When you have let yourself forget the teachings, there
is nothing gained by learning to stabilize your attention on one object of
meditation. The best meditators are the best teachers. Mediocre meditators
become mediocre teachers. You need knowledge of the teachings and
commensurate meditation that both proceed to ever greater levels together.
Knowledge of the dharma/teachings is a condition for the development of
one’s mind. It is a condition for one’s mind to progress i.e. become better
and better.
It is good to read what we have just read out here. If you have already
done your reading prior to coming to class, then it is fine. If not, then
you should read this particular paragraph.

Serenity and Insight
[LRCM Vol  3  page  13]  In  particular,  how  to  train  in  the  last  two
perfections
Training in the last two perfections, in particular, is the way to
cultivate meditative serenity* and insight because serenity and insight are
included under the perfections of meditative stabilization and wisdom
respectively.
*Meditative serenity is translated as calm abiding
This section has six parts:
  1. The benefits of cultivating serenity and insight
  2. Showing that these two include all states of meditative concentration
  3. The nature of serenity and insight
  4. Why it is necessary to cultivate both
  5. How to be certain about their order
  6. How to train in each
[LRCM Vol 3 page 13] (a) The benefits of cultivating serenity and insight
Sutra Unravelling the Intended Meaning says:
 Maitreya, you should know that all mundane and supramundane virtuous
 qualities, whether of sravakas, bodhisattvas, or tathagatas, are the
 result of meditative serenity and insight.
Qualm: Are not serenity and insight good qualities in the mind-stream of
someone who has reached them through meditation? How is it possible for all
good qualities to result from those two?
All mundane and supramundane good qualities of the Mahayana and Hinayana
are the results of calm abiding and insight.
What is the qualm that is raised here? If somebody were to ask you “How can
that be? Sure or not? Why?”
[LRCM Vol 3 page 14] Reply: As will be explained, actual serenity and
insight are good qualities in the mind-stream of someone who has attained
them through meditation, so all the good qualities of the Mahayana and
Hinayana do not result from them. However, concentrations which at least
involve one-pointedness on a virtuous object are classified with serenity;
virtuous cognitions that distinguish an ultimate or conventional object are
classified with insight. This is what the sutra means in stating that all
of the virtuous qualities of the three vehicles result from serenity and
insight, so there is no contradiction.
The reply is essentially this -in the Sutra Unravelling the Intended
Meaning, the meaning of what was stated earlier does not mean that all the
good qualities of the Mahayana and Hinayana come from serenity and insight.
In general:
    • Concentration means the mind that is able to stay focus single-
      pointedly on a virtuous object.
    • Wisdom means being able to distinguished objects such as ultimate or
      conventional objects.
These two are included under calm abiding and special insight. From that
perspective, it is said that all the good qualities of the Mahayana and
Hinayana are the result of serenity and insight.
In general, not all the good qualities of the Mahayana and Hinayana are the
result of calm abiding and insight. But the meaning of the Sutra
Unravelling the Intended Meaning subsumes what I have just explained -what
is concentration and wisdom and subsuming them under calm abiding and
insight. From that perspective, then it is said that all the good qualities
of the Mahayana and Hinayana result from calm abiding and special insight.
Khen Rinpoche (In English): Nobody read?
My first question to you “Did you read?”
You should read and try to see whether you understand what I have just
said. Probably it will become clearer after you read it.
[LRCM Vol 3 page 14] The Sutra Unravelling the Intended Meaning states:
  Once people have cultivated insight
  And serenity, they are free
  From the bondage of dysfunctional tendencies
  And from the bondage of signs.
Here, “dysfunctional tendencies” refers to latent propensities in your mind-
stream which can produce increasing degrees of misconceptions; “signs”
refers to ongoing attachments to erroneous objects, which foster those
propensities.
[LRCM Vol 3 page 15] Ratnakarasanti's Instructions for the Perfections of
Wisdom says that insight eliminates the former, while serenity eliminates
the latter.
These are the benefits attributed to “serenity” and “insight”.
This is explaining the benefits of serenity and insight.
    • Serenity eliminates ongoing attachments to erroneous objects.
    • Insight eliminates the latent propensities in the mind stream that can
      produce increasing degrees of misconceptions.
[LRCM Vol 3 page 15] (b) How serenity and insight include all states of
meditative stabilizations
The branches, leaves, flowers, and fruits of a tree are limitless, yet the
core point at which they all come together is the root. As in this example,
serenity and insight are the sublime core at which gathers all that the
Buddha says about the limitless states of meditative concentration in
Mahayana and Hinayana. The Sutra Unravelling the Intended Meaning states:
 Know that serenity and insight include all of the many aspects of the
 states of meditative concentration which I have taught for sravakas,
 bodhisattvas and tathagatas.
Therefore, since those who are intent on attaining meditative concentration
cannot comprehend a limitless number of distinct forms, they should know
well and always rely on the techniques for sustaining serenity and insight,
the synthesis of all concentrations.
The Sutra Unravelling the Intended Meaning states that serenity and insight
are the sublime core at which gathers all that the Buddha says about the
limitless states of meditative concentration in Mahayana and Hinayana.
Therefore, since those who are intent on attaining meditative concentration
cannot comprehend a limitless number of distinct forms, they should know
well and always rely on the techniques sustaining serenity and insight, the
synthesis of all concentrations.
[LRCM Vol 3 page 15] (c) The nature of serenity and insight
As to the nature of serenity, it is as stated in the Sutra Unravelling the
Intended Meaning:
While you dwell in solitude and properly direct your attention inward, you
attend to just those topics upon which you have carefully reflected. Your
attention is mentally engaged by continuously attending inwardly. The state
of mind wherein you do this, and stay this way often, and in which both
physical and mental pliancy arise, is called “serenity.”
What exactly is serenity? What exactly is insight? This is how the Buddha
describes serenity in the Sutra Unravelling the Intended Meaning. So that
is the quote. Now Lama Tsongkhapa explains the meaning of that.
[LRCM Vol 3 page 16] With undistracted mindfulness and vigilance, you focus
your attention on this object and fix it to the object continuously, so
that your mind stabilizes of its own accord on the object of meditation.
When you produce the delight and bliss of physical and mental pliancy, then
your state of meditative concentration becomes serenity. This comes about
through just sustaining your attention inwardly, without distraction from
the object of meditation; it is not contingent upon understanding the
reality of the thing.
The details about calm abiding will come later when we look at how it is
actually developed. For now, calm abiding is a mind that is able to focus
single-pointedly on any chosen object i.e. chosen object of observation.
So calm abiding is a mind that is able to focus single-pointedly on that.
This single-pointedness of the mind has to be devoid or free from the
faults of excitement and laxity.
On top of that, together with calm abiding, this concentrated mind, you
must have also achieved the bliss of physical pliancy and the bliss of
mental pliancy.
I will explain what physical and mental pliancy is, and what is the bliss
of physical pliancy and what is the bliss of mental pliancy.  There is an
order in which they arise. That will be covered later on.
In short, calm abiding is a mind focus single pointedly on a chosen object
of observation which is devoid of excitement and laxity and is accompanied
by the bliss of physical and mental pliancy.
From what we have read out earlier, it is clear that you do not need to
realize emptiness in order to achieve calm abiding.
Next is the entity of insight. What did Buddha say about the entity of
insight?
[LRCM Vol 3 page 16] As to the nature of insight, the same sutra says:
 After you have attained mental pliancy and physical pliancy, you stay
 therein and eliminate other mental aspects. You then regard inwardly and
 with discernment the mental image which is the domain of the meditative
 concentration on the topics upon which you have reflected. With relation
 to the images that are the domain of such concentration, any
 differentiation of the meaning of these topics, or full differentiation,
 thorough examination, thorough analysis, forbearance, wish,
 differentiation of particulars, view, or thought is called "insight." Thus
 is a bodhisattva skilled in insight.
Khen Rinpoche (In English): That is what Buddha said. Then after that what
Lama Tsongkhapa said - the commentary on that.
[LRCM Vol 3 page 16] In that sutra passage, "differentiation" means
distinguishing the diversity of conventional phenomena; "full
differentiation" means distinguishing their real [ultimate] nature. The
noble Asanga explains that "thorough examination" is when conceptual
attention possessed of wisdom apprehends a sign; "thorough analysis" means
proper examination. "Examination" means rough examination; "analysis" means
detailed analysis. The apprehension of a sign does not here refer to a
conception of true existence, but rather to distinguishing the exact
particulars of an object. Accordingly, there is both examination and
analysis of both the real nature and the diversity of phenomena.
There are different terms that came out in the quotation.
    • "differentiation" means distinguishing the diversity of conventional
      phenomena
    • "full differentiation" means distinguishing their real nature.
    • "thorough examination" is when conceptual attention possessed of
      wisdom apprehends a sign
    • "thorough analysis" means proper examination
You have the mental factor of examination and analysis. Examination is
translated as investigation in the Lorig module. [There are  four
changeable mental factors. Of which two are investigation and analysis]
What is examination? Examination is a rough analysis of the object.
Analysis is a detailed enquiry of the object.
In terms of the order of arising, first you generate calm abiding.
After that, only then you can have the union of calm abiding and special
insight.
First, you achieve calm abiding. Insight is essentially an investigation of
the object – it is an analysis of the object. Investigation is the pursuit
with these two mental factors – examination/investigation and analysis.
When the investigation of the object is able to induce the bliss of
pliancy, then special insight is generated.
First, you have to achieve calm abiding. Special insight is achieved within
calm abiding.
So within calm abiding, you already have the bliss of physical and mental
pliancy.
Within that state, then one engages in the thorough examination of the
object with the two mental factors of investigation and analysis. When this
examination induces the bliss of pliancy that is when special insight is
achieved. Only then, you have the union of calm abiding and special
insight.
[LRCM Vol 3 page 18] Also, [Kamalasila’s] the second Stages of Meditation
says:
 After you have quelled the distraction of external objects, you rest in a
 delighted and pliant mind which naturally and continuously engages an
 internal object of meditation. This is called meditative serenity. While
 you remain in serenity, any analysis of that very object is called
 insight.
It is important to read these passages over and over again. Analyze them
thoroughly in order to gain a very good understanding of what exactly is
the entity of meditative serenity and insight. As you see here in Lama
Tsongkhapa’s Lamrim, the scriptural authority is cited -first taking
quotation from the Buddha’s own words, then supplemented by quotations from
the great Indian masters. It is very important that whatever explanation or
presentation of what exactly calm abiding is and what exactly special
insight is must be based on a reliable and trustworthy source. For that
purpose, Lama Tsongkhapa took pains to quote and to cite all these passages
from the Buddha’s own words and from the great Indian masters.
Lama Tsongkhapa then goes on to explain that meditative serenity and
special insight is not differentiated by their objects.
[LRCM Vol 3 page 18] Thus, meditative serenity and insight are not
differentiated in terms of their respective objects of meditation, for
there is meditative serenity that knows emptiness and there is insight
which does not know emptiness. Also, meditative serenity is your mind
quieting movement toward external objects, and then abiding on an internal
object of meditation; insight is superior, i.e., special, seeing.
Meditative serenity and special insight are not differentiated in terms of
their objects that they take. This is because there is calm abiding
focusing on emptiness while there is special insight that does not observe
emptiness. You cannot explain the ‘special’ in special insight to mean
seeing emptiness; which is superior. This is not necessarily so, and you
cannot explain in that way.
Also meditative serenity and special insight are not to be differentiated
by whether there is a presence or absence of vivid intensity of the mind.
[LRCM Vol3 page 18] Some claim that a mind resting in a non-discursive
state without vivid intensity is serenity, while such a mind with vivid
intensity is insight. This is not correct because it contradicts the
definitions of serenity and insight that are established at length in
sources such as the words of the Conqueror, the treatises of the Regent,
the texts of Asanga, and Kamalasila's Stages of Meditation.
It is likely that there must have been explanations that were floating
around and purporting that serenity a state of mind where your mind is
resting without vivid intensity, and insight is a mind that has vivid
intensity. There must have been such explanation floating around, and Lama
Tsongkhapa is saying this is wrong.
This is not correct because it contradicts the definitions of serenity and
insight that was established earlier on.
[LRCM Vol3 page 19] In particular, the presence or absence of vivid
intensity of mind in a non-conceptual consciousness indicates whether the
concentration is lax; it is utterly incorrect to claim that it indicates
the difference between serenity and insight. This is because in all
concentrations of meditative serenity you definitely must clear away
laxity, and because all concentrations free from laxity are invariably
limpid states of mind.
It is incorrect to say:
    • special insight is a mind that possesses vivid intensity
    • calm abiding/meditative serenity is a mind that does not possess such
      a vivid intensity
 It is incorrect to say that because calm abiding is a mind that
necessarily has vivid intensity, because before you can actualize calm
abiding, you must remove all forms of laxity.
In short, Lama Tsongkhapa is saying that it is wrong to differentiate calm
abiding and special insight based on whether there is vivid intensity of
mind or not.
Calm abiding and special insight is not differentiated by whether there is
vivid intensity of mind or not. Neither is it differentiated by the objects
they take, for example, whether they take emptiness as the object or not.
Basically you cannot say calm abiding is a mind that does not realize
emptiness and special insight is a mind that realizes emptiness. Therefore
you cannot differentiate calm abiding and special insight based on whether
the object is emptiness or not.
Why? Because there is calm abiding that focuses on emptiness and there is
special insight that does not observe emptiness.
Because of these reasons, meditative serenity/calm abiding and special
insight are not differentiated by whether they have emptiness as their
object.
You cannot differentiate meditative serenity and special insight based on:
   1. Whether they take emptiness as their object or not
   2. Whether there is the factor of vivid intensity or not
So you cannot say that special insight is a mind that has the vivid
intensity whereas calm abiding is a mind that does not have vivid
intensity.
Why is that so? In order to be calm abiding, it must necessarily be
separated or free from all forms of laxity.
If a mind is free from all laxities, it necessarily has vivid intensity.
The explanation of excitement and laxity will come when we look at the
actual way of generating or cultivating meditative serenity. There is an
explanation of excitement and there is an explanation of laxity. Both have
coarse and subtle forms.
[LRCM Vol3 page 19] Thus, identify concentration and wisdom that focus on
the real nature according to whether your mind knows as its object either
of the two selflessnesses. Do not identify them according to whether your
mind rests in a non-discursive, clear, and blissful state, because there
are countless states of concentration which are blissful, clear, and non-
discursive, yet which do not orient your mind toward the reality of
objects, their lack of self. Even without finding the view that knows the
way things are, any totally non-discursive mind can be adequate to induce
bliss and clarity. Even without understanding emptiness by establishing it
in perception, nothing at all prevents you from developing non-discursive
concentration. If you keep your mind that way for a long time, you cause
the wind-energies to become serviceable. Once this occurs, nothing
precludes the arising of bliss, as it is the nature of such serviceability
to create mental and physical delight and bliss. Once bliss has arisen,
then there will be mental clarity by virtue of the quality of clarity in
the feelings of delight and bliss. For this reason, there is not a single
authentic source to prove that all blissful; clear, non-discursive
concentrations know reality. Therefore, since bliss, clarity, and non-
discursiveness are present in concentrations that know emptiness, yet very
often occur in concentrations that are not directed toward emptiness, you
have to differentiate these two.
You don’t need to realize emptiness in order to produce or experience a
blissful, clear and non-discursive consciousness.
You don’t need to have emptiness as your object.
You don’t need to realize emptiness in order to have this blissful, clear
and non-discursive concentration, because you can choose any object of
observation and use it and focus on it to develop meditative serenity/calm
abiding. Once you focus on an object, you can achieve serviceability of the
body; where it says all the wind-energies become serviceable. When the wind-
energies become serviceable then you experience delight.
By focusing on the chosen object of observation, you can reach a point in
time whereby your wind-energies become serviceable. Through that you
achieve very special state of bliss and delight. When there is such bliss
and delight the mind can also be very clear.
Let’s say you take the mind as the object of your observation and you focus
on the mind to develop meditative serenity. You focus on it to develop
concentration. You focus on it and come the time when you develop
concentration, then your wind-energies become serviceable whereby the body
feels the bliss and delight. Your mind also feels this bliss and delight.
In this case, you are using your mind as the object of observation. In that
case, the mind becomes very clear; clean clear. But this doesn’t mean you
have realized emptiness.
[LRCM Vol3 page 19] (d) Why it is necessary to cultivate both
Why is it insufficient to cultivate either serenity or insight alone? Why
is it necessary to cultivate both? I will explain.
Why it is necessary to cultivate both meditative serenity and special
insight? The explanation is done by employing an analogy and then
explaining the meaning of the analogy.
First, he gives an analogy:
[LRCM Vol3 page 19] If you light an oil-lamp for the purpose of viewing a
picture in the middle of the night, you will see the depictions very
clearly if the lamp is both very bright and undisturbed by wind. If the
lamp is not bright, or is bright but flickering in the wind, then you will
not see the images clearly.
That is the analogy. Now the meaning.
[LRCM Vol3 page 20] Likewise, when looking for the profound meaning, you
will clearly see reality if you have both the wisdom that unerringly
discerns the meaning of reality and an unmoving attention that stays as you
wish on the object of meditation. However, if you do not have wisdom that
knows how things are -even if you have a non-discursive concentration in
which your mind is stable and does not scatter to other objects - then you
lack the eyes which see reality. Hence, it will be impossible to know how
things are no matter how much you develop your concentration. And even with
a perspective that understands reality – selflessness - if you lack a firm
concentration that stays one-pointedly on its object, then it will be
impossible to clearly see the meaning of the way things are because you
will be disturbed by the winds of uncontrollably fluctuating discursive
thought. This is why you need both serenity and insight.
What we have just read out is supported by the citation of couples of
passages from Kamalasila’s Stage of Meditation. You should read this on
your own. When one has calm abiding, whatever virtue you accomplished will
be very strong and powerful.
[LRCM Vol3 page 20] Kamalasila's second Stages of Meditation says:
With bare insight that lacks serenity, the  yogi's  mind  is  distracted  by
objects; like an oil-lamp in the wind, it  will  not  be  stable.  For  this
reason, what sublime wisdom sees will not be very  clear.  As  this  is  so,
rely equally on both. Therefore, the Great Final Nirvana Sutra says:
  Sravakas  do  not  see  the  lineage  of  the  tathagatas  because  their
  concentration is greater than their  wisdom;  bodhisattvas  see  it,  but
  unclearly, because their wisdom is greater than their concentration.  The
  tathagatas see everything because they have serenity and insight in equal
  measure.
With the power of serenity, your mind—like a lamp placed where there  is  no
wind—will be unmoved by the  winds  of  discursive  thought.  With  insight,
others  cannot  divert  you  since   you   have   abandoned   the   infinite
entanglements of bad views. As the Moon Lamp Sutra says:
  The power of meditative serenity makes your mind steady; insight makes it
  like a mountain.
So, the mark of meditative serenity is  that  your  attention  stays  right
where it is placed without distraction from the object of  meditation.  The
mark of insight is that you know the reality of selflessness and  eliminate
bad views such as the view of self; your mind is like a mountain in that it
cannot be shaken by opponents. Therefore, you should distinguish these  two
marks.
Before you achieve meditative serenity, you may use  discerning  wisdom  to
analyze the meaning of selflessness, but your mind is  extremely  unsteady,
like a lamp in the wind, so your concept of selflessness is unclear. On the
other hand, if you analyze when you have achieved serenity, you  avoid  the
fault of extreme unsteadiness, so your  concept  of  selflessness  will  be
clear. Thus, the mental state of insight has a quality of steadiness  which
derives from non-discursive meditative serenity and a  quality  of  knowing
how things exist which  does  not  derive  from  meditative  serenity.  For
example, a lamp's ability to illumine forms derives from the wick  and  the
preceding moments of flame; it does not derive  from  such  things  as  the
screen that protects it from the wind. However, the stability of the steady
flame of the lamp does derive from this screen.  Thus,  if  you  engage  in
analysis with a wisdom possessed of the meditative equipoise of  serenity—a
state undisturbed by laxity or excitement— then  you  will  understand  the
meaning of reality. With this in mind,  the  Compendium  of  the  Teachings
Sutra states:
  When your mind is in meditative equipoise, you  will  understand  reality
  just as it is.
Kamalasila's first Stages of Meditation says:
  Because your mind moves like a  river,  it  does  not  rest  without  the
  foundation of meditative serenity; a  mind  that  is  not  in  meditative
  equipoise cannot understand reality just as it  is.  Also,  the  Bhagavan
  says, "With meditative equipoise, you know reality just as it is."
[LRCM Vol3 page 21] When you achieve serenity, you not only stop the fault
of movement in the wisdom consciousness that properly analyzes
selflessness, you also stop the fault of distraction from the object of
meditation whenever you use discerning wisdom to conduct analytical
meditation on topics such as impermanence, karma and its effects, the
faults of cyclic existence, love, compassion, or the practice of the spirit
of enlightenment*. No matter what your object of meditation, you engage it
without distraction, so that any virtue you cultivate is much more
powerful. On the other hand, before you reach serenity, you weaken all of
your virtuous deeds by frequent distraction to other objects. As
Santideva's Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds says:
      The person whose mind is distracted
      Lives between the fangs of the afflictions.
And:
      The One Who Knows Reality has said that
      Prayers, austerities, and such—
      Even if practiced for a long time—
      Are pointless if done with a distracted mind.
*Translated as bodhichitta
We are still discussing the benefit of meditative serenity. As the text
says that if  we have single-pointedness of mind on whatever meditation
topics we pursue such as reflecting on impermanence, karma and its effects,
the faults of samsara, love and compassion, it makes a big difference if
such a reflection is done with concentration. This is evidence. It also
makes a difference if you have concentration whenever you recite your
prayers or mantras.
Is there an order in the cultivation of meditative serenity and insight?
Yes there is.
[LRCM Vol3 page 23] (e) How to be certain about their order
Santideva's Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds says:
      Insight possessed of serenity
      Destroys the afflictions.
      Knowing this,
      Seek serenity at the outset.
According to this statement, you first achieve meditative serenity and then
cultivate insight on that basis.
There is an order in the cultivation of meditative serenity and insight.
The cultivation of insight must be preceded by calm abiding. According to
the perspective of sutra, this is the case.
In this section, there are two qualms and the replies to the qualms. You
have to read this on your own first; otherwise it is very difficult for me
to explain. So you should read this. In the next lesson I will give a brief
explanation. Then we will move on to the actual way of cultivating calm
abiding.
[LRCM Vol3 page 23] Qualm: Kamalasila's first Stages of Meditation says,
"Its object of meditation is indeterminate," meaning that the object of
meditation of meditative serenity is indeterminate. As explained above, the
object of meditation of serenity may be either reality itself or a
conventional phenomenon possessed of reality. If you first understand the
meaning of selflessness, and then meditate while focusing on this, it
should be enough to simultaneously produce both the serenity of an
undistracted mind and insight focused on emptiness. Why, then, is it said
that you first seek serenity and then cultivate insight?
Reply: The way in which serenity precedes insight is as follows. You do  not
need to have serenity already in order to develop an  understanding  of  the
view that knows that there is no self, for we see that even those  who  lack
serenity develop this view. Nor do you need  to  have  serenity  already  in
order to experience  mental  transformation  in  regard  to  the  view,  for
nothing precludes mental transformation being brought on by the practice  of
repeated analysis with discerning wisdom, even in the absence  of  serenity.
If you claim that the absence of serenity  precludes  mental  transformation
in regard to the view, then the  very  same  reasoning  forces  you  to  the
extremely absurd conclusion that serenity is  required  even  to  experience
mental transformation when meditating on impermanence, the faults of  cyclic
existence, or the spirit of enlightenment.
So,  why  is  serenity  required  for  insight?  According  to   the   Sutra
Unravelling the Intended Meaning, as long as the practice of  discrimination
and special discrimination with discerning wisdom cannot  generate  physical
and mental pliancy, it constitutes a type of  attention  which  approximates
insight; when it generates pliancy, then it is insight. Thus,  if  you  have
not attained serenity, then no matter how much analytical meditation you  do
with discerning wisdom, in the  end  you  will  not  be  able  generate  the
delight and bliss of physical and mental pliancy.  Once  you  have  attained
meditative serenity, then  even  the  analytical  meditation  of  discerning
wisdom  will  culminate  in  pliancy.  Hence,  insight  requires  meditative
serenity as a cause. This will be explained below.
Discerning wisdom  becomes  insight  when,  without  focusing  on  a  single
object,  it  can  generate  pliancy  through  the  power  of  analysis.   So
generating  pliancy  by  setting  your  attention  on  a  single  object  of
meditation—even if the object is emptiness—is nothing more  than  a  way  to
achieve serenity; that alone does not count as attaining  insight.  Why?  If
you thus first seek an understanding of selflessness, analyzing its  meaning
again and again, it will be impossible to achieve serenity on the  basis  of
this analysis since you have not previously achieved  serenity.  If  you  do
stabilizing meditation without analysis, you will achieve serenity  on  that
basis. However, as there is no way to sustain insight except  by  sustaining
serenity, you have to seek insight later. Hence, this does not fall  outside
the pattern in which,  having  previously  sought  serenity,  you  cultivate
insight based on it.
Accordingly,  the  way  insight  develops  is  that  discerning   analytical
meditation generates pliancy. If this were not so, there would  not  be  the
slightest good reason to seek serenity  first  and  then  cultivate  insight
based on it. Failing  to  do  these  meditations  in  this  order  is  quite
inappropriate because the Sutra Unravelling the Intended Meaning  states  in
a passage cited above that you cultivate insight  on  the  basis  of  having
attained serenity. Also, the order of meditative  stabilization  and  wisdom
among the six perfections— of which it is  said  that  "the  latter  develop
based on the former"— as well as the sequence in which  training  in  higher
wisdom is based on training in higher concentration are  in  agreement  with
the sequence in which, having  previously  cultivated  serenity,  you  later
cultivate insight. Asanga's  Bodhisattva  Levels  (cited  earlier)  and  his
Sravaka Levels   indicate  that  insight  is  cultivated  on  the  basis  of
meditative  serenity.  Also,  Bhavaviveka's  Heart  of   the   Middle   Way,
Santideva's Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds, Kamalasila's three Stages  of
Meditation, Jnanakirti, and Ratnakarasanti  all  state  that  you  cultivate
insight after previously seeking serenity. Some Indian masters  claim  that,
without seeking serenity separately, you generate insight  from  the  outset
through analysis by discerning  wisdom.  Since  this  view  contradicts  the
texts of the great trailblazers, the wise deem it to be untrustworthy.
This is the sequence in which you newly develop  serenity  and  insight  for
the first time; later the sequence  is  indefinite,  as  you  may  cultivate
serenity after previously cultivating insight.
Qualm: Asanga's Compendium of Knowledge states, "Some  attain  insight,  but
do not attain serenity; they strive for serenity on the basis  of  insight."
How do you account for this?
Reply: This means that they have not attained the  serenity  of  the  actual
first meditative stabilization,  or  beyond;  it  does  not  preclude  their
having attained the serenity which is included in the access  to  the  first
meditative stabilization. Also, once you have perceptual  knowledge  of  the
four truths, you can establish on that basis  the  serenity  of  the  actual
first meditative stabilization and  the  higher  meditative  stabilizations.
For Asanga's Levels of Yogic Deeds says:
Moreover, you can accurately know the reality of the truths  from  suffering
to path, without having attained the first  meditative  stabilization,  etc.
As soon as this knowledge of the truths occurs, you stabilize your mind  and
do not analyze phenomena. Based  on  this  higher  wisdom,  you  pursue  the
practice of higher states of consciousness.
In general, for the sake  of  comprehensive  terminology,  the  nine  mental
states are called meditative serenity and the fourfold  analysis  is  called
insight. However, you must apply the terms  "actual  serenity"  and  "actual
insight"—as will be explained—after the generation of pliancy.
Student: (Ven Gyurme rephrased the question): Give an  example  of  how  you
cultivate calm abiding using emptiness as its object. How you can  cultivate
insight using an object other than emptiness?
Student: Maybe with the same object will be clearer because our normal
understanding is that insight on having realized emptiness. How is it that
you can actually develop insight in a conventional aspect of the object?
Khen Rinpoche: Wasn’t Lama Tsongkhapa is very clear on the fact that
meditative serenity and special insight are not differentiated based on
having emptiness as their object?
Student: Yes, it is clear.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): That is very clear. So, what is your question
now?
Ven Gyurme: He wants an example of special insight focusing on something
other than emptiness.
Khen Rinpoche: Keep it simple. The object could be impermanence. You
generate calm abiding focusing on impermanence. Within the state of
meditative serenity then you use examination and investigation. When that
induces bliss or pliancy you have special insight observing impermanence.
Student: Are you saying you focus on impermanence to develop serenity
first?
Ven Gyurme: Because you wanted an example of special insight realizes
something other than emptiness, so Khen Rinpoche gives an example of
impermanence.
Khen Rinpoche: There is calm abiding observing impermanence. There is
special insight observing impermanence. Bear in mind that calm abiding and
special insight is a quality that is shared with non-Buddhist. So it is not
necessary a Buddhist’s realization or quality.
Student: When you develop serenity based on impermanence, you have to
examine and you have to analyze the object first. After you have examined
and analyzed object, you then focus on it and develop pliancy. In that
sense, isn’t that the same as developing insight?
Khen Rinpoche: What is the problem?
Ven Gyurme: I know what you are getting at. You are saying that you focus
on impermanence to actualize calm abiding? Once you actualized calm abiding
focusing on impermanence you have bliss as well, isn’t it? To you, just
because there is bliss and pliancy therefore it makes it special insight,
right?
Student: Yes. So what is the difference here?
Khen Rinpoche: Calm abiding does not engage in analysis. It is single
pointed of mind focus on the object of observation, and of course there is
clarity of the object of observation. If it is calm abiding there is bliss
or pliancy there, but there is no investigation of the object. If you start
to analyze then the mind doesn’t stay single pointed on the object, in this
case, impermanence.
If you don’t have time to read before coming to class then nothing can be
done. If you do have time and can read at least two or three pages before
coming to class, whether you understand it or not, you should just read it
once. It makes a huge difference when you come to class.


