Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/SixPerfections/Lesson13.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:02.687488
================================================================================


Remember the text says that if one develops concentration when one has
single-pointedness of mind, then one’s mind will not be distracted. With an
undistracted mind, whatever virtues one engages in will becomes very
powerful. It is also mentioned in the teaching that when one achieves
concentration single-pointedly, one will experiences bliss and delight, and
one does not experience any heaviness physically or kind of difficulties
that associated with one’s body.  The main reason for developing calm-
abiding is so that one can go on to cultivate special insight.
Special insight is that which can cut the root of samsara. So without
special insight we cannot cut the root of samsara. If we cannot cut the
root of samsara, we just have to go on circling over and over again and
experiencing the sufferings of samsara. So in order to abandon samsara, we
have to cut its root. In order to cut the root of samsara, one must have
special insight. In order to have special insight, it is indispensable to
cultivate calm-abiding.
In order to develop calm-abiding, you must engage in meditation. As for the
object of meditation, it is recommended that you take the Buddha’s body as
an object of meditation. When you meditate, focus your attention on the
Buddha’s body. Meditation is not done with the sensory consciousnesses, for
example, it is not done by staring at the Buddha’s body with your eyes.
Rather, the meditation is done with mental consciousness. When you meditate
on the Buddha’s body, you are meditating on the mental image. The
meditation is done by focusing on the mental image of the Buddha’s body.
It is mentioned in the text that first you have to form a mental image of
the chosen object of meditation.
How do you form a mental image of the chosen object of meditation?
It is either through looking at a representation of the object. In the case
of a Buddha’s body, you should look at a sculpture or painting. Or by
listening to an explanation of your teacher describing how the object looks
like and so forth. The point here is that you develop a meaning-generality
of the object – a mental image. Then you try to have the mental image of
that object that will appear to your mind. When you roughly have this
mental image of the chosen object appearing to your mind, you focus your
attention on the mental image of the object.
As for the size of the appearance of the mental image of the object, how
big or how small should it be?
    • If it is too big, there is a danger of developing excitement.
    • If it is too small, there is a danger of developing laxity.
Let’s say you are meditating on the Buddha’s body. It is mentioned in the
teaching that the mental image of the Buddha’s body that is appearing to
you should be thought of to be in the nature of light, which is very
bright. At the same time, you visualize the mental image to be slightly
heavy so it does not float around i.e. bright, luminous and heavy. That
helps in countering excitement and laxity.
As for the size of the image, you have to choose whatever fits your mind
and whatever is comfortable for yourself. In certain practices, it is
mentioned that you can visualize the object to be the size of a pea. But
that is too difficult for us when it is too small. Perhaps you could
visualize the image to be one cubit tall - half arm length. Visualize and
meditate on the image of the chosen object, in this case the Buddha’s body,
and thinking that the Buddha’s body is in the space in front of you at the
level of your forehead.
There are teachings that talk about visualizing the object of meditation
above one’s crown. Since for most of us there is a strong link or
connection between our sensory and mental consciousness, it would be easier
if we think of the object of meditation is right in front of us at the
level of our forehead, literally at the level of the point between our
eyebrows. That would be easier for us because there is a strong link
between what goes on and the emotional feeling. This is link connection
between our sensory and mental consciousness. If you are thinking of the
object of meditation on one’s crown, then it is fine if you can do it.
In fact there are various places whereby you can place the object of
meditation. Some text talk about visualizing the object of meditation above
one’s head, and some text mentioned it is in one’s heart and so forth.
It is important to identify your object of meditation correctly right from
the beginning. You are supposed to focus your attention once you have
identified the object of meditation. This means after you have chosen the
object of meditation you have to stick with it.  So if you have chosen a
specific object of meditation and its specific size, you stay with it. You
then meditate on it until you have developed concentration; be it months or
years. You stick with the same object of meditation. If you switch the
object of meditation or you change the aspects of the object by changing
the size in the course of your meditation, it is mentioned in the teachings
that you will never ever achieve concentration.
Once you have chosen the object of meditation, you have to focus your
attention on it. As to the concentration that you are seeking to develop,
with respect to your object of meditation, first there must be the factor
of vivid intensity whereby there is intense mental clarity, so there is a
clear appearance of the object. As for the mind apprehending or focusing on
the object, it is a mind that is energetic and it is a mind that is alert.
There must be vivid intensity whereby there is intense mental clarity. What
hinders the arising of vivid intensity is laxity. Laxity is the main
obstacle to the arising of vivid intensity. Here the concentration that we
are seeking to develop must have the features of vivid intensity and single-
pointedness as well. So what hinder single-pointedness of mind is
excitement.
The teachings say that perfect concentration is one that possesses vivid
intensity and single-pointedness.
It is laxity and excitement that mainly hinders the arising of these two.
How to focus your mind on the object of meditation
   1) Presenting the flawless method
   2) Eliminating flawed methods
   3) Indicating the length of sessions.

(1) The flawless method
[LRCM Vol3 page 47] The concentration that you will accomplish here has two
special features: vivid intensity—an intense mental clarity—and non-
discursive stability, staying one-pointedly on the object of meditation.
[LRCM Vol 3 page 48] Since the development of this sort of vivid intensity
is blocked as long as there is laxity, while one-pointed non-discursiveness
is blocked as long as there is excitement, laxity and excitement are the
chief obstacles to achieving genuine concentration.

|Laxity hinders the arising of vivid|
|intensity                          |
|Excitement hinders                 |
|single-pointedness of mind.        |


[LRCM Vol 3 pg. 48] So if you do not understand how to identify accurately
the subtle and coarse forms of laxity and excitement, or if you do not know
how to correctly sustain a concentration which stops these once you have
identified them, then it will be impossible for you to develop serenity,
not to mention insight. Hence, those who diligently seek concentration
should master these techniques.
It is said that if you are aspiring to develop the actual concentration,
you need to identify correctly the two obstacles for developing
concentration. The two obstacles are excitement and laxity.
You need to identify them correctly and experience it. As for the
excitement and laxity, there are both coarse and subtle forms. If you are
not able to identify these two main obstacles correctly for developing
concentration, you may end up with flawed concentration. This means that
you will never ever achieve the actual perfect concentration. So for those
who are diligently seeking and who are really aspiring to have a correct
kind of concentration, you must really know what exactly excitement and
laxity is.
First one must identify the object of meditation. Once you have identified
the object of meditation, then you are suppose to focus your mental
attention on the object of meditation and keep the attention focused
continuously on the object of meditation. That has to be done with
mindfulness. Mindfulness does that. When you do that, you may reach a time
whereby there is the factor of stability in which your mind is abiding on
the object of meditation. But there isn’t a factor of clarity - there is no
clarity but your mind is abiding on the object. That is a situation whereby
coarse laxity is present.
Then by continuing to keep your mental attention focused on the object of
meditation with mindfulness, it will come to a time whereby you also have
the factor of clarity on top of the factor of stability. But there is no
intensity behind the mind’s way of apprehending the object. There is no
vivid intensity. There is a factor of stability and there is a factor of
clarity but there isn’t a force behind the mind’s way of apprehending the
object. As such there is no vivid intensity. This is the situation whereby
the subtle laxity is present.
This is where Lama Tsongkhapa said that this is where a lot of people
mistakenly believe that they have developed concentration - there is a
factor of stability and a factor of clarity but they are not aware of
subtle laxity. They do not know what subtle laxity is therefore mistakenly
believed that they have achieved concentration. These people keep their
mind in that state when there is still subtle laxity. They just keep the
mind meditating on that. So Lama Tsongkhapa said that there is this great
danger of developing this flawed concentration whereby one thinks one has
developed concentration whereas one has not because there is still subtle
laxity. Therefore Lama Tsongkhapa emphasizes how important it is to
identify correctly what laxity is and in particular what subtle laxity is.
This is an essential point. It is very important to correctly identify what
subtle laxity is otherwise one ends up with a flawed concentration, and one
mistakenly believe one has achieved concentration. If you keep on
meditating like when there is a factor of stability and there is a factor
of clarity but there is no vivid intensity, then overtime one’s mental
powers become weaker. Being weakened by this, one becomes basically more
dumb and one’s memory starts to fail i.e. one’s memory is weakened over
time by such meditation. Whereas if one has developed a correct perfect
concentration whereby there is vivid intensity i.e. when there is vivid
intensity in one’s concentration, in fact the more you meditate, your
mental powers should increase. Also one’s memory should also increase
instead of degenerating. Therefore it is extremely important to know
exactly what is laxity and in particular subtle laxity.
Therefore Lama Tsongkhapa says “Hence, those who diligently seek
concentration should master these techniques”. He is emphasizing how
important it is.
In short, when one’s concentration has the factor of stability but no
clarity, this happens during the time there is coarse laxity.
When one has the factor of clarity on top of the factor of stability but
there is no force behind the mind’s way of apprehending the object, i.e.
there is no vivid intensity, then that is the time there is still subtle
laxity in the mind.
What about coarse excitement? Let’s say you have identified the object of
meditation correctly. But as you focus your attention on the object of
meditation, your mind cannot abide on it. Your mind goes off almost very
quickly. This is the time where there is coarse excitement.
You have identified your object of meditation. As you focus your attention
on it, your mind is distracted away from the object of meditation. So
literally you lose your object of meditation. During the time when you
still can lose your object of meditation is the time where you have coarse
excitement.
Now you roughly know when there is a coarse excitement.
What about subtle excitement?
During the time when your mind is still under the influence of subtle
excitement, you will never lose your object of meditation, but there is a
part of the mind which move to, for example, a pleasant object, this is the
time in which there is still subtle excitement.
The two main obstacles for developing concentration are excitement and
laxity.
We will look at these two in more details as we move through the text.
What is the method for preventing the mind from being distracted?
How to you enable the mind to keep its attention on the object of
meditation?
How do you prevent the mind from being distracted?
What are the two things that you need?
You need mindfulness and vigilance.
[LRCM Vol 3 page 48] Here, concentration refers to your attention remaining
one-pointedly on an object of meditation; in addition it must stay with the
object continuously. Two things are needed for this: (1) a technique in
which your attention is not distracted from whatever it had as its original
object of meditation, and (2) an accurate awareness of whether you are
distracted and whether you are becoming distracted. The former is
mindfulness; the latter is vigilance.
The concentration that we are seeking to develop is a concentration when
your mind remains one-pointedly on the object and stays with the object
continuously. You need mindfulness to achieve this. So mindfulness is
extremely important for developing concentration. Mindfulness is
indispensable for developing concentration.
It is said that it is very important to be vigilance. At certain intervals
one should check whether the mind is distracted or the mind is becoming
distracted. So vigilance is very important.
[LRCM Vol 3 page 48] Vasubandhu's Commentary on the "Ornament for the
Mahayana Sutras” states:
  Mindfulness and vigilance bring about close mental focus because the
  former prevents your attention from wandering from the object of
  meditation and the latter clearly recognizes that your attention is
  wandering.
If a lapse in mindfulness leads to forgetting the object of meditation, you
will be distracted and will immediately lose the object upon which you are
meditating. Therefore, the foundation of cultivating concentration is
mindfulness which does not forget the object.
In order to develop concentration, you cannot lose the object of
meditation. If you lose your object of meditation, you cannot develop
concentration. It is mindfulness that prevents us from losing the object of
meditation. For that reason, mindfulness is the foundation of
concentration, literally is the root of concentration.
What is it that stops the mind from being distracted from its object of
meditation? It is mindfulness.
Next is an explanation of how mindfulness focuses your mind right on the
object of meditation.
[LRCM Vol 3 page 48] How does such mindfulness focus your mind right on the
object of meditation?  Once you have at least visualized the object of
meditation in the minimal manner as explained above, generate a powerful
apprehension of the object that tightly holds it with your attention. After
you have set your attention at a high level, stabilize it on the object
without newly analyzing anything.
What this paragraph is saying is that you first must identify your object
of meditation. Once you have identified your object of meditation in the
way I have explained, then you place your attention on it.
You are supposed to generate a powerful apprehension of the object. There
must be a force or intensity behind the manner of apprehending the object.
You keep your attention on that object, and it is mindfulness that does
that.
So if mindfulness is that which keeps the mind from distracted from the
object of meditation, then what exactly is mindfulness?
[LRCM Vol 3 page 49] With regard to mindfulness, Asanga's Compendium of
Knowledge says:
 What is mindfulness? In regard to a familiar object, your mind is not
 forgetful and operates without distraction.
This indicates that mindfulness has three features.
(1) Its observed object is "a familiar object," since mindfulness does not
occur with regard to a previously unfamiliar object. In this case, the
image of a previously ascertained object of meditation appears.
Initially you must seek the object of meditation.
Then you find your object of meditation. It is the appearance of the aspect
of the object of meditation which is the observed object.
Mindfulness has three features.
1st feature: The observed object which is a familiar object.
2nd feature: What about its subjective aspect?
[LRCM Vol 3 page 49] (2) Its subjective aspect or manner of apprehension is
your mind's not forgetting the object, as indicated by the phrase "your
mind is not forgetful." In this case, it is your mind's non-forgetfulness
of the object of meditation.
If the subjective aspect is non-forgetfulness of the object of meditation,
so what exactly is non-forgetfulness?
[LRCM Vol 3 page 49] What does non-forgetfulness mean?  It is not mentioned
in reference to merely being able to remember what your guru taught you
about the object of meditation, thinking or saying "The object of
meditation is like this" when you cast your mind to it or when someone asks
you about it. Rather, it refers to how your attention is fixed on the
object of meditation and brings it to mind clearly without even the
slightest distraction. If you are distracted, you lose your mindfulness to
the extent that you are distracted.
So here mindfulness refers to your mind being able to stay continuously
with the object of meditation without being distracted from it. If the mind
is distracted from the object of meditation, then there is no mindfulness.
[LRCM Vol 3 page 49] Therefore, after you have set your attention on the
object of meditation in the manner explained above, you think, "In this
way, I have fixed my attention on the object of meditation." Then, without
new examination, you sustain the force of that awareness in unbroken
continuity. This is the most critical point in the technique of maintaining
mindfulness.
In summary, first, you have to seek the object of meditation. Upon seeking
the object of meditation, once you have found the object of meditation,
keep your mind’s attention on it without losing the object of meditation.
Your mind’s attention is kept on the object of meditation without
forgetting it. That is what mindfulness does. This is mindfulness.
3rd feature: What is the function of mindfulness?
[LRCM Vol 3 page 49]  (3) Its function is to keep your attention from
wondering from the object of meditation.
Next is an explanation of how mindfulness places the mind continuously on
the object of meditation through an analogy.
[LRCM Vol 3 page 49] Fixing your attention on an object of meditation in
this way and controlling it is said to be like taming an elephant. An
elephant trainer ties a wild elephant to a tree or sturdy post with many
thick ropes.  If it does as the trainer teaches it, then fine; if not, it
is subdued and controlled, struck repeatedly with a sharp iron hook. Your
mind is like the untamed elephant; you bind it with the rope of mindfulness
to the sturdy pillar of an object of meditation such as I explained above.
If you cannot keep it there, you must gradually bring it under control by
goading it with the iron hook of vigilance.
Then you have quotations from Heart of the Middle Way and Stages of
Meditation.
[LRCM Vol 3 page 49] Bhavaviveka's Heart of the Middle Way states:
  The erring elephant of your mind
  Is securely bound by the rope of mindfulness
  To the sturdy pillar of the object of meditation
  And is gradually controlled with the iron hook of intelligence.
Also, Kamalasila's second Stages of Meditation states:
  With the ropes of mindfulness and vigilance, tie  the  elephant  of  your
  mind to the tree trunk, the object of meditation.
The elephant is an analogy of one’s unsubdued and untamed mind.
In order to tame a wild elephant one ties it with rope to a sturdy pillar.
The sturdy pillar is an analogy of our object of meditation.
Tying the elephant with rope to the pillar is an analogy of keeping our
mental attention focused continuously on the object of meditation with
mindfulness.
We need to tame our untamed mind in the way a wild elephant is tamed.
As for mindfulness has a way of apprehending its object that carries a
sense of certitude, there must be some force behind the manner of
apprehending its object. Otherwise, one would develop a flawed
concentration.
[LRCM Vol 3 page 50]  It is said that you achieve concentration on the
basis of mindfulness and that mindfulness is like a rope that actually
fastens your attention to the object of meditation continuously, so
mindfulness is the main technique to sustain in achieving concentration.
Also, mindfulness has a way of apprehending its object that carries a sense
of certitude. If, while maintaining concentration, you stabilize your mind
casually without a solid sense of certainty about the object, then your
mind may take on a limpid clarity, but it will not have the vivid intensity
of certain knowledge, so you will not develop powerful mindfulness.
Therefore, subtle laxity will be unchecked, and only flawed concentration
will ensue.
We need mindfulness but the mindfulness must be strong and powerful as
well. There must be intensity behind the mindfulness, i.e. it must possess
strength and power. If mindfulness lacks strength and intensity, it will
not be able to check subtle laxity. If subtle laxity is not checked, only
flawed concentration will ensue.
Here it is saying that just having mindfulness alone is not enough. It is
the quality of the mindfulness that is important. There must be a force
behind the mindfulness. It must be powerful.
Here it says that mindfulness has a way of apprehending its object that
carries a sense of certitude. That is important because you may have
mindfulness but if your mindfulness’ way of apprehending its object is not
intense, you will still experience clarity of the object but it will not be
able to check subtle laxity. If you cannot check subtle laxity then you
will not develop perfect concentration.
[LRCM Vol 3 page 50]  Those who cultivate just non-discursive attention
without stabilizing their attention on other objects of meditation, such as
a divine body, bring to mind the personal instruction, "Stabilize your mind
without thinking of any object at all." Then they must keep their attention
from being distracted and wandering. This non-distraction is synonymous
with mindfulness that does not forget the object of meditation. Thus, since
this meditation is simply the technique of maintaining mindfulness, those
who meditate in this way must also rely on a mindfulness that carries the
force of certain knowledge.
Next is eliminating flawed methods. First, identify what are the
misconceptions and then eliminating them.
[LRCM Vol 3 page 50]  (b')) Eliminating flawed methods
There are misconceptions to dispel, such as the following.
Wrong position: If you set your consciousness at a high level as you have
explained above and then tightly stabilize it without discursiveness, there
will indeed not be even the slightest fault of laxity. However, since this
increases excitement, you will see that you cannot prolong stability, and
your elevated consciousness is brought down. As you will see that relaxing
a well-tightened mind quickly leads to stability, this technique is a great
personal instruction.
Then Lama Tsongkhapa replied:
[LRCM Vol 3 page 51]  Reply: With a sense of assurance, these words
proclaim in a loud voice, "Good relaxation is good meditation." Yet, they
fail to differentiate laxity and meditation. Thus, as I explained above,
flawless concentration must have two features; the firm stability of non-
discursive attention does not alone suffice.”
Then, another position:
[LRCM Vol 3 page 51]  Wrong position: At that time, laxity is when your
mind darkens and becomes clouded; without this, your mind has a limpid
clarity, so your concentration is flawless.
Reply: As this statement does not differentiate lethargy and laxity, I will
elaborate on them later."
As I have mentioned earlier, during the time when there is still subtle
laxity, there is the factor of stability and the factor of clarity. But
flawless concentration has vivid intensity, not just the factor of
stability and clarity. It must be vivid intensity. So you can’t
differentiate a flawed concentration and a flawless concentration just by
seeing whether both the factor of stability and factor of clarity are there
or not.
There are people who say “When your concentration possesses both clarity
and stability, and when your mind is relaxed, you can just stay in that
relax state.”
For them, there isn’t this force or intensity behind the manner of
apprehending the object. For them, there is the factor of clarity and
factor of stability. They think that is concentration. They say “you can
relax on this state”. Once you relax in this state, you can relax in this
state for a long time.
They say that this is good meditation. Of course Lama Tsongkhapa says “This
is incorrect because in order for it to be good meditation – actual
concentration - besides clarity and stability there must be the force
behind that awareness, and the manner of apprehending the object there must
be vivid intensity.
From this you can see that perfect concentration consists of not only
clarity and stability but it must have an energetic and alert mind. There
is this intensity or force behind its way of apprehending the object. If
you possess such a concentration, then your mind will continue to develop
stronger. If you don’t have this force behind the mind manner of
apprehending the object i.e.there is no intensity, even though you may have
clarity and stability, the mind will not develop.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): Too much talking? Sometimes talk too much
nothing go inside. But if don’t talk cannot finish all this.
Student: [LRCM Vol 3 page 18] Some claim that a mind resting in a non-
discursive state without vivid intensity is serenity, while such a mind
with vivid intensity is insight. What is the meaning of vivid intensity
here?
Answer: Vivid intensity is talking about the energy of the mind. There is
this force, energy or strength behind its way of apprehending its object.
When there is vivid intensity, not only the object appears clearly, the
perceiving mind is also very clear. An analogy of holding a cup is given to
illustrate this vivid intensity. You hold a cup in your hand. You can hold
it with the appropriate tightness or you could hold it in a relax manner.
The mind is apprehending the object, and the object must be the object of
meditation. There must be a force and energy behind the mind way of
apprehending the object.
Student: What are discursive and non-discursive thoughts?
Khen Rinpoche (in English): I don’t know.
Student: [MLLR Text page 213] The feature of function -How meditative
stabilization becomes faulty without a firm mode of apprehension of the
ascertaining consciousness
It is said that meditative stabilization is accomplished in dependence on
mindfulness and that, like a rope, mindfulness continuously ties the mind
to the object. Therefore the principal method for fostering the
accomplishment of meditative stabilization is that of sustaining
mindfulness. Yet mindfulness has a mode of apprehension with an aspect of
ascertainment. So when you foster meditative stabilization and place the
mind without a firm mode of apprehension of the ascertaining consciousness,
you gain the clarity factor of mental limpidity, but the clarity factor of
stark intensity of the ascertaining consciousness does not emerge. As a
result, powerful mindfulness does not arise, and since subtle laxity is not
stopped either, the meditative stabilization becomes faulty.
What causes the clarity factor of intensity of that ascertainment
consciousness to arise? Does powerful mindfulness have something to do with
it so that we can stop subtle laxity? What must you do to let it emerge so
that subtle laxity will be stopped?
Ven Gyurme: What is the antidote to subtle laxity?
Answer:  In the first place, you must have an idea of what subtle laxity
is. Subtle laxity is present in the mind possessing stability and clarity
but there is no force or energy or strength behind the mind manner of
apprehending the object. There isn’t a force or strength behind the mind
manner of apprehending the object. So you must tighten the manner of
apprehending the object. Even though you have mindfulness but if the
mindfulness is not strong you cannot tighten the manner of apprehending the
object. In order to tighten the manner of apprehending the object you first
must “up” the mindfulness. It must be powerful by strengthen it and give it
a force. Just like the example I have gave earlier about holding a cup in
your hand. You can hold it tightly or you can just hold it relax manner it
in your hand. You don’t have grasped the cup firmly but it is still sitting
in your hand.
Student: Does one abandon the obstacles of these two in this sequence:
first you abandon coarse excitement then subtle excitement and then coarse
laxity and then subtle laxity?
What is the reason in saying that one is under the influence of subtle
laxity the mental power and memory deteriorates over time?
Once the antidote to laziness is attained one has pliancy- which means that
at this stage of building up mindfulness and vigilance, abandoning
excitement and laxity one also has pliancy. What is the difference between
this pliancy and the pliancy that one attains after equanimity?
Answer: Next lesson

|Vivid intensity –the way the mind apprehending the object with intense mental  |
|clarity.                                                                       |
|Stability – the mind able to abide on the object of meditation                 |
|Factor of stability in which your mind is abiding on the object of meditation  |
|Coarse laxity is present when there is a factor of stability but there is no   |
|factor of clarity.                                                             |
|Subtle laxity is present when there is a factor of stability and factor of     |
|clarity but there isn’t a force behind the mind way of apprehending the object.|
|As such there is no vivid intensity.                                           |
|Coarse excitement – When you focus your attention on the object of meditation, |
|your mind cannot abide on it and your mind goes off from the object of         |
|meditation almost very quickly                                                 |
|Subtle excitement - you will never lose your object of meditation, but there   |
|still part of the mind that moves towards, for example pleasant object.        |
|Concentration refers to your attention remaining one-pointedly on an object of |
|meditation. In addition it must stay with the object continuously              |
|Mindfulness - a technique in which your attention is not distracted from       |
|whatever it had as its original object of meditation                           |
|Vigilance - an accurate awareness of whether you are distracted and whether you|
|are becoming distracted.                                                       |
|Non-forgetfulness refers to how your attention is fixed on the object of       |
|meditation and brings it to mind clearly without even the slightest distraction|


