Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/SixPerfections/Lesson4.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:53:57.294932
================================================================================


We are now on the section on the perfection of generosity. As mentioned in
the previous lesson, generosity is a generous attitude. So generosity means
having this generous attitude whereby you completely give whatever you own
from the depths of your heart to others.
It is taught that there are three forms of generosity:
   1. The gift of dharma
   2. The gift of material things,
   3. The gift of fearlessness.
As seen in the previous lesson, the text says that whenever we utilize or
enjoy something that we have already dedicated from the depths of our
hearts to others, it is very important to use those things with the thought
of benefitting others. At the time when utilizing those enjoyments, one
should think “I am doing this for the welfare of others”.
Whenever we partake of the food, the drink and the other substances that we
have already offered to the Three Jewels, then it is important to utilize
those objects without any craving. We should partake of those foods, drinks
and those offering substances with the thought of benefitting others. In
the tantric context, there are methods or teachings that involve enjoying
those food and drinks in the manner of a burnt offering.
It is also said in the teachings that there are many living beings abiding
inside our body. The teachings mentioned that there are 84,000 minute
sentient beings. So whenever we eat or drink, we could think that we are
making an offering of food and drinks to these living beings abiding in our
body. Through such an act of gathering them with the gift of material
things, then one motivates and prays “Through this connection, may I gather
and bring all of you into my fold with dharma in the future”. If you know
how to think, then every time when you eat and drink, you could accumulate
a vast amount of merit.
Whenever you eat and drink, you suppose to make offerings to the Three
Jewels. When we make offerings to the Three Jewels, we will accumulate
merit. At the same time, if we think that we are making a gift of food and
drink to the living beings in our body, we also accumulate merit and
virtue. So whenever we eat or drink, we make offerings to the Three Jewels,
and that offering helps us to accumulate a vast amount of merit.
In order to practice the dharma, you need to sustain the physical basis,
this body of ours. At the very minimum, the motivation for eating and
drinking should be wanting to sustain this physical basis, the body of
ours, so that we can continue in our learning and practice. At the very
minimum, this should be the motivation. It is also very important not to
allow strong craving and attachment when eating. This is very important.
Imagine a scenario that from your heart, you have completely dedicated away
or given an object away to another person. The recipient has the idea that
the object now belongs to him and he is the owner. You as the giver are
aware that has happened. In this scenario, if you are a fully ordained monk
utilizing that object, you commit a defeat of the pratimoksha vow, or
translated as a cardinal transgression of the fully ordained monk’s vow.
For those who are not fully ordained monks, they incur the fault of taking
that which is not given, i.e. stealing.
In the case whereby you have turned over something from the depths of your
heart over to another person and that person is not aware and has not
generated the idea that “I’m now the owner of that object”, and if you do
utilize that object that you have completely dedicated away from the depths
of your heart, then in that situation, most likely you do not incur a
cardinal transgression or a defeat.
This is the explanation of Lama Tsongkhapa of the intended meaning of a
verse from the Compendium of Trainings. Lama Tsongkhapa says “You incur a
cardinal transgression given that the total value requirement has been met
when you sincerely turn your food, etc., over to human being, and this
person knows it and takes possession, whereupon you, fully cognizant of
their being another’s property, appropriate them for your own use”.

2. Divisions of actual generosity
   a. The gift of the teachings
   b. The gift of fearlessness
   c. Material gifts
c. Material gifts
1. The generosity of actually giving material things
2. The generosity which is just mental
2. The generosity which is just mental
With a pure motivation and faith from the depths of your heart, you
construct with your thoughts an immeasurably vast quantity of diverse
gifts. Then imagine that you are offering them to all living beings. This
increases merit immeasurably with little difficulty, and moreover, is the
giving of wise bodhisattvas, according to the Bodhisattva Level.
[LRCM V2 page 140]  The generosity which is just mental means that after
you go to a quiet place and then withdraw your mind inward, with a pure
motivation and faith from the depths of your heart, you construct with your
thoughts an immeasurably vast quantity of diverse gifts, and you then
imagine that you are offering them to all living beings. This increases
merit immeasurably with little difficulty and, moreover, is the giving of
wise bodhisattvas, according to the Bodhisattva Levels.
When we make offerings, there are offerings that are mentally imagined. You
construct and visualize them with your mind and then you offer them, for
example, to the Three Jewels. Likewise, there is practice of generosity
which is just mental, in which you mentally construct various offerings and
then you give them away. This is the generosity which is just mental
whereby you construct with your thoughts a whole range of diverse of gifts
and then you mentally give it away to others. Personally, I am not exactly
sure how that would accumulate merit. Perhaps it would be better if we
imagine that our root of virtue has the basis of transformation of the
various mentally constructed offerings. Perhaps we could mentally transform
whatever roots of virtue/merit that we have into various offering
substances and then giving it away to others. I think in so doing, this
will become a condition for us to accomplish the welfare of sentient beings
in the future. This is a personal opinion.
In any case, if we get accustomed to mentally giving things away, and due
to the force of familiarity overtime, that would translate into actual
giving, i.e. carrying it out either physically or verbally an act of
giving. It is a matter of familiarization. Therefore it is very important
to mentally construct diverse offering substances and then give it away. It
is important to train like that. The point is to bring forth a generous
attitude - a mind that willing to give, and wanting to give. In the first
place, if you don’t even have the wish to give, or you don’t even think of
giving, then generosity is not going to happen. It will never happen.
Therefore, it is very important to get accustomed to this idea of generous
attitude by initially constructing all these different substances and gifts
mentally and then mentally give them away to others. Therefore, it is
extremely important to start training now by constructing with your
thoughts immeasurably vast quantity of diverse gifts and then giving them
away. Once you get accustomed to such a mental form of generosity, and due
to the force of familiarity, it will manifest into you being able to really
give physically and verbally. This will slowly cumulate, and one day you
will be able to give likes the bodhisattvas. The bodhisattvas are able to
give away everything, including the body, the thing that we usually cherish
the most. The bodhisattvas are able to give it away and dedicate it to
others without any sense of loss. Their ability comes from familiarity with
a generous attitude.
In order to be able to have a pure practice of generosity, we first must
understand the benefits of giving. If we are obstructed by attachment, then
we have to think about the faults of attachment. So by realizing the faults
of attachment, the faults of not giving and the benefits of giving, then we
are able to start the practice of giving. Even if the practice is not that
spectacular, maybe a small practice of generosity, that itself will bring
about a lot of benefit. It is mentioned in the teachings that we should
think about the faults of being attached to the things that we own, such as
our possessions, our body and so forth. By thinking about the faults of
attachment to the things that we own, we are able to cultivate a generous
attitude in relation to them, and we are able to really give them away. We
should reflect on the faults of being attached to the things that we own by
realizing how they are impermanent by nature, and they are subject to
change anyway. There will definitely come a time that we will be separated
from these things, be it our body or our possessions, forever.
Then the text goes on to discuss about practicing generosity with the six
perfections present. In the case of the practice of generosity, if this
practice is done with all the other perfections present, then that will
make the practice of generosity very powerful.
At the time of giving, whether you are making the gift of dharma, or the
gift of fearlessness or the gift of material things, it is important to
restrain yourself from selfish considerations. At the time when one is
giving, it is important to refrains our self from considerations of our own
purposes and our own welfare. This restraint is the practice of ethical
discipline. During the time when you are making a gift, whether it is
dharma or material things or the gift of fearlessness, if there are people
who exhibit an unpleasant demeanor i.e. “showing you their black face” as
in Singlish, that is the time that we are supposed to apply patience.
During the process of giving, one should do it with a mind of great
enthusiasm and taking delight in what you are doing. That is joyous
perseverance. When you dedicate the merit that you acquired from the act of
giving to the achievement of full enlightenment, and you perform that
dedication with a single pointedness of mind and with concentration, then
that becomes a practice of meditative stabilization. At the time of giving,
you should also reflect on how the object that you are giving away, whether
is the teachings or material thing or fearlessness, you should reflect that
these things, yourself as the giver and the person that you are giving to,
all of these do not exist inherently and they are like illusions. Once you
give with such an understanding, this becomes a practice of wisdom.
This is how one can engage in the practice that contains all the practice
of the six perfections. Whenever you engage in the practice that has all
the six perfections present, this becomes a very powerful method to purify
the obscurations and it becomes a method to achieve full enlightenment.

The Perfection of Ethical Discipline
(ii) How to train in the perfection of ethical discipline
  1. What ethical discipline is
  2. The divisions of ethical discipline
  3. The way to produce it in your mind
The next perfection is the perfection of ethical discipline. In the Middle
Length Lamrim, this perfection of ethical discipline is treated under the
three outlines.
1. What ethical discipline is.
2. The divisions of ethical discipline
3. The way to produce it in your mind.
1. What is ethical discipline
[LRCM V2 page 143]  Ethical discipline is an attitude of abstention that
turns your mind away from harming others and from the sources of such harm.

2. The divisions of ethical discipline
  1. The ethical discipline of restraint
  2. The ethical discipline of gathering virtue
  3. The ethical discipline of acting for the welfare of living beings
When the text talks about what ethical discipline is, it is identify the
entity of ethical discipline, and is speaking primarily about the ethical
discipline of restraint, the definition that was just read out earlier.
[LRCM V2 page 143]  Although ethical discipline does indeed have three
divisions [the ethical discipline of restraint, the ethical discipline of
gathering virtue, and the ethical discipline of acting for the welfare of
living beings], it is explained in this context as the attitude of
abstention in terms of the ethical discipline of restraint, the principal
division.
What is ethical discipline or ethics? In situations where you are about to
engage in a non-virtue, i.e. just prior to engaging in non-virtue, you have
this thought, “I should not be doing this because doing this is incorrect”.
With that thought, you restrain yourself completely and turn yourself away
from doing that action. There is this thought. There is this restrain. You
restrain yourself completely, and stop yourself from engaging in that non-
virtue. That is ethical discipline. That is what ethics is.
You cannot say somebody is ethical, or somebody is practicing ethical
discipline just because he is sitting there and not doing any non-virtue.
Just being there, whether is sitting or sleeping, then in a situation where
time and space you are not doing any non-virtue that does not necessarily
mean that the person is practicing ethical discipline. Ethical discipline
is what I just mentioned earlier, when you are just about to engage in a
non-virtue, you realized that it is wrong. For whatever reason you tell
yourself that you are not going to do it and then you effectively stop
yourself from doing it. You restrain, and turn yourself away from the
action. That is ethical discipline.
Next is the measure of the completion of the perfection of ethical
discipline.
What exactly is the completion of the perfection of ethical discipline?
[LRCM V2 page 143]  Therefore you bring about the perfection of discipline
by progressively increasing your habituation to this attitude until you
reach completion. However, it is not the case that you bring the perfection
of ethical discipline to completion in the external world by establishing
beings in a state free of all harm.
[LRCM V2 page 143]  Shantideva’s  Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds says:
  Where can beings such as fish be sent
  Where they will not be killed?
  So it is said that by attaining an attitude of abstention
  You perfect ethical discipline.
An illustration of the ethical discipline of restraint is the ethical
discipline of restraining from the ten non-virtues.
There are three classes of vows:
  1. The pratimoksha vow,
  2. The bodhisattva vow
  3. The tantric vow
You could say that bodhisattvas necessarily have bodhisattva vow, but you
cannot say that bodhisattvas necessarily have the pratimoksha vow.
Is the pratimoksha vow in the continuum of a bodhisattva the bodhisattva
vow? The answer is no.
(c') The divisions of ethical discipline
  a. The ethical discipline of restraint
  b. The ethical discipline of gathering virtue
  c. The ethical discipline of acting for the welfare of living beings
a The ethical discipline of restraint
[LRCM V2 page 148]  The Bodhisattva Levels says the ethical discipline of
restraint, in the continuum of bodhisattvas*1, is the seven types of vows
of individual liberation. Thus, given that there are those who have taken
vows of individual liberation*2 and are also keeping the bodhisattva vows,
the ethical discipline of restraint is either the actual vows of individual
liberation for the group of either laypersons or renunciates, or it is a
practice of restraint and abstention that would be associated with those
actual vows.
Also, given that there are those who have the bodhisattva vows who are
unsuited to be recipient of vows of individual liberation, the ethical
discipline of restraint is the practice of restraint and abstention that
gives up any deed that is wrong by nature or any deed that is wrong by
prohibition that would be associated with the vows of individual
liberation.
*1 “in the continuum of bodhisattvas” is in the Middle Length Lamrim, but
not in the Lam Rim Chenmo.
*2 Individual liberation is pratimoksha vow
There are:
   1. Deeds that are wrong by nature
   2. Deeds that are wrong by prohibition
1. Deeds that are wrong by nature
Deeds that are wrong by nature are just wrong, it doesn’t matter who does
it. Whether you are lay person or renunciate, those deeds that are wrong by
nature are just that. Whoever engages in it creates negative karma. So this
is what a deed that is wrong by nature. For example, the ten non-virtues
are deeds that are wrong by nature. It doesn’t matter who engages in it;
whether it can be a lay or renunciate, whoever engages the ten non-virtues
creates negative karma.
2. Deeds that are wrong by prohibition
Drinking alcohol is not a deed that is wrong by nature. If an ordained
person was to drink alcohol, he/she creates negative karma because drinking
alcohol is an act that is prohibited by the Buddha for ordained persons. If
an ordained person was to drink alcohol, he would transgress or goes
against what is prohibited by Buddha.  In so doing, therefore he create a
deed that is wrong by prohibition.
There are these two kinds of fault:
   1. Fault which is a deed that is wrong by nature
   2. Fault which is a deed that is wrong by prohibition
There are those actions that are wrong because they were prohibited. But
there are actions that are wrong regardless whether there is any
prohibition or not; those actions that are wrong by nature.
The three categories of vows:
   1. The pratimoksha vows
   2. The bodhisattva vows
   3. The tantric vows
These vows are not the same. They are different categories of vows, because
they are taken by different person.
The basis or the person who takes the pratimoksha vows can only be a human.
The basis for taking the bodhisattva vows can be the six types of migratory
beings.
The basis for taking the tantric vows, something that ………….
Khen Rinpoche (In English): I am not sure, the six realms? Whether the six
realms sentient beings can take tantric vows?
These two vows, the pratimoksha vows and the bodhisattva vows, are
distinct; one is not the other.
The ethical discipline of restraint is present in the pratimoksha vows and,
it is also present in the bodhisattva vows.
The pratimoksha vows is the ethical discipline of restraint. There is part
of the bodhisattva vows that fall under the ethical discipline of restraint
as well. While there is so, the pratimoksha vows and the bodhisattva vows
are distinct; one is not the other.
You should read that paragraph again. If there is anything that you still
do not understand then you should bring it up.
b. The ethical discipline of gathering virtue
[LRCM Page 148] The ethical discipline of gathering virtue means that you
focus on virtues such as the six perfections and then develop the virtues
that you have not developed in your mind, do not spoil the ones that you
have already developed, and increase both of these ever further.
c. The ethical discipline of acting for the welfare of living beings
The ethical discipline of acting for the welfare of living beings means
that you accomplish their aims in this and future lives in a suitable
manner and without wrongdoing. Whenever we talk about the ethical
discipline, it primarily refers to ethical discipline of restraint. With
that acting as the foundation or basis there come the other two forms of
ethical discipline:
(1) the ethical discipline of gathering virtue and
(2) the ethical discipline of helping sentient beings or acting for the
welfare of living beings.
[LRCM Page 148] The ethical discipline of acting for the welfare of living
beings means that you focus on the welfare of eleven sorts of living
beings, and then accomplish their aims in this and future lives in a
suitable manner and without wrongdoing. Since I have already detailed these
in my Basic Path to Awakening, you should definitely read that over and
over again.
3. The way to produce it in your mind
Next is the manner or the way to produce ethical discipline in one’s
continuum.
The way to do so is to reflect on:
  ➢ the grave consequences or the faults of not safeguarding ethical
    discipline and
  ➢ the benefit of safeguarding ethical discipline.
When one has the good understanding of the faults of not safeguarding
ethical discipline and the benefit of safeguarding it, one’s practice of
adopting what needs to be adopted and discarding what to be discarded, then
one’s practice of ethical discipline would be stable and would be very
good.
There is a quotation from The King of the Concentrations Sutra which says:
Compare the merit of making limitless offerings of foods, drinks, parasols,
victory banners with faith to many zillions and millions of buddhas, to the
virtue of keeping even with just one ethical training, or just one vow or
one precept in this degenerate time, that merits of making offerings is
smaller and the merits of keeping just one precept or one training in this
degenerate age is much more powerful.
Earlier on we saw how it is stated in the text that each preceding
perfection is inferior to the perfection that follows it. This means that
the perfection of ethical discipline is superior to the perfection of
generosity. Just using this quotation as the illustration, now you can see
why.
By safeguarding one’s ethical discipline, one experiences joy and
happiness. By not safeguarding one’s ethical discipline, one will
experience suffering. With such an understanding, one would be able to
generate very strong and stable attitude of wanting to safeguard one’s
ethical discipline. It is with this strong and stable attitude of
safeguarding one’s ethical discipline that one goes about safeguarding the
ethical discipline.
[MLLR page 180]  Although there are three kinds of ethical discipline, the
ethical discipline of restraint - practicing what to be adopted and what to
be cast aside concerning the formulated rules of the pratimoksha vows  or
what is common to them -is itself important for bodhisattvas in the
beginning. If this is guarded, the others will also be guarded, whereas if
it is not guarded, the others will not be guarded either. Therefore the
Compendium of Determinations says that if the ethics of the bodhisattva
vows degenerates, all the vows are degenerated.
Whoever thinks that the vows of the individual liberation*1 are for hearers
and rejects their formulated rules of engagement and avoidance*2 saying: “I
must train in the other bodhisattva trainings” has thus not grasped the
essential point of the training in ethics of bodhisattvas, for it is taught
many times that the ethical discipline of restraint is the basis and
province of the two subsequent ethical discipline.
*1 Pratimoksha vows
*2 the rule that is pertaining to what is to be adopted and what is to be
cast aside.
[MLLR page 180] 2 The main ethics of restraint: how the mind of restraining
from natural misdeeds should be generated again and again
The main ethics of restraint is to abandon the natural misdeeds. The
synthesized essential points of the great disadvantages of the natural
misdeeds are to abandon the ten non-virtues. Therefore the mind of
restraint that does not even move toward their motivations should be
generated again and again.
If one thinks “The pratimoksha vows are only for the hearers. I have
something else to practice such as I am going to keep the bodhisattva
vows”, that is actually a sign of not having grasped the essential points
of the training in the precepts.
When the training of the ethical discipline is condensed, it is the ethical
discipline of restraining from the ten non virtues. It is said that aside
from not committing the ten non virtues one should even restrain oneself
from the motivation of even wanting to commit them. We have to ethically
avoid the ten non virtues. As says in the text, we must correctly restrain
ourselves even mentally by not allowing a flicker a mere motivation for
these non-virtues. We should even restrain ourselves mentally from wanting
to engage in these non-virtues.
[LRCM Page 148] Therefore, since the rules of the vows of individual
liberation are one aspect of the precepts for renunciates who have taken
the bodhisattva vows, they are not set off apart from the precepts for
bodhisattvas. Also, within the three divisions of ethical discipline, the
ethical discipline of restraint—the actual rules of the individual
liberation vows or the practice of engaging in what is to be adopted and
rejecting what is to be cast aside that would be associated with these
vows—is initially very important even for bodhisattvas, so train in this.
The Bodhisattva Levels' Compendium of Determinations states:*
 Among the three aspects of ethical discipline, the ethical discipline of
 restraint includes and reaches to the other two; when you are bound by it
 and safeguard it, you will be bound by the other two and safeguard them as
 well, and when you are neither bound by nor protect it, you will not be
 bound by the other two nor safeguard them. Consequently, it is said that
 if bodhisattvas' ethical discipline of restraint degenerates, all their
 vows degenerate.
If you think that the vows of individual liberation are for sravakas, and
if you cast aside their prescriptive and proscriptive rules and say, "There
are other precepts, bodhisattva precepts, to train in," then you have not
grasped the key point of the bodhisattva training in ethical discipline,
for it is often said that the ethical discipline of restraint is the basis
and source of the next two types of ethical discipline.
[LRCM Page 150] Furthermore, the principal aspect of the ethical discipline
of restraint is abstaining from deeds that are wrong by nature. Abstention
from deeds that are wrong by nature is the abstention from the ten non
virtues, which comprise the crux of the major faults of the deeds that are
wrong by nature. You must correctly restrain yourself by not allowing a
flicker of mere motivation for these non-virtues.
[MLLR page 181]  3 Summarized presentation
In brief, to take this as the basis and train again and again in the mind
of restraint that trains in the trainings of whatever ethics one has
promised is the practice of ethical discipline.
Like the perfection of generosity, if we practice the perfection of ethical
discipline with all the other perfections present then that will make the
practice of ethical discipline very powerful.
Earlier on we saw how the practice of the six perfections can be present
when one is practicing the perfection of giving or generosity. You should
write out on your own how the practice of ethical discipline can involve
all the other perfections. There is no great rush to do it right now. You
can do it at any time of your choosing.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): You can do it next life also.
[LRCM Page 149] (d') How to practice
You practice the three types of ethical discipline in association with the
six supremacies and the six perfections. When you practice in association
with the six perfections, the generosity of ethical discipline is
establishing others in ethical discipline after you have stabilized
yourself in it. The remaining perfections are as presented before.
(e') A summary
Not to weaken and to increase steadily the spirit of enlightenment— the
basis of the bodhisattva deeds—is the root of engaging in deeds of ethical
discipline and so forth. It is also the best way to desist from harming any
living being. Aspire to practice the ethical discipline of those at high
levels and then train your mind in it. Sincerely learn right now what to
adopt and what to cast aside, starting with the ethical discipline of a
beginning bodhisattva. In particular, each day frequently exercise an
attitude of restraint with respect to what you know about deeds that are
wrong by nature - such as the ten non-virtues -and deeds that are wrong by
prohibition. Among these also strive again and again to apply an attitude
of restraint toward the fundamental transgressions of the vow to which you
are committed. Once you do this, you will be able to complete the
bodhisattva training in another lifetime as a causally concordant
behavioral effect, with little difficulty and with little suffering.
However, if you neglect these things now, you will be continually tainted
by very grave faults and transgressions, and moreover for many lives you
will be unable to learn the bodhisattvas' trainings. So from now on strive
at these practices.
The section of perfection of patience is a bit longer, so you should read
on your own. When we come to class, we can just go through some of the
points without having to go through everything.

Sunday Discussion Questions:
 1. At the time of small merit, i.e., for those who small merit, with
    regard to this Dharma, the teachings on selflessness, one does not
    generate profound doubt. However, even if one merely generates doubt,
    that doubt will tear apart cyclic existence.

   [Geshe Sopa's commentary on Lam Rim Vol 2 (Karma)
      Those of little merit would not even
      Entertain doubts that things are ultimately empty.
      Even suspicion that objects are empty
      Wrecks the seeds of cyclic existence. ]
   The above is a statement by the great Indian master Aryadeva.
   How does entertaining mere doubt of the nature of reality “tear apart
   cyclic existence”?

 2. It is said that the view of emptiness is indispensable if full
    enlightenment is to be achieved. It is indispensable even if one is
    only seeking the enlightenments of the hearers or solitary realizers.
    Why is this so?
 3. Discuss what the fourfold emptinesses mean.
Question 1: The quotation just says that those who have no merits would not
think about emptiness, and would not even query how things exist. But for
those who even entertain some doubts or start to wonder about emptiness, it
is said to tear samsara into pieces. The question is how is this so? How
does even such a small understanding of emptiness, the ultimate nature of
reality, can start to shake your entire samsara?
Question 2: The view of emptiness is also indispensable even if you are
only looking for liberation. Why is this so?
The purpose of these questions are to help you understand why the
understanding of inherent existence is necessarily even for someone who is
only aiming for hearers or solitary realizers’ enlightenment.
If you remember from Tenets, with the exception of the CMWS, everybody else
starting from the AMWS and down to the MOS and so forth, all of them you
don’t need to realize subtle selflessness, the emptiness of inherently
existence, in order to achieve liberation. But the CMWS says very clearly
that you need to realize the emptiness of inherently existence to achieve
even the hearers or solitary realizers’ enlightenment. Why?
The point of the question is to help you, and move you closer to arriving
at this heartfelt conviction that what the CMWS says is correct that even
to achieve liberation, forget about enlightenment, why you need to realize
the emptiness of inherently existence?  That is the purpose of the question
- to move you towards its conviction.
In the course of discussion, those who do not know then you have to ask
those who know. You have to be interested and you really have to ask find
out for your own why and why until you get a real understanding. For those
who know, you should share what you know with others with patience and with
affection, sharing what you know and trying to explain to those who do not
know. We just have to keep this in mind. All of us are the same. When we
are put in the situation after we get too many questions, one after
another, then one will get irritated. This happens frequently all the time.
So what we need to apply is the practice of patience. This is why in the
process of practicing generosity we also need forbearance.
Khen Rinpoche (In English): Sunday, we will also play the game. We are
trying to play the game as part of fun, part of studying, and part of
gathering. That is the whole idea. We are just trying. Please come and join
for that. Whoever playing the game should not be stressed at all. Whether
you get the right answer or wrong answer, you still smile and enjoy. Okay?
Most of the people don’t want to participate to play game because all of
them have…., better don’t say. Please join because we are trying this game.
Hope this will become very successful then wonderful. First time, it cannot
be perfect. So, please join to play. Whether right or wrong it doesn’t
matter. It is part of the fun. Hope this can help a little bit of the
topic. Then we have dinner. Dinner time also can discuss why is right and
what is wrong, you can find out more details. That is the way to learn.
Maybe you can start the Sunday discussion at 2pm. You can come 2pm. Maybe
2pm to 3:30pm for discussion. Then you have half an hour break. Then we
start the game. You don’t want to play also you can come. You can enjoy and
sit down and eat dinner. Anyway, I just want to tell you whoever play the
game shouldn’t be stressed. This is not exam for you. This is part of fun
and play. It is nothing. You get right then it is good. You get wrong then
it is good. You sit down, someone who is clever come out and answer.
Anyway, I just want to tell you this one more time. What I see people think
that it is so stressed. Nothing about that. Just playing a game.





