Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/SixPerfections/lrcm2_page85_231.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:02.637933
================================================================================


AN INTRODUCTION TO
the Six Perfections
c) How to learn the bodhisattva deeds after developing the spirit of
enlightenment i) The reason why you must learn the trainings after
developing the spirit of
enlightenment ii) Demonstrating that you will not become a buddha by
learning either method or
c) How to learn the bodhisattva deeds after developing the spirit of
enlightenment
How to learn the bodhisattva deeds after developing the spirit of
enlightenment Has three parts;
1. The reason why you must learn the trainings after developing the spirit
of enlightenment
2.  Demonstrating that you will not become a buddha by learning either
method or wisdom separately
3. Explanation of the process of learning the precepts (Chapters 8 and on)
i} The reason why you must learn the trainings after developing the spirit
of enlightenment
It is indeed the case that great benefit comes from mere development of the
aspirational spirit of enlightenment without learning the trainings of
generosity and so forth. Consider in this regard the passage from the Life
ofMaitreya cited earlier.144 However, you still
98     The Great Treatise on the Stages of the Path
both kinds of misdeeds [deeds that are wrong by nature and deeds that are
wrong by prohibition], you must not eradicate virtuous activities. Being
bound by ethical training and being bound by conceiving signs of true
existence are not the same, and loosening the safeguarding of vows and
loosening the chain of the conception of self are not the same either.
You achieve omniscience from a number of causes, each of which is
insufficient by itself. So know that the following sort of person is a
teacher of nonvirtue who blocks the door to the two collections: someone
who says, "Hundreds of birds are driven out with a single stone from a
slingshot," and who attains a fortunate life of leisure and should then
take advantage of it in many ways, but rather does not train in anything
other than one specific aspect of the path.
Also, the difference between the Hinayana or Mahayana comes down to whether
its practitioners train in the limitless collections at the time of putting
the teachings into practice, because the "modest vehicle" and Hinayana are
synonymous, and the meaning of "modest" is "partial." You must achieve even
lesser, current results—food, drink, and the like—through many causes and
conditions, so it is quite wrong to hold that something partial is
sufficient to achieve a person's highest purpose, buddhahood, for it is the
nature of dependent-arising that results are made in accordance with their
causes. With this in mind the Buddha said in the Lot us of Compassion Sutra
(Knruna-pundarika-sutra) that something partial comes from what is partial,
and something total comes from what is total. [355] This is explained at
length in the Sutra on the Coming Forth of the Tathagatas (Tathagatotpatti-
sambhava):171
None of the tatfiagatas arose from a single cause. Why? O conquerors'
children! Tath&gatas are established from ten times one hundred thousand
immeasurable establishing causes. What are the ten? They are these: the
genuine cause of not being satisfied with the immeasurable collections of
merit and sublime wisdom....
This is also explained at length in the Teaching of Vimalakirti:172 O
friends! The bodies of tathagatas are produced from hundreds of meritorious
deeds, from all virtues, from immeasurable virtuous paths....
And the protector Nagarjuna also says in his Precious Garland:™
When the causes of even a buddha's embodiment of form
Have no measure, as with the world.
How then could there be a measure
Of the causes of the embodiment of truth?

86      The Great Treatise on the Stages of the Path
have to practice the bodhisattva trainings. If you do not emphasize this
practice, you will never become a buddha. So learn the bodhisattva deeds.
Thus the Foremost ofGaya says:145
Enlightenment is for great bodhisattvas who take practice to heart, but not
for those who take a wrong practice to heart.
And the King of Concentrations Siitra also says:146
Therefore take practice to heart. Why? O Prince, because when you take
practice to heart, perfect enlightenment is not hard to attain.
"Practice" means the method of achieving buddhahood, i.e., learning the
bodhisattva trainings. The first Stages of Meditation also says:147 The
bodhisattvas, who have thus developed the spirit of enlightenment,
understand that without disciplining themselves they cannot discipline
others and so involve themselves in the practice of generosity and so
forth; without practice they will not attain enlightenment.
And Dharmakirti's Commentary on the "Compendium of Valid Cognition"
says:148
In order to destroy suffering, the compassionate
Work at actualizing the methods; [341]
It is hard for them to explain the methods and their results
When these remain hidden to them.
Those who have great compassion for others feel the need to relieve others'
suffering. To relieve it, the kind thought, "May they be free of their
suffering," is not enough; they must engage in the methods that will bring
it about. Now, if they do not first engage in those methods themselves,
they will be unable to free others. Therefore, if you want to work for
others' welfare, you must first discipline yourself. In reference to this
the King of Concentrations Sutra says that you should "take practice to
heart." Practice is said to be learning the training in the precepts
associated with the bodhisattva vows after you have taken them. Therefore,
it is very important that you are not mistaken about just what is entailed
in taking practice to heart.
ii) Demonstrating that you will not become a buddha by learning either
method or wisdom separately
It is not enough just to want to attain buddhahood; you must engage in the
method of achieving it. This method has to be
An Introduction to the Six Perfections      87
urtmistaken because no matter how much you strive on a mistaken path, you
will not obtain the result—like milking a horn in the hope of getting milk.
Even if the method is unmistaken, if it is not complete in all particulars,
striving will not bring the result, just as the absence of a seed, water,
earth, or the like will preclude the production of a sprout. Thus the
second Stages of Meditation says:149 If you earnestly strive at a mistaken
cause, even a tremendous amount of time will not bring you the desired
result, like milking a horn. A result does not come from an incomplete
causal complex, just as an effect like the production of a sprout does not
happen when something like a seed is missing. Therefore, someone who wants
the result must depend upon an unmistaken and complete set of causes and
conditions.
What, then, is the unmistaken and complete set of causes and conditions?
Vairocana's Great Enlightenment Discourse (Maha-vairocanabhisarnbodhi-
dharma-paryaya) says:lsc
Lord of Secrets, the sublime wisdom of omniscience comes from compassion as
its root. It comes from the spirit of enlightenment as its cause. It is
brought to completion by method. [342]
In regard to this, 1 have already explained compassion.151 The great
trailblazer Kamalasila explains that the "spirit of enlightenment" is both
the conventional and ultimate spirits of enlightenment, and that "method"
is all virtues such as generosity and so forth.
Opponents' position: Some persons like the Chinese Ha-shang (Hva-shang),
who have a mistaken idea about the path of the two types of spirit of
enlightenment, say that any thought—nonvirtuous thoughts, of course, but
even virtuous ones—binds us to cyclic existence, so its results do not
transcend cyclic existence. It is like being tied up with a golden rope or
with an ordinary rope, like white or dark clouds covering the sky, or like
the pain from being bitten by a white or a black dog. Therefore, just
setting your mind in a state that lacks any thought is the path to future
buddhahood. Such virtues as generosity and ethical discipline are taught
for foolish people incapable of such meditation on the definitive
[emptiness]. To engage in those deeds after you have found the definitive
would be like a king descending to a common status or like finding an
elephant and then searching for its footprints. Ha-shang attempts to prove
this position by citing, from the sutras, eighty passages which extol this
state of mind that lacks any thought.
Reply: Ha-shang's saying, "Everything to do with method is not an actual
path to buddhahood," is a tremendous denial of the
88      The Great Treatise on the Stages of the Path
conventional. And, since he refutes analyzing with discerning wisdom the
selfless reality that is at the heart of the Conqueror's teaching, he
banishes the system of the ultimate to the far distance. The great
bodhisattva Kamalasila excellently refuted with a mass of scriptural
citation and stainless reasoning this epitome of wrong views in which it is
maintained that the sublime path consists of stabilizing the mind in a
state that lacks any thought. Such stabilizing of the mind is a practice
properly subsumed under the mere category of meditative serenity, no matter
how superior it may be. Kamalasila then wrote at length on the good path
pleasing to the conquerors. [343]
Nevertheless, there are still some who continue to do just what Ha-shang
did, because the total decline of the Buddha's teaching is drawing near,
because the excellent persons who ascertain with total certainty through
scriptures of definitive meaning and stainless reasoning all the key points
of the path in their entirety are no more, because the merit of living
beings is so minimal, and because there are so many who have little faith
in the teaching and feeble intelligence. Some belittle the deeds that are
part of the path—the vows which are to be kept and the like—-rejecting them
and so forth when they cultivate the path; others do not accept Ha-shang's
mistaken denial of the factor of method, but assert that his way of
understanding the philosophical view is excellent; and still others cast
aside discerning wisdom and claim that Ha-shang's meditation of not
thinking is best.
The path of these persons is indeed not at all in the direction or vicinity
of a meditation on emptiness. But even if you were to allow that it is a
meditation on emptiness, you would not then go on to say that those with
the knowledge that comes from their cultivation of a faultless method of
meditation, after they have found the unmistaken meaning of emptiness,
should meditate on emptiness alone and "not cultivate conventional states
of mind pertaining to deeds," or, alternatively, "do not have to strive at
those conventional states of mind in a variety of ways, upholding them as
the core practice." To say such things contradicts all the scriptures and
completely flies in the face of reason, for the goal for practitioners of
the Mahayana is a non-abiding nirvana. For this you have to achieve non-
abiding in cyclic existence via the wisdom that knows reality, the stages
of the path contingent on the ultimate, the "profound path," the collection
of sublime wisdom, the so-called "factor of wisdom." You also have to
achieve a non-abiding in the
An Introduction to the Six Perfections      89
peace that is nirvana via the wisdom that understands the diversity of
phenomena, the stages of the path contingent on conventional truths, the
vast path, the collection of merit, the so-called "factor of method." [344]
The Sutra of Showing the Tathagata's Inconceivable Secret (Tathagatacintya-
guhya-nirdesa-sutra) thus says:152 The collection of sublime wisdom
eliminates all afflictions. The collection of merit nurtures all living
beings. Bhagavan, since this is the case, mahasattva bodhisattvas should
strive for the collections of sublime wisdom and merit.
The Questions of Sky Treasure Sutra (Gagana-ganja-pariprccha-sutra)
says:1"
With the knowledge of wisdom, you completely eliminate all afflictions.
With the knowledge of method, you include all living beings.
The Sutra Unravelling the Intended Meaning (Samdhi-nirmocana-sutra)
says:154
Utterly turning away from the welfare of all living beings and utterly
turning away from all participation in motivated action— I have not taught
these to be unsurpassed, perfect enlightenment.
The Teaching of Vimalakirti (Vimalaklrti-nirdesa-sutra) states at
length:155
What is bondage for the bodhisattvas and what is their liberation?
Attachment to wandering through cyclic existence without method is bondage
for a bodhisattva; proceeding through cyclic existence with method is
liberation. Attachment to wandering through cyclic existence without wisdom
is bondage for a bodhisattva; proceeding through cyclic existence with
wisdom is liberation. Wisdom that is not imbued with method is bondage?
wisdom imbued with method is liberation. Method not imbued with wisdom is
bondage; method imbued with wisdom is liberation.
Therefore, when you are on the path—right from the time of wanting the goal
of buddhahood—you must depend on both method and wisdom; you will not
attain it by either one alone. The Foremost ofGaya says:156
if you summarize the paths for bodhisattvas, there are these two. Which
two? Method and wisdom. [345]
The Glorious First and Foremost Tantra (Sri-paramadya-kal-pa-raja)
states:157
90      The Great Treatise on the Stages of the Path
The perfection of wisdom is the mother. Skill-in-means is the father.
And the Kasyapa Chapter also says:15fi
Kasyapa, it is like this. Just as kings informed by ministers perform all
royal duties, so too the wisdom of bodhisattvas imbued with skill-in-means
performs all the deeds of a buddha.
Therefore, meditate on an emptiness that has the supremacy of being
associated with all aspects, i.e., an emptiness that is complete in all the
facets of method—generosity and so forth. By meditating on emptiness in
isolation you will never reach the Mahayana path. The Questions of Crest
Jewel Sutra {Ratna-cuda-sutra) states this at length:159
After you put on the armor of love and station yourself in a state of great
compassion, you stabilize your mind in meditation on an actual emptiness
that has the supremacy of being associated with all aspects. What is an
emptiness that has the supremacy of being associated with all aspects? It
is one that is not divorced from generosity, that is not divorced from
ethical discipline, that is not divorced from patience, that is not
divorced from joyous perseverance, that is not divorced from meditative
stabilization, that is not divorced from wisdom, and that is not divorced
from method.
The Sublime Continuum comments on this passage as follows:160 Generosity,
ethical discipline, patience, and so forth— These are the painters;
Emptiness supreme in alt aspects Is said to be the likeness.
This uses the analogy of assembling a group of artists to paint a king's
likeness. One knows how to paint a head but not something else, one knows
how to paint a hand but not something else, and so on. If even one artist
is missing, the painting will not get finished. The king's likeness is
analogous to emptiness and the painters are analogous to generosity and so
forth. So if method—generosity and so forth—is incomplete, it would be like
a decapitated or amputated likeness. [346]
Furthermore, to take emptiness in isolation as what is to be meditated on
and say, "There is no need to cultivate anything else," expresses an idea
that the Bhagavan set forth as a view to be opposed, and he thereupon
refuted it. Were the statement true, then the many
An Introduction to the Six Perfections      91
eons of a bodhisattva's practice of generosity, observance of ethical
discipline, etc. would be an exercise in faulty wisdom that did not
comprehend the definitive, as the Bhagavan says in the Sutra Gathering All
the Threads (Sarva-vaidalya-samgraha-sutra):161
Maitreya, fools intending to repudiate the other perfections will speak
thus about the bodhisattvas' correct practice of the six perfections for
the sake of perfect enlightenment: "Bodhisattvas should train in perfect
wisdom alone, the remaining perfections have no use." Ajita [Maitreya],
what do you think? Was he who was the king of Kas'i [§akyamuni Buddha in a
previous life] exercising faulty wisdom when he gave his own flesh to the
hawk for the sake of the pigeon?
Maitreya replied, "No, Bhagavan, he was not." The Bhagavan continued,
"Maitreya, when I was performing the deeds of a bodhisattva, did the roots
of virtue that I accumulated—the roots of virtue that go with the six
perfections—harm me?"
Maitreya replied, "No, Bhagavan, they did not." The Bhagavan continued,
"Ajita, you have so far practiced the perfection of generosity over sixty
eons, you have practiced the perfection of ethical discipline over sixty
eons, the perfection of patience over sixty eons, the perfection of joyous
perseverance over sixty eons, the perfection of meditative stabilization
over sixty eons, and the perfection of wisdom over sixty eons, in regard to
which these fools will say that enlightenment is only reached through a
single way—the way of emptiness. [347] Their deeds will be completely
impure.
Therefore, to say "It is unnecessary for someone who knows emptiness to
strive hard to cultivate method" is a mistaken denial that states, in
effect, "The period of Our Teacher's previous holy lifetimes was a time
when he had no understanding of the definitive."
Opponents'position: Practicing the deeds of generosity and so forth in a
variety of ways is for when you do not have a firm knowledge of emptiness.
When you do have this firm knowledge, then this is enough.
Reply: This is a very wrong view. If it were correct, then the children of
the conquerors who have ascended to the great levels where they have
attained the nonconceptual sublime wisdom that perceives the ultimate
truth, and, in particular, the eighth-level bodhisattvas, who have control
over nonconceptual wisdom, would not need the bodhisattva deeds. This is
incorrect because the Sutra on the Ten Levels {Dasa-bhumika-siitra) says
that even though on each
92      The Great Treatise on the Stages of the Path
of the ten levels there is an emphasis on one of the deeds—generosity,
etc.—it is not the case that they do not perform the other deeds, so it is
said that they practice all six or ten perfections on each level. Further,
since Ajita [Maitreya], Nagarjuna, and Asariga explain the meaning of these
surras in this fashion, it is not possible to interpret them otherwise.
In particular, bodhisattvas eliminate all afflictions on the eighth level.
Therefore, when they stabilize on the ultimate, wherein they have quelled
all elaboration, the buddhas exhort them, explaining that they have to
train in the bodhisattva deeds: "With just this knowledge of emptiness you
cannot become enlightened because the sravakas and pratyekabuddhas have
also obtained this noncon-ceptuality. Look at my immeasurable body,
immeasurable sublime wisdom, immeasurable realm, and so forth. You also do
not have my powers and so on. Joyously persevere for the sake of these
attributes. Think about the living beings not at peace, disturbed by
various afflictions. But do not discard this forbearance [meditation on
emptiness]," and so forth. [348] To be satisfied with a certain, trivial
meditative concentration and to set aside everything else is something
ridiculed by scholars. The Sutra on the Ten Levels says:162
Listen! There are children of the conquerors, bodhisattvas, who abide in
this bodhisattva's immovable level [eighth level], who have generated the
power of previous aspirational prayers, and who are stabilized in the
"stream of entrance to the teaching" meditation [meditation on emptiness].
The bhagavan buddhas have them accomplish a tathagata's sublime wisdom,
saying this: "Children of good lineage, very good, very good! This goal—the
knowledge of all the buddha qualities—is a forbearance of the ultimate.
Nevertheless, you do not have my ten powers, fearlessnesses, and so forth,
the buddha qualities in all their richness. Joyously persevere at seeking
these perfected qualities of a buddha. Do not throw away this very entrance
to forbearance [meditation on emptiness]. Children of good lineage, though
you have thus attained peace and liberation, think about the ordinary,
childish beings, who are not at peace and are driven by various upsurges of
diverse afflictions. Children of good lineage, recollect your earlier
aspirational prayers, what you should attain for the welfare of living
beings, and the inestimable entrance to sublime wisdom. Also, children of
good lineage, this is the reality of phenomena. Whether there are
tathagatas or not, the sphere of reality simply remains; it is the
emptiness of all phenomena, the non-apprehension of all things. Not by this
alone are the tathagatas
An Introduction to the Six Perfections     93
to be distinguished; all sravakas and pratyekabuddhas also attain this
nonconceptual real nature. [349] Also, children of good lineage, look at my
immeasurable body, my immeasurable sublime wisdom, my immeasurable buddha-
realm, my immeasurable actualization of sublime wisdom, my immeasurable
halo of light, and the immeasurable pure modulations of my voice—and
produce something similar in yourselves."
The Sutra on the Ten Levels also gives the example of a ship sailing out to
sea, driven by a favorable wind.163 The distance it covers in a single day
exceeds the distance it goes even in a hundred years after starting from
port without a wind and using effort to move it. Likewise, it says, after
you have reached the eighth level, without a great effort you cover in just
a moment an amount of the path to omniscience not possible before reaching
this level, even if you were to strive at the path for one hundred thousand
eons. You fool yourself, therefore, by saying "I have a shortcut," and then
not learning the bodhisattva deeds.
Opponents' position: I do not assert that generosity and so forth are
unnecessary, but rather that they are fully present in the state of mind
that lacks any thought, because the absence of adherence to a giver, gift,
and recipient makes non-apprehending generosity fully present, and in the
same way the remaining perfections are fully present, too. It is also
because the sutras say that you include the practice of all six perfections
within the practice of each.
Reply: If they are fully present in a state of mind that lacks thought,
then when non-Buddhist meditators are in meditative equipoise even in
single-pointed states of serenity, all the perfections would be fully
present because they also are not adhering to a giver, gift, and recipient.
In particular, when sravakas and pratyekabuddhas nonconceptually perceive
the real nature, as in the earlier quotation from the Sutra on the Ten
Levels, all bodhisattva deeds would be fully present—so they would,
absurdly, be Mahayana practitioners. And if you assert that just one
practice is sufficient because the sutras say that all six perfections are
included in each, well then, since it also says all six are present even
when offering a mandala while reciting the verse beginning, "Giving cow
dung together with water...," it would also be enough to do only this.
[350]
Deeds imbued with the philosophical view and wisdom imbued with method may
be understood by way of an analogy. When a mother stricken with grief at
the death of her beloved child engages
94     The Great Treatise on the Stages of the Path
in conversation and other activities with others, the feelings she
expresses do not eliminate the force of her grief. Yet not every feeling
she expresses is necessarily grief. Similarly, if the wisdom that knows
emptiness is very strong, even though the states of mind associated with
giving, making obeisance, circumambulating, or reciting are not cognitions
of emptiness, this still does not preclude your being involved in them
while endowed with the potency or force of the cognition of emptiness. For
instance, at the start of a meditation session, if you first generate a
very strong spirit of enlightenment, this spirit of enlightenment is not
manifestly there when you then enter meditative equipoise in a
concentration on emptiness. Yet this does not preclude this concentration's
being imbued with the potency of the spirit of enlightenment.
It is this sort of thing that is referred to by the term "non-apprehending
generosity." It is not the complete absence of a generous attitude, wherein
giving is not feasible. Understand the remaining perfections in a similar
way. Know also that this is how method and wisdom are inseparable.
Furthermore, you should not misconstrue statements that things in cyclic
existence such as your body, resources, and a long life span are the result
of collections of merit; they are so only in the absence of skill-in-means
and wisdom. When collections of merit are imbued with these, it is entirely
proper that they are the causes of liberation and omniscience. There are
limitless passages in the scriptures which say as much, such as this one
from the Precious Garland:tb*
To sum up, the embodiment of form,
O King, is born from the collection of merit.
Moreover, it looks like you are saying that even all ill deeds and
afflictions that cause the miserable realms can sometimes become causes of
buddhahood, and that virtue—generosity, ethical discipline, and so forth
that lead to high status—causes cyclic existence, but does not become a
cause of buddhahood. So compose yourself before you speak. [351]
Do not misconstrue the following statements: From the surras:165 Adhering
to the six perfections—generosity and so forth—is demonic activity.
From the Three Heaps Sutra {Tri-skandhaka-sutra)-}bb
An Introduction to the Six Perfections      95
Confess each of these: descending to the level of objective existence and
giving gifts, observing ethical discipline because of a belief in the
supremacy of ethics, etc.
And from the Sutra Requested by Brahma (Brahma-pariprccha-sutra):^
All analysis is conceptual thought; the nonconceptual is enlightenment
The meaning of the first passage is that generosity, etc. motivated by a
mistaken adherence to the two types of self [the self of persons and the
self of objects] is not pure, and, therefore, is stated to be "demonic
activity." This passage does not teach that generosity and so forth is
demonic activity; otherwise, since it mentions all six perfections, you
would also have to assert that the perfections of meditative stabilization
and wisdom are demonic activity.
The second scriptural passage means that the perfections are impure because
of being motivated by a mistaken adherence and explains that you must
confess them. It does not teach that you should not be involved in
generosity, etc.; otherwise, the mention of a descent to the level of
objective existence in the phrase, "descending to the level of objective
existence and giving gifts" would be unnecessary, and it would instead have
stated, "confess the giving of gifts in general," which it does not in fact
say.
This method of response, formulated in the third Stages of Meditation,
emphasizes an extremely important point, because Ha-shang's view
misunderstands this passage and asserts that the whole range of deeds is
qualified by signs, wherein the deeds are taken to be the apprehension of
signs of a self of persons and objects. If every sort of virtuous
conceptual thought—such as the generous attitude when thinking, "I shall
give this thing," and the attitude of restraint when thinking, "I shall
restrain from this wrongdoing"—were an apprehension of a self of objects
that misconceives the three spheres [agent, object, and recipient], then it
would be right and proper that everyone finding the view of the
selflessness of objects should completely reject virtuous conceptual
thought just as they reject hostility, pride, etc., and it would be quite
wrong for them to purposefully cultivate those virtues. [352]
If all conceptual thoughts, which think, "This is this," were conceptions
of the self of objects that misconceive the three spheres, then what about
contemplating the good qualities of a teacher; contemplating leisure and
opportunity, death, and the suffering of
96      The Great Treatise on the Stages of the Path
the miserable realms; training in the practice of going for refuge;
thinking how a certain action gives rise to a certain result; training in
love, compassion, and the spirit of enlightenment; and practicing the
precepts of the engaged spirit of enlightenment? Since all of these paths
require only that you induce certain knowledge by thinking, "This is this,"
"This comes from that," "This has this good quality or that fault," you
would increase your conception of a self of objects commensurate to your
certainty about these paths. Conversely, you would become less certain
about these paths commensurate to the certain knowledge of the selflessness
of objects you could sustain in meditation. The deeds component and view
component would thus become mutually exclusive, like hot and cold, and you
would then never develop a long-lasting and very forceful certainty about
both the view and deeds.
Therefore, just as in the context of the goal there is no contradiction
that a buddha's embodiment of truth and a buddha's embodiment of form are
both presented as attainments, so on the path you must induce without any
contradiction (1) certain knowledge of the total freedom from any
elaboration of the conception of signs of true existence in the two kinds
of self with respect to even a particle of a mental object and (2) certain
knowledge that "This comes from that," and "This has this good quality or
that fault." This, in turn, is contingent on how you determine the two
truths, the philosophical view of what exists. You are counted "a person
who knows the two truths and who has found the Conqueror's intent" if you
are convinced that the following two valid cognitions not only do not, of
course, harm each other, but rather aid each other: (1) the valid cognition
that establishes the ultimate, which is determined through scripture and
reasoning to be the absence of even a particle of essential nature in the
way of being or ontological status of any phenomenon of cyclic existence or
nirvana, and (2) the conventional valid cognition that establishes that
causes and effects, in their diverse workings, are certain, without any
confusion of even the slightest cause or effect. [353] I shall explain this
system in the insight section.16"
As to the third scriptural passage, the one from the Sutra Requested by
Brahma, since the context for this passage in the sutra is an analysis of
production and so forth, in order to teach that generosity, etc. are not
absolutely produced, it uses the term "conceptual thought" to indicate that
they are mere imputations by conceptual thought. It is not teaching that
you should not involve yourself in these deeds and reject them.
An Introduction to the Six Perfections     97
Therefore, since there is no time when it is not necessary to practice
these deeds-—the six perfections, etc.—until you become a buddha, it is
incumbent upon you to train in these deeds. If you strive right now from
the depths of your heart, you will accomplish with effort what you can
achieve. With respect to the practices that you are unable to do for the
time being, make an aspiration to do them and, as causes of the ability to
practice them, accumulate the collections, clear away the obscurations, and
make many aspirational prayers. Once you do this, it will not be long
before you put them into practice. Otherwise, if you take the position that
you, personally, cannot understand the deeds or cannot do them, and you
then say to others, "You do not need to train in them," not only do you
ruin yourself and bring ruin on others as well, but it also becomes a
condition for the decline of the teaching. So do not do this. As
Nagarjuna's Compendium of Sutras (Sutra-samuccaya) says:169
Discerning even the non-composite and still being disillusioned with
composite virtue is demonic activity. Understanding even the path to
enlightenment and still not seeking the path of the perfections is demonic
activity.
And also:
A bodhisattva who lacks skill-in-means should not strive for the state of
profound reality.
And the Sutra of Showing the Tathagata's Inconceivable Secret says:1™
Children of good lineage, it is like this. Fire, for example, bums from a
cause and goes out when this cause ceases to exist. Similarly, mind is
activated by an observed object; without this it is inactive. The
bodhisattvas with this ski 11-in-means know, through the purity of their
perfection of wisdom, the elimination of a truly existent observed object,
and yet they do not eliminate the observation of roots of virtue. [354]
They do not give rise to the observation of the afflictions and yet set
their attention on the observed objects of the perfections. They discern an
observation of emptiness, yet still observe and consider all living beings
with great compassion.
You must distinguish between explanations of how there is no observed
object and explanations of how there is an observed object. Accordingly,
while you must loosen the bonds of the afflictions and the conceptions of
signs of true existence, you must be firmly bound by the rope of ethical
training, and, while you need to eradicate
98     The Great Treatise on the Stages of the Path
both kinds of misdeeds [deeds that are wrong by nature and deeds that are
wrong by prohibition], you must not eradicate virtuous activities. Being
bound by ethical training and being bound by conceiving signs of tfue
existence are not the same, and loosening the safeguarding of vows and
loosening the chain of the conception of self are not the same either.
You achieve omniscience from a number of causes, each of which is
insufficient by itself. So know that the following sort of person is a
teacher of nonvirtue who blocks the door to the two collections: someone
who says, "Hundreds of birds are driven out with a single stone from a
slingshot," and who attains a fortunate life of leisure and should then
take advantage of it in many ways, but rather does not train in anything
other than one specific aspect of the path.
Also, the difference between the Hinayana or Mahayana comes down to whether
its practitioners train in the limitless collections at the time of putting
the teachings into practice, because the "modest vehicle" and Hinayana are
synonymous, and the meaning of "modest" is "partial." You must achieve even
lesser, current results—food, drink, and the like—through many causes and
conditions, so it is quite wrong to hold that something partial is
sufficient to achieve a person's highest purpose, buddhahood, for it is the
nature of dependent-arising that results are made in accordance with their
causes. With this in mind the Buddha said in the Lot us of Compassion Sutra
(Knruna-pundarika-sutra) that something partial comes from what is partial,
and something total comes from what is total. [355] This is explained at
length in the Sutra on the Coming Forth of the Tathagatas (Tathagatotpatti-
sambhava):171
None of the tatfiagatas arose from a single cause. Why? O conquerors'
children! Tathagatas are established from ten times one hundred thousand
immeasurable establishing causes. What are the ten? They are these: the
genuine cause of not being satisfied with the immeasurable collections of
merit and sublime wisdom....
This is also explained at length in the Teaching of Vimalakirti:172 O
friends! The bodies of tathagatas are produced from hundreds of meritorious
deeds, from all virtues, from immeasurable virtuous paths....
And the protector Nagarjuna also says in his Precious Garland:™
When the causes of even a buddha's embodiment of form
Have no measure, as with the world.
How then could there be a measure
Of the causes of the embodiment of truth?

An Introduction to the Six Perfections      99
This training in method and wisdom comprising the six perfections is, as
explained earlier, common to both the mantra and perfection vehicles. For
in many of the tantric classics we find repeated mention of the complete
path of the perfections—the six perfections, the thirty-seven branches of
enlightenment, the sixteen emptinesses, etc.—in the context of explanations
that the entire celestial mansion and the array of resident deities are the
inner qualities of mind. Therefore, know that all the Perfection of Wisdom
literature's explanations about what is to be adopted and what is to be
discarded are comprehensively shared with the mantra vehicle, except in the
case of the tantric teachings for certain exceptional persons in which they
must take the experience of sensory objects as the path, and so forth.
Take the above explanation as a seed and reflect on it well. If you are not
then certain about a path that is not just partial but complete in all
aspects, you have not comprehended the foundation of the Mahayana path in
general. Therefore, intelligent ones, generate a solid certainty about this
path of method and wisdom and, in many ways, continuously grow in your
natural capacity for the supreme vehicle. [356]

Training in the Mahayana: precepts and perfections
iii) Explanation of the process of learning the precepts a' How to train in
the Mahayana in general
1' Establishing the desire to leam the precepts of the spirit of
enlightenment 2' Taking the vows of the conquerors' children after
establishing the desire to learn
the precepts
3' How to train after taking the vows a" What the precepts are based upon
b" How all the precepts are included in the six perfections
1" A discussion of the main topic, the fixed number of perfections
(a) The fixed number of perfections based on high status
(b) The fixed number of perfections based on fulfilling the two aims
(c) The fixed number of perfections based on perfecting the complete
fulfillment of others' aims
(d) The fixed number of perfections based on their subsuming the entire
Mahayana
(e) The fixed number of perfections in terms of the completeness of paths
or method
(f) The fixed number of perfections based on the three trainings 2" An
ancillary discussion of the fixed order of the perfections
(a) The order of arising
(b) The order in terms of inferior and superior
(c) The order in terms of coarse and subtle
102      The Great Treatise on the Stages of the Path
iii) Explanation of the process of learning the precepts
The explanation of the process of learning the precepts has two parts:
1. How to train in the Mahayana in general (Chapters 8 and on)
2. How to train specifically in the Vajrayana (Chapter 27 of Volume 3)
a' How to train in the Mahayana in general
The explanation of how to train in the Mahayana in general has three
sections:
1. Establishing the desire to Ieam the precepts of the spirit of
enlightenment
2. Taking the vows of the conquerors' children after establishing the
desire to Ieam the precepts
3. How to train after taking the vows (Chapters 8 and on)
1' Establishing the desire to Ieam the precepts of the spirit of
enlightenment
In the discipline of individual liberation and in tantra it is
inappropriate to study the precepts before you have first taken the vows,
but these bodhisatrva vows are different. First you understand the precepts
well and then, after you are trained in them, if you have an enthusiasm for
taking them, you are given the vows. In this regard the Bodhisattva Levels
says:174
For persons wanting to take the ethical discipline vows of a bodhisattva
you should make known in advance the fundamental precepts and the sources
of fault for bodhisattvas taught here in the "Summary of the Bodhisattva
Fundamentals" for the bodhisattvas' scriptural collection of the
discourses. If after sincere investigation and intelligent analysis these
persons are inspired, and if it is not because of being made to do it by
someone else and it is not to compete with others, then know that these are
reliable bodhisattvas. These persons should be given the vows of ethical
discipline and should receive them in accord with the ritual.
This is a very good method because, if you understand the precepts, bring
them to mind, establish a wish to train in them from the depths of your
heart, and then take the vows, you will be extremely constant.
Training in the Mahayana: Precepts and Perfections      103
[357] To explain the precepts both here and below would make for too great
a burden of words, so I shall indicate them below.175
2' Taking the vows of the conquerors' children after establishing the
desire to learn the precepts
I have already established in detail in my Basic Path to Awakening
commentary on the Bodhisattva Levels' chapter on ethical discipline176
first how to take the bodhisattva vows, immediately after that how to guard
against fundamental transgressions and transgressions which constitute
minor infractions, and then how to repair vows if they degenerate. It is
most definitely necessary that you read this before you take the vows, so
understand them from there.
3' How to train after taking the vows
How to train after taking the vows has three parts:
1. What the precepts are based upon
2. How all the precepts are included in the six perfections
3. The process of learning the perfections (Chapters 9 and on)
a" What the precepts are based upon
There are limitless clear categorizations, but if you arrange the
bodhisattva precepts by type, you can include them all within the six
perfections. The six perfections are thus the great condensation of all the
key points of the bodhisattva path. The four ways to gather disciples
[generosity, pleasant speech, working at the aims, and consistency of
behavior] are also included within these six perfections as follows. That
generosity is included is obvious. Pleasant speech is giving instructions
to disciples, taking the six perfections as the point of departure; working
at the aims is establishing others in the aims of these instructions; and
consistency of behavior is practicing just as the disciple does.
Although it is true that the entire bodhisattva path is also subsumed under
other condensations such as the two collections, the three trainings
[ethical discipline, meditative concentration, and wisdom], and so forth,
these are not able to produce the understanding that the six perfections
do, so the six perfections are the best inclusive set.
104     The Great Treatise on the Stages of the Path
b" How all the precepts are included in the six perfections
How all the precepts are included in the six perfections has two parts:
1. A discussion of the main topic, the fixed number of perfections
2. An ancillary discussion of the fixed order of the perfections
1" A discussion of the main topic, the fixed number of perfections
The Bhagavan formulated a bare outline of the six perfections, and the holy
Regent [Maitreya] produced certain knowledge of these by explicating in
accord with the Buddha's intended meaning the key points of the rationale
for formulating the perfections in that fashion. These explanations show
that there is a fixed number of perfections. When you are convinced of this
and astonished by it, you will understand the practice of the six
perfections as the supreme instruction, so obtain such conviction.
The discussion of the main topic, the fixed number of perfections, has six
parts:
1. The fixed number of perfections based on high status
2. The fixed number of perfections based on fulfilling the two aims
3. The fixed number of perfections based on perfecting the complete
fulfillment of others' aims
4. The fixed number of perfections based on their subsuming the entire
Mahayana
5. The fixed number of perfections in terms of the completeness of paths or
method
6.  The fixed number of perfections based on the three trainings
fa) The fixed number of perfections based on high status
To fully complete the greatly effective bodhisattva deeds you need an
immeasurably long succession of lifetimes. [358] Moreover, to attain quick
success on the path within these lifetimes you need a life excellent in
every aspect. Our present life is not excellent in every aspect but rather
has only some of the aspects of full excellence; we do not make progress
with it though we practice the teachings. You need a life that has four
kinds of excellence: (1) resources to use [the result of the perfection of
generosity], (2) a body with which
Training in the Mahayana: Precepts and Perfections     105
you act [the result of the perfection of ethical discipline], (3)
companions together with whom you act [the result of the perfection of
patience], and (4) work that you are able to accomplish once undertaken
[the result of the perfection of joyous perseverance]. Since in many cases
these four kinds of excellence alone may themselves become conditions for
afflictions, you must not fall under the control of the afflictions [the
result of the perfection of meditative stabilization]. As just the four
kinds of excellence are not sufficient, you must also distinguish well, in
regard to what to adopt and what to cast aside, precisely what things to do
and to stop doing [the result of the perfection of wisdom]. Otherwise, just
as a bamboo or plantain tree dies after giving fruit, or a mule dies with
pregnancy, you will be destroyed by the four excellences.
The wise understand how these six—the four excellences, control of the
afflictions, and knowledge of what to adopt and what to cast aside—are the
results of earlier virtuous actions, and they strive again at steadily
increasing their causes. The unwise use the results of their earlier
accumulations of virtue and exhaust them; as they do not increase them
anew, they reach the brink of their future suffering.
When you again produce these six in future lives, their production will not
be causeless, or from discordant causes, but rather from concordant causes
that are the perfections, fixed as six in number. Therefore in this
lifetime you must repeatedly habituate yourself to constant reliance on the
six perfections because the superiority of the effects is commensurate to
the superiority of the causes. A life with the four excellences constitutes
temporary high status, whereas the ultimate high status, which consists of
ultimate excellence of body, etc., exists at the buddha level. Thus the
Ornament for the Mahayana Sutras (Mahayana-siitralamkara) says:177
High status possessed of excellent resources and body,
Excellent companions and undertakings,
Not going under the power of the afflictions.
And never being mistaken in activities.... [359]
(b) The fixed number of perfections based on fulfilling the two
When someone in such a life of high status learns the bodhisattva deeds,
these activities are comprehensively categorized as two: those which
fulfill your own aim and those which fulfill the aims
106      The Great Treatise on the Stages of the Path
of others. Therefore, there is a fixed number of perfections based on
fulfilling the two aims.
To fulfil! the aims of others you must first help them with material goods.
Since no benefit will come from generosity accompanied by harmfulness
toward living beings, you need ethical discipline, which has a great
purpose for others in that it is the state of desisting from harm to others
and the causes of such harm. To bring this to its full development you also
need patience that disregards the harm done to you, for, if you are
impatient with harm and retaliate a time or two, you will not attain pure
ethical discipline. When you do not retaliate because of your patience, you
prevent others from accumulating a great amount of sin and bring them to
virtue by inspiring them with your patience. So this practice has a great
purpose for others.
You attain your own aim, the bliss of liberation, through the power of
wisdom. Since you will not attain this with a distracted mind, you must set
your mind in meditative equipoise by means of meditative stabilization,
obtaining a mental serviceability wherein you intentionally set your
attention on any object of meditation. Since a lazy person does not produce
this, you need joyous perseverance day and night that never slackens, so
this is the basis of the other perfections.
For accomplishing the two aims, then, the number of perfections is fixed as
six. The Ornament for the Mahayana Sutras says:178
Those who strive for the aims of beings
Work at giving, non-harm, and patience;
And completely fulfill their own aims
With stabilization and liberation, together with their basis.
In these six there is no complete fulfillment of others' aims.179 The
mention of "stabilization and liberation" differentiates between the two as
(1) the stabilization of the mind on the object of meditation, this being
the imprint of meditative stabilization, and (2) the liberation from cyclic
existence, this being the imprint of wisdom. Notice that this does not
mistake meditative serenity for insight. [360] As this is so, those who
assert that the meditation of fixing one's attention in an absence of
conceptual thought is meditation on the profound are speaking of a
meditation that is a single portion of the meditative stabilization that is
one of these six perfections. You must attain certain knowledge of the six
perfections in their entirety.
Training in the Mnhayana: Precepts and Perfections      107
(c) The fixed number of perfections based on perfecting the complete
fulfillment of others' aims
You first relieve others' poverty by giving away material goods. Then you
do no harm to any living being and, in addition, are patient with harm done
to you. Without becoming dispirited you joyously persevere at helping those
who harm you. You depend on meditative stabilization and inspire them
through displaying supernormal powers and so forth. When they become
suitable vessels for the teachings, you rely on wisdom and give good
explanations, cut through their doubts and thereby bring them to
liberation. Because you do all this, the perfections are fixed as six in
number. The Ornament for the Mahayana Sutras states:1*1
Through relieving others' poverty, not harming them,
Being patient with their harm, not being dispirited with what
they do,
Delighting them, and speaking well to them You fulfill others' aims, which
fulfills your own.
This verse, together with the one above, says that it is not possible to
fulfill others' and your own aims without relying on the six perfections.
Once you are certain about the way in which you fulfill your own and
others' aims through these six perfections, you will have respect for the
practice of them.
(d) The fixed number of perfections based on their subsuming the entire
Mahayana
You are indifferent to resources because you are not attached to those you
have and do not pursue those you lack. Since you then have the ability to
safeguard precepts, you adopt and respect ethical discipline. You are
patient with the suffering that comes from living beings and inanimate
things and you are enthusiastic about whatever virtue you set out to
cultivate, so you do not get dispirited by either of these. You cultivate a
non-discursive yoga of meditative serenity and a non-discursive yoga of
insight. These six comprise all the Mahayana practices through which you
advance by the six perfections, for you accomplish these practices in
stages by means of the six perfections and you do not need any more than
these six perfections. The Ornament for the Mahayana Sutras states:181
The entire Mahayana is summed up in Not delighting in resources.
108      The Great Treatise on the Stages of the Path
Reverence, not being dispirited in two ways, And the yogas free of
discursiveness. [361]
Given this, it is a contradiction to want to enter the Mahayana and yet to
reject the practice of the six perfections.
(e) The fixed number of perfections in terms of the completeness of paths
or method
The path—i.e., method—for not being attached to the resources that are your
possessions is generosity, because you become free from attachment to your
things by becoming habituated to giving them away. The method for
restraining yourself from the distraction of trying to possess what you do
not possess is ethical discipline, for when you maintain a monk's vows, you
do not have all the distractions of making a living. The method for not
abandoning living beings is patience, because you do not despair at the
suffering caused by the harm others inflict. The method to increase virtues
is joyous perseverance, because you increase them when you joyously
persevere at what you undertake. The methods for clearing away obscurations
are the final two perfections, because meditative stabilization clears away
the afflictions and wisdom clears away the cognitive obscurations. Thus the
perfections are fixed as six in number. The Ornament for the Mahayana
Sutras states:182
Non-attachment to objects is a path;
Another is restraint from the distraction of obtaining them;
Not abandoning beings, increasing virtues,
And clearing away the obscurations are others.
The following explanation produces strong conviction about the six
perfections. In order to avoid being dominated by the distraction of
sensual objects, you need generosity that is free from attachment. To
prevent sensory experiences that have not occurred, you need ethical
discipline that restrains distraction by things that are pointless [deeds
that are wrong by prohibition] or counterproductive [deeds that are wrong
by nature]. Given that there are a great number of living beings whose
behavior is bad and who you are constantly in danger of meeting, you need a
powerful conditioning to patience as a remedy for giving up on their
welfare. In order to increase virtue in terms of the great number of
actions and its practice over long periods of time, you need joyous
perseverance that has the intense and long-term enthusiasm that comes from
reflecting on the benefits of virtuous actions, etc. In order to sup-
Training in the Mahayana: Precepts and Perfections      109
press afflictions you need meditative stabilization, and to destroy their
seeds and the cognitive obscurations you need wisdom. [362]
(f) The fixed number of perfections based on the three trainings
The nature of the training in ethical discipline [the first of the three
trainings] is the practice of ethical discipline. The precondition of the
training in ethical discipline is generosity, because once you have
generosity that is indifferent to resources, you can properly adopt an
ethical discipline. The aid to the training in ethical discipline is
patience, because the patience of not retaliating when scolded, etc.
safeguards your properly adopted ethical discipline. Meditative
stabilization is the training of mind [the second training, the training of
meditative concentration], and wisdom is the training in wisdom [the third
training]. As for joyous perseverance, it is included in all three
trainings, so the perfections are fixed at six in number. The Ornament for
the Mahayana Sutras states:183
The Conqueror rightly presented six perfections
In terms of the three trainings: three are the first,
Two of the six are connected with the final two,
One is included in all three.
By a certain kind of excellent life you bring to completion either others'
or your own aims; you practice certain kinds of trainings by possessing a
diversity of methods, depending on which vehicle you are in. Understand in
this way that the six perfections comprise and bring to completion the
above perspectives on their fixed number—life, aims, the Mahayana, the
methods, and the trainings. Reflect until you get a deep conviction about
how the six perfections are the summation of all the key points of
bodhisattva practice.
Furthermore, there are two causes of not initially transcending or rising
above cyclic existence—attachment to resources and attachment to a home.
The remedies for these are generosity and ethical discipline, respectively.
You may rise above these attachments once, but still rum back without
reaching the end. There are two causes of this—suffering from the
wrongdoing of living beings and becoming dispirited at the length of time
you have pursued virtue. The remedies for these are patience and joyous
perseverance, respectively. Once you understand how to sustain a disregard
for all suffering and harm, as well as an enthusiasm which views even an
eternity as though it were one day, you must practice them in various ways.
[363] If you
110     The Great Treatise on the Stages of the Path
do this, you will produce the patience and joyous perseverance that are
capable of functioning as remedies to what causes you to turn back. Thus,
they are extremely crucial. Never mind the matter of the bodhisattva deeds,
even with regard to present-day cultivation of virtue, there are many who
start out but few who do not turn back after a while because (1) their
forbearance for the slightest hardship is tiny, and (2) their enthusiasm
for the path they cultivate is tepid. This is the result of their not
putting into practice the personal instructions associated with patience
and joyous perseverance.
There are two causes for letting your virtue go to waste even if you do not
turn back after a while—distraction, wherein your attention does not
stabilize on a virtuous object of meditation, and faulty wisdom. The
remedies for these are meditative stabilization and wisdom, respectively.
Meditative stabilization is a remedy because it is said that even virtuous
practices such as repetition of mantra and daily recitations are senseless
if your attention wanders elsewhere. Wisdom is a remedy because if you fail
to develop the wisdom that fully delineates the topics in the collections
of Buddhist knowledge, you will be mistaken about what to adopt and what to
cast aside, even the obvious, and will then conduct yourself wrongly. This
fixes the number of perfections at six in terms of their being remedies
that eliminate the class of phenomena that are incompatible with virtue.
The number of perfections is fixed at six based on the fact that they are
the foundation for achieving every quality of a buddha. This is because the
first four perfections are preconditions for meditative stabilization, so
through these four you accomplish meditative stabilization—the perfection
of non-distraction. Furthermore, when you cultivate insight based on this,
you will know reality.
Fixing the number of perfections at six in terms of their being concordant
with helping living beings to mature is similar in meaning to the third one
[perfecting the complete fulfillment of others' aims] mentioned earlier.
I have explained here the noble Asanga's assertions as presented by the
master Haribhadra [in his Long Explanation of the Perfection of Wisdom
Sutra in Eight Thousand Lines (Abhisamayalamkaraloka)]. It is extremely
crucial to gain conviction about the six perfections.
Training in the Maliayana: Precepts and Perfections     111
2" An ancillary discussion of the fixed order of the perfections
This discussion has three parts:
1. The order of arising
2. The order in terms of inferior and superior
3. The order in terms of coarse and subtle
(a) The order of arising
When you have a generosity that is disinterested in and unattached to
resources, you take up ethical discipline. [364] When you have an ethical
discipline which restrains you from wrongdoing, you become patient with
those who harm you. When you have the patience wherein you do not become
dispirited with hardships, the conditions for rejecting virtue are few, so
you are able to persevere joyously. Once you joyously persevere day and
night, you will produce the meditative concentration that facilitates the
application of your attention to virtuous objects of meditation. When your
mind is in meditative equipoise, you will know reality exactly.
(bj The order in terms of inferior and superior
Each preceding perfection is inferior to the superior one that follows it.
(c) The order in terms of coarse and subtle
Each preceding perfection is easier than the subsequent one to engage in
and perform, so it is coarser than the subsequent one. Each subsequent
perfection is more difficult than the preceding one to engage in and
perform, so it is more subtle than the preceding one. The Ornament for the
bAahayana Sutras says:'*4
Because the subsequent perfections arise contingent on the preceding ones,
Because they are ranked as inferior and superior,
And because of their coarseness and subtlety,
The perfections are taught in order.

9 The Perfection of Generosity
c" The process of learning the perfections
1" How to train in the bodhisattva deeds in general
(a) Training in the perfections that mature the qualities you will have
when yoi become a buddha
(i) How to train in the perfection of generosity (a') What generosity is
(b') How lo begin the development of generosity (c') The divisions of
generosity
(1') How everyone should practice it (2') Divisions of generosity relative
to particular persons (3') Divisions of actual generosity (a") The gift of
the teachings (b") The gift of fearlessness (c") Material gifts
(1") The generosity of actually giving material things (a)) How to give
away material things (1)) Recipients of giving (2)) The motivation for
giving
{a')) What kind of motivation is required
(b'l) Whaf kind of motivation must be eliminated
c" The process of learning the perfections
The process of learning the perfections has two parts:
1. How to train in the bodhisattva deeds in general (Chapters 9-15)
2. In particular, how to train in the last two perfections (Volume 3)
114      The Great Treatise on the Stages of the Path
1" How to train in the bodhisattva deeds in general
How to train in the bodhisattva deeds in general has two parts:
1. Training in the perfections that mature the qualities you will have when
you become a buddha (Chapters 9-14)
2. Training in the four ways to gather disciples that help others to mature
(Chapter 15)
(a) Training in the perfections that mature the qualities you will have
when you become a buddha
Training in the perfections that mature the qualities you will have when
you become a buddha has six parts:
1. How to train in the perfection of generosity (Chapters 9-10)
2. How to train in the perfection of ethical discipline (Chapter 11)
3. How to train in the perfection of patience (Chapter 12)
4. How to train in the perfection of joyous perseverance (Chapter 13)
5. How to train in the perfection of meditative stabilization (Chapter 14)
6. How to train in the perfection of wisdom (Chapter 14)
(i) How to train in the perfection of generosity
How to train in the perfection of generosity has four sections:
1. What generosity is
2. How to begin the development of generosity
3. The divisions of generosity (Chapters 9-10)
4. A summary (Chapter 10)
(a) What generosity is
The Bodhisattva Levels says:ias
What is the nature of generosity? It is the intention accompanying
bodhisattvas' disinterested non-attachment to all their possessions and
their body, and, motivated by this, the physical and verbal actions of
giving the things to be given.
Hence it is the virtue of a generous attitude, and the physical and verbal
actions which are motivated by this. [365]
Bringing the perfection of generosity to completion is not contingent on
removing beings' poverty by giving gifts to others.
The Perfection ofCenerosity      115
Otherwise, since there sti] 1 rema in many destitute living beings, all the
earlier conquerors would not have attained perfect generosity. Therefore,
the physical and verbal aspects of generosity are not the main thing; the
main thing is the mental aspect. This is because you perfect generosity
after you destroy your stingy clinging to all that you own—your body,
resources, and roots of virtue—and you completely condition your mind to
giving them away to living beings from the depths of your heart and, not
only that, but also to giving to others the effects of this giving as well.
Thus Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds says:1*6
If generosity were perfected
By removing beings' poverty,
Since beings are still destitute
How could past saviors have perfected it?
Generosity is perfected, it is said.
Through the attitude of giving away to all beings
All your possessions, along with the effects of this.
Therefore, generosity is a state of mind.
Thus the practice of the perfection of generosity entails generating in
various ways the intention to give and steadily increasing this generosity,
even though you may not be actually giving away something to others.
(b') How to begin the development of generosity
Simply destroying all stinginess in regard to your body and resources is
not the perfection of generosity, for stinginess is included within
attachment and so even the two kinds of Hinayana arhats have totally
eliminated it along with its seeds. What is required, then, is that you not
only clear away stinginess's tightfistedness, which prevents giving things
away, but also that you develop from the depths of your heart the intention
to give away to others all your possessions. For this you have to meditate
on the faults of holding on to things and the benefits of giving them away.
I shall, therefore, discuss these.
The Moon Lamp Sutra {Candra-pradlpa-sutra) says:187
These childish people are attached
To this rotting body and to this
Rushing life-force, both of which lack independence
And are like a dream or a magician's illusion. [366]
116      The Great Treatise on the Stages of the Path
So these unintelligent beings do terrible things, Fali under the control of
sin, And, carried away by the chariot of Death's Lord, Proceed to
unbearable hells.
This says that you should stop attachment by viewing the body as unclean,
life as rushing like a mountain cascade, both body and life as devoid of an
independent self because they are under the control of karma, and both as
false like a dream or a magician's illusion. Furthermore, if you do not
stop attachment, you will become dominated by it, build up great
wrongdoing, and proceed to miserable realms.
Consider also the Formula That Accomplishes Limitless Methods (Ananta-mukha-
nirham-dharani)}™
As to living beings who dispute with others,
It is tightfistedness that is the root cause.
So renounce that which you crave.
After you give up craving, the formula will work.
The Compendium of Trainings says:185
My body and rnind
Move on moment by moment.
If with this impermanent body, dripping with filth,
I attain enlightenment,
Which is permanent and pure,
Will I not have attained what is priceless?
And the Garland of Birth Stories (Jataka-mala) states:190
This body devoid of self, perishing, without substance, Suffering,
ungrateful, and continually impure Is of benefit to others; not to delight
in this Is not to be intelligent.
Though you make much effort to care for your body, which has no substance,
you have to discard it. By sincerely giving it away to others you fulfill
many of your own and others' aims. After you think, "I would be a fool not
to train my mind to do this," do whatever you can to produce the thought of
giving away your body and the like to others. Engaging in the Bodhisattva
Deeds says:191
By giving everything away, I pass from sorrow, So my mind reaches nirvana.
As I have to give up everything [at death], It is best to give it to living
beings. [367]
The Perfection of Generosity      117
And the Compendium of the Perfections says:192
If you see the impermanence of resources
And naturally have great compassion
You will know with good reason that the gifts
You have kept in your house belong to others.
There is never fear from what has been given away;
What is kept at home gives rise to fears
That it is insufficient, ordinary, or needing constant protection.
If you give it away, these faults never harm you.
By giving you achieve happiness in future lives; Not giving brings
suffering even in this life. Human wealth is like a shooting star— What is
not given away will cease to exist. Wealth not given is transitory and will
be gone;
Wealth of no value comes to have value When you strive to help living
beings.
The wise praise giving wealth away, Childish persons like to hoard it; No
wealth is kept by holding on to it; From giving it away excellence always
arises.
By giving things away, you no longer grasp the afflictions; Being miserly
breeds afflictions on an ignoble path. Noble beings say generosity is the
best path, While its opposite is a bad path.
If you dedicate from the depths of your heart all roots of virtue, however
great or small they may be, for the sake of accomplishing both temporarily
and ultimately extensive benefit and happiness for all living beings, and
then give something, you obtain merit related to each living being. Hence
you easily complete the collection of merit. The Precious Garland
states:193
Were the merit of saying this
To have physical form
It would not fit into universes as numerous
As the grains of the Ganges' sand.
The Bhagavan said this
And there is a logic to it—
The expanse of living beings is immeasurable;
The merit of the wish to help them is the same. [368]
118      The Great Treatise on the Stages of the Path
Furthermore, do not hold on to companions and belongings that have
prevented you from increasing your ability to give things away, that have
intensified your stinginess, that have stopped the development of
previously absent inclinations to give, or that have weakened your
inclinations to give. Do not take on these kinds of companions or accept
these kinds of material gifts even if others offer them. The Compendium of
the Perfections states:194
Bodhisattvas give up all possessions
That intensify the fault of stinginess
Or that do not expand generosity,
The deceivers that become an obstacle.
Bodhisattvas should not accept
Jewels, wealth, or even a kingdom
If it would harm their generous attitude and
Obscure the path to perfect enlightenment.
When you act in this way, stinginess may lead you to feel attached to your
goods. If so, become unattached by thinking, "The Sage reached
enlightenment after he gave away every possession. Previously, recalling my
commitment to emulate him, I gave away my body, every resource, and all my
virtue to all living beings. If I am still attached to resources, I am
behaving just like an elephant, oppressed by the sun, who goes into the
water and bathes and then, back on dry land, rolls in the dirt. Then again,
after it sees that it is covered in dirt, it goes back into the water and
does the same thing over again." The Compendium of the Perfections
says:1"15
Recalling the superior deeds of the sages, Strive at them and reflect on
your comm.itm.ent; Understand the following excellent thoughts In order to
clear away your attachment to things: "I gave away my body to all beings;
Then I relinquished the virtue of this gift. My being attached to external
objects Is senseless, like an elephant's bathing."
If you are able to generate intense delight as you contemplate the many
benefits of giving things away and great fear as you reflect on the faults
of tightfistedness, you will naturally produce a generous attitude. [369]
Accordingly, generate the thought of giving away everything to others at
the conclusion of cultivating love and compassion, or at the conclusion of
reflecting on the life sto-
The Perfection of Generosity     119
ries of the Conqueror, his children, and so forth- Engaging in the
Bodhisattva Deeds states how this is done:1"6
I will give away without a sense of loss
My body and my resources
As well as all my virtue from the past, present, and future
For the welfare of all living beings.
You focus on three things—your body, your resources, and your roots of
virtue—and mentally give them away to all living beings. If you stop the
craving that conceives everything to be your personal property and then
repeatedly condition yourself to the attitude of giving it all away to
others, you will be called a bodhisattva. The Compendium of the Perfections
says:197
"All these things are yours;
1 have no pride that they are mine/'
Someone who has this amazing thought repeatedly
And emulates the qualities of the perfect Buddha
Is called a bodhisattva—so said
The inconceivable Buddha, the supreme being.
At present, as your determination has not matured and is weak, you do not
actually give away flesh, etc., though you have already mentally given your
body to all beings. According to the Compendium of Trainings, however, if
you do not train in the thought of giving away your body and life, you will
not become accustomed to it and so will remain incapable of giving away
your body and life. Therefore, from now on cultivate this thought-
If you use food, clothes, shelter and so on that you have sincerely given
away to all beings, and you do so with craving for your personal welfare,
forgetting the thought, "I will use them for others' welfare," then you
commit a major infraction. When you have no craving but forget to apply the
idea of focusing on all living beings, or if you use those resources for a
particular living being out of attachment, you commit a minor infraction.
[370]
With regard to the material goods that you have turned over to others, the
Compendium of Trainings states™ that when you use them for your own welfare
fully cognizant of their being the property of others, you are stealing,
and if the total value is enough, you commit a cardinal transgression of
the vows of individual liberation. In response to this, some say that since
you have turned over your food, etc., to all living beings, it is
impossible for the total value of any one being's portion to be enough, so
you cannot commit a
120      The Great Treatise on the Stages of the Path
cardinal transgression. Others say this is not correct because you have
turned over your belongings as a whole to each being individually. Others
argue that even though you have mentally surrendered them to others, they
do not take personal possession of them, so there is no cardinal
transgression.
The intended meaning behind the Compendium of Trainings statement is that
you incur a cardinal transgression (given that the total value requirement
has been met) when you sincerely turn your food, etc., over to a human
being, and this person knows it and takes possession, whereupon you, fully
cognizant of their being another's property, appropriate them for your own
use. Therefore, the positions stated by the others are wrong.
There is no fault in using some living beings' resources if you think,
while using them, "I do this for their welfare." The Compendium of
Trainings states:"9
There is no fault in using things if you think, "I am taking care of my
body which is owned by others with these resources that are owned by
others." Slaves have no material goods of their own with which to survive.
You may think, "I incur a fault because, after I have turned over these
belongings to living beings, I use them without their permission," but
there is no fault. The Compendium of Trainings says:200
A servant who labors hard on a master's behalf might use the master's
belongings without permission when the master's mind is unclear due to
illness and so forth, but incurs no fault.
Do not lack faith and think, "Mentally giving everything away to living
beings while not actually giving it is tantamount to a lie and, therefore,
is without real substance." The Compendium of Trainings says:201
Some people who are close to a bodhisattva who practices in this way fail
to understand the bodhisattva's practice accurately and lack faith. This is
unwarranted because they are well acquainted with someone who has a great
and wonderful spirit of generosity. [371] It is wrong for them to doubt
this method.
(c') The divisions of generosity
The section on the divisions of generosity has three parts:
1. How everyone should practice it
2. Divisions of generosity relative to particular persons
3. Divisions of actual generosity (Chapters 9-10)
The Perfection of Generosity      111
(1') How everyone should practice it
Asariga's Mahayana Compendium says that you practice generosity in
association with six supremacies. Supreme basis means that you practice
generosity based on the spirit of enlightenment; i.e., you act after you
have been motivated by it. Supreme things means that in general you give
all objects that can be given, and, even when you are engaged in specific
acts of generosity, you do not give up this thought of giving away
everything. Supreme aim is when you give things away to all living beings
for the sake of their immediate happiness and ultimate benefit. Supreme
skill-in-means is said to be when generosity is imbued with nonconceptual
sublime wisdom; beginning bodhisattvas should take this to be the wisdom
that knows the lack of intrinsic nature in objects. Supreme dedication
means that you dedicate the virtue from generosity to complete
enlightenment. Supreme purity is when you stop both the afflictive and
cognitive obscurations.
Haribhadra's Long Explanation of the Perfection of Wisdom Sutra in Eight
Thousand Lines says that you practice generosity with the six perfections
present. When you are giving the teachings, for instance, it is extremely
powerful if you practice all six perfections. You have ethical discipline
when you restrain yourself from the considerations of s'ravakas and
pratyekabuddhas; patience when you bear any hardship while you aspire to
the qualities of omniscience and when you are patient with abuse from
others; joyous perseverance when you yearn for the ever-greater increase of
your generosity; meditative stabilization when you dedicate to complete
enlightenment the virtue that you cultivate with one-pointed attention
unmixed with Hinayana considerations; and wisdom when you know that the
giver, gift, and recipient are like a magician's illusion.
{2') Divisions of generosity relative to particular persons
In general it is said that lay bodhisattvas make gifts of material
things and renunciate bodhisattvas make gifts of the teachings. [372]
The Bodhisattva Vows of Liberation {Bodhisattva-pratimoksa) says:202
Sariputra, the renunciate bodhisattva who teaches just a single
four-line stanza produces much more merit than the lay
bodhisattva who makes offerings of buddha-realms filled with
jewels, as many in number as the sand grains of the River Ganges,
to the tathagatas, the arhats, the perfectly enlightened buddhas.
Sariputra, the Tathagata does nol permit renunciates to make
material gifts.
122      The Great Treatise on the Stages of the Path
The Compendium of Trainings says the Buddha intended here material gifts
that would become a hindrance to study and the like. It is said that
renunciates are prohibited from making offerings of material goods that
they have worked to obtain, but they must give them away if they obtain
many things through the force of their previous merit and without hindering
their virtuous activities. Also, Sha-ra-wa (Sha-ra-ba) said:
I am not talking to you about the benefits of giving; I am talking
to you about the faults of tightfistedness.
It is displeasing news when renunciates harm their ethical discipline as
they strain to the utmost in their search for wealth to give away.
(3') Divisions of actual generosity
The presentation of the divisions of actual generosity has three parts:
1. The gift of the teachings
2. The gift of fearlessness
3. Material gifts (Chapters 9-10)
(a") The gift of the teachings
The gift of the teachings is teaching the sublime teaching without making
mistakes, teaching the arts and the like (worldly occupations which are
blameless and proper to learn), and involving others in upholding the
fundamental precepts.
(b") The gift of fearlessness
The gift of fearlessness is protecting living beings from fear of humans
such as kings and robbers, from fear of non-human beings such as lions,
tigers, and crocodiles, and from fear of the elements such as water and
fire.
(c") Material gifts
Material gifts are explained in two parts:
1. The generosity of actually giving material things (Chapters 9-10) [3731
2. The generosity which is just mental (Chapter 10)
(1") The generosity of actually giving material things
The generosity of actually giving material things has three parts: 1. How
to give away material things (Chapters 9-10)
The Perfection of Generosity     123
2. What to do if you are unable to give (Chapter 10)
3. Relying on the remedies for the hindrances to generosity (Chapter 10)
(a)) How to give away material things
This section has four parts:
1. Recipients of giving
2. The motivation for giving
3. How to give (Chapter 10)
4. Things to give (Chapter 10)
(1)) Recipients of giving
There are ten of these: (1) friends and relatives who help you, (2) enemies
who harm you, (3) ordinary people who neither harm nor help you, (4) those
with good qualities such as ethical discipline, (5) those with flaws such
as faulty ethical discipline, (6) those inferior to you, (7) those equal to
you, (8) those superior to you, (9) the rich and happy, and (10) the
miserable and destitute.
(2)) The motivation for giving
The motivation for giving has two sections:
1. What kind of motivation is required
2. What kind of motivation must be eliminated
(a')) What kind of motivation is required
Your motivation should have three attributes: (1) a focus on purpose, which
thinks, "Based on this I will complete the perfection of generosity, a
precondition for unexcelled enlightenment"; (2) a focus on the thing to be
given, which thinks, "From the outset a bodhisattva gives away all
possessions to living beings, so the material goods that I am giving belong
to others, and it is as if they are receiving things kept in trust"; and
(3) a focus on the recipient, which thinks, "Since these recipients,
whether asking for the gift or not, bring to completion my perfection of
generosity, they are my teachers." The Compendium of the Perfections
states:2^
When someone comes to ask for something,
Bodhisattva s, so as to build up the preconditions for complete
enlightenment, Consider what they have as belonging to others, give it as
from
a trust, And consider the person their teacher.
124     The Great Treatise on the Stages of the Path
With respect to giving away individual things, understand in detail from
the Questions ofSubahu Sutra {Subahu-pariprccha) and the Compendium of the
Perfections your motivation's focus on purpose, which is the thought, "I
will give this away for this or for that purpose." As to your motivation's
focus on the recipient explained above, you should apply it to all
situations of generosity, so it is the general motivation- [374] Specific
motivations would be when you make a gift to those who harm you, once you
have established a loving attitude; to those who suffer, once you have
established a compassionate attitude; to those who have good qualities,
once you have established an attitude of delight; and to those who help
you, once you have established an impartial attitude.
Moreover, you must be even-minded toward all recipients, give away to
living beings—such as those who ask and so forth—all the virtuous results
of giving, and, in particular, be compassionate to those recipients who are
suffering. Candrakirti says:
Once the giving is free from stinginess,
The giver must compassionately make gifts
Which are given equally with an even-mindedness
To those who are superior or inferior recipients.
The results of such giving Go to both self and other at the same time. Holy
beings praise this giving without stinginess To those who seek gifts.
And the Praise of Infinite Qualities says:204
Even when some see a hopeful person who is destitute and of
low birth They do not care and, out of desire for results, seek other
recipients who have good qualities. They have a base motive; though givers,
they are the same as
those asking for gifts, you [Buddha] said. Hence, you remain committed out
of compassion to giving to
those who ask.
(b') What kind of motivation must be eliminated
1. A motivation that believes in the supremacy of bad views. Lacking this
means that you do not give while thinking, "There is no result from
generosity," "Harmful blood offerings are religious," "I am giving as I
apply myself to what is good and beneficial," or "Through just the
completion of generosity alone I will be free of mundane and supramundane
attachments."
The Perfection of Generosity     125
2. A motivation that is arrogant. Lacking this means that you do not
despise the person who asks for something, you do not compete with others,
and, after you give something, you do not conceitedly think, "I am so
generous; no one else can do like this." [375]
The Purification of the Obscurations of Karma Sutra {Karmavarana-visuddhi-
sutra) explains that when ordinary beings make gifts, they lose faith in
those who are stingy, on account of which they get angry and are reborn in
a hell, so it is said that this obstructs generosity. When these ordinary
persons observe ethical discipline, they speak unflatteringly of those
whose ethical discipline is faulty, so they lose faith in many living
beings and fall into miserable realms on account of their loss of faith;
and when these ordinary people maintain patience and the like, they speak
disparagingly of those who do the opposite of these, and so obstruct their
own ethical discipline and so forth.
Hence you should do as the Praise of Infinite Qualities says:205 At the
times when you were learned and very intelligent you
did not praise yourself; You extolled and revered other persons who had few
good
qualities.
When you maintained a mass of good qualities, you seized on even a small
fault in your own behavior.
3. A motivation for support. Lacking this means that you do not give with
the hope of getting praise or fame.
4. A motivation of discouragement. Lacking this means that when you give
after becoming joyful even before the act of giving, you are filled with
faith and then have no regret after giving; and even when you hear about a
bodhisattva's vast acts of generosity, you are not discouraged but
intensify your enthusiasm without belittling yourself.
5.  A motivation in which you turn your back on someone. Lacking this means
that you give out of an even-minded compassion that is impartial toward
enemy, friend, and ordinary persons.
6. A motivation of expecting something in return. Lacking this means that
you do not give to others out of the hope that they will help you, but
because you see that these beings are bereft of happiness, burned by the
flames of craving, without the power to relieve their sufferings, and
naturally miserable.
7. A motivation of expecting fruition. Lacking this means that you do not
hope for the fruition of an excellent body and resources in future lives,
but give because you see that all composite things are
126     The Great Treatise on the Stages of the Path
without substance but can contribute to unexcelled enlightenment. This does
not stop you from expecting these results in the short term, but stops you
from taking the mere body and resources of cyclic existence to be your
goal. [376]
Besides these, you should give without the motivation of wrong livelihood
in which you think, "If I make this gift, the ruler, etc., will recognize
me as a generous person, and I will get some respect." Do not give from
fear of becoming poor, or with the motivation to deceive someone who asks
for something. Give something when you are free from distraction and
feelings of dislike or anger. Make gifts when you are not dispirited due
the various wrong actions of the one who asks for something. Even when you
see the faults of someone who has deceived you, etc., do not give with the
motivation to proclaim these faults to others. Finally, give in the belief,
from which others cannot dissuade you, that each individual act of giving
will give rise to an individual result.
10 How to Give
(3)) How to give
(a')) How not to give (b')) How to give (4)} Things to give
(a')) Brief presentation of the things which are and are not to be given
(b')) Detailed explanation of the things which are and are not to be given
(1')) Detailed explanation about inner things which are and are not to be
given
(a")) Inappropriate giving from the viewpoint of time (b")) Inappropriate
giving from the viewpoint of purpose (c")) Inappropriate giving from the
viewpoint of the one who asks
for something
(2')) Detailed explanation about outer things which are and are not to be
given (a")) How not to give outer things
(1")) Inappropriate giving from the viewpoint of time (2")) Inappropriate
giving from the viewpoint of the gift (3")) Inappropriate giving from the
viewpoint of the person (4")) Inappropriate giving from the viewpoint of
material things (5")) Inappropriate giving from the viewpoint of purpose
(b")) How to give outer things (b)) What to do if you are unable to give
(c)) Relying on the remedies for the hindrances to generosity (1)) The
hindrance of not being used to generosity (2)) The hindrance of declining
fortune (3)) The hindrance of attachment (4)) The hindrance of not seeing
the goal (2") The generosity which is just mental (d') A summary
128      The Great Treatise on the Stages of the Path
(3)) How to give
This section has two parts:
1. How not to give
2. How to give
(a')) How not to give
Cast aside these thirteen ways of giving because they are to be eliminated:
(1) not giving right away but only after you have delayed; (2) giving under
stress; (3) giving after you have involved yourself in affairs that accord
neither with the teachings nor with the ways of the world; (4) making a
commitment beforehand that "I will give this much" and later making a gift
of reduced quality or amount; (5) giving in return for favors; (6) giving
in installments when you could give all at one time; (7) as a ruler, giving
away someone else's child or spouse that you have kidnapped; (8) taking
through pressure the belongings of your parents, servants, etc. and then
giving them to others; (9) making a gift by a method that will hurt someone
else; (10) while you remain idle, employing someone else to do the giving;
(11) giving while you criticize and have contempt for the one who asks for
something, while you are indirectly critical in a way that implies
contempt, or while you intimidate the recipient with harsh words; (12)
giving while you violate the Buddha's prohibitive precepts; and, (13) not
giving resources as you acquire them but giving them after you accumulate
them for a long time. [377]
Indeed, bodhisattvas see that it is wrong to give resources that you have
stored up, whereas it is not wrong to give them away as you acquire them.
This is because there is no additional merit in storing them up and then
giving them at one time, and because you turn away many requests for your
goods while you are storing them up; you come to feel tormented and may
give them to someone who has not asked for them. These points stated in the
Bodhisattva Levels are very important, for you can see that during the
period of storing up the goods you produce many afflictions such as
stinginess and the like, that the trouble of safeguarding them and so forth
becomes a hindrance to many virtuous actions, and that more often than not
you lose them at some point and are not able to give them away in the end
anyway.
(b'» How to give
First of all, smile with a beaming countenance and then give to any
recipient, showing respect by speaking honestly. Give with your
own hands, at the appropriate time, without hurting anyone else, and
bearing the suffering of any hardship. The result of these actions is
described in the Chapter of the Truth Speaker (Satyaka-parivarta):Wh
By charity out of a sense of service, you will receive service from others
such as your relatives; by using your own hands when giving you will obtain
people who serve you; by giving when appropriate you will accomplish your
aims on time.
And also:
By charity without hurting anyone else you will obtain stable resources; by
giving while bearing unpleasantness you will have
Vasubandhu's Treasury of Knowledge (Abhidharma-kosa) states that from
giving charity with your own hands you get a vast amount of resources. The
Treasury of Knowledge Auto-commentary (Abhidharma-kosa-bhasya) explains
that "stable resources" means that others do not interfere with them and
that fire, etc. does not destroy them. [378]
Furthermore, there is a way to help others to be generous. If you have some
belongings, go to the homes of stingy people who have no experience of
giving gifts even a few times. Joyfully and in a relaxed manner direct them
as follows: "I really do own a vast amount of things. I want some people to
ask me for things so that I can complete the perfection of generosity, so
if you meet some people who ask you for something, rather than turning them
away without giving them anything, take from my wealth and give it to them.
Or else lead them to me, and then rejoice in my generosity." This does not
destroy their wealth, and they do this with pleasure. In this way they
plant the seed for the removal of their stinginess. By gradually getting
used to doing this they will give away a little of their own wealth and
they will reduce their attachment a little. Contingent upon this, they will
reach a moderate absence of attachment, and contingent upon that, a great
absence of attachment. In like fashion, give belongings to your abbot,
master, students, and friends who have a lot of attachment and are
incapable of giving, and to those who are not like that but have no
belongings, and then cause them to make offerings to the three jewels,
rather than doing it yourself. By doing this you produce a great deal of
personal merit. It pacifies the afflictions of some, fulfills the desire to
practice the teachings in others, gathers beings around you, and causes
them to mature.
130     The Great Treatise on the Stages of the Path
Similarly, if you have no belongings, you may build up wealth through a
craft or a job, and then give it away. Or else you may tell others a
religious story in which even the poor or miserly wish to give.
Alternatively, send those reduced to begging to the houses of rich persons
who have faith, and go there yourself to assist in the giving of gifts to
the extent that you are able. Also, as you sort through the material goods
for charity, give the better first and give away completely all the goods
presented for charity. [379]
(4)) Things to give
The explanation of the things to give has two parts:
1. Brief presentation of the things which are and are not to be given
2. Detailed explanation of the things which are and are not to be given
(a')) Brief presentation of the things which are and are not to be
In brief, bodhisattvas should give to others those things which immediately
produce in the recipients pleasurable feelings that are free from the
causes for a miserable rebirth and which ultimately will benefit them,
either eliminating their sin or setting them in virtue. Even if these
things do not immediately bring happiness, they should give them if they
are beneficial in the end. They should not give things which immediately
produce pain and ultimately cause harm, or which are immediately pleasant
but ultimately harmful.
(b)) Detailed explanation of the things which are and are not to be given
The detailed explanation of the things which are and are not to be given
has two sections:
1. Detailed explanation about inner things which are and are not to be
given
2. Detailed explanation about outer things which are and are not to be
given
(1')) Detailed explanation about inner things which are and are not to be
given
Once you understand how not to give inner things, you will know the
opposite of that, what you should give. Therefore, I will first explain how
not to give. This has three parts:
How to Give     131
1. Inappropriate giving from the viewpoint of time
2. Inappropriate giving from the viewpoint of purpose
3. Inappropriate giving from the viewpoint of the one who asks for
something
(a")) Inappropriate giving from the viewpoint of time
Right from the start, bodhisattvas give away to all living beings their
bodies, etc. with complete sincerity. Nevertheless, though you may be
asked, do not give away the flesh of your body and so forth until you have
developed an attitude of great compassion. Then you will not despair at the
hardship of being asked for such things. The Compendium of Trainings
says:207
What is the joyous perseverance on account of which you become dispirited?
It is when one who has little strength undertakes activity that is weighty
or that extends over a long period of time; or when those lacking fully
mature belief undertake difficult tasks like, for example, giving away
their own flesh and so forth. Though these beginning bodhisattvas have
given away their own body to all beings, still they turn away from untimely
uses of it. Otherwise they would despair about these beings who ask for
flesh, and thereby squander huge masses of good results due to wasting the
seed of their spirit of enlightenment. [380] Therefore, the Questions of
Sky Treasure Sutra says: "Untimely wishes are demonic activity."
Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds also says:2US Do not give away your body
While your compassionate attitude is impure. In any case, give it away to
achieve a great purpose In this and future lives.
(b")} Inappropriate giving from the viewpoint of purpose
Do not give away your body for some trifling purpose. Engaging in the
Bodhisattva Deeds states:209
For something trifling do not harm your body, Which is for practicing the
sublime teachings; In this way you will quickly Fulfill the aims of living
beings.
When from your perspective you are free of the hindrances to
generosity—stinginess, etc.—and from others' perspective there is the
greater purpose of accomplishing the aims of many living beings if you do
not give away your body, then you do not give away your
132     The Great Treatise on the Stages of the Path
limbs, etc. even if asked. If you are asked for your body, etc. for the
purpose of engaging in wrongdoing such as killing and so forth that will
harm yourself and others, do not give yourself away to another even
temporarily.
(c"» Inappropriate giving from the viewpoint of the one who asks
Do not give your limbs, etc. when demonic deities or beings possessed by
them ask for them with an intention of inflicting harm, because it will
hurt them. Do not give when asked by a mad person or by those whose minds
are disturbed because they are not sincerely asking, and their request is
not well-considered. Not only is there no transgression in not giving to
these beings, if you do give there is a transgression.
On occasions other than these you should give away your body when it is
asked for. Furthermore, there are two ways to give away your body: (1)
sectioning out your limbs and so forth and then making a permanent gift,
and (2) giving yourself over temporarily into someone else's power as a
servant, etc. in order to bring about their religious aims.
(2')) Detailed explanation about outer things which are and are not to be
given
This section has two parts:
1. How not to give outer things
2. How to give outer things
(a")) How not to give outer things
How not to give outer things has five parts: [381]
1. Inappropriate giving from the viewpoint of time
2. Inappropriate giving from the viewpoint of the gift
3. Inappropriate giving from the viewpoint of the person
4. Inappropriate giving from the viewpoint of material things
5. Inappropriate giving from the viewpoint of purpose
(1")) Inappropriate giving from the viewpoint of time
Inappropriate giving from the viewpoint of time is, for instance, giving an
afternoon meal to renunciates or those who have taken a one-day vow.
How to Give      133
{2")) Inappropriate giving from the viewpoint of the gift
Inappropriate giving from the viewpoint of the gift is, for instance,
giving left-over food and drink to one observing vows; giving food and
drink contaminated and polluted by feces and urine, spittle and mucus, or
vomit and pus; giving garlic, onion, meat, alcohol, or something tainted by
these to those who do not eat or drink these things or who have vows for
which it is inappropriate to use these things, even though they might want
to eat or drink them; giving away a child, servant, and the like—even if
you clearly convey the significance of the giving and they are pleased with
it—when requested by someone you dislike, a yaksa, a raksasa, someone
overcome by belligerence, someone who is ungrateful, or someone forgetful;
when approached by a sick person who asks for food and drink, giving
unwholesome food and drink, and even giving wholesome food without
moderation; giving tasty food when asked for it by extremely greedy people
who are already satiated; and giving scriptures to non-Buddhist
philosophers who have commercial interests, are seeking points of
criticism, or do not want to learn the meaning of scripture. This is how
the Bodhisattva Levels presents it.210 Understand it in more detail from
the Bodhisattva Levels' Compendium of Determinations (Viniscaya-
samgrahani), where it says:211 If you give a fully written Buddhist text to
persons of childish intelligence who ask for it, you incur a misdeed. If
you ask others for it to give to them, you also incur a misdeed. If you
give it totally within thinking that you can cause them to become
interested in or to embrace the profound teachings, you do not incur a
misdeed. [382] If you give a text of spurious teachings or a treatise by
non-Buddhist philosophers to beings who have faith in it after you have it
set to writing, or you have an already written text in your possession, or
you ask for a text from others, you incur a misdeed.
Bodhisattvas erase the written texts of non-Buddhist philosophers that they
have in their possession and have the scriptures of the Buddha written
down, or they recognize that the texts are without any substance at all and
make it known to others as well that it is better to erase them and to have
the Buddha's scriptures written down.
If someone asks you, a bodhisattva, for a stack of blank paper prepared for
a text, you should inquire, "What are you going to do with it?" If the
reply is, "I am going to use it for commercial
134     The Great Treatise on the Stages of the Path
purposes," and the stack of blank paper is one that you are preparing for
religious purposes, do not give it. If you have the monetary equivalent of
the stack of blank paper, give this to the person. If you do not have the
monetary equivalent of the paper and can give neither money nor paper, you
still do not incur a misdeed.
If you are not preparing the stack of blank paper for a religious purpose,
by all means give it away so that it will be joyfully put to use. Similarly
you do not incur a misdeed for not giving it when the request derives from
a desire to transcribe a really vile book. It is the same case for someone
who wants to transcribe a middling kind of book. But be aware that you do
incur a misdeed by not meeting a request made by one who wants to
transcribe an exalted text.
(3")) Inappropriate giving from the viewpoint of the person
Inappropriate giving from the viewpoint of the person is, for instance,
giving away a text to someone who asks for it while you have a desire to
understand it—you still have not achieved the purpose of the text but are
free from the defilement of stinginess about it.
Why this is inappropriate giving is as follows. Generosity such as this
giving of the teachings is for the sake of any of three purposes: (1J
removal of your stinginess, (2) completion of your vast collection of
sublime wisdom, and (3) fulfilling the vast aims of others. Given this, if
you do not give the text, the latter two purposes remain available to you,
whereas if you do give it, they are not available to you. [383] You do not
need to accomplish the first purpose, for in this case you do not have the
defilement of stinginess, so it is not necessary to remove this affliction.
If you do not give it, you will see an increase in your collection of
sublime wisdom, whereas if you do give it, you will not have such a large
increase. Furthermore, if you do not give the text, you will accomplish the
collection of sublime wisdom for the benefit and happiness of all living
beings, so you will be able to bring about happiness for this being who
asks for the text and for all other living beings as well. If you do give
it, however, just the one living being will be happy.
These greater or lesser purposes are spoken of in this manner in the
Bodhisattva Levels.2U Also, Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds says,113 "Do
not give up something exalted for something lesser," so it is not that
there is merely no fault in not giving it away.
How to Give      135
The way to refuse to give is to avoid using harsh language, such as saying,
"I am not giving it to you." Rather, communicate with skill-in-means and
then send the person off.
Skill-in-means is as follows. From the first, bodhisattvas turn over with
pure intention all their belongings to all the buddhas and bodhisattvas of
the ten directions. This is like, for example, the way that fully ordained
monks keep religious robes and the like which they have mentally earmarked
for their abbot or master. Because the monks have transferred their robes
in this way, even though they accumulate belongings, they are called
"bodhisattvas living in the noble family"214 and infinitely increase merit.
The bodhisattvas, then, hold their belongings in trust, as it were, for the
buddhas and bodhisattvas. If someone asks for something, and if the
belonging is suitable to be given to this person, then bodhisattvas give
it, thinking, "I have no belonging that the buddhas and bodhisattvas have
not given away to all living beings." If the belonging is not suitable, the
bodhisattvas depend on having transferred their things to the buddhas and
bodhisattvas in a way similar to the monastic ritual of earmarking
belongings, and then let the person know the situation, saying with
soothing words, "My good person, this belongs to someone else. It is not
something that I can give to you." Or else, the bodhisattvas might give the
monetary equivalent of two or three times the price of the book to someone
to whom they have refused a text. [384] In any case, the person who asks
for it will think with regard to the bodhisattva, "It is not craving that
keeps this person from giving me the text; it is not in this person's power
to give it." This kind of activity is the generosity of the wise.
(4")) Inappropriate giving from the viewpoint of material things
Inappropriate giving from the viewpoint of material things is, for example,
such gifts as your parents; food and drink that have bugs; a child, wife,
servant, etc. whom you have not told or, even if told, does not want to be
given away; or a child or wife who are persons of the sort who have become
accustomed to comfort. Though it is said that you should not give your
child, wife, etc. into servitude, I have included them here among "material
things" because the gift of material things is the form of generosity that
is emphasized the
The Bodhisattva Levels' Compendium of Determinations says that even if you
do not satisfy a request for your three kinds of religious
136     The Great Treatise on the Stages of the Path
robes and any extra belongings [robes] other than those which the Buddha
has permitted renunciates to own, you incur no fault if you do not have a
stingy attitude toward them, and if they are requisite to your cultivation
of virtue. Thus it says:215
If renunciate bodhisattvas give away extra belongings—robes other than
their three kinds of religious robes—that are permitted by the Buddha, are
resources for their bodies, and are conducive to maintaining their comfort,
and do so after they have looked carefully at the persons who want them and
ask for them, they do not incur a misdeed. Even if they do not give them
away, they incur no misdeed at all as long as their not giving is for the
purpose of their cultivation of virtue and they do not have attachment to
them.
The Bodhisattva Vows of Liberation says:216
Sariputra, if bodhisattvas give away their three kinds of religious robes,
treating the one who asks for them as more important than themselves, they
are not relying on few desires.
Hence, if renunciate bodhisattvas give away their three kinds of religious
robes, they incur a transgression. [385]
(5"» Inappropriate giving from the viewpoint of purpose
Inappropriate giving from the viewpoint of purpose is, for instance, when
you fulfill a request for poison, weapons, fire, or alcohol which is for
harming either yourself or others; when you meet a request for things to
play with and enjoy but which are associated with a prohibitive risk of
accumulating the causes for taking a miserable rebirth; or when you satisfy
a request for, or a request to learn about, pits, traps, and so forth for
the sake of hurting living beings. This means that it is inappropriate even
to give instructions about these things for the sake of bringing harm to
the lives and resources of beings. Other examples are giving land or bodies
of water when they are requested for the sake of harming beings that
inhabit watery or dry areas; giving political authority over these or other
places for the sake of bringing harm to the human inhabitants; or, when
asked for such things by somebody whom you dislike, giving them instead to
an enemy of this person.
(b")) How to give outer things
You must give outer things if the timing is not prohibited by the Teacher
with respect to the recipient, and if giving the gift to this person is
appropriate and suitable. Moreover, if you as the giver
How to Give     137
are a person opposite to that explained above, and are stingy with regard
to a text, you must give it to a person who asks for it and who wishes to
understand it, even though you may not have finished using it. This is to
say, if you have a second copy, you give that, and if you do not, you
should give the cost of having it copied out. If you do not have the money,
you should definitely give the text away, thinking, "Though by giving this
away I may be stupid in this life, it is all right; I will not acquiesce in
my stinginess."
As to material things, you should give everything except those things
listed above. If you are a ruler, and someone asks for others' children,
wives, and so on, it is inappropriate to meet the request by separating
each from their families, but you can give them as a whole together with
the family dwelling and the like. Likewise, you must meet requests for
things to play with that do not become a cause of taking a miserable
rebirth; traps, etc. that do not hurt others; dry or wet places inhabited
by living beings when no harm will come to the beings; and food and drink
which do not have any bugs. [386] You should give even poison, weapons,
fire, and alcohol if people ask for them in order to benefit themselves or
others.
Qualm: What should you do when you are giving material gifts and two
persons ask you for something, one of whom is poor and the other of whom is
wealthy?
Reply: If you are confronted by both of them right from the first and you
are able to fulfill both of their wishes, you should do so. If you are
unable to do this, however, you should first think, "I will fulfill the
wishes of the poor person," and work to give the gift to this person. So
you should let the wealthy one know the situation, saying with soothing
words, "My friend, I have already planned from the first to distribute this
article to this poor person. Please do not think that I have spumed you,"
and then fulfill the wishes of the person who has no wealth.
I have written about the ways to learn these kinds of giving because they
are extremely important for beginners who are keeping the bodhisattva vows.
With the exception of some special cases I have explained all in accordance
with the intended meaning of the Bodhisattva Levels.217
(b)) What to do if you are unable to give
If you are overcome with stinginess when someone asks you for something,
think as follows: "This material thing and I are definitely going to be
parted by death; it will leave me and I will leave it. So
138     The Great Treatise on the Stages of the Path
I might as well take pleasure in giving this away and put it to good use,
making a separation just as at the time of death. If I give this away, I
will not have attachment to my wealth when the time comes for me to die. I
will have no regrets and will give rise to feelings of pleasure and joy."
If you are unable to give it away even though you reflect in this way, then
inform the person who asks for it by means of the three things that they
should know. This is described in the Questions of Householder Ugra Sutra
(Grha-pati-ugra-pariprccha-siitra),2is which states that you should say, "I
am new to the practice of the Mahayana and am still a person of small
ability whose roots of virtue are not yet ripened. Also, I am under the
influence of an ungenerous attitude. Further, 1 have a strongly grasping
view of self and constantly conceive of a self and that which belongs to
the self. So, excellent person, please forgive me and do not make it
difficult for me. I shall try to do just what satisfies your thoughts and
the thoughts of all living beings." [387] According to the Compendium of
Trainings, this is to eliminate the further fault of each losing confidence
in the other, but it does not get rid of the fault of stinginess, a fault
in bodhisattvas that is looked down upon. Still it seems that doing this
prevents the cardinal transgression of not giving the teachings and wealth
because of stinginess. Also, the Compendium of the Perfections states:219
If you cannot give because your ability is so small Though people come and
ask you for something. So as to not make them feel low, Comfort them with
gentle speech. Henceforth when people come to ask for something, Do your
best not to make them, feel low and despairing, And clear away the fault of
stinginess. Earnestly strive to eliminate craving.
(c)) Relying on the remedies for the hindrances to generosity
According to what is found in the Bodhisattva Levels' Compendium of
Determinations, there are four hindrances:
1. The hindrance of not being used to generosity
2. The hindrance of declining fortune
3. The hindrance of attachment
4. The hindrance of not seeing the goal
How to Give      139
(1)) The hindrance of nol being used to generosity
The hindrance of not being used to generosity is when you do not want to
give to those who ask for something, even though you have material goods to
give. The remedy for this is to avoid succumbing to the shortcoming of not
being accustomed to generosity by quickly becoming aware, examining the
situation, and reflecting, "This shortcoming is definitely the result of my
previously not getting used to generosity," and "Moreover, if I do not make
this gift, I will dislike generosity in my future life as well." Then, be
generous.
(2)) The hindrance of declining fortune
The hindrance of declining fortune is when you do not feel generous because
of the sparseness of your resources. The remedy to this is to make a gift
after you willingly accept the suffering of poverty, thinking, "During the
time that I have been passing through cyclic existence I have not helped
others and have experienced many unbearable sufferings such as thirst,
hunger, and the like because of being under the control of something
else—that is, my former karma. [388] So even if I die from the suffering of
this lifetime on account of my helping others, it is just better for me to
be generous; whereas to turn away the person who asks me for something is
not all right. Even in the absence of those resources, I will survive on
some sort of wild plant."
(3)) The hindrance of attachment
The hindrance of attachment is when you do not feel generous inasmuch as
you have become attached to extremely attractive and excellent material
goods that are to be given. The remedy for this is to quickly become aware
of your shortcoming of attachment, and then to think, "This mistaken notion
that thinks 'I am happy' with regard to what is by nature suffering will
bring me suffering in the future." Understanding this, eliminate your
attachment and give away your material goods.
(4)) The hindrance of not seeing the goal
The hindrance of not seeing the goal is when you do not have in view the
benefit of reaching perfect enlightenment that is contingent on generosity,
but instead consider the benefit of a great amount of resources and then
give things away. The remedy for this is to quickly become aware of this
shortcoming; then to consider how, in general,
140     The Great Treatise on the Stages of the Path
all conditioned things perish moment by moment and how, in particular, your
resources perish and leave you; and then to fully dedicate the giving of
any gift for the sake of great enlightenment.
If you give while merely considering the karmic result of
generosity—resources and the like—you will obtain a large amount of
resources, but you will not attain liberation, just as business people who
give without any hesitation all their goods to others for a price merely
get a profit, but do not obtain merit. Aryadeva's Four Hundred Stanzas
(Catuh-sataka) says:220
"From making gifts to this person
I will get a great reward."
Such getting and giving are looked down on
As being like wanting profit in business.
(2") The generosity which is just mental
The generosity which is just mental means that after you go to a quiet
place and then withdraw your mind inward, with a pure motivation and faith
from the depths of your heart, you construct with your thoughts an
immeasurably vast quantity of diverse gifts, and you then imagine that you
are offering them to all living beings. [389] This increases merit
immeasurably with little difficulty and, moreover, is the giving of wise
bodhisattvas, according to the Bodhisattva Levels.221 Although it says in
the Questions ofSubahu SutraP2 that this is to be done by those who do not
have wealth, it is appropriate for those who have wealth to do it as well.
These ways for wise bodhisattvas to give when they have no resources are
employed until they attain the first level, the level of pure wholehearted
resolve, whereupon poverty in resources no longer occurs. For, the
Bodhisattva Levels says;321
Thus, this is the giving of gifts for wise bodhisattvas while they have no
resources and until they attain pure wholehearted resolve. Just as
bodhisattvas of pure wholehearted resolve obtain a state which transcends
miserable rebirths, so also they attain inexhaustible resources in all
lifetimes.
(d') A summary
After you have taken the bodhisattva vows, make aspirational prayers with
respect to how to learn the practice of generosity on the high levels, and
then train in these methods. Understand and learn what is permitted and
prohibited with respect to the methods of making gifts that you can engage
in right away, as explained above.
In particular, you must rely on the remedies to stinginess with respect to
your body, resources, and roots of virtue. After you strive to steadily
increase your generosity, you must cultivate joy for this practice and
generate a feeling of sorrow for not having earlier trained your mind in
that way. For, as it says in the Questions of Subahu Sutra,21^ once you do
this, you will be able to complete the perfection of generosity with little
difficulty in another lifetime, whereas if you give all this up and set it
aside, not only in this life will you be continually tainted by very grave
faults, but in other lives as well you will not want to engage in giving,
and it will therefore become extremely difficult to enter into the
bodhisattva deeds. [390]
Furthermore, the Compendium of the Perfections states:225
The spirit of enlightenment is the root of such generosity,
So do not give up this motive to make such gifts.
The Conqueror said, "In the world the supreme form of giving
Is the wish to give accompanied by the spirit of enlightenment."
Thus, being mindful of the spirit of enlightenment—the basis of the
bodhisattva deeds—cultivating it, aspiring to enlightenment, and making
aspirational prayers to become enlightened form the root of all giving and
the supreme kind of giving, so work hard at these. This is the excellent
key point that sums up the meaning of the Questions of Subahu Sutra.

11
The Perfection of Ethical Discipline
(ii) How to train in the perfection of ethical discipline fa') Whal ethical
discipline is fb') How to begin the cultivation of ethical discipline {c')
The divisions of ethical discipline
(1') The ethical discipline of restraint
(2') The ethical discipline of gathering virtue
(3') The ethical discipline of acting for the welfare of living beings (d')
How to practice (e') A summary
(ii) How to train in the perfection of ethical discipline
How to train in the perfection of ethical discipline has five parts:
1. What ethical discipline is
2. How to begin the cultivation of ethical discipline
3. The divisions of ethical discipline
4. How to practice
5. A summary
(a') What ethical discipline is
Ethical discipline is an attitude of abstention that turns your mind away
from harming others and from the sources of such harm. Therefore, you bring
about the perfection of ethical discipline by progressively increasing your
habituation to this attitude until you reach completion. However, it is not
the case that you bring the
144      The Great Treatise on the Stages of the Path
perfection of ethical discipline to completion in the external world by
establishing beings in a state free of all harm. Otherwise, since there are
still living beings who are not free from harm, the conquerors who visited
in the past would absurdly not have completed the perfection of their
ethical discipline and would therefore also not be able to guide these
beings to freedom from harm. Hence, whether all living beings in the
external world are freed or not freed from harm makes no difference in this
context; the practice of ethical discipline is just the habituation within
your own mind to the attitude of abstention which turns away from harm to
these beings. Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds says:226
Where can beings such as fish be sent
Where they will not be killed?
So it is said that by attaining an attitude of abstention
You perfect ethical discipline. [391]
Although ethical discipline does indeed have three divisions [the ethical
discipline of restraint, the ethical discipline of gathering virtue, and
the ethical discipline of acting for the welfare of living beings], it is
explained in this context as the attitude of abstention in terms of the
ethical discipline of restraint, the principal division. Moreover, in terms
that include motivation, it is the ten abstentions that eliminate the ten
nonvirtues; and in terms of what it really is, it is seven abstentions,
which are the nature of the actions of body and speech that abstain from
the seven nonvirtues. Candrakirti's Explanation of the "Middle Waif"
Commentary (Madhyamakavaiara-bhasya) says:227
It is called ethical discipline because it does not acquiesce in the
afflictions, because it allows no sins to arise, because it is coolness
since it quells the fire of regret, or because it is that upon which the
excellent rely since it is the cause of happiness. Moreover, it is
characterized by seven abstentions. These are motivated by three
qualities—non-attachment, non-hostility, and correct view. Therefore,
ethical discipline is explained as the ten paths of action in terms that
include motivation.
(b') How to begin the cultivation of ethical discipline
As a person who generates the spirit of enlightenment and then promises to
train in the bodhisattva deeds, you have promised to endow all living
beings with the ornament of the ethical discipline of the perfect buddhas;
therefore, you must accomplish the aims of all beings. In this regard you
must first develop the strength of your
The Perfection of Ethical Discipline     145
own pure ethical discipline, for, if your own ethical discipline is impure
and degenerates, you will fall to a miserable rebirth and will therefore
not even achieve your own welfare, never mind the welfare of others. Hence,
once you begin working for the welfare of others, value highly your ethical
discipline. You need to sharply focus on safeguarding it and restraining
your behavior. Do not be lax. The Compendium of the Perfections states:2^
Those who strive to endow all beings
With the ornament of the perfect buddhas' ethical discipline
Initially purify their own ethical discipline;
With pure ethical discipline they develop powerful strength. [392]
And also:
If you cannot achieve your own welfare with faulty ethical
discipline,
Where will you get strength for the welfare of others? Therefore, those who
strive for others' welfare Do not relax their devotion to this.
Moreover, such pure ethical discipline is based on the practice (just as
prescribed) of what to adopt and what to cast aside. This, moreover,
depends on a strong and stable attitude of wanting to safeguard your
ethical discipline. Consequently, develop a desire to safeguard your
ethical discipline by meditating for a long time on the grave consequences
of not safeguarding it and the benefits of safeguarding it.
With respect to the first, the grave consequences of not safeguarding your
ethical discipline, the Compendium of the Perfections says:OT
Therefore, see the unbearable fright and
Eliminate even the smallest thing that should be eliminated.
Thus, once you are frightened by the grave consequences of your misdeeds,
you strive to abstain from even the small ones. Think as explained earlier
about the grave consequences of the ten nonvirtues, the coarsest factors
incompatible with ethical discipline.230
With respect to the benefits of safeguarding your ethical discipline, they
are as explained earlier331 and as set forth by the glorious Aryasura in
his Compendium of the Perfections-.^2
The divine substances, the resources of humans in which to
delight, and
The supreme bliss and supreme tastes which are the wonders of the deities—
146     The Great Treatise on the Stages of the Path
Does anything more marvelous come from ethical discipline? Even the buddhas
and the teaching arise from it.
Furthermore, in dependence on ethical discipline your mind-stream
progressively develops; your training becomes the same as that of the
mahasattva bodhisattvas, who have a compassionate nature; and you attain
the pure sublime wisdom that eliminates all the seeds of wrongdoing. When
worldly ornaments adorn the very young or very old, they make these persons
seem ridiculous and are therefore ugly. But no matter who has the ornament
of ethical discipline—old, young, or in-between—it delights everyone; thus,
it is the best of ornaments. The pleasant fragrance of ethical discipline's
good name spreads in all directions, whereas other pleasant fragrances must
follow the direction of the wind and are thus limited. [393] A lotion
scented of sandalwood, which relieves the torment of heat, is prohibited
for renunciates, but a lotion which protects against the torturous heat of
the afflictions is not prohibited and is appropriate for them. Someone who
copies the outer appearance of being a renunciate but who has the jewel of
ethical discipline is superior to others. The Compendium of the Perfections
says:233
Ethical discipline is the path of special attainment,
Achieves equality with those of compassionate nature,
And has the highest nature of pure sublime wisdom.
Free of flaws, it is called the best of ornaments.
It is a pleasant fragrance throughout the three realms,
And a lotion not prohibited for a renunciate.
Even those who copy appropriate attire, if they have ethical
discipline. Will be superior to other human beings.
Furthermore, other benefits arise from ethical discipline: although you do
not speak flattering words and do not strive with great effort and
hardship, you naturally gather immediately necessary resources; even
without threats of force all beings pay homage to you; there is no casual
talk about the lineage of your relatives, etc.; people who previously did
not know you or help you are naturally kind to you; and deities and humans
revere the dust of your footprint and carry away what they can get as an
object of worship. The Compendium of the Perfections states:234
Even without speaking or undertaking hardship
You gather immediate necessities and service.
The Perfection of Ethical Discipline     147
Without threat all the world pays homage to you;
You obtain power effortlessly and without toil.
You are among those about whom it is improper to talk casually.
Even all persons who you did not know previously,
Who have not helped you or done what you need,
Pay homage to you, a person with ethical discipline.
Excellent beings revere the dust blessed by your feet, Touching their heads
to it; deities and humans bow down to it, Place it on the crowns of their
heads, and carry away what they
can get. [394] Therefore, one who has ethical discipline is in the supreme
lineage.
The wise who reflect well on these benefits and grave consequences must
safeguard their ethical discipline, as the Compendium of the Perfections
explains:235
Due to a craving for their own happiness, bodhisattvas Will not compromise
ethical disciplines, which must be protected.
And also:
Because you control yourself, you experience happiness; Because you have
the ornament praised by the learned, you
safeguard ethical discipline; As you bring to perfection all the trainings,
Rely on ethical discipline completely and without pride.
Moreover, after you have cleared away your mere fear of the miserable
realms and your wish for the mere excellences of deities or humans,
safeguard your ethical discipline for the sake of establishing all living
beings in ethical discipline. The Compendium of the Perfections states:236
Whoever aspires to establish in pure ethical discipline Every living being
in worlds beyond measure And relies on ethical discipline to benefit the
world Is said to bring ethical discipline to perfection. Therefore, clear
away fear of the miserable realms And the wish for the marvels of kingdoms
and high status; Safeguard a flawless ethical discipline, and depend on
Ethical discipline because you are striving for the welfare of the world.
148      The Great Treatise on the Stages of the Path
(c') The divisions of ethical discipline
There are three divisions of ethical discipline:
1. The ethical discipline of restraint
2. The ethical discipline of gathering virtue
3. The ethical discipline of acting for the welfare of living beings
(1) The ethical discipline of restraint
The Bodhisattva Levels says the ethical discipline of restraint is the
seven types of vows of individual liberation.237 Thus, given that there are
those who have taken vows of individual liberation and are also keeping the
bodhisattva vows, the ethical discipline of restraint is either the actual
vows of individual liberation for the group of either laypersons or
renunciates, or it is a practice of restraint and abstention that would be
associated with those actual vows. [395] Also, given that there are those
who have taken the bodhisattva vows who are unsuited to be recipients of
the vows of individual liberation, the ethical discipline of restraint is
the practice of restraint and abstention that gives up any deed that is
wrong by nature or any deed that is wrong by prohibition that would be
associated with the vows of individual liberation.
(2') The ethical discipline of gathering virtue
The ethical discipline of gathering virtue means that you focus on virtues
such as the six perfections and then develop the virtues that you have not
developed in your mind, do not spoil the ones that you have already
developed, and increase both of these ever further.
(3') The ethical discipline of acting for the welfare of living beings
The ethical discipline of acting for the welfare of livingbeings means that
you focus on the welfare of eleven sorts of living beings, and then
accomplish their aims in this and future lives in a suitable manner and
without wrongdoing.238 Since I have already detailed these in my Basic Path
to Awakening,239 you should definitely read that over and over again.
Therefore, since the rules of the vows of individual liberation are one
aspect of the precepts for renunciates who have taken the bodhisattva vows,
they are not set off apart from the precepts for bodhisattvas. Also, within
the three divisions of ethical discipline, the ethical discipline of
restraint—the actual rules of the individual
The Perfection of Ethical Discipline     149
liberation vows or the practice of engaging in what is to be adopted and
rejecting what is to be cast aside that would be associated with these vows-
—is initially very important even for bodhisattvas, so train in this. The
Bodhisattva Levels' Compendium of Determinations states:*40
Among the three aspects of ethical discipline, the ethical discipline of
restraint includes and reaches to the other two; when you are bound by it
and safeguard it, you will be bound by the other two and safeguard them as
well, and when you are neither bound by nor protect it, you will not be
bound by the other two nor safeguard them. Consequently, it is said that if
bodhisattvas' ethical discipline of restraint degenerates, all their vows
degenerate.
If you think that the vows of individual liberation are for sravakas, and
if you cast aside their prescriptive and proscriptive rules and say, "There
are other precepts, bodhisattva precepts, to train in," then you have not
grasped the key point of the bodhisattva training in ethical discipline,
for it is often said that the ethical discipline of restraint is the basis
and source of the next two types of ethical discipline. [396]
Furthermore, the principal aspect of the ethical discipline of restraint is
abstaining from deeds that are wrong by nature. Moreover, it is taught in
all the vehicles, higher and lower, that this abstention from deeds that
are wrong by nature is the abstention from the ten nonvirtues, which
comprise the crux of the major faults of the deeds that are wrong by
nature. You must correctly restrain yourself physically, verbally, and
mentally by not allowing a flicker of mere motivation for these nonvirtues.
The Compendium of the Perfections says:241
Do not let these ten paths of action degenerate; They are the path to the
joys of high status or liberation. By maintaining these you reach your
goals, which are Special contemplations wherein you think of helping
beings.
Correctly restrain your speech, body, and mind; The Conqueror said, "This,
in brief, is ethical discipline." This is the basis that comprises all
ethical discipline. So train in this restraint.
The master Candrakirti also explains the practice of the perfection of
ethical discipline as abstaining from the ten nonvirtues in the chapter on
the perfection of ethical discipline of his Explanation of the "Middle Way"
Commentary, and such explanations also occur in
150     The Great Treatise on the Stages of the Path
many sutras such as the Sutra on the Ten Levels. Therefore, if you
initially train your mind in such restraint as presented above, you easily
accomplish the remaining two types of ethical discipline.
(d') How to practice
You practice the three types of ethical discipline in association with the
six supremacies and the six perfections. When you practice in association
with the six perfections, the generosity of ethical discipline is
establishing others in ethical discipline after you have stabilized
yourself in it. The remaining perfections are as presented before.Z42
(e') A summary
Not to weaken and to increase steadily the spirit of enlightenment— the
basis of the bodhisattva deeds—is the root of engaging in deeds of ethical
discipline and so forth. It is also the best way to desist from harming any
living being. Aspire to practice the ethical discipline of those at high
levels and then train your mind in it. [397] Sincerely learn right now what
to adopt and what to cast aside, starting with the ethical discipline of a
beginning bodhisattva. In particular, each day frequently exercise an
attitude of restraint with respect to what you know about deeds that are
wrong by nature— such as the ten nonvirtues—and deeds that are wrong by
prohibition. Among these also strive again and again to apply an attitude
of restraint toward the fundamental transgressions of the vow to which you
are committed. Once you do this, you will be able to complete the
bodhisattva training in another lifetime as a causally concordant
behavioral effect, with little difficulty and with little suffering.
However, if you neglect these things now, you will be continually tainted
by very grave faults and transgressions, and moreover for many lives you
will be unable to learn the bodhisattvas' trainings. So from now on strive
at these practices.
12 The Perfection of Patience
(iii) How to train in the perfection of patience (a') What patience is
(b') How to begin the cultivation of patience (c') The divisions of
patience
(1') Developing the patience of disregarding harm done to you (a") Stopping
impatience with those who harm you
(1") Stopping impatience with those who prevent your happiness and with
those who cause you to suffer (a)) Showing that anger is unjustified
(1)) On analysis of the object, anger is unjustified
(a')) On analysis of whether the object has self-control, anger is
unjustified (b')) On analysis for either adventitiousness or inherency,
anger
is unjustified (c'l) On analysis of whether the harm is direct or indirect,
anger
is unjustified {d')) On analysis of the cause that impels the harmdoers,
anger
is unjustified
(2)) On analysis of the subject, anger is unjustified (3)) On analysis of
the basis, anger is unjustified
(a')) Analyzing the causes of harm and where the fault lies (b')) Analyzing
your commitment (b)) Showing that compassion is appropriate
(2") Stopping impatience with those who prevent your praise, fame, or
honor, and with those who have contempt for you, or say offensive or
unpleasant things to you
(a)) Stopping impatience with those who prevent three things—praise, fame,
or honor
(1)) Reflection on how praise and so forth lack good qualities (2))
Reflection on how praise and so forth have faults (3)) The need to delight
in those who prevent praise and so forth
152     The Great Treatise on the Stages of the Path
(b)) Stopping impatience with those who do three things to you—have
contempt for you, or say offensive or unpleasant things to you (b")
Stopping both dislike for hartndoers' attainments and delight in their
troubles
(2') Developing the patience of accepting suffering (a") The reason you
must definitely accept suffering (b") The way to develop acceptance
(1") Rejecting the idea that when suffering occurs it is absolutely
unpleasant
(2") Showing thai it is appropriate to accept suffering (a)) Reflecting on
the good qualities of suffering (b)) Reflecting on the advantages of
bearing suffering's hardships (1)) Reflecting on the crucial benefits such
as liberation, etc. (2)) Reflecting on the benefit of dispelling
immeasurable suffering (c)) How it is not difficult to bear suffering if
you gradually grow
accustomed to it, starting with the small (c") A detailed explanation from
the viewpoint of the bases (3') Developing the patience of certitude about
the teachings (d') How to practice (e') A summary
(iii) How to train in the perfection of patience
The explanation of how to train in the perfection of patience has five
parts:
1. What patience is
2. How to begin the cultivation of patience
3. The divisions of patience
4.  How to practice
5. A summary
(a) What patience is
Patience is (1) disregarding harm done to you, (2) accepting the suffering
arising in your mind-stream, and (3) being certain about the teachings and
firmly maintaining belief in them. There are three sets of factors
incompatible with these: for the first, hostility; for the second,
hostility and loss of courage; and for the third, disbelief and dislike.
Perfecting patience means that you simply complete your conditioning to a
state of mind wherein you have stopped your anger and the like. It is not
contingent upon all living beings becoming free from undisciplined conduct
because you would not be able to bring this about, and because you
accomplish your pur-
The Perfection of Patience     153
pose just by disciplining your own mind. Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds
states:2"13
Undisciplined persons are as limitless as space;
If you conquer the single mental state of anger It is like vanquishing all
your enemies. [398]
Where could you get enough leather To cover the entire surface of the
earth? Wearing just the leather of your sandals Is like covering all the
earth.
Similarly, I cannot change
External things, but when
I can change my state of mind,
Why do I need to change anything else?
(b') How to begin the cultivation of patience
Although there are many ways to cultivate patience, to begin I will explain
the meditation on the benefits of patience and the faults of not being
patient. The benefits are set forth in the Bodhisattva Levels:1™ Initially,
bodhisattvas consider the benefits of patience. They think, "Persons who
have patience will not have many enemies later on and will not have many
separations from those to whom they are close. They will have much
happiness and contentment. They will have no regret at the time of death,
and upon the disintegration of their bodies they will also be reborn among
the deities in the happy realms of high status." By looking at such
benefits, they too are patient. They engage others in upholding patience,
and they also praise patience. When they see patient persons, they are
delighted and full of joy.
The Compendium of the Perfections says:243 It is said, "Patience is the
best approach For dealing with the inclination to disregard others'
welfare"; Patience against the fault of anger protects All that is
excellent in this world. Patience is the best ornament of the powerful, The
greatest strength for those who practice asceticism, And a stream of water
on the wildfire of malice. Patience clears away much harm in this and
future lives.
The arrows of undisciplined people's words
Are dulled by a superior being's armor of patience;
154     The Great Treatiseon the Stages of the Path
These unruly people then give pleasant flowers of pra Which become
attractive garlands of fame. [399]
Patience is also the craftsman that creates a buddha's embodiment of form,
Adorned with the beautiful signs of good qualities.
Thus, Aryas'ura praises patience by way of its many benefits: it stops you
from turning away from others' welfare on account of living beings'
misperceptions; it protects you from anger, the enemy that destroys many
roots of virtue; it is a captivating ornament because it endures the harm
of those of little power; it is the excellent strength of ascetics who are
tormented by the afflictions; it is a stream of water that extinguishes the
wildfire of malice; it is armor that cannot be pierced by the arrows of
undisciplined persons' misperceptions; it is the skilled artisan who
creates a fine form of golden color that captivates the eyes and minds of
beings. Furthermore, Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds states:24*
Whoever works hard and overcomes anger
Is happy in this and future lives.
When you rely on patience continually, you do not spoil your joyful
attitude, so you are always happy even in this life. Moreover, patience
stops miserable rebirths in future lives, gives special rebirths in happy
realms, and ultimately bestows certain goodness, so you are utterly happy
in this and future lives.
Meditate on these benefits until you gain a strong, firm certainty about
the cause-and-effect relationship wherein benefits such as these arise from
patience.
With respect to the faults of anger, the invisible faults are as follows.
Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds states:247
Any good deeds, such as Generosity and worshipping the sugatas, You have
collected over a thousand eons Are all destroyed in one moment of anger.
Aryas'ura formulated this exactly as it is presented in Engaging in the
Bodhisattva Deeds. The Play ofManjusri Sittra (Manjusri-vikridita-sutra)
mentions the destruction of virtue accumulated over a hundred eons, and
also Candrakirti's Commentary on the "Middle Way" says that virtue
accumulated over a hundred eons of conditioning to the perfections of
generosity and ethical discipline is destroyed even by the generation of
just a momentary angry thought. [400]
The Perfection of Patience     155
Concerning who or what the recipient of such destructive anger must be,
some say that it must be bodhisattvas, while others assert that it is
recipients in general. The former accords with the statement in the
Commentary on the "Middle Way":2®
Therefore, a moment's anger toward a conquerors' child Destroys the virtue
arising from generosity and ethical discipline Accumulated over a hundred
eons.
With respect to the person who gets angry, Candrakirti's Explanation of the
"Middle Way" Commentary says that if anger even by bodhisattvas destroys
their roots of virtue, it goes without saying that the anger of non-
bodhisattvas toward bodhisattvas does. Regardless of whether the recipient
of the anger is ascertained to be a bodhisattva or whether the perceived
faults that cause the anger are real, the destruction of virtue is said
nonetheless to be just as explained above [i.e., the virtue accumulated
over a hundred eons is lost].
In general, for there to be destruction of the roots of virtue it is not
required that the anger be toward bodhisattvas. The Compendium of Trainings
states:249
The text of the Arya-sarvastivadins also says: The Bhagavan said, "Monks,
consider a monk who makes a full prostration to a stupa that contains a
buddha's hair and nails and who has an attitude of faith."
"So be it, Revered One."
"Monks, this monk will experience reigns as a universal monarch a thousand
times the number of grains of sand eighty-four-thousand leagues under the
ground his prostrate body covers— down to the disk of gold that supports
the earth."
Then the venerable Upali, who was located off to the side from where the
Bhagavan was seated, bowed with hands joined respectfully and asked, "The
Bhagavan has said that this monk's roots of virtue are so great. O
Bhagavan, how are those roots of virtue used up, diminished, erased, and
extinguished?" [401]
"Upali, when such a sin as malice is done to fellow practitioners, it is
Hke a wound or maiming. I cannot see its full impact. Upali, this
diminishes, erases, and extinguishes those great roots of virtue.
Therefore, Upali, if you would not feel malice toward a burned stump, what
need to mention feeling that way toward a body with consciousness?"
Some scholars' position: "The meaning of destroying the roots of virtue is
that in destroying the capacity of previous virtues to issue their effects
speedily, you delay the issuance of their effects. So
156      The Great Treatise on the Stages of the Path
anger, for instance, will give its effect first, but it is certainly not
the case that the seeds of the roots of virtue will not issue effects when
they later meet with the requisite conditions, because, given that no
mundane path can eliminate the seeds that are to be eliminated, it is
impossible to have an elimination of the seeds of the afflictions."
Reply: This reasoning is unsound because (1) even the purification wherein
ordinary beings clear away nonvirtue by means of its remedy, the four
powers of confession, is not an elimination of its seeds; nevertheless,
though the seeds of this nonvirtue may later meet with the requisite
conditions, they cannot issue a fruition; (2) even virtuous and nonvirtuous
karma that are spent upon issuing their individual fruitions do not lose
their seeds; nevertheless, even when the seeds of such karma meet
henceforth with the requisite conditions, it is impossible for fruitions to
arise; and (3) when you attain the peak and forbearance levels of the path
of preparation [the second and third of four levels], you do not eliminate
the seeds of nonvirtue that cause wrong views and miserable rebirths;
nevertheless, even though the seeds of this nonvirtue may meet with the
requisite conditions, they cannot give rise to wrong views or a miserable
rebirth.
Furthermore, the reasoning is unsound because, as the earlier citation
[Vasubandhu's Treasury of Knowledge Auto-commentary] says:250
As to the actions that give rise to cyclic existence, There are those that
are weighty, those that are near, Those to which you are habituated, and
those you did earliest. Among these, the former will ripen first.
Any virtuous or nonvirtuous action that comes to fruition does temporarily
stop the opportunity for the fruition of another action; however, it is not
said nor can it be established that a mere preceding fruition destroys
virtue or nonvirtue. Nor is it appropriate for "destroying the roots of
virtue" to mean the mere temporary postponement of fruition; otherwise, it
would absurdly follow that all powerful nonvirtuous actions must be
considered destroyers of the roots of virtue. [402]
Therefore, concerning this the master Bhavaviveka states (as already
explained)251 that in the case of both the purification of nonvirtue by the
four powers of confession and the destruction of roots of virtue by wrong
views and malice, the seeds of the virtue or nonvirtue cannot give rise to
effects even though they may later
The Perfection of Patience     157
meet with the requisite conditions, just as spoiled seeds will not give
rise to sprouts even though they may meet with the requisite conditions.
Moreover, as already explained,252 even though you cleanse your
accumulation of sins through purification by the four powers, this does not
contradict the fact that you are slow to produce higher paths. Accordingly,
for some persons anger destroys, for instance, their resources and
excellent body—the respective effects of giving gifts and safeguarding
ethical discipline—but is unable to destroy their ability to easily produce
roots of virtue again through giving gifts and safeguarding ethical
discipline by means of the causally concordant behavioral effect of their
habituation to generosity and an attitude of abstention. For other persons,
anger destroys the continuous occurrence of a similar type of causally
concordant virtuous behavior like ethical self-discipline and so on, but
does not destroy the occurrence of an excellent body, resources, and so
forth. Some [bodhisattvas] realize a path through which they progress to
perfection within one eon, for instance, if they do not generate anger
toward a bodhisattva who has obtained a prediction of his or her upcoming
enlightenment (as explained earlier).253 If they produce a single angry
thought toward such a bodhisattva, this path is not expelled from their
mind-stream, but their progress on the path becomes slow for the length of
an eon.
In brief, just as in the case of the purification of nonvirrue there is no
need to purify every behavioral effect, so with respect to the destruction
of virtue there is no need to destroy every behavioral effect. However, as
this is important and as it is critical to analyze it using the scriptures
of the unique Buddha and the reasoning based on them, you should research
the scriptures well and do an analysis.
Thus, the invisible faults of anger are that it projects its own fruitions,
which are extremely unpleasant, and that it prevents the arising of the
measureless very pleasant fruitions of its opposite [virtue]. [403]
The faults of anger visible in this lifetime are that you do not experience
a peaceful and good mind; the joy and happiness that you had previously
perish, and you cannot regain them; you cannot sleep well; and you weaken
the stability wherein your mind stays calm. When you have great hatred,
even those for whom you formerly cared forget your kindness and kill you;
even friends and relatives will get annoyed and leave you; although you
gather
158      The Great Treatise on the Stages of the Path
others with your generosity, they will not stay; and so on. Engaging in the
Bodhisaltva Deeds states:254
In the grasp of the mental pains of hate,
Your mind does not experience peace,
You do not find joy or happiness,
Sleep does not come, and you become unstable.
Even those who depend on a master Who cares for them with wealth and
services Will overcome and kill A master who gets angry.
His anger disheartens friends. Though he gathers people with gifts, They
will not serve him. In brief. No angry person is happy.
The Garland of Birth Stories also says:255
When your complexion is spoiled by the fire of anger.
You cannot look good, though adorned with jewelry.
You may sleep on a good bed, but
Your mind suffers the sharp pains of anger.
You forget to achieve goals beneficial to yourself;
Tormented by anger, you take an evil path.
You ruin the achievement of your aims and your good name.
Your grandeur fades like the waning moon.
Though your friends love you, You fall into an abyss of wrong. Weakening
your intelligence about what is helpful and what
harmful,
You mostly transgress and your mind becomes confused. Through anger you are
accustomed to sinful acts, So you suffer for a hundred years in miserable
realms. What harm greater than this could be done Even by enemies avenging
the great harm you have done? This anger is the inner enemy; I know it to
be so. Who can bear Its proliferation? [404]
Meditate until you are firmly convinced that grave consequences such as
these arise from anger. Thus, Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds says:256
The Perfection of Patience     159
There is no sin like hatred And no fortitude like patience. Therefore,
earnestly cultivate Patience in a variety of ways.
First, understand the benefits and faults, and then strive to cultivate
patience in many ways. The reason behind the first line is set forth in
Candrakirti's Explanation of the "Middle Way" Commentary-?57
You cannot measure the fruitions of anger, just as you cannot measure the
water in the ocean with a balance scale. Therefore, for projecting
unpleasant effects and damaging virtue, there is no sin greater than a lack
of patience.
For, although other sins result in extremely unpleasant fruitions, they are
not great sins on that account alone, given that they do not destroy roots
of virtue. Still, there are many wrongs other than anger that combine both
production of a terrible fruition and destruction of the roots of virtue:
wrong views that deny cause and effect; abandoning the sublime teachings;
generating pride in relation to bodhisattvas, gurus, and the like and thus
terribly belittling them; and so forth. You can know of these from the
Compendium of Trainings.
(c') The divisions of patience
The section on the divisions of patience has three parts:
1. Developing the patience of disregarding harm done to you
2. Developing the patience of accepting suffering
3. Developing the patience of certitude about the teachings
(1') Developing the patience of disregarding harm done to you
Developing the patience of disregarding harm done to you has two parts:
1. Stopping impatience with those who harm you
2. Stopping both dislike for harmdoers' attainments and delight in their
troubles
(a") Stopping impatience with those who harm you
Stopping impatience with those who harm you has two parts:
1. Stopping impatience with those who prevent your happiness and with those
who cause you to suffer 1405]
2. Stopping impatience with those who prevent your praise,
160     The Great Treatise on the Stages of the Path
fame, or honor, and with those who have contempt for you, or say offensive
or unpleasant things to you
(1") Stopping impatience with those who prevent your happiness and with
those who cause you to suffer
Stopping impatience with those who prevent your happiness and with those
who cause you to suffer has two parts:
1. Showing that anger is unjustified
2. Showing that compassion is appropriate
(a)) Showing that anger is unjustified
Showing that anger is unjustified has three parts:
1. On analysis of the object, anger is unjustified
2. On analysis of the subject, anger is unjustified
3. On analysis of the basis, anger is unjustified
(1)) On analysis of the object, anger is unjustified
On analysis of the object, anger is unjustified has four parts:
1. On analysis of whether the object has self-control, anger is unjustified
2.  On analysis for either adventitiousness or inherency, anger is
unjustified
3. On analysis of whether the harm is direct or indirect, anger is
unjustified
4. On analysis of the cause that impels the harmdoers, anger is unjustified
(a')) On analysis of whether the object has self-control, anger is
unjustified
Analyze, thinking, "What would be reasonable grounds for anger toward
harmdoers?" Whereupon, you might think, "They first had the thought of
wanting to harm me, prepared the method, and then either prevented my
happiness or inflicted unpleasant physical or mental suffering, so my anger
is justified." Are you angry because they inflicted harm while they had the
self-control not to harm you, or are you angry because they were utterly
without any self-control and hurt you while helplessly impelled by
something else? In the former case, your anger is unjustified because those
who inflict harm do not have control over themselves, for, when the
conditions and causes—seeds left by afflictions to which they were
previously
The Perfection of Patience     161
habituated, a nearby object, and erroneous conceptions—come together, they
give rise to the thought to harm, even though the harmdoers do not think,
"I will feel malice"; whereas if those causes and conditions are not
complete, they will never produce the thought to harm, even if the
harmdoers think, "I will feel malice." These causes and conditions produce
the desire to harm; this in turn produces the work of harming; and this
produces suffering for someone else, so those harmdoers do not have even
the slightest self-control. Moreover, they have become like servants of
their afflictions, because they are under the control of others, i.e.,
their afflictions.
In the latter case—you are angry because the harmdoers are utterly without
any self-control and, being helplessly impelled by something else, they
hurt you—then your anger is totally unjustified. [406] For instance, some
people who have been possessed by demons and have come under their control
may wish to hurt those who are helping them to get free of their demons and
thereupon beat them, etc. However, their helpers think, "They do this
because their demons have eliminated their ability to control themselves,"
and do not have even the slightest anger toward them. They then strive to
the best of their ability to free them from their demons. Likewise, when
bodhisattvas are hurt by others, they think, "They do this because the
demons of the afflictions have eliminated their ability to control
themselves." Without being even the slightest bit angry with those persons
they then must generate the spirit of enlightenment, thinking, "I will
strive at the bodhisattva deeds in order to free them from these
afflictions." Accordingly, Aryadeva's Four Hundred Stanzas says:J5H
Just as a doctor does not fight but helps
Patients who are possessed by spirits, though they get angry,
So the Sage sees that the afflictions are at fault.
Not the persons who have the afflictions.
The master Candrakirti also states:
"This is not living beings' fault, Rather it is the fault of the
afflictions." So the learned analyze And do not fight with others.
Although many reasonings are set forth in Engaging in the Bodhisattva
Deeds, it is easy to be certain of this one, and it is a very powerful
remedy for anger. Also, the Bodhisattva Levels has the same
162      The Great Treatise on the Stages of the Path
meaning where it states that you can bear harm after you meditate on the
idea of mere phenomena, so meditate repeatedly on this remedy until you
reach certain knowledge of it.
If these beings had self-control, they would not have any suffering,
because they would not want suffering and because they could control it.
Furthermore, you should stop your anger by also thinking, "When these
beings are moved by strong afflictions, they commit suicide, leap from
cliffs, harm themselves with thorns, weapons, etc., and stop eating and so
forth. [407] If they do this to even their greatly cherished and dear
selves, of course they will hurt others." Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds
states:2511
Thus, everything is dependent on something else,
And, because that in turn is dependent, it is not autonomous.
Understanding this, do not be angry
At anything, all things being like illusions.
And also:
Therefore, if you see an enemy or friend Doing what is wrong, think "This
arises from certain conditions," And remain happy.
If all beings could achieve results According to their wish, then, Since no
one wants suffering, No one would suffer.
While under the control of their afflictions, Some people will kill even
their dear selves. So how can you expect them Not to harm the bodies of
others?
(b')) On analysis for either adventitiousness or inherency, anger is
unjustified
The fault of doing harm to others either is or is not in the nature of
living beings. If it is in their nature, it is wrong to get angry, just as
it is wrong to get angry at fire for being hot and burning. Similarly, if
it is adventitious, it is also wrong to be angry, just as when smoke and
the like appear in the sky, it is wrong to be angry at the sky on account
of these flaws of smoke and so forth. Thinking in this way, stop your
anger. Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds states:260
The Perfection of Patience     163
If doing harm to others
Is natural for the childish,
It is wrong to get angry at them,
Just as it is at fire's burning nature.
Still, if the fault is adventitious.
And the nature of beings is good,
My anger is wrong, just as is
Anger at smoke's appearance in the sky.
(c')) On analysis of whether the harm is direct or indirect, anger is
unjustified
If you are angry at the agent of harm that directly inflicts the harm, you
will have to be angry at the stick, etc., just as you are at the person. If
you are angry at the harmdoer who indirectly inflicts harm, then, just as
the person impels the stick and so forth to do the harm, so hostility
impels the person. [408] Therefore, get angry at the hostility. Engaging in
the Bodhisattva Deeds says:261
The stick and so forth directly cause the harm.
But if I am angry at the one who throws it,
Then, since hostility impels them,
It is better to get angry at hostility.
If you are not angry at the stick, it is also wrong to be angry at the one
who throws it; if you are angry with the one who throws it, it is correct
to be angry also at the hostility. Not believing this, your mind has gone
down a wrong path. Therefore, become certain about the overall sameness of
the logic here and direct your mind toward not being angry at the person in
the same way that you are not angry at the stick. Furthermore, use the
reasonings taught earlier that negate the idea that anything has self-
control in order to understand that you should not differentiate the stick
and the one who throws the stick by whether they have a harmful intent.
{d')) On analysis of the cause that impels the harrrtdoers, anger is
unjustified
The experience of suffering produced by those who harm does not occur
causelessly or from discordant causes, so it occurs from concordant causes;
that is to say, from nonvirtuous actions you have done in the past.
Therefore, harmdoers are helplessly impelled to do harm by the power of
your karma. Consequently, blame yourself, thinking, "This is my fault, and
I am wrong to get angry at
164      The Great Treatise on the Stages of the Path
others," and stop your anger on all occasions. For example, it is similar
to the way that beings produce the guardians of hell with their own bad
karma, and these guardians then inflict harm on them. Engaging in the
Bodhisattva Deeds states:2"
I, at a former time, inflicted
Harm such as this on living beings.
Therefore, it is fitting that 1, who hurt others,
Should receive this harm.
And also:
The childish do not want suffering. Yet crave the causes of suffering. So
why should I be angry with others When it is my own fault that I am hurt?
For example, just like the guardians of hell
And the Sword-leafed Forest,
I produce this harm with my own actions. [409]
So at whom should I get angry?
Those who do me harm arise
Impelled by my own karma.
If thereby they go to a hell,
Have I not ruined them?
Also, Sha-bo-ba said, "When you say, 'I am not at fault,' it indicates that
you, in fact, have not internalized even a bit of the teaching."
(2)) On analysis of the subject, anger is unjustified
If you get angry at a harmdoer through an inability to bear suffering, it
is contradictory because, even as you are failing to bear slight suffering
in the present, you are aggressively creating the cause of measureless
suffering in the miserable realms. Therefore, induce a sense of
embarrassment, thinking, "I am very stupid," and work to contain your
anger. Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds states:263
Even the slight suffering of the present, Then why do I not stop my anger,
The cause of suffering in the hells?
The suffering generated by harm is the effect of previous bad karma; by
experiencing it, you exhaust this karma. If you bear the suffering, you do
not accumulate new sins and you greatly increase your merit. Therefore, you
must not consider how harmdoers ruin their virtue, but view them as kind in
that it is as though they are
The Perfection of Patience      165
engaged in actions for the sake of clearing away your sins. The Garland of
Birth Stories says:264
I do not think about this person ruining his virtue,
But that he is as if engaged in actions to clear away my sins;
If I am not patient even with this person,
How could I be any more unkind?
And Candrakirti's Commentary on the "Middle Way" says:265 You want to say
that you are exhausting The effects of nonvirtuous karma done in the past;
How then can you sow the seeds of further suffering By getting angry and
harming others?
Therefore, just as you tolerate bleeding or burning as a treatment to cure
a severe illness, it is appropriate to bear small sufferings for the sake
of preventing great suffering. [410]
(3)) On analysis of the basis, anger is unjustified
On analysis of the basis, anger is unjustified has two parts:26*
1. Analyzing the causes of harm and where the fault lies
2. Analyzing your commitment
(a)) Analyzing the causes of harm and where the fault lies
Engaging in the Bodliisattva Deeds says:267
His sword and my body
Are both causes of suffering.
He obtained the sword, I obtained the body;
At which should I be angry?
If, blinded by craving, 1 have obtained
This abscess with a human form,
So painful that it cannot bear to be touched,
With whom should I be angry when it is hurt?
If some people, out of confusion, harm others While others in confusion get
angry with them, Who is blameless And who is to blame?
(b')) Analyzing your commitment
Develop the fortitude of patience, thinking, "It is wrong for even
sravakas, who act for their own purposes alone, to be impatient and get
angry. So of course it is wrong for me. I committed myself to
166      The Great Treatise on the Stages of the Path
achieving the benefit and happiness of all living beings when I generated
the spirit of enlightenment. I act for others' welfare and care for all
beings." Also, Bo-do-wa said:
The Buddha's teaching is to commit no sin. When you fail to cultivate
patience with a slight harm, you make the curse, "May this eradicate the
teaching." Thereby you give up your vow, and this eradicates the teaching.
We do not have the teaching as a whole; when we break our vows, we
dissipate what we do have.
And also:
When a yak has been saddled up for carrying goods, if the saddle tightens
around his tail, he bucks, and the saddle beats against his legs. If the
saddle is loosened, the straps drop, and the yak is happy. Similarly, if
you do not relax around a harmdoer, the harmdoer matches what you do, and
you steadily become more unhappy.
(b)) Showing that compassion is appropriate
Contemplate from the depths of your heart, "All living beings have been in
cyclic existence since beginningless time, and there is not one who has not
been my friend and relative—father, mother, etc. Being impermanent, they
lose their lives and are miserable due to the three types of suffering.
Crazed by the demon of the afflictions, they destroy their own welfare in
this and future lives. [411] I must generate compassion for them. How could
it be right to get angry or to retaliate for harm?"
(2") Stopping impatience with those who prevent your praise, fame, or
honor, and with those who have contempt for you, or say offensive or
unpleasant things to you
Stopping impatience with those who prevent your praise and so forth, and
with those who have contempt for you and so forth has two parts:
1.  Stopping impatience with those who prevent three things—praise, fame,
or honor
2. Stopping impatience with those who do three things to you—have contempt
for you, or say offensive or unpleasant things to you
(a)) Stopping impatience with those who prevent three things— praise, fame,
or honor
Stopping impatience with those who prevent three things—praise, and so
forth—has three parts:
The Perfection of Patience      167
1. Reflection on how praise and so forth lack good qualities
2. Reflection on how praise and so forth have faults
3. The need to delight in those who prevent praise and so forth
(1)) Reflection on how praise and so forth lack good qualities
When others praise you and spread your fame, it serves neither of two
purposes: for this life it does not bring you long life, health, and the
like, and for future lives it does not bring merit and so forth. Therefore,
do not get attached to fame and praise, but reproach yourself by thinking,
"My displeasure when my praise and fame are ruined is no different from
when small children cry upon the collapse of their sand castles, which lack
any of the requisites for a dwelling." Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds
states:268
Praise, fame, and honor
Do not cause merit, nor longevity,
Nor cause strength, nor health,
Nor bring physical well-being.
Once I understand my own welfare.
What meaning is there for me in those?
When their sand castles collapse. Children cry in great distress. Likewise,
my mind is childish When my praise and fame are ruined.
(2)) Reflection on how praise and so forth have faults
Develop disgust for praise and so forth, thinking, "Praise, fame, and honor
distract my mind with the meaningless, destroy my disenchantment with
cyclic existence, make me jealous of those with good qualities, and spoil
my virtuous activities." Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds states:269
Praise and so forth distract me,
Destroy my disenchantment,
Promote my jealousy of those with good qualities,
And destroy all that is good. [412]
(3)) The need to delight in those who prevent praise and so forth
Stop your anger and feel delight from the depths of your heart, thinking,
"In that case, damage to my praise, fame, gain, and honor protects me from
going to miserable realms, cuts the bonds of my
168     The Great Treatise on the Stages of the Path
attachment, and, like the Buddha's blessing, blocks the door through which
I am about to enter into suffering." Thinking like this, you should from
the depths of your heart stop anger and feel happy. Engaging in the
Bodhisattva Deeds states:370
Therefore, are not those involved in destroying
Praise of me and the like
Engaged in protecting me
From falling into miserable realms?
I diligently seek freedom
And do not need the bonds of gain and honor;
How could I get angry
With those who free me from bondage?
I am about to descend into suffering.
But, like the Buddha's blessing, they are
Giving me an opportunity to avoid it.
How could I be angry with them?
(b)) Stopping impatience with those who do thtee things to you— have
contempt for you, or say offensive or unpleasant things to you
Prevent your unhappiness, thinking, "Since the mind is not material, it
cannot be directly harmed by others. While the mind is indirectly harmed by
directly harming the body, the body cannot be harmed by contempt, offensive
speech, and unpleasant words. These harm neither body nor mind, so I should
be delighted." When you prevent your unhappiness, you do not give rise to
hostility. Thus Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds says:271
Since the mind is not physical,
No one can ever destroy it.
It is strongly attached to the body
And so it is harmed by physical suffering.
Contempt, offensive speech,
And unpleasant words
Do not harm the body,
Then why, mind, are you so angry?
Sha-ra-wa said:
No matter what the three geshes Kam-lung-ba, Neu-sur-ba (sNe'u-zur-pa) and
Drap-ba (Grab-pa) heard, it was no different from speaking to dirt and
rocks, so they remained happy. Since everyone nowadays reacts quickly to
what is said, they become unhappy.
The Perfection of Patience      169
When somebody whispered to Shen-don (gShen-ston), "He said this and then
that," Shen-don replied, "People also say things behind the king's back.
You have committed divisive speech, so confess it." [413]
When someone said to the yogi Shay-rap-dor-jay (Shes-rab-rdo-rje), "People
are talking about us and saying that our attendants are too lax," he
replied, "Well, the talk of the people will be about people; what else
would they talk about?" Thereafter that person completely stopped the
spread of his divisive speech.
Objection: When someone has contempt for me, etc., other people will not
like me, so this is why I am unhappy about it.
Reply: This would have some truth if others' dislike were to harm you.
However, since their dislike does nothing to you, give up your unhappiness
about others' contempt. Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds says:272
Others' dislike for me Does not devour me In this or other lives. Why am I
averse to it?
Objection: Indeed I am not harmed by their dislike, but in dependence on it
I may be hindered in acquiring things from them, so I will get angry at
those who have contempt for me, scorn me, or say unpleasant words to me.
Reply. Even if you acquire things, you must leave them here, whereas the
sin of your anger at them will follow you. Hence, of the two choices—dying
quickly in destitution or living for a long time improperly—the former is
better.
Even if you acquire things and live for a long time, you must die since you
are not liberated from death. At the time of death, it is the same whether
you have enjoyed pleasure for the previous hundred years or enjoyed it for
merely one year, for both alternatives are nothing more than mere objects
of memory; and at that time it makes no difference at all for your
happiness or suffering. It is analogous to how in a dream the experience of
pleasure for one hundred years and the experience of a mere moment's
pleasure have no difference at all with respect to your happiness or
unhappiness at the time of waking.
When you contemplate in this way and turn away from attachment to gain and
honor, you will not become unhappy with unpleasant words and contempt. You
have no interest in being special in the eyes
170     The Great Treatise on the Stages of the Path
of others, so you do not lose your contentment. Thus, Engaging in the
Bodhisattva Deeds states:273
While I do not like contempt and so forth
Because they interfere with my prosperity,
I leave my acquisitions here
But firmly keep my sins. [414]
Better that I die today
Than live a long, improper life.
Those like me might live a long time,
But then there is only the suffering of death.
Someone might wake from a dream
After experiencing happiness for one hundred years;
Another might wake from a dream
After experiencing happiness for a mere moment.
For both persons once they awaken Happiness does not return; It is like
this at the time of death Whether your life was long or short.
After acquiring many things, I may enjoy pleasure for a long rime, But just
like one robbed by a thief I will leave naked and empty-handed.
(b") Stopping both dislike for harmdoers' attainments and delight in their
troubles
Contemplate as follows, "After I have generated the spirit of enlightenment
for the sake of accomplishing all living beings' benefit and happiness, I
get angry at harmdoers when they obtain happiness on their own. After I
have said that I want all beings to become buddhas, 1 get unhappy when
harmdoers get even minimal prosperity or honor. This is extremely
contradictory." You must eliminate your jealousy regarding any sort of
attainment by other persons and delight in it from the depths of your
heart. Otherwise your spirit of enlightenment and the achievement of the
welfare and happiness of beings are nothing but words. Engaging in the
Bodhisattva Deeds says:274
Since you want all beings to be happy,
You have generated the spirit of enlightenment.
Then, when beings find happiness themselves,
Why do you get angry with them?
The Perfection of Patience      171
If you wish to attain for living beings' welfare Buddhahood, which is
worshipped in the three worlds, Why are you tormented when you see Their
most paltry gain or honor?
When a relative finds sustenance
For those whom you should nurture—
Objects of your care and generosity—
Instead of being pleased, are you angry again?
If you do not wish even that for beings,
How can you wish them enlightenment?
Where is the spirit of enlightenment
In someone who gets angry at others' attainments? [415]
Whether your enemy gets something from someone
Or it remains in the benefactor's house
It is never yours, so why be angry—-
Whether it is given or not?
Even your mere malicious thoughts that delight in your enemies' troubles or
that wish for their destruction do not harm your enemy; they lead only to
your own suffering. Yet, if such malice were to harm them, you should stop
it completely, reflecting on the drawback that this would bring ruin to
yourself and others. Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds states:*75
When my enemies are unhappy. What am I pleased about? My wishes alone Will
cause them no harm.
Even if I should effect their suffering with my wish, What could I be
pleased about? If I say I will be satisfied, What could be more ruinous?
Once I ant caught by the terrible, sharp hook Cast by the fishermen, the
afflictions, I will surely be cooked by the hell-guardians In a kettle for
the beings of hell.
You will be unhappy if you view as absolutely undesirable the obstacles to
what you and your friends want, movement in directions you do not want, and
the prosperity of your enemies. If this unhappiness increases, you become
hostile. If you stop your absolute dislike of these three things, you
prevent unhappiness. Once
172      The Great Treatise on the Stages of the Path
you do this, you will not feel hostile. Thus, dispel your absolute dislike
of these by using the reasonings previously taught. Take many approaches to
stop your anger, because it is a very great fault.
These instructions—the lines of reasoning of the conquerors and their
children presented above—provide the techniques for defeating your greatest
enemy, anger. They involve arguing with your own afflictions and looking
within yourself. When you analyze well with discerning wisdom and stop
anger with many lines of reasoning, you prevent many different types of
anger, and you become patient in many ways. [416] Since this is an
experience engendered by penetrating understanding that uses flawless
reasoning to get at the meaning of correct scriptures, it leaves an
extremely stable latent propensity.
Those who reject meditative analysis with discerning wisdom are those who
reject the whole of the great undertaking of bodhisattva deeds such as
these. Understand that such rejection is the worst hindrance to using a
life of leisure for the benefit of yourself and others. Get rid of it as
you would poison.
(2') Developing the patience of accepting suffering
Developing the patience of accepting suffering has three parts:
1. The reason you must definitely accept suffering
2. The way to develop acceptance
3. A detailed explanation from the viewpoint of the bases
(a") The reason you must definitely accept suffering
Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds states:276 The causes of happiness
sometimes occur, Whereas the causes of suffering occur frequently.
As you continually experience whatever suffering is appropriate to you, you
absolutely must know how to bring it into the path. Otherwise, as the
Compendium of Trainings says, you either generate hostility or you become
discouraged about cultivating the path, either circumstance interfering
with applying yourself to virtue.
Moreover, some sufferings will be caused by others, and some will be
produced by your former karma, whether or not you strive at the path. Some,
as will be explained below, occur when you engage in virtuous activity but
do not occur when you are not so engaged. For the time being, you cannot
dispel the sufferings definitely produced by the power of former karma and
immediate conditions. You must accept them when they arise, because (1) if
The Perfection of Patience     173
you do not do this, in addition to the basic suffering, you have the
suffering of worry that is produced by your own thoughts, and then the
suffering becomes very difficult for you to bear; (2) if you accept the
suffering, you let the basic suffering be and do not stop it, but you never
have the suffering of worry that creates discontentment when you focus on
the basic suffering; and (3) since you are using a method to bring even
basic sufferings into the path, you greatly lessen your suffering, so you
can bear it- Therefore, it is very crucial that you generate the patience
that accepts suffering. [417]
(b") The way to develop acceptance
The way to develop acceptance has two parts:
1. Rejecting the idea that when suffering occurs it is absolutely
unpleasant
2. Showing that it is appropriate to accept suffering
{1") Rejecting the idea that when suffering occurs it is absolutely
unpleasant
If you can remedy a situation wherein suffering occurs, you do not need to
feel that it is unpleasant. If you cannot remedy it, it is not helpful to
find it unpleasant, so there is no need for, or effectiveness to, your
displeasure; there is even a disadvantage. If you are very impatient, a
slight suffering is extremely difficult to bear, whereas if you minimize
your impatience, you can endure great suffering. Engaging in the
Bodhisattva Deeds says:277
If there is a remedy,
Why be displeased?
If there is no remedy.
What is the use of being displeased?
And also:
I shall not be impatient with Heat, cold, wind, and rain, Illness, bondage,
beatings, and so on; If I am, the harm increases.
(2") Showing that it is appropriate to accept suffering
Showing that it is appropriate to accept suffering has three parts:
1. Reflecting on the good qualities of suffering
2. Reflecting on the advantages of bearing suffering's hardships
174     The Great Treatise on the Stages of the Path
3. How it is not difficult to bear suffering if you gradually grow
accustomed to it, starting with the small
(a)) Reflecting on the good qualities of suffering
Suffering has five good qualities: (1) The good quality of spurring you on
to liberation. This is because if you had no suffering, you would not
develop the determination be free of it. (2) The good quality of dispelling
arrogance. This is because when suffering strikes you, it reduces your
sense of superiority. (3) The good quality of causing you to shun sin. This
is because when you experience very painful feelings, they arise from
nonvirtue, so if you do not want these effects, you must avoid their
causes. (4) The good quality of causing you to like cultivating virtue.
This is because when you are tormented with suffering, you desire
happiness, and once you want it, you must cultivate the virtue that causes
it. [418] (5) The good quality of producing compassion for those who wander
in cyclic existence. This is because after you have assessed your own
situation, you think, "Other beings suffer like this." From these five and
what they indicate, recognize other good qualities on your own and then
repeatedly train your mind to think, "This suffering is a condition that I
want." Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds says:278
Since without suffering there is no determination to be free.
You, mind, stay fixed!
And also:
Furthermore, the good qualities of suffering are that you Dispel arrogance
with disenchantment, Develop compassion for the beings of cyclic existence,
Carefully avoid sin, and delight in virtue.
{b)) Reflecting on the advantages of bearing suffering's hardships
Reflecting on the advantages of bearing suffering's hardships has two
parts:
1. Reflecting on the crucial benefits such as liberation, etc.
2. Reflecting on the benefit of dispelling immeasurable suffering
(1)) Reflecting on the crucial benefits such as liberation, etc.
Repeatedly make your mind steadfast, thinking, "I know that in the past
while passing through cyclic existence I suffered for the sake of trifling
desires and minor needs, yet 1 disregarded the many
The Perfection of Patience     175
sufferings, undergoing a great deal of purposeless suffering that will in
turn cause immeasurable suffering for me in my future lives. Given this,
now that I know that I am engaged in virtue that will accomplish
immeasurable benefits and happiness for myself and others, it is
appropriate that I accept suffering a trillion times more than before—so of
course 1 will accept sufferings smaller than that." Engaging in the
Bodhisattva Deeds states:279
For the sake of my desires I have experienced
Being burned, etc., thousands of times in the hells.
But have not achieved either my own welfare
Or the welfare of others.
This is not as harmful as that.
And it achieves great purpose,
So it is correct here only to delight
In suffering that clears away all beings' hurt.
Thus, after you reflect on how you have previously created only hardship
that did not accomplish any of your own or others' aims, uplift your mind,
thinking, "Why am I not now bearing a suffering that achieves great
purpose? Although I am suffering, how excellent that T have found something
like this to do." [419] Moreover, develop a fearless attitude toward
hardship, thinking how you were misled by bad teachers to ignoble,
purposeless paths whereon you endured ascetic practices such as leaping on
a trident, sitting close to five fires, and the like. Also think how for
the sake of inferior, mundane purposes you made yourself bear many
sufferings in farming, business, and war.
(2)) Reflecting on the benefit of dispelling immeasurable suffering
Reflect well on the differences between short-term and long-term suffering,
thinking, "A man who is to be executed is overjoyed when he is freed from
execution by having merely his finger cut off. How excellent it would be if
similarly, by means of this slight suffering of human hardship, I could
permanently dispel the suffering of limitless cyclic existence in general
and in particular the suffering of miserable rebirths such as the hells,
etc." If you do this well, you produce fearless courage with respect to
hardship. Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds says:280
How is it unfortunate if a man who is to be executed Is freed from that by
having his hand cut off? How is it unfortunate if by human suffering You
are released from hell?
176      The Great Treatise on the Stages of the Path
(c)) How it is not difficult to bear suffering if you gradually grow
accustomed to it, starting with the small
Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds states:181
There is nothing whatsoever
That does not become easier through habituation.
So by becoming used to small harms
You will bear great harms as well.
After you have conceived the armor-like thought to accept suffering, you
gradually blend it with suffering, starring with small sufferings. When you
do this, you steadily increase your capacity to accept suffering. The
Compendium of Trainings says:282
Once you have first grown used to small sufferings, you will become
accustomed to the difficult and the very difficult. For example, just as
all living beings have the idea that suffering is happiness through the
power of conditioning, so you maintain the idea of joy whenever you
experience suffering by becoming used to applying the idea of joy to these
experiences. [420]
As to how this comes about, the Questions of Householder Ugra Sutra
states:383
Free yourself from a mind that is like a piece of cotton. And the Array of
Stalks Sutra says:3S4
Daughter, in order to destroy all afflictions you should develop a
mind that is hard to defeat.
Thus, you need courage that is very firm and stable; you will not be able
to accept suffering with a fragile mind.
If you initially develop a significant degree of courage, even great
suffering becomes helpful. It is just like the case of warriors entering a
battle and using the sight of their own blood to increase their boldness.
If right from the start you belittle yourself, saying, "I have never heard
of such a thing, and even if I had heard of it, I could never do something
like that," then even a small suffering becomes a cause for you to turn
back from the path. It is just like the case of cowards who see others'
blood and, fainting, fall unconscious. Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds
says:285
Some, seeing their own blood, Become more intrepid. Some, seeing others'
blood, Fall unconscious.
The Perfection ofPatie;
This comes from the n Or from its timidity.
<c") A detailed explanation from the viewpoint of the bases Question: Given
that one must accept the suffering that occurs, from where do these
sufferings come and how does one accept them? Reply. There are eight bases
for accepting suffering:
1. Acceptance of suffering that is based on objects. Robes, alms, bedding,
seat, medicine, and necessities are objects that enhance pure conduct.
Without displeasure and disappointment you accept the suffering that arises
when these are given to you and you find them to be inferior or too few, or
when they are given with disrespect or after a long delay. [421]
2. Acceptance of suffering that is based on world!]/ concerns. The nine
worldly concerns are: (1) loss; (2) disgrace; (3) blame; (4) pain; (5)
disintegration; (6) extinguishment; (7) aging; (8) sickness; and, (9) the
death of what is subject to death subsequent to its decay. After you have
analyzed the sufferings based on all or each of these, you accept the
suffering.
3. Acceptance of suffering that is based on physical activities. The four
physical activities are moving around, standing, sitting, and lying down.
When all day and all night you purify your mind of obstructions by means of
the first [moving around] and third [sitting] of these four, you are
accepting the sufferings that arise from them; however, you do not relax on
a couch, chair, or bed of straw or leaves when it is not the time to do so.
4. Acceptance of suffering that is based on upholding the teaching. The
teaching is upheld in seven ways: by (1) worshipping and serving the three
jewels; (2) worshipping and serving the guru; (3) understanding the
teachings; (4) teaching extensively to others what you have understood; (5)
reciting its praises in a loud, clear voice; (6) correctly reflecting on it
in solitude; and (7) cultivating meditative serenity and insight that is
imbued with yogic attention. When you strive at these, you accept the
sufferings that arise.
5. Acceptance of suffering that is based on living by begging. The seven
aspects of living by begging are (1) you experience having an ugly
appearance due to shaving off your hair, beard and so forth; (2) you
experience wearing cloth that is patched together and is of poor color; (3)
you live by restraining yourself from the conduct of worldly persons and
act in a way other than they do; (4) you give up farm work, etc., and then
live by getting material goods from others, so you live in dependence on
others; (5) since you do not
178     The Great Treatise on the Stages of the Path
accumulate or employ material gain, you seek things such as robes, etc.,
from others for as long as you live; (6) since you give up sexual
intercourse, you turn away from human desires until you die; and (7) since
you give up dancing, laughter, and the like, you turn away from human
merriment until you die in order to give up friends, intimate companions,
childhood friends, and the like, as welt as pleasures and enjoyments. You
accept the suffering that comes about based on these. [422]
6. Acceptance of suffering that is based on fatigue due to perseverance.
You accept the suffering that arises from mental and physical fatigue,
hardship, and disturbance while you are persevering at cultivating virtues.
7. Acceptance of suffering that is based on acting for the welfare of
living beings. There are eleven activities for others' welfare; you accept
the sufferings that occur because of these.286
8. Acceptance of suffering that is based on current tasks. You accept the
suffering that arises from tasks for a renunciate, such as the work
associated with the begging bowl, robes, and so forth, or from the tasks
for a householder, such as faultless work on a farm, in business, as a
government employee, etc.
Even if you are stricken with any of the sufferings that arise in
dependence on these eight bases, you do not give up your joyous
perseverance at each. You act for the sake of enlightenment, joyfully, not
letting such sufferings become an obstacle that causes you to turn back
once you have set forth.
(3') Developing the patience of certitude about the teachings
The patience of certitude about the teachings means generating the
forbearance of conviction. It has eight objects:
1. The object of faith. This is the good qualities of the three jewels.
2.  The object to be actualized. This is the reality of the two
selflessnesses.
3. The desired object. This is the great powers of the buddhas and
bodhisattvas, of which there are three—the power of the superknowledges,
the power of the six perfections, and the power which is innate.
4. The object to be adopted. This is wanting both the cause—good deeds—-and
the effect of these deeds.
5.  The object to be discarded. This is wishing to avoid both the
cause—misdeeds—and the effect of these deeds.
6.  The object of meditation that is the goal to be achieved. This is
enlightenment.
The Perfection of Patience     179
7.  The object of meditation that is the method for achieving the goal.
This is all the paths of training in the spirit of enlightenment.
8. The object of subsequent practice through study and reflection.
According to Dro-lung-ba (Gro-lung-pa), this refers to the province of what
is to be known, such as impermanence and so forth. [423] The Power-Lineage
Chapter (Bala-gotra-parivarta) of the Bodhisattva Levels mentions that the
eighth is the sublime teaching—the twelve branches of scripture and so
forth—so I think you have to take it as being this.
The way to have conviction is to become certain about these objects just as
they are, and then to think about them again and again, apprehending them
without conflict.
In accordance with passages in the Bodhisattva Levels, I have set forth the
set of eight bases with respect to the patience of accepting suffering and
eight objects with respect to the patience of certitude about the
teachings. In particular, there is extensive coverage there of the patience
of certitude about the teachings.
(d) How to practice
When practicing any kind of patience, you practice it in association with
the six supremacies and all six perfections. These are the same as in the
earlier explanation, except the generosity of patience means to establish
others in patience.2"7
(e') A summary
The recollection and cultivation of the spirit of enlightenment—the basis
of the bodhisattva deeds—is the root of the wish to establish all beings in
a patience wherein they have extinguished the contaminations. After you
steadily increase this spirit, aspire to practice the patience of those at
high levels and then train your mind in it. Distinguish the trainings for
the patience of a beginning bodhisattva, and then learn these properly. If
you transgress the boundaries as explained, you must make an effort to
amend this. If you neglect these transgressions at the time of practicing
these trainings, you will be continually tainted by many great misdeeds,
and even in future lifetimes your practice of the marvelous deeds of the
bodhisattvas will be extremely difficult- Seeing that the essentials of the
path are supreme, practice right now what you can, and inculcate the
intention to practice even those you now cannot. If you do this, then, as
the Questions ofSubahu Sutra says, you will bring the perfection of
patience to completion with little difficulty and minor suffering. [424]

13
The Perfection of joyous Perseverance
(iv) How to train in the perfection of joyous perseverance (a') What joyous
perseverance is (b') How to begin the practice of joyous perseverance (c')
The divisions of joyous perseverance (1') The actual divisions (a") Armor-
like joyous perseverance fb") Joyous perseverance of gathering virtue (c")
Joyous perseverance of acting for the welfare of living beings (2') The
method of developing joyous perseverance (a") Eliminating unfavorable
conditions that prevent joyous perseverance (1") Identifying factors
incompatible with joyous perseverance (2") Employing the methods to
eliminate the incompatible factors (a)) Stopping the laziness of
procrastination (b)) Stopping attachment to ignoble activities (c))
Stopping discouragement or self-contempt (1)) Stopping discouragement about
the goal (2)) Stopping discouragement about the means to attain the goal
(3» Stopping discouragement because wherever you are is a place
to practice
(b") Gathering the forces of the favorable conditions (1") Developing the
power of aspiration (2") Developing the power of steadfastness (3")
Developing the power of joy (4") The power of relinquishment (c") Based on
the elimination of unfavorable conditions and the accumulation
of favorable conditions, being intent on joyously persevering (d") How to
use joyous perseverance to make the mind and body serviceable (d'j How to
practice (e') A summary
182     The Great Treatise on the Stages of the Path
(iv) How to train in the perfection of joyous pei
This section has five parts:
1. What joyous perseverance is
2. How to begin the practice of joyous perseverance
3. The divisions of joyous perseverance
4. How to practice
5. A summary
(a') What joyous perseverance is
When you have focused upon something virtuous, joyous perseverance is
enthusiasm for it. Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds says:2** What is
joyous perseverance? It is delight in virtue.
The Bodhisattva Levels explains it as a flawless state of mind that is
enthusiastic about accumulating virtue and working for the welfare of
living beings, together with the physical, verbal, and mental activity such
a state of mind motivates.
(b') How to begin the practice of joyous perseverance
Frequently reflect upon the benefits of joyously persevering and the faults
of not doing so, for you will develop joyous perseverance if you habituate
yourself to this reflection. As to its benefits, the Exhortation to
Wholehearted Resolve {Adhyasaya-samcodana-sutra) says:289
Always rely upon noble joyous perseverance, Which clears away all suffering
and darkness, Which is the basis of freedom from miserable realms, And
which is praised by all the buddhas.
One who joyously perseveres
Has no difficulty accomplishing any project
Whether mundane or supramundane.
Who among the learned is disheartened by joyous
perseverance?
Those who set forth for the buddhas' enlightenment. Perceive the faults of
lethargy and sleepiness, And then continually persevere with enthusiasm. So
have I advised them.
Also, the Ornament for the Mahayana Sutras states:290 Joyous perseverance
is supreme among virtues; Based on it, you subsequently attain [he rest.
The Perfection of Joyous Pe
Through it you immediately gain a supreme state of joy,
As well as the mundane and supramundane attainments.
With joyous perseverance you attain the pleasures desired ii life;
Become possessed of utter purity;
Are liberated, transcending the view of the perishing aggregates;
And reach buddhahood, the supreme enlightenment. [425]
One who has joyous perseverance Is not brought down By prosperity,
afflictions, Discouragement, or petty attainments.
The Bodhisattva Levels as well says:*"
Because joyous perseverance alone, nothing else, is the principal and
highest cause for the correct attainment of a bodhisattva's virtuous
qualities, the tathagatas have pointed it out, declaring, "Joyous
perseverance is what brings about the attainment of unsurpassed, perfect
enlightenment."
The Compendium of the Perfections also states:1'2
If you are free of fatigue and have great joyous perseverance, There is
nothing you cannot attain or accomplish.
And also:
Even all non-human beings delight in helping you; You attain all types of
meditative concentrations And spend all periods of the day and night
fruitfully. Your collection of good qualities does not decline, And your
purposes surpassing the affairs of humankind Flourish like the blue ulpala
flower.
As to the faults of not joyously persevering, the Questions of Sagaramati
Sutra states:"3
The enlightenment of the lazy is exceedingly far off and distant. The lazy
lack all perfections from generosity to wisdom. The lazy do not work for
others' welfare.
And the Mindfulness of the Excellent Teaching {Sad-dlwrmanusmrty-
upastliana) states as well:294
184     The Great Treatise on the Stages of the Path
Whoever has laziness— The single basis of the afflictions— Whoever feels
some laziness Lacks all good qualities.
Thus, if you lack joyous perseverance, you come under the influence of
laziness and become poor in all good qualities, so you lose every temporary
and ultimate purpose of being human.
(c') The divisions of joyous perseverance
The section on the divisions of joyous perseverance has two parts:
1. The actual divisions
2. The method of developing joyous perseverance [426]
(1) The actual divisions
The section on the actual divisions has three parts:
1. Armor-like joyous perseverance
2. Joyous perseverance of gathering virtue
3. Joyous perseverance of acting for the welfare of living beings
(a") Armor-like joyous perseverance
When bodhisattvas joyously persevere, prior to actively engaging themselves
they put on the armor of a preliminary enthusiastic thought such as, "For a
trillion sets of three immeasurably great eons each composed of days as
long as a thousand great eons, I shall not relinquish my practice of joyous
perseverance. For the sake of relieving the suffering of a single living
being, I would rejoice at remaining only as a hell-being until I attain
buddhahood. As I exert myself in this manner for the sake of complete
enlightenment, what need is there to mention my perseverance over a shorter
period or in the face of lesser suffering?"
Such is the joyous perseverance that is like armor. Abodhisattva who
produces even an aspiration for, or just faith in, such joyous perseverance
is steadfast; how much more so one who is endowed with this perseverance,
given that he or she develops measureless causes for joyously persevering
for the sake of unsurpassed enlightenment. The Bodhisattva Levels says that
for such a person there is absolutely no action for the sake of others and
for enlightenment that is discouraging or entails hardship. When you become
conditioned to such a state of mind, it becomes the definite cause of
awakening your potential for the Mahayana lineage, so train in it.
The Perfection of joyous Perseverance      185
Concerning armor-like joyous perseverance the Compendium of the Perfections
says:"5
In as many eons as there are drops of water in the ocean,
Eons in which the years are composed
Of long, drawn out days and nights equal in duration
Even to the temporal limits of cyclic existence,
You produce the spirit of supreme enlightenment once.
Though you likewise have to accomplish every other collection,
You do not become disheartened because of your compassion,
And undiscouraged you achieve sublime enlightenment. [427]
To generate this immeasurable steadfast armor While disregarding your
suffering in cyclic existence Is declared the first proper undertaking For
the disciplined hero possessed of compassion.
Furthermore, even if it took you a hundred thousand years to produce the
spirit of enlightenment once and to see one buddha, where each year is
composed of twelve months, each month of thirty days, and each day as long
as the time from beginningless cyclic existence to the present, and even if
it took you this length of time multiplied by the number of grains of sand
in the Ganges River to know the mind and behavior of one living being, you
similarly must come to know the minds and behaviors of all living beings.
The Teachings ofAksayamati Sutra says the armor of being undaunted is the
inexhaustible armor; it is armor-like joyous perseverance of the highest
caliber.
In short, if you can generate a single attitude such as this, you easily
complete limitless accumulations and purify measureless obscurations. This
becomes the most excellent cause for never turning back; by just being
joyful no matter how long it takes, you quickly become a buddha. Those who
want to become a buddha in a short time, but take no joy at all in the
limitless deeds and great length of time required, take a very long time to
reach buddhahood, because they thereby fail to produce the wonderful
courage of the conquerors' children.
After you have put on such armor, you joyously persevere for two purposes:
to gather virtue and to act for the welfare of living beings.
(b"> Joyous perseverance of gathering virtue
The joyous perseverance of gathering virtue is applying yourself to the
practice of the six perfections in order to properly accomplish them.
186     The Creat Treatise on the Stages of the Path
(c") joyous perseverance of acting for the welfare of living beings
The joyous perseverance of acting for the welfare of living beings is
properly applying yourself to the practice of the eleven activities for
others' welfare.
(2') The method of developing joyous perseverance
As explained above, since you produce, maintain, and increase all the
virtues of the two collections in dependence upon joyous perseverance, the
practice that develops it is very crucial. I shall discuss the system of
the text of the great scholar and adept Santideva, Engaging in the
Bodhisattva Deeds, noting that it is complete as well as easy to understand
and to sustain in practice. [428] The method of developing joyous
perseverance has four parts:
1. Eliminating unfavorable conditions that prevent joyous perseverance
2. Gathering the forces of the favorable conditions
3. Based on the elimination of unfavorable conditions and the accumulation
of favorable conditions, being intent on joyously persevering
4. How to use joyous perseverance to make the mind and body serviceable
(a") Eliminating unfavorable conditions that prevent joyous perseverance
Eliminating unfavorable conditions that prevent joyous perseverance has two
parts:
1. Identifying factors incompatible with joyous perseverance
2. Employing the methods to eliminate the incompatible factors
(1") Identifying factors incompatible with joyous perseverance
There are two factors incompatible with entering the path: (1) not entering
even though you see that you can do the practice, and (2) not entering
because you become discouraged, thinking, "How can I do such a practice?"
Indeed there is also not practicing because you are unconcerned with
whether you are capable or not, but this is irrelevant here since this
explanation is for those pursuing liberation.
Within the first factor, there are two possibilities: (1) you have the
laziness of procrastination, thinking, "There is still time"; and
The Perfection of Joyous Perseverance     187
(2) you are not procrastinating but you are overwhelmed by your attachment
to inferior and common activities. In this vein Engaging in the Bodhisattva
Deeds says:2%
The factors incompatible with joyous perseverance Are said to be laziness,
adhering to what is ignoble, And self-contempt out of discouragement.
Causes for the production of laziness are indolence, attachment to the
taste of inferior pleasures, craving the pleasure of sleep, and a lack of
disenchantment with cyclic existence. Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds
states:297
Laziness arises from craving based upon Indolence, enjoyment of pleasure,
and sleep; And from a lack of disenchantment With the suffering of cyclic
existence.
Some assert that the first two lines indicate the form that laziness takes
rather than its causes.
(2") Employing the methods to eliminate the incompatible factors
Employing the methods to eliminate the incompatible factors has three
parts:
1. Stopping the laziness of procrastination
2. Stopping attachment to ignoble activities
3. Stopping discouragement or self-contempt
(a)) Stopping the laziness of procrastination
This involves the following three meditations: you contemplate that the
body you have at present is rapidly disintegrating, that after death you
will fall into miserable realms, and that it will be difficult to find an
excellent life such as this one again. Meditation on these stops the
laziness that holds to the notion that there is plenty of time, thereby
generating the conviction in your mind that there is no time to spare.
[429] These three meditations were explained earlier in the section on the
person of small capacity.2*
(b)) Stopping attachment to ignoble activities
You see that the sublime teaching is the source of endless joy in this and
future lives, and that you lose its great purpose when you are distracted
in idle chatter and amusements which are the source of much pointless
suffering later. Meditate on this and stop youT attachment. Engaging in the
Bodhisattva Deeds states:299
188     The Great Treatise on the Stages of the Path
How could you abandon the source of infinite joy, The highest of pleasures,
the sublime teaching. And delight in distractions and amusements That are
the causes of suffering?
(c)) Stopping discouragement or self-contempt
It is not enough just to delight in the sublime teaching after you have
stopped your procrastination and your attachment to ignoble activities; you
must train as a Mahayana practitioner. Therefore, if you become
discouraged, thinking, "Someone like me is unable to practice that," you
must eliminate this discouragement. Stopping discouragement or self-
contempt has three parts:
1. Stopping discouragement about the goal
2. Stopping discouragement about the means to attain the goal
3. Stopping discouragement because wherever you are is a place to practice
(1)) Stopping discouragement about the goal
Qualm: If the goal is buddhahood—the total elimination of all faults and
the total completion of all good qualities—then, since it is extremely
difficult for me to accomplish even a few good qualities or to remove even
a few faults, how could someone like me be capable of attaining such a
result?
Reply: If such a sense of discouragement manifests, it is a very great
fault because it constitutes giving up the spirit of enlightenment. Even if
such a thought does not fully manifest, you must stop it at its incipient
stage.
How to stop it? Encourage yourself with this thought: "The Bhagavan—the
authoritative person who speaks what is true and correct, never what is
false or erroneous—said that even flies, etc. will attain enlightenment.
That being so, why should I not attain it—so long as I do not give up
persevering—inasmuch as human birth gives me an excellent basis and I have
the mental capacity to analyze what to adopt and what to cast aside?" [4301
Et>g&g'ng '« the Bodhisattva Deeds says:10"
"How could I attain enlightenment?"
I shall not indulge in such discouragement,
For the truth-declaring Tathagata
Has spoken this truth:
The Perfection of Joyous Perseverance      189
"Even flies, mosquitoes,
Bees, and worms will attain
Unsurpassed enlightenment, so hard to attain,
Once they generate the power of perseverance."
Why should someone like me—
Born into the human race, recognizing benefit and harm—
Not attain enlightenment.
As long as I do not give up the bodhisattva deeds?
Furthermore, stop your discouragement with this thought: "In the past there
were former buddhas, now there are living buddhas, and in the future there
will also be those who reach buddhahood. It is not the case that just one
person who has already become a buddha accomplishes the path. Rather, those
just like myself, gradually progressing upward, have become buddhas and
will become buddhas." The Cloud of Jewels Sutra says:301
The bodhisattva thinks as follows: "All the tathagatas, arhats, perfect
buddhas who have attained, who are attaining, and who will attain complete
enlightenment have, are, and will attain complete enlightenment through
this kind of method, this kind of path, this kind of joyous perseverance."
Thus, it is not the case that all these tathagatas are just one person who
has already become a tathagata attaining complete enlightenment. Rather, I
too shall reach total perfection in utterly unsurpassed, perfect, and
complete enlightenment. With joyous perseverance in common with all living
beings and joyous perseverance focused upon all living beings, I too shall
seek and strive for enlightenment. [431]
The Praise of Infinite Qualities also says:302
"Even some who have earlier obtained the state of a sugata previously fell
to states much lower than this one." Thinking thus and in order to inspire
us, you [Bhagavan] did not disparage yourself even when you fell into a
dreadful condition. To disparage oneself is wrong, causing those with well-
developed faculties to become discouraged.
As to this discouragement, since a buddha's good qualities are infinite and
results follow from causes, you must accomplish good qualities and remove
faults through limitless avenues while on the path. After you have
understood this well, you may become discouraged when you then take a look
at yourself.
However, this particular discouragement will never arise at a time like the
present when an erroneous understanding of the path
190      The Great Treatise on the Stages of the Path
is in operation. Now, when practicing to attain the limitless buddha
qualities, you suppose that they are achieved by one-sidedly pursuing just
a single, small portion of a quality and intensively working on it. Yet, in
this case your not getting discouraged is not a good sign. Rather, it is
the result of your not being certain about how to proceed on the path—or,
having a rough understanding but not putting it into practice—so you are
confused by its apparent ease. For, when you come up against the practice
and receive an explanation of a fairly complete outline of the path,
roughly arranged from beginning to end, you say, "If that much is needed,
who could do it," and thoroughly give it up. Also, Sha-ra-wa said:
For bodhisattvas who have not engaged in practice all the bodhisattva deeds
seem easy, like looking at a target for arrows, and they do not even get
discouraged. At present, we lack a complete practice of the teachings, so
we have not even reached the level at which we would have discouragement or
self-contempt. When we more fully appropriate the teaching, then there is
great danger of discouragement and self-contempt.
This is quite true.
(2)) Stopping discouragement about the means to attain the goal
Qualm: To accomplish buddhahood you have to give away your feet, hands,
etc., but I am not capable of such feats. [432]
Reply. You must bear suffering to that extent, for even those who live as
they please without engaging in the bodhisattva deeds experience as they
pass through cyclic existence unspeakable sufferings such as having their
bodies cut open, torn to pieces, stabbed, set on fire, and so forth, but
they do not accomplish even their own welfare. The suffering occasioned by
undergoing hardships for the sake of enlightenment is not even a fraction
of this suffering, and also has the great purpose of accomplishing both
your own and others' welfare. Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds says:303
"But it frightens me that I must Give away my feet, hands, and the like."
Without distinguishing heavy suffering from light, Confusion reduces me to
fear.
For countless tens of millions of eons I will be cut, stabbed,
Burned, and torn asunder numerous times, Without thereby attaining
enlightenment.
The Perfection of Joyous Perseverance     191
This suffering which brings about my enlightenment
Does have a limit.
It is like undergoing the pain of an incision
To excise an injurious internal disease.
All doctors eliminate illness
Through forms of discomfort which heal it.
Thus, I will bear a little discomfort
To destroy numerous sufferings.
With respect to giving away your body, you do not give it in the beginning
when you are afraid. But through graduated training in generosity, you end
your attachment to your body. Once you have increased the strength of your
great compassion, you have no difficulty when you give it away, provided it
is for a great purpose. Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds states:3114
The Supreme Physician does not employ Ordinary remedies such as those. He
heals limitless chronic diseases With the most gentle treatments. At the
beginning the Guide enjoins you To give vegetables and so forth. Later,
after you are used to this, You gradually offer even your flesh.
Once I come to conceive of my body As being tike a vegetable and so forth,
What difficulty will there be in giving away Such things as my flesh?
Some say that since practitioners of the perfection vehicle must give away
their bodies and lives, they undergo torment and are on a path that is very
difficult to follow. This text clearly refutes this, because you do not
give away your body so long as you perceive it to be a difficult deed, but
rather do so once it becomes very easy, like giving a vegetable. [433]
(3)) Stopping discouragement because wherever you are is a place to
practice
Qualm: Reaching buddhahood requires taking limitless rebirths in cyclic
existence, so I will be harmed by the suffering therein. I am not capable
of such a thing.
Reply: Reflect as follows. Bodhisattvas have eliminated all sin; therefore,
sin's effect—the feeling of suffering—will not arise
192      The Great Treatise on the Stages of the Path
because they have stopped the cause. Through firm knowledge that cyclic
existence lacks an intrinsic nature, like a magician's illusion, they also
have no mental suffering. Given that their physical and mental bliss
increases, they have no reason to become disheartened even though they are
still in cyclic existence. Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds says:305
Since sin is eliminated, there is no suffering.
Through knowledge, there is no lack of joy.
Misconceptions and sin
Harm the mind and body.
Through merit the body is blissful;
Through knowledge the mind is too.
Though remaining in cyclic existence for others' welfare,
Why should the compassionate ones be disheartened?
And also:
Thus, after mounting the steed of the enlightenment spirit.
Which dispels all dejection and fatigue,
You proceed from joy to joy.
What sensible person would become discouraged?
Likewise, do not become discouraged even by being delayed in cyclic
existence for an immeasurable length of time, because a long length of time
is not in itself a reason to be disheartened. If suffering is extremely
intense, even a brief period of it is disheartening. But if there is no
suffering and you are happy, even a long time is not disheartening.
Nagarjuna's Precious Garland states:306
When suffering, even a short time is hard to bear;
What need mention a time that is long?
But when free of suffering and joyful,
What harms you over even endless time?
Bodhisattvas have no physical suffering;
How could they have mental suffering?
Out of compassion they feel distress for the world;
Thus they remain for a long time.
So do not be discouraged.
Thinking, "Buddhahood is far away."
Always strive at these collections
So as to eliminate faults and gain good qualities. [434]
Also, since the completion of endless collections is not difficult, do not
discourage yourself with the thought, "To become a buddha
The Perfection of Joyous Pel
requires completing limitless collections of merit and sublime wisdom. This
is so difficult that I could not possibly do it." First, motivate yourself
with the desire to attain the goal of limitless buddha qualities for the
welfare of the limitless beings you intend to help. Next, focus on
remaining in cyclic existence for a measureless period of time and take the
bodhisattva vows, thinking: "I shall accomplish limitless collections!"
Then, as long as you keep the vows, whether your mind is distracted by
other things or not, asleep or awake, you will constantly accumulate merit
as vast as space. The Precious Garland states:307
Just as in all directions
Space, earth, water, fire, and wind
Suffering beings are without limit. With compassion the bodhisattvas
Extricate these limitless beings From suffering and then determine To set
them in buddhahood.
Those remaining steadfast in this way Properly make this commitment, And
then, whether asleep or awake, And even when careless,
They constantly accumulate merit as limitless As living beings, for beings
are without limit. Because of the limitlessness of this, know That
limitless buddhahood is not hard to gain. Those who remain for an
immeasurable time Seek immeasurable enlightenment For the sake of
immeasurable beings And accomplish immeasurable virtue.
Hence, though enlightenment is measureless. How could they fail to attain
it Before long through a combination Of these four immeasurable ways?
It is most wonderful to think, "If only I could attain buddhahood in a
brief time for the sake of living beings," because you are moved by the
very intense power of your love, compassion, and spirit of enlightenment.
[435] However, when you are not within the sphere of these motivations, and
you see the necessity of a very long training in endless deeds and that
much hard work is required, you
194      The Great Treatise on the Stages of the Path
might think, "If this is the case, who could possibly do it?" If you should
then claim that you are seeking a quick path, you directly damage the
engaged spirit of enlightenment and indirectly damage the aspirational
spirit of enlightenment. Your capacity for the Mahayana lineage steadily
weakens, and your enlightenment fades into the remote distance, for you
have utterly contradicted what Nagarjuna and Asariga determined to be the
Conqueror's own thought on how to increasingly strengthen the spirit of
enlightenment.
Thus, since becoming discouraged and remaining so brings no benefit at all
and only leads to further discouragement, understand well the methods for
achieving enlightenment and uplift your mind. When you do this, the
completion of your aims is as if in your hand. The Garland of Birth Stories
says:306
Discouragement does not help to free you from misfortune,
So, rather than torment yourself in sorrow,
Develop stable proficiency in the required goals.
Then even the very difficult becomes easy, bringing liberation.
So achieve what must be done by the indicated method Without making
yourself fearful and unhappy. Support yourself with stability that has the
brilliance of
proficiency, Then, the achievement of all aims is in your hand.
Arya Asaiiga says repeatedly that you have both to know well the methods of
training in extensive practice without being discouraged and to not be
satisfied with only minimal qualities. At present you think, "I have
reached a high level of the path," when you have produced a single
approximation of a good quality; even if it is an actual good quality, it
is only one aspect of the path. You are content to meditate solely on it.
But then those knowledgeable in the key points of the path explain from
within the guidelines of scripture and reasoning that it is indeed a
fraction of virtue, but with just that alone you have not reached anywhere.
When you understand what they have said, you become extremely discouraged.
[436] Thus, those who do not remain satisfied with just some portion of
virtue, who seek higher distinction, and who are not discouraged even with
the necessity to learn limitless trainings are extremely rare.
The Perfection of Joyous Pt
(b") Gathering the forces of the favorable conditions
This section has four parts:
1. Developing the power of aspiration
2. Developing the power of steadfastness
3. Developing the power of joy
4. The power of relinquishment
(1") Developing the power of aspiration
As it is said that yearning acts as the basis for joyous perseverance,
aspiration here refers to yearning. The need to generate it is stated in
Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds-™
My present destitution has arisen
From my not aspiring for the teachings
Both now and in the past.
Who would forsake aspiration for the teachings?
The Sage declared aspiration The root of all aspects of virtue.
It then states how to develop aspiration:31"
Its root, in turn, is constant meditation On karma's fruitional effects.
This means that the way to develop aspiration is to meditate on how
pleasant and unpleasant effects arise from virtuous and nonvirtuous karma
respectively. This is because it is taught that faith acts as the basis for
yearning, so that the faith of conviction in the two types of karma and
their effects will generate two kinds of desire: to eliminate nonvirtuous
karma and to adopt virtuous karma. Furthermore, you consider karma and its
effects in general, and in particular, the causality underlying the
benefits of the bodhisattva deeds and the faults of violating them.
Understand these from the relevant sections of this text.311
Once you aspire to the Mahayana, you enter its door through a commitment to
clear away all faults and achieve all good qualities for yourself and
others. You must exhort yourself, thinking, "I will have to meditate for
many eons to purity myself of every single fault along with its latent
propensity and to develop every single good quality to the fullest extent.
Yet since I have not even a fraction of the joyous perseverance needed to
clear away faults or
196      The Great Treatise on the Stages of the Path
accomplish good qualities, I have pointlessly wasted my leisure." [437]
Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds states:™
I will destroy the immeasurable
Faults of myself and others.
To destroy each fault
Will take an ocean of eons.
But if I cannot see in myself even a fraction Of the effort needed to
terminate a fault, I am a source of measureless suffering. Why does my
heart not break? I will accomplish numerous Good qualities for myself and
others. To cultivate each good quality Requires an ocean of eons,
But I have never conditioned myself To even a mere fraction of a good
quality. Somehow I have obtained this life— It is appalling to waste it.
(2") Developing the power of steadfastness
Developing the power of steadfastness means that you bring to conclusion,
without turning back, anything at which you joyously persevere. First, do
not try to do everything; examine the situation carefully. If you see that
you can do it, you engage in it; whereas if you cannot do it, you do not
engage in it. You should not even start in the first place things you will
do for a while and then discard. The reason is that if you become
habituated to giving up in the middle what you have committed yourself to
do, then through this conditioning you will in other lives again abandon
your commitment to the training, etc. Consequently, your sin will increase
in that life, and in subsequent lives the suffering that is the effect of
this sin will increase. Furthermore, you will not accomplish other virtues
because you will be thinking of carrying out your earlier commitment; there
will be an inferior result because you turned away from your earlier
commitment; and your earlier commitment itself will not be fulfilled
because you did not follow through. In sum, committing yourself to do
something but leaving it unfinished is a hindrance to your accomplishment
of other projects, and the conditioning also destabilizes your commitment
to the vows you have taken. In this vein Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds
states:313
The Perfection of]oyous Perseverance      197
First I examine the endeavor
And then undertake it or not.
If unable, it is best not to undertake it.
But once begun, I will not turn back.
Otherwise 1 will be conditioned to this [starting and then
stopping] in other lives And my sin and suffering will increase. Also,
other actions and their results Will be poor and unaccomplished. [438]
Therefore, if you want to complete what you have committed yourself to do,
cultivate three types of pride. Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds
states:314
You should have pride in three areas: Action, ability, and afflictions.
Pride about action means that no matter who else may be your companion as
you practice the path, you do not count on them but accomplish it yourself
alone. Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds states:315
"I alone shall do it." This is pride about action.
Also Nagarjuna's Friendly Letter (Suhrl-Iekha) says:316
Liberation depends on oneself;
It never occurs through the help of others.
The thought, "I alone shall achieve this without having any expectation of
others," is similar to pride, so it is given the name "pride about action."
Pride about ability means that you accomplish your own and others' welfare,
thinking: "Since living beings are under the power of afflictions, they are
unable to achieve even their own welfare, much less the welfare of others.
I am able to accomplish the welfare of both myself and others." Engaging in
the Bodhisattva Deeds says:317
The beings of this world, subject to the afflictions, Cannot achieve their
own welfare. They are not as able as I am. So I shall do it for them.
Furthermore, practice while thinking, "If these beings strive at lowly
activities without interruption, why should I not perform the
198      The Great Treatise on the Stages of the Path
actions that will achieve the perfect effect?" Engaging in the Bodhisattva
Deeds says:118
If others perform lowly actions,
How can I be idle?
However, when you achieve these two prides [about action and ability], you
should not do so with self-conceit, out of contempt for others. Rather,
regard others with compassion, and do not mix in any pride. Engaging in the
Bodhisattva Deeds states:-11*1
I do not do it out of pride, I should have no pride.
Thinking, "Others are not capable; I am able," again resembles pride, so it
is labelled "pride."
Pride about afflictions means that with contempt for the afflictions on all
occasions, you think, "I shall be victorious over these; they shall never
defeat me." [439] It means being steadfast after you have generated the
courageous thought to destroy the incompatible factors. Engaging in the
Bodhisattva Deeds states:™
I shall conquer all;
Nothing shall defeat me.
I, a child of the Victorious lion,
Shall continue to have this pride.
Otherwise, if you lose courage, even a small incompatible factor will harm
you. Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds says:331
Even a crow acts like a garuda
When it finds a dying snake.
If I am feeble,
Even a slight shortcoming will harm me.
How can one who gives up, discouraged. Find freedom from destitution?
Sha-ra-wa said:
The happiness of those who cast aside the teaching does not exceed their
happiness before doing so. Consider the fact that if you give up the
teaching in this lifetime, you must hereafter undergo endless suffering. If
you make no effort, the afflictions will not look upon you with compassion.
Also, the remedy will not say, "You are unable to cultivate me, so I will
complete the task for you." Even the buddhas and bodhisattvas will not be
able to protect you.
The Perfection of Joyous Perseverance     199
If you apply the aforementioned three prides, even great incompatible
factors cannot block you, so you must generate these three kinds of pride.
Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds states:322
Against one who strives with pride Even great obstacles will be in trouble.
So with a steadfast mind 1 will overcome my shortcomings.
Otherwise, if practitioners are defeated by their shortcomings, their
desire to conquer the afflictions of the three realms will be an
embarrassment among the learned. Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds says:323
If I am defeated by shortcomings,
My desire to conquer the three realms is a joke.
It is called "pride about afflictions" because you have contempt for the
afflictions and then want to destroy them.
Some commentators to Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds explain this pride
about afflictions differently, but I think the above explanation accords
with the text. [440]
Thus, stop expecting something from others and put on the armor of doing it
alone. That is, be confident and think, "Unlike me, others cannot do it. I
can do it." When you practice with this perspective, you are sure that you
will defeat the afflictions—that they will never defeat you—and you
consider that it would be a mistake to abandon your commitment after a
while. Train yourself until your mind is steadfast in the desire to finish
everything to which you have committed yourself after you have carefully
examined whether you can do it.
(3") Developing the power of joy
You develop the power of joy after the power of aspiration, an intense
yearning, produces a joyous perseverance not previously present, and you
have achieved the power of steadfastness (also called the power of pride)
which causes the perseverance that has already developed to be
irreversible. The power of joy means that when you first engage in an
activity, you do it joyfully, and once you have engaged, you have a sense
of being insatiable in that you do not want to discontinue the activity.
With respect to how you develop this sense of insatiability, Engaging in
the Bodhisattva Deeds says:324
200     The Great Treatise on the Stages of the Path
Like those who want the pleasure that results from play, Bodhisattvas are
passionate About any activity they have to do. Insatiable, they take joy in
their work.
So strive with an attitude like that of children who engage in play without
being satiated. That is, you must be just as insatiable about what causes
pleasurable results as you are about the results themselves. For, if
ordinary persons strive even when they are uncertain whether they will
obtain a pleasant result, what need is there to speak about activities
which are certain to bear pleasurable results? Engaging in the Bodhisattva
Deeds states:*"
Even though they work for the sake of happiness, It is uncertain whether
happiness will come. But as for those whose work itself is happiness, How
can they be happy unless they work?
This is also the reason why being satiated is wrong. [441] Engaging in the
Bodhisattva Deeds says:326
If I am never satiated by sensual desires.
Which are like honey on a razor's edge,
How could I be satiated with merit,
Whose fruition is happiness and peace?
Develop an attitude of being insatiable, thinking, "Indulging in sensual
pleasures is like licking honey off the sharp blade of a razor; it is the
source of a little sweetness, but it slices up the tongue. If I cannot get
enough of this experience, which gives me great suffering for the sake of
just a slight, temporary pleasure, what sense could there be in feeling
that I have had enough of the collections of merit and sublime wisdom,
which give flawless, infinite happiness, both immediate and long-term?"
Thus, in order to bring to completion the virtuous activities in which you
have engaged, enter them as a sun-scorched elephant enters a pleasing lotus
pond at noon. Train in this attitude until you produce it. Engaging in the
Bodhisattva Deeds states:327
Thus, in order to finish the work,
I shall enter into it just as
An elephant, scorched by the midday sun.
Comes upon a pond and plunges in.
The Perfection of Joyous Perseverance     201
(4") The power of relinquishment
If you become physically or mentally fatigued from your perseverance, you
must rest for a while. Otherwise, you will become exhausted and very
disheartened, thereby later preventing your joy* ous perseverance.
Immediately after you have rested, persevere again, and when you have
completely finished your earlier activity, do not let this satisfy you. You
must joyously persevere at other, higher activities. Engaging in the
Bodhisattva Deeds says:32ti
When my strength declines,
I shall leave the task so I can do it later.
When it is really done, I shall set it aside,
Seeking the next task and the next.
The next task is important, because if you consider each earlier good
quality sufficient, this will be a big obstacle to the attainment of many
higher attributes.
The above presentation shows how to joyously persevere. Do not overexert
yourself. You must avoid both being overly intense and being overly
relaxed, so make your effort continuous like a river. [442] The glorious
Matrceta's Praise in One Hundred and Fifty Verses states:32"
In order to make yourself more exalted You never overexerted or relaxed too
much. Thus your good qualities are indistinguishable By former and later
phases.
Bo-do-wa also said:
The scouts of Se-mo-dru-wa (Se-mo-dru-ba), for instance, never get there.
But the scouts of Chang-wa (Byang-ba) take their time at the start and
pursue the robbers until they reach them. Likewise, practice at a measured
pace that you can sustain. For example, a louse proceeds at a modest pace
but never stops, so it soon arrives; whereas a flea takes great successive
leaps and then stops, so it never gets there.
(c") Based on the elimination of unfavorable conditions and the
accumulation of favorable conditions, being intent on joyously
persevering330
After you have thus identified the three conditions unfavorable to joyous
perseverance, you attend to their remedies. You generate
202     The Great Treatise on the Stages of the Path
three powers: the power of aspiration which is the favorable condition for
weakening those as-yet unweakened unfavorable conditions, the power of
steadfastness which is the cause of not turning back once you have started,
and the power of joy which never wants to discontinue the activity once you
have engaged in it. Through the power of relinquishment you become adept at
how to joyously persevere. At this point you must develop the power of
being intent on joyous perseverance, so I will explain this.
As to how you are to act when you joyously persevere at eliminating what is
to be eliminated, Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds states:331
As a seasoned warrior approaches
A sword-fight with an enemy,
I shall parry the blows of the afflictions
And strongly strike the afflictions, my enemies.
For example, when seasoned warriors—the adepts who are accustomed to the
activity of fighting battles—enter into a sword fight, etc., with their
enemy, they do not put value only on destroying their opponent. Rather,
they must accomplish two things—skillfully avoiding the blows of weapons
directed at them and destroying their opponent. Likewise, when
practitioners battle their afflictions, they must persevere as they become
proficient in two things—taking defensive precautions and thus avoiding a
wound to their mind, and, on the offensive, destroying the afflictions by
applying their remedies. [443] For, otherwise, while they may use the
remedy to stop the activity of one portion of the afflictions, they are
either robbed of some aspect of virtue by other afflictions, or else they
develop a great fault in their mind so that the harm of the afflictions and
the creation of virtue are equal, in which case it will be hard to make
further progress in the virtuous practice of applying the remedy.
To cite an example, some people may think that knowledge is most important
for practicing the teaching and make knowledge alone crucial. When they
then inquire into the teachings, they dispel by means of study the
confusion of ignorance, but meanwhile— because they were not cautious about
the other afflictions—their mind-stream is utterly ruined by the stain of
wrong behavior. Other people may think that disciplining the mind is much
more important than knowledge and thus emphasize meditation. Casting away
caution about the enemy, confusion, they neither study nor learn the
teachings, so they become greatly confused about engaging in
The Perfection of joyous Pt
what is to be adopted and rejecting what is to be cast aside under the
rules of the vows they have taken and are thus continually overcome by
infractions,
If in battle your sword were to fall from your hand, you would without
hesitation immediately retrieve it out of fear for your life. Likewise,
when you battle the afflictions and lose the weapon of mindfulness (which
does not forget the subjective and objective aspects of engaging in what is
to be adopted and rejecting what is to be cast aside), you must immediately
reapply mindfulness out of fear of falling into miserable realms. Engaging
in the Bodhisattva Deeds says:332
If you drop your sword in battle.
Out of fear, you quickly pick it up.
Likewise, if I lose my weapon of mindfulness.
In fear of hell, I quickly retrieve it.
The protector Nagarjuna [in his Friendly Letter] also taught the great
importance of mindfulness:333
O lord, the Sugata declared mindfulness of the body
To be the one path to follow.
Hold fast to it and guard it.
When mindfuiness declines, all virtues perish.
Furthermore, regarding the object to which mindfulness attends, mindfulness
apprehends an object that wisdom has fully discerned; mindfulness does not
distinguish its object on its own. [444]
Question: What does wisdom discern?
Reply: In general wisdom discerns everything to be adopted and everything
to be cast aside as explained in scripture; in particular, it discerns what
is to be adopted and what is to be cast aside according to the vows that
you have taken. Therefore, once you apply mindfulness and vigilance to
these, you will complete your practice; you will not be successful by just
applying mindfulness and vigilance within the narrow confines of attention
to an object of meditation.
What is more, when warriors are in a battle, they strive from the beginning
not to lose their sword; when by chance they do drop it, they pick it up
immediately. These two actions rest on a fear of being killed that is not
mere words. Likewise, those who cultivate the path are afraid to lose the
mindfulness that does not forget what is to be adopted and what eliminated;
even if they do lose it, they immediately reapply it. These two actions are
based on
204      The Great Treatise on the Stages of the Path
the development in their minds of a real terror of falling into miserable
realms as a result of the pollution of infractions and faults that occur
when mindfulness lapses. This, in turn, depends on having made karma and
its effects central to their practice and then sustaining that approach.
Those who fail to develop the awareness that these points are profound
instructions sever the root of the good qualities ensuing from the practice
that delights the learned, the sacred foundation of the path.
Question: Well, why is it necessary to look with fear upon even minor
misbehavior, and not let it continue but immediately stop it?
Reply: Take the example of a poisoned arrow that makes a tiny surface
wound. Before long, the poison from this wound will spread throughout the
entire body. You must operate on the wound and remove the poison.
Similarly, even when wrong behavior does not make anything more than a
small wound in the mind, if you ignore it, it will quickly pervade your
mind so that it becomes large. Therefore, from the start you must prevent
wrongdoing before it takes place and, if it does happen, you must
discontinue it immediately. Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds states:134
Just as poison spreads throughout the body,
Carried by the blood,
So a fault pervades the mind
If it finds an opportunity. [445]
Question: Well, how do those who want victory over the afflictions apply
mindfulness and vigilance?
Reply: You must concentrate, just as Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds
says:3SS
A practitioner must be as concentrated As someone carrying a pot full of
mustard oil Who is fearful when a swordsman before him Threatens to kill
him if he spills a drop.
Understand this from the scriptural statement with respect to the border
region in the story of Katyayana.33* While you are concentrating, if in
general you should behave wrongly or in particular you should experience
the causes of laziness—such as sleepiness, etc.—then you must not assent to
them but must confront and avert them. Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds
states:337
Thus, if a snake came onto your lap, You would hastily stand up.
The Perfection of joyous Perseverance     205
Just so, if sleepiness and indolence come, Quickly avert them.
Furthermore, do not merely discontinue faults, but actively feel
displeasure at their having occurred. Contemplate as follows, "Because I
proceeded in this way in the past as well, I have been wandering in cyclic
existence up to now. In particular, it is especially blameworthy that I
have taken the bodhisattva vows and yet continue with things that are
incompatible with the vows' precepts." Become inspired to henceforth
restrain yourself, thinking, "From now on I shall make sure that this fault
never occurs." Frequently employ both these attitudes. Engaging in the
Bodhisattva Deeds says:33*
Whenever a fault occurs, I shall reproach myself and long ponder, "By all
means I will do whatever it takes So that this shall never happen again."
Strive at any deep causes that give rise to the continuous, powerful
mindfulness that is the root of this practice. Rely on such activities as
keeping the company of excellent teachers and excellent companions, and
broad learning, which are the causes of this powerful mindfulness. In this
vein Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds states:33*
"In any of these situations
1 will practice mindfulness."
With this motive aspire to meet teachers
And engage in appropriate activities. [446]
In summary, you must study and discern well what bodhisattva training
requires you to adopt and to cast aside, and then joyously persevere at
continuously being mindful in all your conduct of what you have understood
about what to adopt and what to cast aside. Hence, it is extremely
important not to err about that at which you are to persevere.
(d") How to use joyous perseverance to make the mind and body serviceable
The method for using joyous perseverance to make the mind and body
serviceable is the power of mastery. Santideva sets forth in the chapter on
conscientiousness [in his Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds] the necessity
of learning the bodhisattva trainings; the extremely grave consequences if
you do not train in these once you
206     The Great Treatise on the Stages of the Path
have pledged to do so; how to regard the afflictions as the enemy; and the
ways to generate the courage that looks upon the hardship of battling the
afflictions as an ornament rather than as a burden. Meditate on these
before taking up the task of training in the bodhisattva deeds. Thus
stopping all the inhibitions that prevent you from using your body and mind
for virtuous activity, rise gladly to that task. Engaging in the
Bodhisattva Deeds says:340
In order to have strength for everything
Before engaging in any activity
I will recall the advice on conscientiousness
And then gladly rise to the task.
Question: What form will the joyous perseverance produced by such efforts
take?
Reply: Just as wind drives a piece of cotton to and fro, a joyful energy,
enthused for virtue, controls your body and mind. When you act along with
this energy, joyous perseverance is well-established. Once you produce
this, you will easily achieve all the collections. Engaging in the
Bodhisattva Deeds states:341
Just like cotton under the power
Of a wind that blows to and fro
So I will be driven by enthusiasm;
In this way I will accomplish all.
Although such tasks are difficult, it is wrong to give them up. Rather, as
the glorious Matrceta's Praise in One Hundred and Fifty Verses says, you
must make effort:342
"The sublime state, difficult to reach,
Is not attained without hardship."
Knowing this, you intensified your joyous perseverance
Without concern for yourself. [447]
(d') How to practice
You must practice any kind of joyous perseverance in association with the
six supremacies and all six perfections. The generosity of joyous
perseverance is establishing others in joyous perseverance after you have
stabilized yourself therein. The remaining perfections are in accord with
the earlier explanation.343
(e') A summary
The recollection and cultivation of the spirit of enlightenment—the
basis of the bodhisattva deeds-—inspires you to train in order to set
The Perfection of joyous Pc
all living beings in joyous perseverance. So steadily increase this spirit,
and then aspire to and train in the methods of joyous perseverance for
those at high levels. Also, strive as you are able at the methods of
learning joyous perseverance for a beginning bodhisattva. In particular,
effectively stop the various forms of discouragement, these being uniquely
subject to elimination by joyous perseverance. Mentally put on the armor of
joyous perseverance that is enthusiastic about the following: the goal of
enlightenment, the aim of accomplishing the happiness and eliminating the
suffering of all living beings, the very long period of time, the limitless
collections, and the immeasurable hardships. Strive at this attitude
because, as the Questions ofSubdhu Sutra says, just by generating the
powerful surge of such a resolve, you accumulate a great wave of merit. If
you do not do this, you fail to secure your Mahayana lineage, and you are
also continually stained by much wrongdoing. Then, in other lives as well,
you will find it very difficult to learn the bodhisattva deeds. Also, after
you have become aware of such things, even if you do not practice
perfectly, motivate yourself in that direction. If you then joyously
persevere to the extent that you are able, then, as the Questions o/Subahu
Sutra says, you will quickly complete the perfection of joyous perseverance
in future lives, without suffering and with little difficulty.

14
The Perfections of Meditative Stabilization and Wisdom
fv) How to train in the perfection of meditative stabilization (a') What
meditative stabilization is (b') How to begin the cultivation of meditative
stabilization (c') The divisions of meditative stabilization (d') How to
practice (e'J A summary
(vi) How to train in the perfection of wisdom (a') What wisdom is
(b') How to begin the generation of wisdom (c'} The divisions of wisdom
(1') Wisdom that knows the ultimate
(2') Wisdom thai knows the conventional
(3') Wisdom that knows how to ad for the welfare of living beings (d') How
to practice (e') A summary
(v) How to train in the perfection of meditative stabilization
The explanation of how to train in the perfection of meditative
stabilization has five parts:
1. What meditative stabilization is
2. How to begin the cultivation of meditative stabilization [448]
3. The divisions of meditative stabilization
4. How to practice
5. A summary
210     The Great Treatise on the Stages of the Path
(a') What meditative stabilization is
Meditative stabilization is a virtuous, one-pointed state of mind that
stays fixed on its object of meditation without distraction to other
things. The Bodhisattva Levels says:344
It is the one-pointed state of mind—stabilized on virtue, and either
mundane or supramundane—of bodhisattvas who have first studied and
reflected on the bodhisattvas' scriptural collections. Whether it is
oriented toward meditative serenity, toward insight, or toward both as the
path that conjoins them, understand that this one-pointed state of mind is
the bodhisattvas' meditative stabilization.
And Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds also says:345
Having thus generated joyous perseverance. Set your mind in meditative
concentration....
(b') How to begin the cultivation of meditative stabilization
Think over the benefits of cultivating meditative stabilization and the
faults of not cultivating it. I will explain this in the meditative
serenity section.346
(c') The divisions of meditative stabilization
In line with the above citation [from the Bodhisattva Levels], if you
subdivide meditative stabilization according to nature, there are two
kinds: mundane and supramundane; and if you do so according to orientation,
there are three kinds [oriented toward serenity, toward insight, or toward
both conjoined]. If you subdivide it according to function, there are three
types: meditative stabilization that stabilizes the body and mind in bliss
within the present life, meditative stabilization that achieves good
qualities, and meditative stabilization that carries out the welfare of
living beings. The first, meditative stabilization that stabilizes the body
and mind in bliss within the present life, is all meditative stabilizations
that generate mental and physical pliancy when you enter them with
equipoise. The second, meditative stabilization that achieves good
qualities, is all meditative stabilizations which accomplish good qualities
shared with sravakas—the superknowledges, liberations, totalities,
masteries, etc. The third, meditative stabilization that carries out the
welfare of living beings, is meditative stabilization that accomplishes the
eleven activities for others' welfare.
The Perfections of Meditative Stabilization and Wisdom     211
(d') How to practice
Whenever you practice any virtuous meditative stabilization, you do so in
association with the six supremacies and all six perfections. The
generosity of meditative stabilization is maintaining meditative
stabilization yourself and then establishing others in it. [449] Understand
the other perfections from the earlier explanation.347
<e') A summary
The recollection and cultivation of the spirit of enlightenment—the basis
of the bodhisattva deeds—is what inspires you to train in order to set all
living beings in uncontaminated meditative stabilization. After you have
increased the stability of this spirit, aspire to the high meditative
stabilizations and train in these. Even if you are unable to fully develop
the meditative stabilizations, you must strive to train from time to time
in one-pointed concentration to whatever extent you are able. For, if you
do not do so, you will be continually stained with the fault of breaking
the precepts, and in other lives as well you will find it most difficult to
learn the trainings for entering the many doors of the bodhisattvas'
meditative stabilizations. Whereas if you never give up your effort, even
in this life your mind will become steadily less distracted, making your
accumulations of virtue very powerful. In future lives, as the Questions
ofSubahu Sutra says, you will have physical and mental bliss and a joyful
mind, thereby easily completing the perfection of meditative stabilization.
I will not elaborate further here as I will be explaining this at length in
the meditative serenity section.
(vi) How to train in the perfection of wisdom
How to train in the perfection of wisdom has five parts:
1. What wisdom is
2. How to begin the generation of wisdom
3. The divisions of wisdom
4. How to practice
5. A summary
(a') What wisdom is
In general, wisdom is what thoroughly discerns the ontological status of
the object under analysis, but in this context wisdom refers to proficiency
in the five topics of knowledge and the like. The Bodhisattva Levels
says:348
212     The Great Treatise on the Stages of the Path
Know that the bodhisattvas' wisdom is the thorough analysis of phenomena
that engages or has engaged all of what is to be known and that operates
through focusing on the five topics of knowledge—Buddhist knowledge,
grammar, logic, technical arts, and medicine. [450]
Here, the wisdom that "engages" refers to wisdom prior to attaining the
bodhisattva levels; wisdom that "has engaged" refers to wisdom after
attaining such levels.
(b') How to begin the generation of wisdom
The way to begin the generation of wisdom is to contemplate the benefits of
generating wisdom and the faults of not generating it. Since I will explain
the benefits and faults of having or lacking the wisdom of
reality—selflessness—in the insight section, I will not elaborate on it
here.349 But I will discuss the remaining types of wisdom a little.
With respect to indicating wisdom's benefits, wisdom is the root of all
good qualities for this and future lives. As the protector Nagarjuna's
Hundred Verses on Wisdom {Prajna-s'ataka) says:350
Wisdom is the root of all good qualities, Seen and not yet seen. To achieve
both of these, Embrace wisdom. The great source for what you seek And for
liberation is knowledge. So, esteeming it from the start, Adhere to wisdom,
the great mother.
As the Verse Summary of the Perfection of Wisdom in Eight Thousand Lines
states, wisdom functions like an eye for the other five
perfections—generosity, etc.:351
When the other perfections are completed by wisdom, They acquire their eye
and fulfill their name, Just as a painting may be complete except for the
eyes, But until the eyes are drawn, no wage is obtained.
How wisdom is necessary for other good qualities is illustrated by the
example of a special piece of jewelry made of fine gold that becomes even
more breathtaking when adorned with a precious emerald. Likewise, if the
gold ornament of the five perfections from generosity to meditative
stabilization is adorned with wisdom, which is able to distinguish right
from wrong, they become more
The Perfections of Meditative Stabilization and Wisdom     213
magnificent, because wisdom makes them much purer. It is simitar to the way
that the mental consciousness, by distinguishing the merits and faults in
the objects of the five sensory faculties (the visual faculty, etc.),
causes you to engage in what is to be adopted or reject what is to be cast
aside. [451] This is what the glorious Aryasura's Compendium of the
Perfections says:352
The merits of generosity and so forth
Are more powerful with wisdom as their lord,
Just as an array of fine gold jewelry
Shines more brightly when inset with jewels.
It is this wisdom that renders vast
The capacity for virtue in the purpose of each one,
Just as the mind's additional power clearly displays
The respective objects of the sensory faculties.
Similarly, wisdom is also crucial for other faculties such as faith and so
on. When wisdom is present as lord, your generosity, faith, etc. understand
well the merit of virtue and the faults of stinginess and so forth, so you
become skilled at eliminating the afflictions and increasing good
qualities. The Compendium of the Perfections states:353
Among the various faculties of faith and so on, Wisdom is chief, as the
mind is to the sensory faculties. With wisdom as lord, you know what is a
fault and what merit, So you are skilled in the method of eliminating
afflictions.
Bodhisattvas depend on wisdom to purify the other five
perfections—generosity, etc. Even when they give their flesh to someone who
asks for it, they are unaffected by such thoughts as pride, discouragement,
etc. It is as though they were taking a cutting from a medicinal plant.
This is because their wisdom makes reality manifest. With the wisdom that
sees the troubles of both cyclic existence and the peace of nirvana, they
accomplish ethical discipline for the sake of others' welfare, so they
practice pure ethical discipline. Through wisdom they know the faults of
impatience and the merits of patience, and they then discipline their minds
so they are not overpowered by suffering and others' misperceptions of
them. With wisdom they understand well everything at which they joyously
persevere, so their perseverance brings great success on the path. And
through wisdom based on reasoning they accomplish the supreme delight and
bliss of the meditative stabilization that is fixed
214     The Great Treatise on the Stages of the Path
upon the meaning of reality. [452] The Compendium of the Perfections
states:35*
Once bodhisattvas have opened the clear eye of wisdom. Even when they give
their own flesh without a thought, They never feel high or low about it, As
if they were cutting a medicinal plant.
Intelligent ones do not practice ethical discipline for their own
aims;
They see the flaws in the prison of cyclic existence And aspire to release
the entire world from it. So of course they do not practice it for mundane
aims.
Injury done to the wise is not harmful
Because they possess the good quality of patience,
Like the best of very tame elephants
Who are patient with many different tasks.
Perseverance by itself ends in exhaustion;
If aided by its ally, wisdom, it achieves great purposes.
How could the supreme delight and bliss of such meditative
stabilizations
Be established in the minds of crude people who rely Upon reasoning that
has led them to a wrong path That is polluted by the great fault of
accumulated errors?
Two good qualities which may appear to be mutually exclusive prove to be
non-contradictory for those who have wisdom. When bodhisattvas have become
universal monarchs with authority over the entire world, they still do not
fall under the control of sensory objects. This is the power of having
wisdom as a royal minister. Similarly, the bodhisattvas' love that views
living beings with affection is intense, but it is not mixed with even a
trace of attachment; although they have a long-lasting and very forceful
compassion that cannot bear for living beings to suffer, they do not have
the laziness of being overcome with distress and thereby lacking enthusiasm
for virtue; they have immeasurable joy, but their minds are free of
instability which would distract them from their focus; and they are
continually possessed of great impartiality, but they
The Perfections of Meditative Stabilization and Wisdom     215
do not neglect for even a moment the welfare of all living beings. Wisdom
does all this, because it is what removes the impediments to achieving a
balanced strength in these good qualities. Thus the Compendium of the
Perfections states:355
Even bodhisattvas possessed of great kingdoms. Who have sensory objects
similar to divine substances, Remain uncorrupted in their very nature.
[453[ This is the power of having the virtue of wisdom as their minister.
Their love, inseparable from helping others, Is utterly free of stain from
attachment. Their compassion, unable to bear for others to suffer. Never
succumbs to laziness due to the burden of distress. Possessed of supreme
joy, they do not waver from the real. Their great impartiality never
neglects the welfai Great wisdom removes all that would counteract These
good qualities, and so it beautifies them.
Matrceta's Praise in Honor of One Worthy of Honor (Varnarha-varna-stotra)
also says:356
Without rejecting the real nature,
You are also in accord with the conventional.
Thus, you do not have to forsake the real nature that gives great certainty
that there is not even an atom of what your cognitive processes apprehend
as signs of true existence. And you are also in accord with and do not
contradict the conventional that gives deep certainty that effects arise
from their respective internal and external causes and conditions. For
others these appear to totally exclude each other, but for those who have
wisdom, there is compatibility and a lack of contradiction.
The Praise in Honor of One Worthy of Honor states:357
Regarding your proscriptions and prohibitions,
Some of your word is definitive
While some of it is not,
But between these, there is no contradiction.
The two facts—that there are many dissimilarities in proscriptions and
prohibitions between higher and lower vehicles and between sutra and
tantra, and that these are all the practices of a single person— are
contradictory for those who are confused and lack the power of intelligence
to seek the intended meaning of the innumerable
216     The Great Treatise on the Stages of the Path
scriptures. Yet through wisdom the learned know that these are not mutually
exclusive.
There are limitless things that the unwise see as contradictory and the
wise see as lacking contradiction—the presentations of the two truths and
the many prescriptions in one scripture that are prohibitions in others and
vice versa. To say that wisdom distinguishes the non-contradictory,
intended meaning behind them is the peerless praise of wisdom. [454] In
short, all good qualities come from wisdom. The Compendium of the
Perfections says:356
How wondrous that such excellent things come from wisdom That is like a
mother who loves her child.
The ten powers of the sugata, most excellent of strengths;
All superior activities, without parallel;
And all other collections of virtues in their entirety
Arise based on such wisdom as their cause.
The arts and the best treasures in all worlds;
The variety of sacred learning that is like an eye;
Protections, awarenesses, mantras, and so on;
The different attributes of the teachings that set these forth;
The multitude of enumerations; and the doors to liberation;
All such types of service to the world
That display the great power of the conqueror's children,
All arise from the power of wisdom.
The faults of not having wisdom are as follows. Without wisdom, generosity
and the other perfections are as if blind. The Verse Summary of the
Perfection of Wisdom in Eight Thousand Lines states:""
How could billions of blind people without a guide, Who do not know the
way, enter the city? Once these five perfections lack wisdom, they are
blind; As they lack a guide, they cannot reach enlightenment.
Consequently, generosity and the other perfections do not become pure, and
you do not find the correct view. The Compendium of the Perfections
states:360
If those intent upon the final fruit are without wisdom, Their generosity
does not purify them. The Buddha said, "Giving for others' sake is supreme
generosity." Other kinds of giving serve only to increase one's wealth.
And also:
The Perfections of Meditative Stabilization and Wisdom      117
Ethical discipline does not become pure
Unless wisdom's light dispels the darkness.
Ethical discipline without wisdom usually
Becomes sullied by afflictions through faulty understanding.
If your mind is muddled fay the fault of erring intelligence, You have no
interest in keeping the virtue of patience. You maintain a dislike for
weighing merit and fault, And are like an unworthy king who becomes famous.
(455]
For adepts, wisdom is lauded as foremost;
Nothing else is as subtle or profound.
Without wisdom, you do not head straight for the mental path
That is unclouded by the defects of desire.
Without maintaining joyous perseverance in wisdom's ways, Your view will
not become pure.
Here, the "king who becomes famous" refers to an unworthy king for whom
fame occurs once, but then declines.
You do not repel the darkness of delusion's confusion as long as wisdom's
great light does not shine, but when it does, you cast away the darkness,
so you must make an effort to generate wisdom with whatever capacity and
strength you have. The Compendium of the Perfections says:361
Like the dawning of the sun's great light, The enormous power of wisdom's
light arises And the concealing darkness in beings' minds Is completely
dispelled, only its name left behind.
And also:
Therefore, with all the power at your disposal,
Work hard at the methods for producing such wisdom.
What are the causes of confusion? They are relying on bad friends;
laziness; indolence; oversleeping; taking no pleasure in analysis and
discernment; lack of interest in the vast variety of phenomena; the pride
of thinking "I know" when you do not; the major wrong views; and being
discouraged and thinking, "Someone like me cannot do this," and thus not
taking pleasure in relying upon the learned. The Compendium of the
Perfections says:w
218      The Great Treatise on the Stages of the Path
Laziness, indolence, and reliance upon bad friends,
Being governed by sleep, no feeling for discernment,
No interest in the Sage's most sublime wisdom,
Inquiring under the influence of false pride,
Lacking the faith to rely upon learned persons
Due to attachment to self from feelings of inadequacy,
The great poison of false concepts which are wrong views—
These are the causes of confusion.
Therefore, as the Compendium of the Perfections says:363
Serve and venerate a guru worthy of trust, And study to achieve wisdom.
Once you rely on a learned person, you must study in accord with your
capacity, for if you do not, you will not produce the wisdom that arises
from study and the wisdom that arises from reflection, whereupon you will
not know what to meditate upon, [456] And if you do study, you will produce
the wisdom that arises from reflection by thinking over the meaning of what
you have studied, and from this you will gain vast wisdom that arises from
meditation. Again the glorious Aryasura says:3M
Little study is like blindness—you do not know how to meditate.
Without study, what could there be to reflect upon?
Therefore, from the cause of making an effort to study
You meditate in accord with reflection and thereby gain vast
The venerable Maitreya also says in the Sublime Continuum:^5 The
conceptualizations of the three spheres Are asserted to be cognitive
obscurations, While conceptualizations such as stinginess and the like Are
asserted to be afflictive obscurations.
Solely wisdom is the cause
Of their elimination, nothing else,
So wisdom is supreme. Study is its basis,
So study is supreme.
And Santideva's Compendium of the Trainings in Verse (Stksa-samuccaya-
karika) says:366
Be forbearing and then study; Stay in a forest, and then Persevere at
meditative equipoise.
The Perfections of Meditative Stabilization and Wisdom     219
His auto-commentary [Compendium of Trainings] to this says:367
With impatience, you become disheartened and cannot forbear, so your
perseverance at study, etc., declines. And without study, you do not know
the means for either meditative stabilization or for clearing away the
afflictions. Therefore, without becoming disheartened, study.
And the Questions ofNarayana Formula (Namyana-pariprccha-dharani)
also says:368
Just so, child of good lineage, if you study, wisdom will come. If you are
possessed of wisdom, the afflictions will be stilled. Once you have no
afflictions, demons do not have a chance with you.
Scripture and reasoning establish the following: Those who wish to properly
practice the teaching need a broad study of the stainless scriptures and
their commentaries, the unexcelled cause that gives rise to the wisdom
which thoroughly distinguishes phenomena, which is the sacred life-force of
the path. [457] However, not achieving wisdom while thinking that a broad
study is necessary to develop it is simply the fault of your not being
convinced that you need the analytical meditation of discerning wisdom when
the time comes for practice, and of having the mistaken conviction that
thinks that analytical meditation is not necessary. Therefore, those of you
who want what is best for yourselves should eliminate such a mistaken
conviction as though getting rid of poison. Nal-jor-ba-chen-bo said:
Jo-wo-pa (Jo-bo-ba), when it comes to accomplishing the state of omniscient
enlightenment, whether you show off or conceal that you studied only a
handbook, you cannot get anywhere without reading a yak's load of books.
Pu-chung-wa (Phu-chung-ba) placed an opened sacred text beside his pillow
and said:
We must learn the texts, so even though you do not get a chance to read
them, make a wish to read them all. If someone said that you should
practice the teaching without understanding it, how would you do it?
Bo-do-wa said three times to a monk of Jen-nga-wa (sPyan-snga-ba) who was
escorting him a short distance, "You are enjoying yourself too much." He
then continued:
You rely upon my teacher who is like the sky covering the earth, so do not
salivate over other teachers. Since you do not have to
220     The Great Treatise on the Stages of the Path
read the root texts and their commentaries and mark their corresponding
passages, you do not have a lot of work. You are happy because you do not
think about cause and effect, while you work at certain activities by means
of certain tantric practices. And you can be satisfied with these many
things?
Sha-ra-wa said:
Until you become a buddha, your studies are not finished. They are finished
when you are a buddha.
Ga-ma-pa (Ka-ma-ba) said:
Some say, "When you practice the teachings, what need is there of
knowledge," and they degenerate. This idea is a real danger for those of us
who have studied little. Others say, "If you really try you do not need
knowledge." This is very dangerous. If you are making a big effort at the
teaching, knowledge is required; since it is not completed in this brief
lifetime, we must resolve, "I will study continually through many lifetimes
without interrupting the succession of lives having leisure and
opportunity." Some think that meditators do not need to study, only those
who explain the teachings do. But those who explain the teachings and do
not study merely run the risk of sinning, while it is precisely the
meditator who must study to avoid straying from the path. [458]
Thus you must be convinced that wisdom and the study that causes it are
indispensable for proper practice. Moreover, unless you reach certainty
about the need for analytical meditation when you practice, you will have a
very hard time getting anywhere.
Even some well-regarded scholars of the scriptural collections claim,
"Understand study to be either a mere preliminary to practice or to be a
background support—like mountains at the back of a valley—but not the
actual instructions. For this reason, you need practice to quickly attain
buddhahood and study to benefit the Buddha's teaching." This is
contradictory nonsense. There are just two kinds of teaching: teaching as
scripture and teaching that has been put into practice; the former makes
known the procedures for practice, and the latter is assimilating the
practice after you have understood the procedures. Therefore, doing the
practice without error is the best way to uphold the teaching. Moreover,
unerringly upholding the teaching in the sense of practice depends upon an
unerring understanding of scriptural teaching.
Therefore, it is not right to forget what you have studied at the time of
practice, for you must first know many teachings and then put their very
meaning into practice when the time comes to do so.
The Perfections of Meditative Stabilization and Wisdom      221
Even if you do not understand the teachings from the outset, do not be
discouraged, but strive to study them in accord with your mental capacity,
as much as feasible, whether that be a little or a lot. Do not make study
and practice into separate things. Rather, the very thing that you practice
must be exactly what you first study and reflect upon. Beginning
bodhisattvas must depend with certainty on a single procedure of the path—a
practice that is not biased toward one side but is complete in all aspects
of the path. When their mental capacity is small, they engage in
conditioning themselves to just this process of study followed by practice.
If their mental capacity is great or, though at first small, has become
greater through conditioning, they steadily expand upon the very stage of
the path they know, proceeding in connection with all the scriptures and
their stainless commentaries. There is no need for them to pursue something
else to study besides these. [459]
Therefore if instructions are accurate and complete, then, although
summarized, all of the key points of the sutra and tantra paths and the
paths of the higher and lower vehicles must be covered; once they have been
explained at length, you must be able go through all the teachings. Until
you reach something like this, it is possible to feel delight about just
some portion of your practice, but it is impossible to become certain about
the key points of practice for the complete corpus of the teachings.
Consequently, rely upon excellent teachers and companions. Make a
foundation of pure ethical discipline to which you commit yourself. Listen
again and again to the instructions, do four sessions of meditation, and
then sustain the object of meditation and its subjective aspects. After you
have made fervent supplications to the deities and gurus, strive at all the
causes of engaging from many perspectives in accumulating the collections
and purifying obscurations. If you do this, you will become profoundly
certain that the good qualities in your mind will steadily improve.
As the former excellent beings said:
Make all the teachings you have previously heard completely clear in your
mind. You must reflect upon them again and again, evaluate them, and
deliberate on them. When you have let yourself forget the teachings, there
is nothing gained by learning to stabilize your attention on one object of
meditation. The best meditators are the best teachers. Mediocre meditators
become mediocre teachers. You need knowledge of the teaching and
commensurate meditation that both proceed to ever greater levels together.
222      The Great Treatise on the Stages of the Path
Once you gain a firm certainty from such reflection, you do not pay heed
when bad friends say, "All thoughts, virtuous and nonvirtuous, are
conceptualizations and are therefore to be eliminated," but rather think,
"The teachings do not say this nor do my teachers assert it." Otherwise, if
you are a person who possesses a little faith but no wisdom, you are like
the leading edge of water running downhill—you go anywhere you are led,
taking anything said to be true, wanting to cry when you see others crying,
wanting to laugh when you see others laugh.
(c) The divisions of wisdom
The presentation of the divisions of wisdom has three parts:
1. Wisdom that knows the ultimate [460]
2. Wisdom that knows the conventional
3. Wisdom that knows how to act for the welfare of living beings
(1') Wisdom that knows the ultimate
Wisdom that knows the ultimate cognizes the reality of selflessness, either
by means of a concept or in a direct manner.
(2') Wisdom that knows the conventional
Wisdom that knows the conventional is wisdom that is proficient at the five
topics of knowledge. The Ornament for the Mahayana Sutras says:369
Without making effort at the five topics of knowledge, Even supreme noble
beings do not reach omniscience. So they must strive for these so as to
refute others. To care for others, and to know everything.
The topics are distinguished by the different sorts of purposes for
pursuing them. To refute those who do not believe in the teaching, you
pursue knowledge of grammar and logic. To help those who do believe, you
pursue knowledge of the arts and medicine. To achieve knowledge of all for
yourself, you pursue Buddhist knowledge. But to attain buddhahood, there
are no such distinctions between them; you must pursue all the topics of
knowledge.
(3') Wisdom that knows how to act for the welfare of living beings
Wisdom that knows how to act for the welfare of living beings knows the way
to accomplish blamelessly the welfare of beings in their present and future
lives.
The Perfections of Meditative Stabilization and Wisdom      223
(d') How to practice
When you develop the three types of wisdom, you do so in association with
the six supremacies and all six perfections. The generosity of wisdom is
establishing others in wisdom after you have stabilized yourself in it. The
remaining perfections are as presented before.37"
(e') A summary
Even if you have the wisdom that perceives emptiness, it does not become a
bodhisattva deed without the spirit of enlightenment, so steadily increase
the spirit of enlightenment—the basis of the bodhisattva deeds. Next,
aspire to the wisdom of those at high levels and then train your mind in
it. From this moment you must strive to produce the three types of
wisdom—the method for completing the peerless, great collection of sublime
wisdom—and you must study. For, if you do not do this, you contradict the
principal precept and will then be destroyed by faults and infractions; in
future lives as well you will not take pleasure in broad learning.
Consequently, you will be unable to learn the bodhisattva trainings. [461]
Whereas, if in this life you strive at the methods of developing wisdom,
you prevent the infraction of not training in the six perfections as
promised; then in other lives as well, as the Questions of Subahu Sutra
says, you will easily be able to complete the perfection of wisdom.
Nowadays, from among the six perfections—the center post of both the surra
and tantra paths—there exist in slight measure the stages of the practice
of meditative stabilization, but the stages of the practice of the other
five perfections have disappeared. Therefore, I have explained the key
points of their practice in abbreviated form and a little of the method for
generating certain knowledge of them. Below, I will teach at length two
topics that come from the classic texts: the stages of how to practice
insight—-wisdom that observes the real nature and the diversity of
phenomena—and the stages of the practice of meditative serenity, which is
meditative stabilization.
All bodhisattvas who will attain buddhahood do so in reliance upon the six
perfections. The Bodhisattva Levels says this emphatically at the
conclusion of its discussions of each of the six perfections. Hence, these
six perfections are to be known as the one path traveled by bodhisattvas of
the past, present, and future. And
224     The Great Treatise on the Stages of the Path
because these six are the great ocean of all virtues, they are the
perfect summary of the key points of practice. The Bodhisattva Levels
states:371
Bodhisattvas who attain unsurpassed, perfect enlightenment by these six
perfections are called a great river, a great ocean of virtues; generosity
and so forth are the most precious causes of all excellent things for all
living beings. Accordingly, there is nothing comparable to the perfections'
immeasurable completion of the collections of merit and subiime wisdom and
their fruit of unsurpassed, perfect enlightenment. [462]
15
Helping Others to Mature: The Four Ways to Gather Disciples
(b) Training in the four ways to gather disciples that help others t (i)
What the four ways to gather disciples are (ii) The reason they are
stipulated as four (iii) Their functions
(iv) The need for those who gather a following to rely on them (v) A
somewhat elaborate explanation
(b) Training in the four ways to gather disciples that help others to
mature
Training in the four ways to gather disciples that help others to mature
has five parts:
1. What the four ways to gather disciples are
2. The reason they are stipulated as four
3. Their functions
4. The need for those who gather a following to rely on them
5. A somewhat elaborate explanation
(i) What the four ways to gather disciples are
(1) Generosity is as earlier explained in the section on this
perfection.172 (2) Pleasant speech is teaching the perfections to
disciples.
226     The Great Treatise on the Stages of the Path
(3) Working at the aims is setting disciples to work on the aims as they
have been taught, or involving them in correctly taking up these aims. (4)
Consistency of behavior is stabilizing yourself in the very aims in which
you have established others, and then training in them. The Ornament for
the Mahayana Sutras says:373 Generosity is the same as before; teaching the
perfections, Involving others in taking them up, and involving yourself Are
asserted to be pleasant speech, working at the aims, And consistency of
behavior, respectively.
(ii) The reason they are stipulated as four
Question: Why are the ways of gathering disciples set as four?
Reply: In order to gather a following of disciples for the sake of
establishing them in virtue, they must first be pleased. This, moreover,
depends on your giving them material things, providing benefit to their
bodies. Thus pleased, they first must know how to connect to the path. That
is to say, by using pleasant speech to explain the teaching, you cause them
to cast away ignorance and doubt, and then to correctly apprehend the aims.
Once they have understood these, you cause them to accomplish virtue by
working at these aims. However, if you have not accomplished virtue
yourself, when you say to others, "You have to engage in this, you have to
reject that/' they will say, "Why do you tell others, 'Accomplish this
aim,' when you do not accomplish it yourself? You still need somebody else
to correct you." They will not listen to what they have to practice. But if
you are practicing yourself, they will think, "This person is established
in the virtue to which he (or she) is leading us, so we will definitely
derive benefit and happiness if we accomplish it." They then either engage
in it anew, or (for those who have already engaged in it) do not reject it
and become stable in it. [463] So for this you have to be consistent in
your behavior. The Ornament for the Mahayana Sutras says:374
Know the ways to gather disciples to be four: A method to give benefit,
involving others in Comprehending the teachings, involving them in
Engaging, and likewise involving yourself.
(iii) Their functions
Question: What do these four ways to gather disciples do for the disciples?
Reply: Generosity makes them fit vessels to hear the teaching, for
Helping Others to Mature: The Four Ways to Gather Disciples     227
it makes them happy with the person who explains it. Pleasant speech makes
them take interest in the teaching that is to be given, because it gives
them a detailed understanding of the aims and dispels their doubts. Working
at the aims makes them practice in accord with what they have been taught.
Consistency of behavior makes those who have engaged in the teachings not
reject them but practice for a long time. The Ornament for the Mahayana
Sutras says:3"
By the first they become vessels; By the second they take interest; By the
third they practice; By the fourth they train.
(iv) The need for those who gather a following to rely on them
Because the buddhas have declared these four ways to gather disciples to be
what achieves all the aims of all disciples and to be the superb method,
those gathering a following must rely on them. The Ornament for the
Mahayana Sutras states:376
Those involved in gathering a following
Rely on this means;
It is praised as the superb method,
Achieving all aims for all.
(v) A somewhat elaborate explanation
There are two types of pleasant speech. The first, pleasant speech
associated with worldly customs, means that you first assume a clear
expression free of anger, give a smile, and then please living beings in
worldly ways, such as inquiring after their health, etc. The second type,
pleasant speech associated with presenting the perfect teaching, means that
you instruct living beings in the teaching for their benefit and happiness,
beginning with teachings on developing faith, ethical discipline, study,
generosity, and wisdom.
The avenues of pleasant speech are as follows. To an enemy who would kill
you, you say helpful words without a fault in your heart. With the very
dull-witted, you willingly rise to the challenge, tirelessly giving talks
on the teaching and causing them to adhere to virtue. [464] To devious
beings who deceive their masters, abbots, etc., and engage in wrongdoing,
you speak pleasantly with helpful words and without anger, teaching even
the most difficult persons. In order that persons whose minds have not
matured may eliminate obscuration and be reborn in happy realms, you give
228     The Great Treatise on the Stages of the Path
discourses to them on preliminary practices—generosity and ethical
discipline. To persons whose minds have matured, who are rid of obscuration
and possessed of a joyful frame of mind, you reveal the foremost and
perfect teaching of the four noble truths. You encourage householders and
renunciates who are careless to be conscientious, and to those who have
doubts you speak elaborately and explain the teaching to them to dispel
their doubts.
Working at the aims is twofold: bringing the immature to maturity and
liberating the matured. It is also presented in three parts as follows. (1)
Involving persons in taking up the aims of this life is causing them to
employ means consistent with the teaching to acquire, to protect, and to
increase their resources. (2) Involving persons in taking up the purpose of
future lives means to establish persons in the life of a renunciate who
lives as a mendicant after they have rid themselves of possessions.
Although this is certain to bring happiness in future lives, it is not
certain to do so in this life. (3) Involving persons in taking up the aims
of both this and future lives means lo cause householders and renunciates
to take up freedom from mundane and supramundane attachment, for this
generates mental and physical pliancy in the present life, and the
attainment of a purified deity and nirvana in the future.
Work at the aims even when it is very difficult. It is difficult to induce
those who have not previously accumulated roots of virtue to take up
virtue. It is difficult to work at the aims with respect to those who have
magnificent resources because they live in a situation where there are so
many grounds for being unconscientious. And it is difficult to work at the
aims with respect to those who are indoctrinated with the views of non-
Buddhist philosophers because they are hostile to the teaching and, because
of their foolishness, do not understand reasoning. [465]
With respect to the stages of working at the aims, you first cause those
with childlike intelligence to follow easy personal instructions. Then,
when their understanding has reached a middling level, you have them follow
intermediate personal instructions. Finally, when their wisdom has greatly
expanded, you have them follow the profound teaching and subtle personal
instructions.
Consistency of behavior means that you maintain practices equal to or
superior to those in which you establish others. Accordingly, even though
in whatever you do you must first focus on the welfare of living beings and
not lose your resolve for others' welfare,
Helping Others to Mature: The Four Ways to Gather Disciples     229
you must discipline yourself in conjunction with these pursuits.
Triratnadasa's Praise of Infinite Qualities says:377
Some who are undisciplined use reasonable words, but Contradict these
words, so they are called "unable to help
others to discipline themselves."
Knowing this, you placed all living beings in your heart, And strove to
discipline yourself wherever you had lacked discipline before.
The four ways to gather disciples also comprise two categories: gathering
disciples via material things and gathering disciples through the teaching.
Giving material things is the first of the four ways to gather disciples.
The remaining three of the four ways are included in the second, gathering
disciples through the teaching. Furthermore, this latter category includes
the teaching of the objects of meditation, the teaching as put into
practice, and the teaching of purifying oneself in practicing these two.
The Ornament for the Mahayana Sutras states:378
The four ways to gather disciples
Are asserted as two ways of gathering:
By material things and by the teaching,
Which means presenting the objects of meditation, etc.
Moreover, these four ways to gather disciples are the way all the
bodhisattvas of the three times work for the welfare of others, so it is
the single path to travel. The Ornament for the Mahayana Sutras states:37"
All those who have gathered disciples,
Are gathering, or will gather them
Do so in this way; therefore, this is the path
For the maturation of living beings.
In general, then, though the bodhisattva deeds are limitless, the six
perfections and the four ways to gather disciples are their best summation.
For, bodhisattvas have just two tasks, the maturation of causal collections
for their own buddhahood and the maturation of the mind-streams of living
beings; they accomplish both of these through the perfections and the ways
to gather disciples. [466] Thus the Bodhisattva Levels also says:*80
The perfections bring to complete maturation the buddha qualities you will
have yourself. The ways to gather disciples bring all
230     The Great Treatise on the Stages of the Path
living beings to complete maturation. In sum, know these to be the active
expression of a bodhisattva's virtuous qualities.
Therefore, I have set forth in this section these two categories of
practice. If you want to know them in more detail, look in the Bodhisattva
Levels.
With respect to the way these practices are done during and after
meditative equipoise, the Great Elder says:331
The deeds of bodhisattvas are
The magnificent six perfections and so forth.
The yogi arisen from meditative equipoise
Resolutely accomplishes the path of accumulation.
Beginning bodhisattvas who have taken the vows of the conquerors' children
and are on the path of accumulation practice only the six perfections,
whether in meditative equipoise or subsequent to it. They sustain some of
the perfections in meditative equipoise and others in the post-equipoise
state. Some aspects of meditative serenity (which is meditative
stabilization) and some aspects of insight (which is the perfection of
wisdom) are cultivated in meditative equipoise, whereas some other aspects
of meditative stabilization and wisdom are sustained in the post-equipoise
state, along with the first three perfections. Joyous perseverance occurs
in both the meditative equipoise and post-equipoise states, while one type
of patience—certain aspects of the patience of certitude about the profound
teachings—also occurs in meditative equipoise. The Great Elder says:382
During periods after rising from meditative equipoise,
Cultivate the view that all things
Are like a magician's illusions, as in the eight similes.383
Thereby emphasize in post-meditative thought
Purification and the training in method.
During periods of meditative equipoise
Continually condition yourself to
Serenity and insight in equal measure.
When bodhisattvas whose minds are untrained in such marvelous but difficult
deeds hear of them, they feel distressed. [467] Although they are unable to
practice such things at first, they come to understand them and then to
intimately familiarize themselves with them as objects of aspiration. Later
they engage in them spontaneously without any strain. Thus, familiarization
is of the greatest importance, for if these bodhisattvas recognized their
inability
Helping Others to Mature: The Four Ways to Gather Disciples     231
to actually engage in such deeds and then gave up on even the
familiarization conducive to training the mind in them, they would greatly
delay reaching the pure path. The Praise of Infinite Qualities says:384
Deeds that hurt the worldly even to hear about And that even you did not
undertake for a long time You accustomed yourself to, so in time they
became
spontaneous.
Thus, it is difficult to develop good qualities without familiarization.
Those who have taken the bodhisattva vows have no choice but to learn the
bodhisattva deeds. But even those who have not adopted the engaged spirit
of enlightenment through its ritual strive to inculcate a desire to learn
the deeds, thus increasing the force of their enthusiasm for learning them.
Then, when they take the vows, their vows will be extremely stable, so make
an effort to do this.
From among the stages of the path for persons of great capacity, this
concludes the explanation of the stages of the path for training in the
aspirational spirit of enlightenment and for learning the deeds of the
conquerors' children in general.

